THE HOLY HISTORY IN BRIEF: OR, AN ABRIDGMENT OF THE Historical Parts OF THE
Old and New Testament.

By Samuel Clark, Author of the Annotations upon the Bible lately Published.

Romans 15.4. Whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our
learning, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope.
1 Cor. 10.11. Now all these things happened unto them for ensamples, and are
written for our Admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come. LONDON,
Printed for Jonathan Robinson at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1690.

To the Honored Thomas Pigot of Dodders-hall, and Edward Bates of
Maide's-Morton in the County of Bucks, Esquires; Brothers-in-law.
THE Design of this Address is neither to proclaim your Merits, nor to beg your
Patronage, (the, too, common Theme of Epistles) but to give you a naked Account
of the Origin of this Birth; which was a Question propounded to me by one of
you, under the Roof of the other, Whether I knew of any one that had contracted
the History of the Bible into a narrow compass? I answered in the Negative. But
the Question made some impression upon me, and gave me the first hint of this
design, which thereupon I applied my self unto, and pursued till I brought it
to this issue which you see. This occasion, in conjunction with my great
Obligations to the Person and Family of one of you, will more than justify
this present Dedication.

I am sensible that if this Task had been undertaken by some Hands, it would
have been dressed up after a more genteel and fashionable manner, and appeared
in a far more gay and splendid Equipage: But for my part, I am not wont to
trade in Silks, Sattins, and such costly, Court-like Attire: I leave them to
such as frequent King's Palaces. A plain Country Garb agrees better with my
Mind and Purse: Such therefore I have provided for it, and bestowed upon it.

For the Work it self, the Usefulness hereof is apparent, both as an
Abridgment, and as such an Abridgment. As an Abridgment, it is helpful, not only
to the Memory, but also to the Judgment and Understanding: for, by laying
passages closer together, and bringing 'em into a narrower Compass, one may
take the fuller prospect of 'em, and more easily apprehend the Frame of the
whole.

Then as its an Abridgment of the Holy History, so its useful in many respects.
For, in general, All these things were written for our learning, (Romans 15.4 --)
and admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come, 1 Cor. 10.11. To
teach us, particularly, in reference to Kingdoms and Nations, that Piety is the
best Policy: That Righteousness exalts a Nation, but sin is a reproach to (and
the ruin of) any People, Prove. 14.34. and, That the Lord is with us while we
keep close to him; -- but if we forsake him he will forsake us, 2 Chronicles. 15.2.
And then, in reference to particular persons, they serve to teach us how to
govern our selves in all cases and conditions, and in all capacities and
relations. The Examples of Judgments on Transgressors are Warnings to us to
avoid the like sins for which they smarted, 1 Cor. 10.6-11. The Examples of
Blessings on the Obedient, are Encouragements to us to practice the like
Duties, and Exercise the same Graces for which they were rewarded, Romans 4.23,
24.

If what is here done may be of any use to you, (Gentlemen) or to any others,
to promote your Acquaintance with, and delight in the Holy Scriptures, and
dispose you to a greater diligence in the study thereof, I shall rejoice in
this fruit of my Labors; and likewise in this opportunity of giving this
slender Testemony to the world, that I am,

Your Servant for your Soul's good, Sam. Clark.

An Abridgment of the Historical Parts of the Old Testament.
The Introduction.
THOUGH God was what he is, and in the perfect fruition of his own Excellencies
from all Eternity, before his Omnipotent Hand had drawn the Creatures out of
their Nothing; yet his Nature required Homages, his Majesty Servitudes, his
Glory Admirations, his Goodness Acknowledgments, and his Beauty Hearts and
Affections. It was needful, tho he were Independent of all Beings, Immense in
his Extent, Eternal in his Duration, and Infinite in all his Perfections, that
he should cause himself to be seen and felt by Emanations out of Himself. It
was not sufficient (methinks) that God should contemplate himself in the mirror
of his Essence, and that, without issuing out of Himself, he should beget his
Word in the Splendors which flow from his Clarity: It was not enough to love
Himself, and in loving Himself to produce without change, loss or alteration,
the Sacred Spirit and Fire of his Love: All these immanent and infinite
Productions could not exhaust the Treasures of so fruitful a Nature; for in
giving it self it suffers no detriment, since amidst these Sallies and
Emanations the Father and the Son in such sort communicate their Natures and
Perfections, the Father to the Son, and both to the Holy Ghost, that all Three
by a common power can act ad extra, or exteriourly; and they needed to employ
but one single Word to create, not only a World, but even Worlds without end.

I represent unto my self that Nature sighed even without Tongue or Voice,
before she had a Being: Methinks I hear her Silence, and that she says to God
before her Creation,

Speak then, O speak: (Great God) Stretch forth thy Arm, and cast thy Looks out
of thy Self: Issue forth of the Luminous Darkness, which forms thee a Day
without Night, and a Night more resplendant than the Day. Give some little
passage to those Ejaculations and Flames, which from all Eternity are enclosed
within thy Bosom, and which frame therein a Circle of Light and Love. Thou
needst but open thy mouth, and immediately all Creatures will be obedient to
thy Commands: The least of thy Irradiations will scatter the shadows, and open
that Abyss in which they are buried. It is true, that nothing ought to disturb
the peace and repose of thy Solitude: It is true, Thou have and possessest in
thy Self all that can ever be; but Thou can bring it to light, and art able
without noise and disorder to break that eternal Silence, which hitherto has
made Thee heard but of thy Self. In fine, Thou art a God of Love, and this Love
would be captive, if it had not Sallies and Ejaculations. It was not satisfied
to remain in thee by Eminence, and as it were in the source of Beauty and
Goodness; but having made its folds within it self by numberless revolutions,
it must descend upon external objects, to attain that effect and property which
is natural to Love, viz. That amorous Ecstasy, that prodigious Effusion, that
pompous and magnificent show, which to speak properly, Is the Torch of Love; or
rather, the Chariot of its Triumph.

Well then, Creatures, come forth of the Mass in which you lie confused;
Heaven, Earth, Sea, Stars, Trees, Fishes, Furnaces of Fire and Flames, vast
Extents of Air, Clouds, Abysses, Precipices, listen to the Voice and Command of
God, of the Word, and of their Love. O God! O Power! O Love! What Word? What
Speech? and what Voice?

In fine, this glorious and happy moment, which saw the Birth of Times and
Seasons, being arrived, the Eternal God seeing no Object out of Himself which
could deserve his Love; and besides this, Love being incited by a holy desire
of communicating it self, that Nothing, which has but the bare Name given it,
became immediately a fruitful Abyss of Essences, and Nature was engendered out
of it by the sole power of the Divinity. Talon's Holy History, cap. 1.

GENESIS.
CHAP. I.
THE World had a Beginning, which was by Creation; and it was made in the space
of six days.

On the first day was made the rude Mass or Matter of all things; and
afterward the Light.

On the second, the Firmament, or space from the Earth to the Highest Heavens.

On the third, the Sea and Dry Land, stockt with all sorts of Trees, Herbs and
Plants; and more especially the Garden of Eden.

On the fourth, he furnished the Heavens with their Host of Sun, Moon and Stars.

On the fifth, he stockt the Air and Waters with Fowl and Fish.

On the sixth, he stored the Earth with all sorts of Creatures that live upon
it; and then, having thus furnished the World in all the parts of it, he made
Man after his own Image, and made him King of this lower World, giving him
Dominion over the Works of his Hands.

CHAP. II.
On the seventh day God rested from the Work of Creation, and blessed and
sanctified it for a Sabbath Day.

The Man which he had made he called Adam, and placed him in Eden, forbidding
him to eat of the Tree of Knowledge under pain of death. He brought all the
Beasts and Birds to him to give 'em Names. He cast him into a deep sleep, took
out one of his Ribs, built it into a Woman, and gave her to Adam to Wife, whom
he was hereby taught to look upon still as part of himself. He called her Name
Eve.

CHAP. III.
This first Couple being tempted by Satan in the Serpent, transgressed the
Command of God, and did eat of the forbidden Fruit; whereupon being arraigned
by God, he first dooms the Serpent to a more ignominious kind of Food and
Motion; and especially the Devil, that his Head should be broken by the Seed of
the Woman, the Messiah, who was now promised to our first Parents, as the
Restorer of the Creation, and Destroyer of the works of the Devil. Then he
dooms the Woman to pain in Childbearing, and to a more uneasy subjection to
her Husband. And lastly, he dooms the Man to labor and travel in tilling and
dressing the ground, which was now cursed for his sake; and afterward drives
'em out of Paradise.

CHAP. IV.
To Adam and Eve were born first Cain, a Tiller of the Ground; then Abel, a
Keeper of Sheep. These brought Offerings to the Lord, who accepted Abel's, but
rejected Cain's; whereupon Cain was wroth, and slew his Brother Abel: for which
God cursed him, and made him a Vagabond; yet set a mark upon him, that none
should kill him. Lamech, one of his Posterity, was the first that transgrest
the Institution of Marriage, by having two Wives.

CHAP. V.
Afterward Adam had another Son, called Seth; one of whose Posterity was
Enoch, who was one that had much communion with God, and so God translated him
Soul and Body to Heaven; to assure us that there is a state of happiness in
another World both for Soul and Body.

CHAP. VI, VII.
God being provoked by Man's wickedness, threatens to destroy all Mankind by a
Flood; commands Noah to make an Ark, into which himself, Wife and Children, and
some of every sort of Cattle, Fowl, and Creeping things, entering, were shut in
by God and preserved, when all the rest of Mankind, and all on the Land, were
drowned in the Flood.

CHAP. VIII, IX.
At length the Earth being dried, God bids Noah come forth, and bring out all
with him: whereupon Noah built an Altar, and offered Burnt-offerings thereon,
wherewith God was well-pleased, and blessed Noah and his Sons, and made a
Covenant with 'em, that he would no more destroy the Earth by Water; of which the
Bow in the Clouds was made a Token. After this Noah being drunk, lay uncovered
in his Tent; which Cham espying, tells his two Brethren of it in derision; but
they going backwards, carried a Mantle and covered him; for which Noah curses
Cham and his Posterity, and blesses Shem and Japhet.

CHAP. XI. I -- IX.
All the Earth being now of one Language, they consulted to eternise their
memory, before they were separated one from another, by building a City and
Tower, which should reach up to Heaven; but God defeats their design by
confounding their Language; whereupon the place was called Babel, and they were
scattered abroad upon the face of the Earth.

CHAP. X.
One of Cham's Grandchildren was Nimrod, who was a great Tyrant, and laid the
Foundation of the Assyrian Monarchy, (which ended in Belshazzar, Dan. 5.30, 31.)

CHAP. X -- XI.
Among the Posterity of Shem was Terah, who was Abram's Father: Abram took
Sarai to Wife, and they came to Haran with their Father Terah, who died there.

CHAP. XII.
Then God appears to Abram, and calls him from Haran to go to Canaan, and
promises to make him a great Nation, and that in him all the Families of the
Earth should be blessed: accordingly, Abram goes into Canaan with Lot his
Nephew, to Sichem, where God appeared to him, and promised to give that Land to
his Seed. A Famine coming upon that Land, Abram goes into Egypt to sojourn,
where he denies his Wife, and Pharaoh takes her; but finding that she was
Abram's Wife, he sends her to him, and away they go,

CHAP. XIII.
And came to Bethel: But Abram's Cattle and Lot's being so numerous, they could
not continue together, and therefore agreed to part: Abram gives Lot his
Choice, who chooses the Plain of Jordan toward Sodom, and Abram continued in
Canaan. God renews his Grant of Canaan to him and his Seed, which he promised
should be as the dust of the Earth. Then Abram came to Mamre.

CHAP. XIV.
After this there rose war between the King of Elam, and the Kings of Sodom and
the other Cities of the Plain; wherein the King of Elam had the better, and
plundered Sodom and Gomorrah, carrying away Lot, (among others) and his Goods:
News whereof being brought to Abram, he pursues after them with his trained
Servants, and recovers all again. At his return, Melchesideck King of
Jerusalem, and Priest of the true God, meets him with Bread and Wine, and
blesses him; to whom Abram gave the Tenth of all the Spoils he had taken, and
then restores all to the King of Sodom, without reserving any thing to himself.

CHAP. XV.
After this God appears again to Abram, promising to be his Shield and
exceeding great reward: and upon Abram's bemoaning the want of a Child to be
his Heir, God renews his promise of an Heir to come out of his own Loins, and
of a numerous Posterity; which he firmly believing (tho so unlikely) God
thereupon accounts him a righteous person, and this an Act of Righteousness,
and promises Canaan again to him, and that his Posterity, after four hundred
years sojourning in Canaan and Egypt, should possess it; and confirms this by a
Sign, (upon Abram's request) and Vision.

CHAP. XVI.
Sarai, to obtain the accomplishment of the promise, being barren her self,
gives Hagar her Handmaid to Abram to be his Concubine; who conceiving by him,
grows insolent and despised her Mistress; which Sarai not brooking, complains
of her to Abram: he leaves her to her disposal; who dealing hardly with her,
she ran away; for which she was rebuked by an Angel, and required to return and
submit her self to her Mistress; and withal promises her a numerous Seed, and
tells her she was with Child of a Son, whom she should call Ismael: and
accordingly, when he was born Abram called him so; which was in the eighty
sixth year of Abram's Age.

CHAP. XVII.
Thirteen years after this, when Abram was ninety nine years old, God appears
to him again, renews his Covenant with him, that he should be a Father of many
Nations; and as a pledge thereof changes his Name from Abram to Abraham,
signifying, A Father of a multitude: Institutes the Sacrament of Circumcision:
Changes Sarai's Name to Sarah: Promises him a Son by her: Abraham intercedes
for Ismael; God promises to bless and multiply him exceedingly, but his
Covenant should be with his Son by Sarah. Then Abraham circumcised himself; and
Ismael being thirteen years old, and the rest of his Family.

CHAP. XVIII.
Abraham sitting in his Tent-door spies three Men, whom he invites to his House
to refresh themselves, which they accept of; enquire for Sarah, and one of them
(who was the Second Person of the Trinity) tells him she should have a Son;
which she over-hearing, disbelieves (at present) and laughs at; with which
being charged, she denies it. They departing, Abraham brings them on their way,
to whom the Lord Christ discovers his intent of destroying Sodom, and the other
Cities, for their grievous sins: Whereupon Abraham intercedes for 'em, and God
yields so far, that if there had been but ten righteous persons found in Sodom,
he would have spared it.

CHAP. XIX.
While Christ staid talking with Abraham, the other two Angels in humane Shape,
past on and came to Sodom at Even: Lot seeing 'em, salutes 'em, invites 'em to
his House, and makes 'em a Feast. But presently the Men of the City gathered
about the House, and called to Lot to bring out those two Strangers, that they
might abuse 'em; which he refusing, they pressed near to break the door.
Whereupon the Angels smote 'em with blindness, and warn Lot to bring out his
Children, and whatsoever he had in the City, because they were come to destroy
it. But while he lingered, they laid hold upon him, his Wife, and two Daughters,
and brought 'em forth, commanding 'em to escape for their lives, and not look
back; which his Wise not observing, was turned into a Pillar of Salt. Lot
entering into Zoar about Sunrising, presently the Lord rained Fire and
Brimstone upon those Cities, and destroyed 'em. But Lot removed from Zoar, and
dwelt in a Cave in a Mountain, where his two Daughters made him drink Wine, and
lay with him; and so were with Child by their Father; from whence descended the
Moabites and Ammonites.

CHAP. XX.
Abraham sojourning in Gerar calls Sarah his Sister; whereupon the King takes
her; but being warned of God in a Dream, he restores her to her Husband with a
great Present.

CHAP. XXI.
Sarah now bears Isaac, his Father Abraham being an hundred years old. At his
weaning, Abraham makes a great Feast. Ismael falls a jeering Isaac; whereupon
he and his Mother are sent away. In their travel, the water being spent, the
Boy was ready to perish with thirst: but God showed her a Well of Water,
encourages her, and blesses the Child: So they dwelt in the Wilderness of
Paran, and his Mother took him a Wife out of Egypt. Abimelech King of the
Philistines made a Covenant with Abraham at Beersheba, who sojourned in their
Land many days.

CHAP. XXII.
Isaac being grown up, God for the trial of Abraham's Faith and Obedience,
commands him to offer his only Son Isaac for a Burnt-offering, upon a Mountain
which he would show him. Presently the next morning Abraham begins the Journey, and
when he came to the place, he bound Isaac upon the Altar, and lift up his hand
to slay his Son. But God called to him out of Heaven, and bad him hold his
hand: And there was a Ram behind him, which he took and offered instead of his
Son: Whereupon God swears to bless and multiply his Seed, and that in it all
Nations should be blessed.

CHAP. XXIII.
Sarah dying at a hundred and twenty years old, Abraham buys a burying place
for her in Macpelah of the Sons of Heth.

CHAP. XXIV.
Abraham growing old, obliges his chief Servant to take a Wife for Isaac from
among his Kindred. The Servant goes to Nahor, Abraham's Brother. When he came
to the City, to a Well where they used to draw water, he begs of God good
success in his business, and that the Virgin who should treat him kindly, might
be the Person designed for his Masters Son. Presently comes Rebecca out, by
whom his sign was fulfilled: whereupon, being invited, he goes to her Father's
House, tells his errand, and desires their Answer. They seeing Gods hand in it,
could not gainsay it. Then he presents 'em all, especially Rebecca, and takes
her away the next day. In the evening Isaac walking abroad to meditate, meets
the Servant, and Rebecca with him, whom he brought into his Mother's Tent, and
took her to be his Wife.

CHAP. XXV.
Abraham marries Keturah, and has many Children by her, to whom he gave Gifts.
At length, being sevenscore and fifteen years old he dies, and was buried in
Machpelah with Sarah. Rebeccah being barren about twenty years; Isaac prays for
her, whereupon she conceived Twins, which strugled in her Womb. When they were
born, the eldest was hairy, and thereupon called Esau; the younger took hold of
his Brothers Heel, and so was called Jacob. Esau was a Hunter, and killed
Venison for his Father, which drew his affection to him. Jacob was a plain Man.
Jacob having made Pottage, Esau comes home from Hunting hungry and saint, and
so sold his Birthright to Jacob for some of his Pottage.

CHAP. XXVI.
A Famine being in the Land, Isaac goes to Gerar among the Philistines; where
God appears to him, and makes him the same promises he had made to Abraham, of
a numberless Seed, and those Countries. Here Isaac dashed against the same Rock
his Father Abraham had done, calling his Wife his Sister: But at length
Abimelech observed some familiar carriage between 'em, whereby he discerned she
was his Wife; so none of the People offered to touch her. Here Isaac grows very
rich, whereupon they made a League with him.

CHAP. XXVII.
Isaac being old and dim-sighted, sends Esau to get him some Venison, that he
might bestow upon him his Patriarchal Blessing for it. Rebeccah over-hearing,
bids Jacob fetch a Kid from the Flock, which she would dress according to
Isaac's Palate, and he should carry it to him, that he might get the Blessing;
which he does accordingly, and his Father blesses him. Immediately after comes
Esau with his Venison. Isaac then discerned the Fraud, and trembled
exceedingly. Esau cries out bitterly for loss of the Blessing, and begs hard
for one Blessing; which his Father bestows on him. Upon this Esau hated Jacob,
and threatens his Death; which Rebeccah hearing of, sends him to her Brother
Laban.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Before Jacob goes, Isaac blesses him again, and charges him to take a Wife of
his Kindred, and not of the Canaanites. In this Journey he came to a place one
night where he had a Dream and Vision of a Ladder reaching to Heaven, whereon
the Angels passed up and down, and God at the top, who renews his promise to
him made formerly to his Fathers Abraham and Isaac, and promises to be with him
wheresoever he went. This place Jacob calls Beth-el, and vows to take this God
for his God, and to give the tenth of all his Substance to God.

CHAP. XXIX.
Jacob passes on and came to a Well, where he meets with Rachel; to whom he
made himself known: She acquaints her Father Laban with it, who hired him to
keep his Sheep seven years for his Daughter Rachel; so a Feast was kept a Week
together to solemnize the Marriage; but at night Laban brings Leah to him
instead of Rachel, which he discerning in the morning, expostulates with Laban
about it; he excuses it, and desires him to keep her, and he would give him Rachel
too for seven years service more; which he agreed to; and another Weeks Feast
was kept for her; and she was his best beloved, and was barren; but Leah bare
him four Sons, Reuben, Simeon, Levi and Judah.

CHAP. XXX.
Rachel being impatient for Children, gives her Maid Bilhah to Jacob, by whom
he has Dan and Nepthali. Then Leah likewise gives her Maid Zilpah to Jacob, by
whom he has Gad and Asher. Leah hires the Company of her Husband Jacob of
Rachel, with her Sons Mandrakes, and so has two Sons more, Issachar and
Zebulon, and a Daughter Dinah. At last Dinah harkned to Rachel, and gave her a
Son, Joseph. Then Jacob's fourteen years of service being expired, he makes a
new Bargain with his Uncle Laban, that he would have only the speckled and spotted
Lambs for his Wages; which beyond expectation and the course of Nature proved
very advantageous to him by the Providence of God, and his Blessing on the Arts
he used to make the Sheep bring forth speckled and spotted Lambs.

CHAP. XXXI.
Jacob being brow-beaten by Laban for the good success of his Bargain, and
slandered by his Sons, upon warning from God departs privately, and carries
away all his Substance; and among other things, Rachel stole away her Fathers
Images. As Soon as Laban had notice of his departure, he pursues after him with
no good intent, and overtakes him; but being warned of God not to endeavor,
either by fair means or foul, to bring him back again, he only expostulates
with him concerning his departing so privately; and charges him with stealing
his Gods. Jacob gives him leave to search for 'em, which he did, but in vain,
Rachel having hidden 'em, and sat upon them. Hereupon Jacob chode with him,
complaining of his hard dealing all the time of his Service; but at length they
made a Covenant, and so parted.

CHAP. XXXII.
Jacob going on has a Vision of Angels at Mahanaim; sends a Message to his
Brother Esau to give him notice of his coming: Esau comes out to meet him,
which fills Jacob with fear; whereupon he prays to God for deliverance from
him, and prepares a present to pacify him. That Night the Angel of the
Covenant, Christ, wrestles with him in humane Shape, and suffers himself to be
prevailed over, and calls his Name Israel.

CHAP. XXXIII.
After this Jacob and Esau meet together, and great expressions of kindness
pass between 'em: then Esau returns to his own Habitation, and Jacob comes to
Shalem, and builds an Altar there.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Dinah gadding abroad was ravished by Sechem; and afterward upon agreement
that all the men of his City should be circumcised, Dinah was given to Sechem:
but her Brethren, Simeon and Levi, on the third day after their Circumcision,
when they were sore, came upon 'em and slew all the Males, plundered the City,
and took away their Sister Dinah.

CHAP. XXXV. ver. 1-20.
After this God sends Jacob to Beth-el, where he purges his Family from Idols,
and builds an Altar. God appears again to him there, and renews the Name Israel
to him, and his former promises; whereupon he calls the Name of it Beth-el. As
they journied from thence, Rebeccah falls in travail of Benjamin, and dies, and
was buried there.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Esau's Offspring is recorded.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Joseph was feeding the Flock with his Brethren; but they hated and envied him
for his Fathers love to him, and carried themselves unkindly to him, which he
acquainted his Father with. Then he dreamt two Dreams, of the Sheaves bowing
down to his Sheaf, and the Sun, Moon, and eleven Stars making Obeisance to him,
which he told to his Father and his Brethren. Afterward his Father sends him
to see how his Brethren did in Sechem. They seeing him acoming, conspired
against him, stripped him of his Coat of diverse colors, and cast him into an
empty pit; but seeing some Merchants traveling that way, they took him out and
sold him to them, (who carried him into Egypt, and sold him to Potiphar, chief
Officer in Pharaoh's Court) and to disguise their wickedness they took his
Coat, dipped it in Blood, and sent it to their Father, to make him believe that
some wild Beast had torn him to pieces.

CHAP. XXXV. ver. 27-29.
After this Jacob goes to visit his Father Isaac, who died about that time,
being ninescore years old.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Judah took a Wife and had three Sons by her. The eldest he married to Tamar;
but he being wicked, God slew him before he had a Child. Then Judah spoke to
his Second Son to marry her, and raise up Seed to his Brother; but he (though he
married her, yet) to prevent her conceiving by him, spilt his Seed on the
ground; for which God slew him also: Whereupon Judah being unwilling to bestow
his third Son upon her, to put her off, persuades her to go to her Fathers till
his third Son was fit for her. Afterward Tamar seeing that that third Son was
not given to her, and hearing that Judah was going to his Sheep-shearers to
Timnah, she sits in the way, veiled and disguised. Judah taking her for a
Harlot, sollicits her Chastity: She yields, and takes his Staff, Signet and
Bracelets as a Pledge of the reward he promised her, and goes away with 'em.
Afterward being found to be with Child, her Father-in-law Judah was acquainted
with it; who thereupon sentences her to be burnt. But she producing the Staff,
Seal and Bracelets, Judah acknowledges his Fault, and acquits her. When she
fell in Travel, she brought forth Twins, the eldest of which was Pharez, who
was one of Christ's Ancestors.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Joseph being sold to Potiphar, and behaving himself with great prudence, was
made Ruler over all his House; and being a goodly Person, his Mistress fell in
love with him, and tempts him to lie with her; which he constantly refusing, at
length watching a fit opportunity, she lays hold on him to force him to it:
But he made a shift to get away, leaving his Upper Garment in her hands.
Hereupon she accuses him to her Husband, that he had made an attempt upon her
Chastity; which he believing, without more ado, cast him into Prison. But God
inclined the Keepers Heart to show him kindness, and he committed the
Government of the Prisones, and management of all his Affairs to Joseph; and
God prospered all that he did.

CHAP. XL.
During his Imprisoment two of the Kings chief Officers were committed to
Prison, the chief Butler and the chief Baker. One night they dreamt each of
them a Dream, which in the morning they told to Joseph, and he interpreted them
to 'em, and the event made it good.

CHAP. XLI.
After this the King himself dreamt a Dream of Seven Fat Kine, and seven Lean
Ones, which eat up the Fat Ones: And another Dream of seven full Ears of Corn,
and seven thin ones, which devoured the seven full Ones. These Dreams he
related in the Morning to the Magicians and Wise Men, but they could not
understand the meaning of 'em. Then the chief Butler acquainted the King, how
Joseph had expounded his Dream, and his Fellow's, to them. So Joseph was sent
for, to whom the King relating his Dreams, he expounded them, and likewise gave
him prudent advice thereupon. The King finding Joseph a Personage of such
extraordinary Sagacity and Prudence, made him Ruler over his House, and over
all the Land of Egypt, and gave him an honorable person to be his Wife.
Hereupon Joseph travels all over the Land, and appoints Officers, and prepares
Granaries, and in the seven years of plenty laid up vast quantities of Corn in
the Store-cities. During this time he had two Sons, Manasseh and Ephraim. Then
came the years of Famine, and Joseph supplied both the Egyptians and Neighbor
Countries with Corn.

CHAP. XLII.
Jacob hearing there was Corn in Egypt, sends all his Sons, but Benjamin,
thither to buy Corn; who coming before Joseph, made a lowly Obeisance to him,
(according to his Dream, chapter 37.5.) but they knew him not, tho he knew them. He
questioned them about several things, spoke roughly to 'em, charged 'em to be
Spies, and imprisoned 'em three days; but at last lets 'em go, and sends 'em
all away but one (whom he detained as an Hostage, till they brought their
youngest Brother Benjamin) with their Sacks full of Corn, and their Money in
every Man's Sack. When they came to their Father, they relate all these passages
to him, and emptying their Sacks, found every Man's Money in his Sack; which they
were concerned at, for fear of some design therein against 'em. But Jacob would
not hear of letting Benjamin go.

CHAP. XLIII.
The Famine continuing, Jacob spoke to 'em to fetch more Corn out of Egypt, and
upon their importunity suffers 'em to take Benjamin along with 'em. They carry
also a Present, and double Money. When they came before Joseph, and he saw
Benjamin with 'em, he caused 'em to be entertained at his House, and Simeon to
be brought out to 'em; and when he came home, he treated 'em very courteously;
especially Benjamin,

CHAP. XLIV.
And commanded their Sacks to be filled again with Corn, and every Man's Money
put into his Sack, and his Drinking Cup to be put into Benjamin's Sack; so they
departed. But presently Joseph sends his Steward after 'em to charge 'em with
stealing his Cup, and makes search for it, and finds it in Benjamin's Sack.
whereupon they all came back to Joseph's House, and Judah relates to him what
passed between their Father and them concerning Benjamin's coming with 'em, and
that if they should now return without him, it would certainly break their
Fathers Heart, and bring down his Gray Hairs, with Sorrow to the Grave.

CHAP. XLV.
Upon this affecting Discourse Joseph was so overcome with tenderness of
affection, that he could refrain no longer, but makes himself known to them,
saying, I am Joseph: Which struck 'em with such surprise and terror that they
had not power to speak a word: But he encourages 'em, and ascribes all they had
done to him to the Providence of God for their good; and bids 'em hasten to
their Father to acquaint him that he was not only alive, but Lord of all Egypt,
and therefore he should come down immediately, and he would sustain him and his
Family the five remaining years of the Famine: And then he embraced his Brother
Benjamin, and kissed him, and accomodated them with Wagons and all necessaries
for their Journey, and bids 'em not to fall out by the way. They being come to
their Father, and relating these passages to him, he was ready to faint and
swoon away with the Surprise, and could not believe 'em. But afterward upon
further Discourse and sight of the Wagons he was satisfied, saying, It is
enough, Joseph my Son is yet alive; I Will go and see him before I die.

CHAP. XLVI.
Jacob having received this Message, removes toward Egypt with his whole
Family. At Beersheba God appears to him, and encourages him to go into Egypt,
promising to make him a great Nation, and to bring up him and his Posterity
again out of that Land. Then Jacob sends Judah before him to Joseph, who comes
to meet his Father, and instructs his Brethren what to say to Pharaoh, to
incline him to grant 'em the Land of Goshen for their dwelling.

CHAP. XLVII.
Joseph presents his Father and some of his Brethren to Pharaoh; who questions
'em about their Occupation, and gives order to appoint 'em the best part of the
Land, viz. Goshen, for their Abode: So he placed them in Rameses, and provided
for 'em; and likewise supplied all the Land of Egypt and Canaan with Corn,
first for Money, then for their Cattle, and lastly for their Bodies and Lands.
After this Jacob lived in Egypt seventeen years, and drawing toward his end,
he sends for Joseph, and obliges him by Oath not to bury him in Egypt, but to
carry him to Canaan, and bury him with his Fathers.

CHAP. XLVIII.
Jacob being sick, Joseph comes to visit him, and brings his two Sons with him,
that they might receive their Grandfathers Blessing; which Jacob having notice
of, sits up, and tells Joseph that his two Sons, Ephraim and Manasseh should be
reckoned as his own, being Heads of distinct Tribes, as his other Sons were:
Then lays his Right Hand upon Ephraim's head the younger, and his Left upon
Manasseh's the Elder; to show that Ephraim, tho the Younger, should have the
pre-eminence, and bestow his Patriarchal Blessing on them, and gives Joseph a
parcel of Land in Canaan, (all that he had there) as his Heir.

CHAP. XLIX.
Afterward he calls all his Sons together, and by the Spirit of Prophecy
blesses them, and foretells their future Estate, and what should betide each
Tribe particularly in their succeeding Generations: Then commands 'em to bury
him with his Fathers, and so yields up the Ghost.

CHAP. L.
Then Joseph commands his Body to be embalmed; which being dispatched, having
craved leave of the King, he carries his Father's Body into Canaan, to his
Sepulcher there, according to his appointment. The Funeral Solemnity being
over, Joseph's Brethren began to fear that he would reckon with 'em for their
misusage of him formerly: But he was so far from that, that he comforts and
speaks kindly to 'em, and promises to nourish them and all theirs. After which
Joseph and his Brethren lived long in Egypt; and when he was ready to die, he
told them, that God would certainly visit them in mercy, and bring 'em out of
Egypt into Canaan, and therefore they should not bury his Body there, but carry
it along with 'em whenever they went out. So he died, being an hundred and
ten years old; and they embalmed him, and put him in a Coffin.

EXODUS.
CHAP. I.
JOseph being dead, and the Children of Israel being multiplied exceedingly,
there arose a new King, who not regarding the eminent Service Joseph had done
to that Crown, fearing their Strength, contrives several ways to keep 'em
under; endeavoring first to wear 'em out with hard Labor, and rigorous
Bondage; which not succeeding, he commands the Midwives to strangle all the
Male Children in the Birth; but they not obeying this barbarous Edict, he next
commands all his People to throw every Male Child they met with into the River.

CHAP. II.
During this Distress Moses was born, and concealed by his Parents; but when
they could hide him no longer, they put him in an Ark of Bullrushes, and laid
him among the Flags by the River side, and set his Sister to watch the event.
Pharaoh's Daughter coming that way, and spying the Ark, sent for it, and found
a Child therein: Then she sent the Child's Sister to fetch an Hebrew Nurse, who
called the Child's Mother; so she nursed it, and when he was grown up, brought
him to Pharaoh's Daughter, who adopted him for her Son, called his Name Moses,
and trained him up in all the Wisdom and Learning of the Egyptians; whereby he
was fitted (by God's singular Providence) for those great Services he was
afterward employed in. In this capacity he continued in Pharaoh's Court till
he was forty years old; but then he forsook the Court, and joined himself to
his afflicted Brethren, resolving to afford 'em what help he could. So going
among 'em one day, and seeing an Egyptian cruelly beating one of his Brethren,
he slew the Egyptian; which being known to Pharaoh, he was fain to fly into the
Land of Midian, where he dwelt with a Priest of that Land, and married one of
his Daughters, by whom he had a Son. Here he continued forty years, till that
King of Egypt was dead: But still the Israelites were exceedingly oppressed,
which made 'em cry to God, and he took notice of it.

CHAP. III.
As Moses kept his Father-in-law's Flock by Horeb, he had a Vision of a Bush
Burning, yet not consumed; out of which God calls to him, and tells him he
heard the Cry of the Israelites, and was come down to deliver them, and would
send him to bring 'em forth: from which employment Moses excuses himself, but
God encourages him. Moses asks his Name. God bids him say to the Israelites, I
AM THAT I AM has sent me to you; and bids him and the Elders of Israel go to
Pharaoh to ask his leave to go into the Wilderness to offer Sacrifice, and
Promises, tho Pharaoh did refuse, to bring 'em out by Power, and with much
Wealth.

CHAP. IV.
Moses further excuses himself, and God encourages him again by two Miracles;
but still he is loath to venture, and frames new excuses, till God was angry
with him; and to encourage him, joins his Brother Aaron in Commission with him
to be his Spokesman to Pharaoh and the People: Hereupon Moses with his Family
return into Egypt, and in an Inn by the way the Lord had like to have slain him
for not circumcising his Child. In the Wilderness he meets with his Brother
Aaron; and so they went and called together the Elders of the People, and
rehearsed these things to them, who rejoiced at it.

CHAP. V.
Moses and Aaron went to Pharaoh to demand leave for the People to go to keep a
Feast in the Wilderness to the Lord. Pharaoh proudly demands, Who is the Lord,
that I should obey his voice to let Israel go? and chides 'em for their
message, and increases the Peoples task; which when they complain of they are
chidden, and get no redress: whereupon they cry out upon Moses and Aaron, and
Moses complains to God.

CHAP. VI.
Then God encourages him, and renews his Promise by his Name Jehovah, assuring
him that he will bring the People out of Egypt, and bring 'em into Canaan: And
this Moses relates to 'em; but they minded it not by reason of their oppression.

CHAP. VII.
Then God sent Moses and Aaron again unto Pharaoh, who requires a Sign whereby
he might know that God sent 'em. Aaron throws down his Stick before Pharaoh,
and it became a Serpent. The Magicians did also in like manner: So Pharaoh's
Heart was hardened that he would not let 'em go. Then God sends Moses and Aaron
again, and in case Pharaoh would not yet be persuaded, that they should smite
the Waters with the Staff, and turn 'em to Blood: which accordingly they did;
and the Magicians did the like. So that Pharaoh was hardened still.

CHAP. VIII.
God sends 'em again, and upon Pharaoh's refusal, sends Frogs all over the
Land; and the Magicians did the like: But now Pharaoh seeks to Moses and Aaron
to have the Frogs removed, and promises to let 'em go; but when the Frogs were
taken away, he refuses still: Then God sends Lice upon Man and Beast; which the
Magicians could not do, and so were convinced that it was Gods work: yet
Pharaoh stands out still. Then God sends Swarms of Flies which corrupted the
Land. Pharaoh then would let 'em go, with some Limitations, and prays that this
Judgment might be removed; which being done, he was hardened still.

CHAP. IX.
Next God sends a Murrain upon the Cattle, so that they died; next, Boils upon
Man and Beast, so that the Magicians could not stand before Moses; next,
Thunder, Lightning, and Hail, which destroyed all that was in the Fields,
Herbs, Trees, Man and Beast. Then Pharaoh promises to let 'em go; but when the
Storm ceased, he was the same still.

CHAP. X.
Next God sends the Locusts, which darkened the Sky with their multitude, and
covered the Face of the Earth, and devoured all that the Hail had left:
Whereupon Pharaoh capitulates with 'em again, but was still hardened. Then God
sends Darkness which might be felt, and Pharaoh capitulates again, but was
still hardened.

CHAP. XI.
During this Darkness, God bids all the People borrow of their Neighbors
Jewels of Gold and Silver, and foretells the Destruction of all their Firstborn.

CHAP. XII.
God now changes the beginning of the year, and instituted the Sacrament of the
Passover, with the Blood whereof they were to mark the Posts of their Doors,
that the destroying Angel might pass over them. Then at Midnight God smote all
the Firstborn of Egypt, both of Man and Beast: whereupon Pharaoh and the
Egyptians drove 'em out in haste; so they went out about six hundred thousand
men, besides Children, at the end of four hundred and thirty years, in that
very Night that the time expired.

CHAP. XIII.
God commands the Firstborn to be sanctified, in memory of the preservation of
their Firstborn when the Egyptians were destroyed; and seven days of
unleavened Bread to be observed in memory of their coming out in have, and
eating unleavened Bread. Moses carries Joseph's Bones with 'em, as he had made
'em swear to do. God went before 'em by a Pillar of a Cloud in the Day, and a
Pillar of Fire in the Night.

CHAP. XIV.
When the Israelites were gone, Pharaoh and the Egyptians repent that they had
let 'em go, and so pursue after 'em, and overtook 'em near the Red Sea:
whereupon the Israelites were mighty fraid, and cried out to God, and he
divided the Red Sea, so that they passed through it on dry ground. The
Egyptians also went in after 'em; but when the Israelites were passed through,
God caused the Waters to return upon the Egyptians, and drowned 'em all.

CHAP. XV.
Upon which occasion Moses composes a Song, which the Israelites sang unto the
Lord. When they were passed through the Sea, they came to a place in the
Wilderness where the Waters were bitter, (called therefore Marah) whereat the
People murmured; but Moses cast in a Bough of a Tree, and they became sweet.

CHAP. XVI.
The People murmur for want of Bread, and wish they had died in Egypt, where
they had Bread enough; whereupon God gave 'em Manna, which fell on the six
days, but not on the Sabbath. Then they murmured for Flesh; then God gave 'em
Quails in such multitudes, that they covered the Camp. Then God commanded 'em
to fill an Homer with Manna to be kept before the Testimony, for a Memorial to
succeeding Generations. This Manna continued till they came to Canaan.

CHAP. XVII.
Then they came to another place where was no Water, which made 'em murmur
again; but Moses, at the Commandment of the Lord, smote the Rock, and there
issued out Water. Here Amalek came and sought with 'em; but Moses went and
stood upon a Hill, and while he held up his hand Israel prevailed, but when he
let it down Amalek prevailed.

CHAP. XVIII.
Jethro, Moses his Father-in-law, hearing that God had brought the Israelites
out of Egypt, carries Moses's Wife and two Sons to him into the Wilderness, to
whom Moses related all that God had done for 'em, which he rejoiced at, and
they feasted together. Jethro seeing Moses tiring and wearing out himself with
judging the People from Morning till Night, advises him to make inferior Judges
and Rulers for lesser matters, and reserve only the more weighty for his own
Determination; which God approved of, and so was done accordingly.

CHAP. XIX.
In the third Month after their coming out of Egypt they came to the Wilderness
of Sinai, to Mount Sinai. Here God spoke unto Moses, and by his means made a
Covenant with the People to become his peculiar People. Then God commanded him
to sanctify the People, and set Bounds to the Mount, that the People might not
come to touch it. On the third day there were Thundrings and Lightnings, and
the Mount all on Fire, and the Voice of the Trumpet exceeding loud; then Moses
brought forth the People to meet God.

CHAP. XX -- XXIII.
And God spoke with an audible Voice in the hearing of the People the Ten
Commandments: whereupon the People desire that God might not speak any more to
them, but that Moses might speak to them from God. So God by Moses gave 'em
diverse Judicial Laws for the better government of the Commonwealth.

CHAP. XXIV.
Moses acquaints the People with these Laws, and they promise Obedience to
them; and so he made a Covenant before God and the People. Then Moses and the
Elders went up into the Mount, and saw the Glory of God. But Moses went up
further into the Mount, and was there forty days and forty Nights.

CHAP. XXV.
God appoints what they should offer for the Tabernacle, prescribes the form of
the Ark, and Mercy-seat with the Cherubims, of the golden Table, and golden
Candlestick.

CHAP. XXVI.
God directs how to make the Tabernacle, and all things belonging to it, ( Chapter
27.) and the Altar of Burnt offering, the Court of the Tabernacle, and Oil for
the Lamps.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Aaron and his Sons are set apart for the Priests Office, and holy Garments are
appointed 'em.

CHAP. XXIX.
God shows how the Priests should be consecrated, appoints the daily
Burnt-offering, and promises to dwell with 'em.

CHAP. XXX.
God directs the making of the Altar of Incense; appoints what should be the
ransom for their Souls; the brazen Laver, holy anointing Oil, and composition
of the Perfume.

CHAP. XXXI.
God furnishes Bezaleel and Aholiab with Abilities to make all things belonging
to the Tabernacle. He again strictly enjoins the Sanctification of the Sabbath,
and gave Moses the two Tables of the Law written with his own Finger.

CHAP. XXXII.
Moses staying so long in the Mount, the People cause Aaron to make a golden
Calf, which they worship as a Representation of the true God; wherewith God was
so provoked, that he treats with Moses about destroying them, and making him a
great Nation: But Moses intercedes for 'em, and obtains their pardon. But when
he came down near the Camp, and saw the Calf and the dancing, he cast the two
Tables of the Law out of his Hand and brake 'em, and burnt the Calf, and chode
Aaron for making it, who excuses himself. Moses commands the Levites to slay
the Idolaters, and intercedes for the People, and prays, that himself might be
blotted out of Gods Book, rather than they should not be pardoned.

CHAP. XXXIII.
God refuses to go with the People, but speaks of sending an Angel with 'em,
whereat the People mourn; and the Tabernacle is removed out of the Camp; God
talks familiarly with Moses in it, who desires God to show him his Glory, and
he promises to let him see his back parts.

CHAP. XXXIV.
God commands Moses to hew two Tables more of Stone, which he carried up into
the Mount. Then God passed by before him and proclaimed his Name: Moses begs
again for pardon and God's Presence to go with 'em: God makes a Covenant with
'em; writes the Ten Commandments in the two Tables. Then Moses came down from
the Mount, and his Face shone, so that he was feign to put a Vail upon it.

CHAP. XXXV.
The Sabbath is again commanded, and Freewill Offerings for the Tabernacle,
which the People cheerfully offer. Then Moses sets Bezaleel and Aholiab about
the Work, which they perform in all the parts of it, and as to all things
belonging to the Tabernacle, as was before directed, chapter 36, 37, 38. together
with all the Holy Garments for Aaron and his Sons; all which Moses viewed and
approved, chapter 39.

CHAP. XL.
On the first day of the first Month of the second year after they came out of
Egypt was the Tabernacle reared, and all things put in order about it by Moses;
which being done, the Glory of the Lord filled it, and a Cloud covered it, so
that Moses could not enter into it.

LEVITICUS.
CHAP. I -- IX.
THE Tabernacle, the place of solemn Worship, being set up, God spoke unto
Moses out of it, and gave him directions concerning the several sorts of
Sacrifices and Offerings upon several Occasions.

CHAP. X.
Nadab and Abihu offering strange Fire, were consumed by Fire from God; but
Aaron their Father, and his Sons, are forbidden to mourn for 'em. They are also
forbidden to drink when they were to Minister in the Tabernacle.

CHAP. XI.
God declares what kind of Food should be clean, and what unclean.

CHAP. XII.
He gives Rules concerning the Purification of Women after Childbirth, and

CHAP. XIII.
Rules for the Priests in judging of Leprosy, and how it is to be cleansed, and

CHAP. XIV.
Signs of Leprosy in a House.

CHAP. XV.
Concerning uncleanness by Issues.

CHAP. XVI.
Other Offerings are directed, and the Feast of Expiation.

CHAP. XVII.
Blood must not be eaten.

CHAP. XVIII.
Shows what are unlawful Marriages.

CHAP. XIX, XX.
A Repetition of sundry Laws.

CHAP. XXI, XXII.
Several Laws concerning Priests.

CHAP. XXIII.
Several Solemn Feasts prescribed.

CHAP. XXIV.
Some Ceremonial Laws, and concerning Blasphemy.

CHAP. XXV.
Concerning the Jubilee.

CHAP. XXVI.
Blessings of Obedience, and Curses of Disobedience.

CHAP. XXVII.
Laws concerning Vows, and things Dedicated, and Tithes.

NUMBERS.
CHAP. I.
THE people were numbered, (all but the Levites) and they were six hundred and
three thousand five hundred and fifty.

CHAP. II.
The order and method wherein the Tribes were to pitch their Tents.

CHAP. III.
The Levites are given to the Priests for the Service of the Tabernacle insted
of the Firstborn, being almost equal in number, and the overplus of the
Firstborn were to pay so much a Man for their Redemption.

CHAP. IV.
The several charges and offices of the Levites.

CHAP. V.
The Trial of Jealousy.

CHAP. VI.
Laws concerning the Nazarites. The Form of the Priests blessing the people.

CHAP. VII.
The Offerings of the Princes at the Dedication of the Tabernacle and Altar.

CHAP. VIII.
Directions about lighting the Lamps, and Levites Consecration, and the time of
their Service.

CHAP. IX.
The Passover was kept, and directions are given for those that could not keep
it in its season. The Cloud and Pillar of Fire guide the Israelites removings
and encampings.

CHAP. X.
Silver Trumpets are commanded to be made, and their use showed. By direction
of the Cloud they removed from Sinai to Paran.

CHAP. XI.
God kindles a Fire among the people for their complaining, which upon Moses's
prayer was quenched. They despise Manna, and fall a lusting for Flesh; which
Moses being disturbed at, begs of God to take away his Life: Whereupon God
provides him Seventy Men for his Assistants, and promises to satisfy them with
Flesh for a whole Month together, which Moses cannot tell how to believe: But
God sent 'em Quails in abundance, but withal smote 'em with a very great Plague.

CHAP. XII.
Miriam and Aaron speak against Moses, because of an Ethiopian Woman whom he
had married; which God himself chides them for, and smites Miriam with
Leprosy, but upon Moses's intercession she is healed.

CHAP. XIII.
Spies are sent to search the Land of Canaan, who brought a bunch of Grapes of
such a prodigious bigness that it was carried between two Men; but withal they
give a discouraging account of the Inhabitants, and so brought up an evil
Report of the Land. Whereupon

CHAP. XIV.
The people murmured, and talked of returning again to Egypt; but Caleb and
Joshua labored to satisfy 'em, but the people mutiny against them: whereupon
the Glory of God appeared in the Tabernacle, and God threatens to destroy 'em
all with a Plague; but Moses intercedes for 'em, and prevails for pardon; but
God resolves that those Murmurers shall never see the Land, but die in the
Wilderness; and those that slandered the Land, died by the Plague: Whereupon
some of them would needs go and fight with the Canaanites, and take possession
of the Land, but Moses forbids 'em: yet they will go, and are worsted by the
Canaanites.

CHAP. XV.
Diverse Laws about Offerings. The Sacrifice for sins of Ignorance. The
punishment of presumption. A Man that was found gathering Sticks on the
Sabbath Day was by God's Command stoned to Death. Fringes to be worn on the
borders of their Garments.

CHAP. XVI.
Corah, Dathan and Abiram with two hundred and fifty Nobles make a Mutiny
against Moses and Aaron, because the other Tribes had not a share in the
Priesthood as well as the Tribe of Levi; and because the other Families of the
Tribe of Levi were not taken into the Priesthood as well as the Family of
Aaron. Whereupon Moses bids 'em bring their Censers with Incense in them to the
Tabernacle, that it might appear whom God had chosen. When they came to the
Tabernacle, God commanded Moses that the Congregation should separate
themselves from the Tents of those persons; then the Earth opened and swallowed
'em up; and also Fire came out from the Lord, and consumed the two hundred and
fifty that offered Incense. The next day the people murmured against Moses and
Aaron for killing the people of the Lord, and gathered together against them;
but the Glory of God appeared upon the Tabernacle, and he smote them with a
Plague, whereof there died fourteen thousand and seven hundred: Then Aaron made
atonement for them, and so the Plague was staid. And

CHAP. XVII.
For a further confirmation that God had chosen the Tribe of Levi peculiarly
for the Priesthood, he commanded that every Head of each Tribe should bring a
Rod to be laid up in the Tabernacle before the Lord, and the Rod belonging to
that Tribe which God did choose should blossom. On the morrow, when they
brought out the Rods, the Rod of Aaron was budded, blossomed, and had Fruit
on it; which Rod God commanded to be laid up before the Testimony for a Token of
this Decision of the Case.

CHAP. XVIII.
Their Election to the Priesthood being thus sixth beyond all dispute, God gives
them the charge of the Sanctuary and holy things, and assigns 'em their share
of 'em, and appoints the place where they should be eaten.

CHAP. XIX.
The Water of Separation for the purification of the unclean.

CHAP. XX.
In the Wilderness of Zin Miriam dies. Here the People wanted Water, and
thereupon murmur against Moses and Aaron. They pray God, and he bids Moses take
the Rod and strike the Rock with it, and that should give Water. Moses
accordingly took the Rod, and being in a passion, smote the Rock twice, saying,
Hear now ye Rebels, must we fetch you water out of this Rock? whereat God was
displeased, and tells them, They should not bring the people into the promised
Land. Then Moses sent to the King of Edom to desire passage through his
Country, but he denied it. At Mount Hor, Moses, at God's command, strips Aaron
of his Garments, and put them on Eleazar his Son; and then Aaron died there.

CHAP. XXI.
The people murmur for want of Bread and Water, and loath Manna; whereupon God
sent poisonous Serpents among 'em, which bit 'em, whereof many died. Then the
people acknowledge their Fault, and beg the removal of those Serpents. But God
commanded Moses to make a Serpent of Brass, and set it upon a Pole, and every
one that looked upon it was healed. The Israelites send Messengers to Sion for
leave to pass through his Land; but he not only denied leave, but waged war
against 'em; but they overcame him, and took all his Land, and dwelt in the
Cities thereof. Then Og fought with 'em also, but they slew him and all his
Posterity, and possessed his Land.

CHAP. XXII.
Balak King of Moab, seeing what they had done to the Amorites, was afraid, and
sent to Balaam a Southsayer to come and curse 'em, that so he might prevail
against 'em; but God forbad him to go; so he sent the Messengers away. But
Balak sent other Messengers with promises of great Rewards: Whereupon Balaam
gaping after the Rewards, detains them that Night, to try if he could obtain
leave to go with 'em; which God yields unto, only with this Caution, That he
should say nothing but what God directed him. But God was angry with Balaam for
going with a mischievous intent, and sent an Angel to stand in his way and
hinder him. Balaam's Ass seeing the Angel, turned out of the way; then he went
and stood in a narrow way between two Walls; whereupon the Ass, to shun the
Angel, thrust her self to the Wall, and crushed Balaam's foot: Then the Angel
went to a narrow place, where he could not possibly pass by: Then the Ass fell
down under Balaam, whereupon he smote the Ass with a Staff. Then the Lord
opened the Asses mouth, and she argued the case with Balaam; after which God
opened the eyes of Balaam also to see the Angel, who reproved him, both for his
usage of the Ass, and for his Journey; yet bids him go on with the the former
caution: So he came to Balak, who brought him to a place where he might see all
the Camp of Israel.

CHAP. XXIII.
Balaam having appointed seven Altars to be built, offers Sacrifice on 'em, and
waits for some word from God; who put a Word into his Mouth, and overruled him
to bless the people of Israel, which Balak was angry at; and takes him to
another place, from whence he might see but part of 'em: There also he built
Altars, and offered Sacrifices; and God put another Word into his Mouth, That
he would not repent of what he had said, but that they should be blessed, and he would
be with 'em, so that no Enchantment should take place against 'em, and that
they should prevail over all their Enemies. Balak was very angry at this, but
brought him to another place, to try whether he could get 'em cursed from
thence.

CHAP. XXIV.
Sacrifices being offered as before, Balaam seeing his purpose crossed hitherto,
goes with a resolution to curse 'em whatever came on it; but as soon as he
beheld them, the Spirit of God came upon him, and overruled him to foretell
their flourishing Estate, multitude of People, advancement of the Nation, their
Power, Strength and Victory over their Enemies, and concludes with a Blessing
on those that blessed them, and a Curse on those that cursed them. Whereupon
Balak in a great huff sends him away. But before his departure he prophesied
farther of the Star of Jacob, that should smite all the Corners of Moab, and of
his Conquest of several Nations; and so they parted.

CHAP. XXV.
While Israel continued thereabouts, the People began to commit Whoredom with
the Daughters of Moab, and to worship their Gods; whereupon God commanded the
Ringleaders to be hanged up, and others were slain: And when Phineas saw one
bring a Midianitish Woman into his Tent in the Face of the Congregation, he
went and thrust them both through; whereupon the Plague was staid, whereof
twenty four thousand died; and God promised him an everlasting Priesthood.

CHAP. XXVI.
The People are commanded to be numbered, and the Land to be divided according
to the number of each Tribe.

CHAP. XXVII.
Zelophehad leaving behind him only Daughters, they sue for an Inheritance,
which was allowed them; and a general Law made, That Daughters should inherit.
Moses is commanded to go to the top of a Mountain, to take a view of the Land,
and so be gathered to his People: Whereupon he sues for a Successor; and Joshua
is appointed, upon whom Eleazur the Priest laid his hand, and invested him in
his Office.

CHAP. XXVIII, XXIX.
Laws concerning several sorts of Offerings. And Chapter 30. About Vows.

CHAP. XXXI.
The People are sent to fight against the Midianites, and they slew the Kings
and all the Males, but saved the Women. They also slew Balaam among the rest.
When they returned, Moses was angry for sparing the Women, because they had
enticed the Israelites to Whoredom and Idolatry, and commands 'em all to be
slain, but the Virgins to be kept alive and purified. Then the Prey was divided
between those that went to War, and those that stayed at home, and a Tribute
was levied to the Lord out of each of their shares. The Officers of the Army,
upon a muster, find that there was not one Man wanting, whereupon they offered
a Free Will Offering to God.

CHAP. XXXII.
The Reubenites and Gadites sue for their Inheritance on that side Jordan, for
which Moses reproves them, as if thereby they discouraged their Brethren; but
they promising to go over along with their Brethren, and not to return till
they had conquered the Land, Moses accepts of the Offer, and so assigns 'em the
Kingdom of Sihon, and of Og; so they repaired the Cities, and possessed them.

CHAP. XXXIII.
The several Journies of the Israelites in the Wilderness.

CHAP. XXXIV.
A Terrier of the Land of Canaan, describing it by its borderings on every
side. The Names of the Persons appointed to divide it.

CHAP. XXXV.
Forty eight Cities with their Suburbs were to be assigned to the Levites;
whereof six were to be Cities of Refuge; and Laws are given to direct who
should be received into those Cities, and who should be accounted guilty of
wilful Murder; and that no satisfaction should be taken for such a one.

CHAP. XXXVI.
The Daughters of Zelophehad being Heiresses, are appointed to marry within
their own Tribe, to prevent alienating the Possessions of one Tribe to another;
whereupon they married to their Cosin-Germans.

DEUTERONOMY.
This Book contains only a Repetition of what had passed, and was related
before, with little addition of Historical Passages, and so may be omitted in
this Abridgment, most of it, only

CHAP. XXXI.
God foreseeing that the Israelites would break his Covenant, and commit
Idolatry, and so provoke him to inflict many Evils upon 'em, commands Moses to
write a Song to be taught their Children from Age to Age, which should be a
Witness for him against them. Which he did, chap. 32. Then

CHAP. XXXIII.
He blesses the Tribes, and

CHAP. XXXIV.
Afterward goes up to the top of Pisgah, from whence God showed him all the
Land of Canaan, and then he dies, being an hundred and twenty years old; and
God buried him in a place that no man knew of. His Successor was Joshua the Son
of Nun.

JOSHUA.
CHAP. I.
AFter Moses's Death, God commands Joshua to lead the Israelites over Jordan
into Canaan, promising to be with him, and never to fail him nor forsake him.
According he prepares for their passage, and puts the two Tribes and half in
mind of their promise; which they own, and promise Obedience to him, as they
had done to Moses.

CHAP. II.
Joshua sends two Men to spy Jericho, who came to a Harlots House, and lodged
there; which being known to the King, he sends to Rahab to produce 'em; but she
hid 'em, and made an excuse, that they were gone. Before they went away, she
treats with 'em about sparing her self, and Family and Relations, when God
should deliver the Land into their hands. Which they consent unto, upon
condition she concealed the Agreement, and tied the Scarlet Thread, by which
they were to be let down, to her Window. So she let 'em down through the Window,
and they escaped, and came to Joshua.

CHAP. III.
Joshua removes the Camp to Jordan, and commands the Priests to take up the
Ark, and go before the People; and as soon as the Priests Feet touched the
Waters of Jordan, they were divided, and so the Priests and all the People
passed through Jordan on dry ground.

CHAP. IV.
The People being passed over, but the Priests with the Ark standing still in
the Chanel, God commands Joshua to appoint twelve Men to take twelve Stones out
of the midst of Jordan, and set 'em on the other side, for a memorial of this
Miracle. And likewise he set up twelve Stones in the midst of Jordan. All this
while the Priests with the Ark stood in the Chanel: But when all was done, and
they were come away, presently the Waters returned to their place, as before.

CHAP. V.
When the report of this miraculous appearing of God for his People, was heard
among the Canaanites, they were struck with such terror, that they had no
Spirit left in 'em. As soon as the People were passed over Jordan, God commands
all the Males born in the Wilderness to be circumcised, (because they had not
been circumcised by the way.) Then they kept the Passover, and the morrow after
did eat of the old Corn of the Land of Canaan, and the Manna ceased. God
appears to Joshua with a drawn Sword in his hand, as being come to his
assistance.

CHAP. VI.
God commands Joshua, that seven Priests with Trumpets of Rams Horns going
before the Ark, and attended with the Militia before and behind them, should go
round about Jericho once every day for seven days together, and on the seventh
day should compass it about seven times, and at the seventh time should shout;
which being done, the Wall fell down flat, so that every man went into the City
strait before him, and utterly destroyed all that was in it, both Man and
Beast, (it being devoted) only Rahab and her Family was saved alive, and all
that she had, and the Gold and Silver they put into the Treasury of the Lord.
And Joshua laid a Curse upon whomsoever should ever after build that City again.

CHAP. VII.
But one of the Israelites converted some of the Spoils thereof to his own use
(all which should either have been destroyed, or dedicated to God) whereupon
when some of the People were sent against Ai, they fled before the Men of Ai,
and about thirty six were slain. Joshua was much surpised at this
Discomfiture, and expostulates with God about it; who tells him, It was because
some body had taken of the accursed thing, and converted it to his own use,
which must be discovered and punished; and therefore they should all appear
before the Lord, and cast Lots; and the person that was taken by lot should be
burnt with Fire, he and all that he had. Which being done, Achan was taken; who
thereupon confessed that he took a goodly Babylonish Garment, two hundred
Shekels of Silver, and a Wedg of Gold, and hid 'em in his Tent: So Joshua sent
Messengers and fetched 'em, and took them, and him, and his Children, and all
that he had, and burnt 'em with Fire; and then the Lords Anger was appeased.

CHAP. VIII.
God encourages Joshua, and promises to deliver Ai into his Hands, and gives
him the prey of it for themselves; only directs him to lay an Ambushment behind
the City, which was done; and so the City was taken, sacked and burnt, the King
hanged; but they took the prey for themselves. Then Joshua built an Altar on
Mount Ebal, and wrote the Law upon it; and half of the People stood upon Mount
Ebai, and half on Mount Gerizim, and read the Blessings and Curses of the Law,
as was commanded by Moses.

CHAP. IX.
The Gibeonites hearing of the taking of Jericho and Ai, sent Messengers with
moldy Bread and clouted Shoes, pretending that they came from a far Country,
and desired to make a League with the Israelites; which they accepted of,
without asking Counsel of God; and so clapped up a League with 'em. But soon
after they understood they were their Neighbors: But the Princes having sworn
to 'em the People let 'em alone; only, as a punishment for their Fraud, they
made 'em Hewers of Wood, and Drawers of Water for the House of God.

CHAP. X.
Some of the Kings of the Canaanites hearing what Gibeon had done, combined
together to smite it; whereupon they sent to Joshua for help, who came suddenly
upon the Kings, and slew 'em with a great slaughter. The Lord also cast down
great Hailstones upon 'em, which slew many more than had been slain with the
Sword. And that the Victory might be complete, Joshua commanded the Sun to
stand still over Gibeon, which it did for about a whole day. But the five Kings
fled and hid themselves in a Cave, which Joshua being told of, he sent for 'em,
and made the great Officers set their Feet upon their Necks, in token that they
should deal so by all their Enemies. Then he commanded 'em to be hanged till
the Evening. Afterward he took several other Towns, with the Kings thereof,
and then returned to the Camp to Gilgal.

CHAP. XI.
Diverse other Kings joining together to fight against Israel, God delivers 'em
into their hands, and they smote 'em till they left none remaining: They also
took their Cities, and slew the Inhabitants, but took the Spoil for themselves.

CHAP. XII.
A Rehearsal of the Kings that Moses took on the other side Jordan, and of the
thirty one Kings that Joshua took on this side Jordan.

CHAP. XIII.
Tho much of the Land was yet unconquered, yet God bids Joshua divide it all
among the Nine Tribes and an half.

CHAP. XIV.
Caleb challenges a certain share in the Land by the promise of Moses, which
Joshua allowed, and gave him Hebron for his Inheritance.

CHAP. XV.
The Borders of the lot of Judah are set down, among which was the Inheritance
of Caleb, who promised his Daughter Acsah to whomsoever should take
Kinjath-sepher: This Othniel performed, and obtained her for his Wife: She
begged of her Father some Land that had Springs in it; so he gave her the upper
Springs and the nether Springs. The Children of Judah could not wholly drive
the Jebusites out of Jerusalem.

CHAP. XVI.
The Borders of the Lot of the Children of Joseph, viz. Ephraim, and ( chapter 27.)
Manasseh.

CHAP. XVIII.
The Tabernacle is set up at Shiloh; and there being seven Tribes that had not
yet received their Inheritance, certain Persons are appointed to describe the
remaining part of the Land into seven parts, for which they cast Lots before
the Lord in Shiloh for Benjamin; and ( chapter 19.) for Simeon, Zebulon, Issachar,
Asher, Nepthali and Dan. Then they allotted an Inheritance to Joshua.

CHAP. XX.
Six Cities of Refuge are set out.

CHAP. XXI.
Forty eight Cities are given by Lot to the Levites. So they possessed all the
Land that God promised 'em, and had rest.

CHAP. XXII.
Then Joshua called the two Tribes and an half, and blessed them, and sent them
away, and they went homewards; but when they came to the Borders of Jordan in
Canaan, they built there a great Altar, which when the other Tribes heard of,
they gathered together to make war with 'em; but first sent Phineas and ten
Princes to 'em to expostulate with 'em, as if they intended thereby to
apostatize from God. But the two Tribes and half replied, That the design of
that Altar was not for Sacrifice or Offerings, but for a witness between 'em,
That tho they dwelt without Jordan, yet they were of the same People, and
worshipped the same God with the Israelites on the inner side Jordan. Which when
Phineas and the Princes related to the Congregation, they were very well
pleased, and called the Altar Ed, i. e. Witness.

CHAP. XXIII.
Joshua being old, calls for the Rulers of the People, and exhorts 'em to
obedience, as they desire God should continue with 'em; and that as God had
fulfilled his Promises to a tittle to them, so if they should depart from him,
and serve other Gods, then he would bring all sorts of Evils upon ^em, and they
should be rooted out of the Land.

CHAP. XXIV.
He further gives 'em a brief Narrative of God's signal Providence and singular
Benefits to them and their Fathers, from his first calling of Abraham to the
present time, and thereupon earnestly exhorts 'em to fear the Lord, and serve
him in sincerity and truth; declaring his own fixed resolution, That both
himself and his Family would serve the Lord, which the People likewise engage
themselves to do. So Joshua made a Covenant between God and the People that
day, and wrote it in the Book of the Law, and set up a great Stone in testimony
thereof. After which he died, being an hundred and ten years old; and Eleazar
died also; and Joseph's Bones were buried in Shechem, according to his
commandment.

JUDGES.
CHAP. I.
AFter Joshua's Death the Tribes of Judah and Simeon make War with some of the
Cannanites, and flew ten thousand in Bezek, and took their King Adonibe^ek, and
cut off his Thumbs and great T^^^; which he acknowledges as a just requital
from God for having served seventy Kings in that manner. Afterward they fought
against others of the Canaanites, and slew three Giants at Hebron, and took
several places, because God was with 'em. The Children of Joseph also took Luz,
or Bethel, and slew all the Inhabitants, except one Man and his Family, that
showed him the entrance into the City. But yet many of the old Inhabitants
remained still among the Tribes of Ephraim, Manasseh, Asher and Nepthali, whom
they could not drive out.

CHAP. II.
An Angel reproves the Israelites for making Leagues with the People of the
Land, and sparing their Altars, and thereupon threatens not to drive 'em out.
Then the People lift up their Voice and wept; so the place was called Bochim.
Afterward they forsook the Lord, and served Baal and Ashtaroth; then God
delivered them into the hands of Spoilers, and they were greatly distressed; but
upon their Repentance God raised up Judges, who delivered 'em; yet they soon
returned to Idolatry again: And thus they did time after time; therefore God
left many of the Canaanites among 'em. And

CHAP. III.
The Children of Israel dwelt among 'em, and made Marriages with 'em, and
served their Gods. Then God delivered them into the hand of Cushan ^ishathaim
Eight Years: But when they cried to the Lord, he raised up Othniel, who
prevailed against Cushan Rishathaim; so the Land had rest Forty Years. Then
they did evil again, and the Lord strengthened the hand of Eglon King of Moab,
who smote 'em, and ruled over 'em eighteen years; but when they cried to the
Lord, he raised up Ehud, who being sent with a Present to Eglon, smote him with
a Dagger, and slew him, and afterward raised an Army, and slew about ten
thousand Moabites; whereupon the Land had rest eighty years. And after him was
Shamgar, who slew six hundred Philistines with an Ox Goud, and delivered Israel.

CHAP. IV.
Then they did evil again, and God sold 'em into the hand of Jabin, whose
Captain was Sisera; and he oppressed 'em twenty years; and they cried to the
Lord. Now Deborah a Prophetess judged Israel at that time, and she called
Barak, and sent him against Sisera; but he would not go, except she went with
him: So they went together, and ten thousand Men with 'em; and Sisera came with
nine hundred Charets of Iron, and a great Host. But the Lord discomfited them
before Barak, who slew 'em, that there was not a Man left; only Sisera escaped
on his Feet, and fled to the Tent of Heber the Kenite, and Jael his Wife
invited him into her House, and gave him Milk to drink, and covered him: Then
he fell asleep, and Jael took a Nail and drove it into his Temples, and he
died: And as Barak pursued him, she called him in to see Sisera. So God subdued
Jabin.

CHAP. V.
Upon this Victory Deborah composes a Song, which she and Barak sang; wherein
they commend Jael's Fact, and pronounce her blessed for it; whereby it appears
she had a special Warrant from God for it.

CHAP. VI.
The Children of Israel did evil again, and the Lord delivered 'em into the
hand of Midian, who oppressed 'em seven years. Then they cried to the Lord, and
he sent a Prophet to 'em, who upbraids 'em for their Idolatry and other Sins;
and God appeared to Gideon, and sent him to deliver 'em. Gideon desires a Sign:
The Angel makes Fire to rise out of the Rock, and consume the Flesh and Cakes
that Gideon had brought to him, and then departed out of his sight. Then Gideon
built an Altar there. That Night God appeared again to him, and commands him to
throw down the Altar of Baal, and cut down the Grove, and build an Altar to
God; which he did. In the morning when the Citizens saw what was done, they
made enquiry about it, and understanding it was Guideon, they would have had
him put to death: But his Father defends the Fact, and calls him Jerubbaal.
Then when the Midianites and Amalekites brought a great Army, Gideon also
raised an Army, and desired a Sign from God of his good Success, That his
Fleece might be wet with dew, when the rest of the Earth was dry; and
afterward, That it might be dry when the rest was wet; both which came to pass
accordingly.

CHAP. VII.
Gideon having an Army of thirty two thousand, God would not make use of 'em,
lest they should think their own Power saved 'em, and therefore appoints him to
dismiss 'em all but three hundred. That Night Gideon went down to the outside
of the Camp of the Midianites and Amalekites, who were like Grasshoppers for
multitude; there he overheard one telling a Dream to his Fellow, of a Barley
Cake tumbling into the Host of Midian and overturning a Tent, that it lay
along. To whom his Fellow replied, This is nothing else save the Sword of
Gideon, into whose hand God has delivered the Host of Midian. Hereupon he took
the three hundred Men, and divided 'em into three Companies, and gave unto
every one of 'em a Trumpet in one hand, and an empty Pitcher with a Lamp in it,
in the other, and bad 'em, when they came to the outside of the Enemies Camp,
to do as he did, saying, The Sword of the Lord and of Gideon. So when they came
to the outside of the Camp, they blew their Trumpets, and brake their
Pitchers, and stood round the Camp, and all the Host ran and fled, and slew one
another. And they took two Princes of the Midianites, Oreb and Zeeb, and slew
them, and brought their Heads to Gideon, who pursued after the rest.

CHAP. VIII.
Then the Ephraimites quarreled with Gideon, because he did not call them to
the Battle; but with mild words he pacified 'em, and still proceeded in the
pursuit of the Midianites, and came to Succoth, and to Penuel, who refused to
relieve him. Then he took the Kings of Midian, Zeba and Zalmunna, and came back
to Succoth, and took seventy seven of the Magistrates, and taught 'em with
Briers and Thorns of the Wilderness, and rased the Tower, and slew the
Citizens. He slew also Zeba and Zalmunna. Hereupon the Israelites offer him the
Kingship for himself and his Posterity; but he refused it, because God was
their chief Ruler. After this Gideon desired the People to give him their
golden Earrings which they took from the Midianites; wherewith he made an
Ephod, and put it in the City of Ophrah, and all Israel went thither a whoring
after it, whereby it became a Snare to him and his House. Gideon had seventy
Sons by several Wives, and one by a Concubine, whom he called Abionilech. After
Gideon's Death the People made Baal-berith their God, and did not show kindness
to the House of Gideon for all his kindness to them.

CHAP. IX.
Abimelech, by the Assistance of his Mothers Friends, inveigles the Men of
Shechem to choose him King, which they did, and furnished him with Money,
wherewith he hired vain and light Persons, and went to Ophrah, and slew his
seventy Brethren, all but Jotham the youngest, who hid himself and escaped.
Then the Men of Shechem installed him King. But Jotham by a Parable of the
Trees choosing a King, rebukes 'em, and foretells their ruin, and that they
should be the cause of one another destruction. After which God sent a Spirit
of Dissension between Abimelech and the Men of Shechem, who dealt treacherously
with him, and set Liers in wait for him, and entertained Gaal, who sent a
Challenge to Abimelech to come and fight with him. But Zebul the Governor of
the City under Abimelech gave him notice that he should come and lie in wait
for Gaal, and set upon the City; which accordingly he did, and prevailed
against Gaal, and took the City, and demolished it, and slew the Inhabitants;
but many of 'em retired into the Idol-Temple, which Abimelech set on fire, and
burnt 'em all. Then he came to Thebez and took it; only there was a strong
Tower whether the People fled for safety; but Abimelech had like to have set
that on fire also; but a certain Woman threw a piece of a Millstone upon his
Head, and so slew him. Then they all went to their own Houses. And thus God
brought the Curse of Jotham upon 'em.

CHAP. X.
After Abimelech arose Tola, who judged Israel twenty three years. After him
arose Jair, who judged Israel twenty two years. Then they did evil again, and
served other Gods, and he delivered 'em into the hands of the Philistines and
Ammonites, and they were sore distressed. Then they cried unto the Lord, and
acknowledged their sin: But God bids 'em seek to the Gods whom they had chosen,
for he would deliver 'em no more. Then they put away their strange Gods, and served
the Lord, and gathered together to fight against Ammon. But,

CHAP. XI.
Wanting a General, the Elders of Gilead chose Jephthah, promising if he
conquered the Ammonites, to make him their Head: Then Jephthah sent Messengers
to the King of Ammon to know the reason of his Invasion of them. Who answered,
It was because they had taken away his Land when they came out of Egypt. But
Jephthah replied, That they meddled not with his Land, but took only the Land of
Sihon, who came out to fight with 'em; therefore the King of Ammon did 'em
wrong to war against 'em. But he harkned not to 'em. Then Jephthah vowed, That
if God would deliver 'em into his hands, whatsoever came first out of his Doors
to meet him should be the Lords, and he would offer it for a Burnt-offering. So
Jephthah fought with 'em, and obtained a great Victory over 'em. After which,
as he returned to his House, his Daughter came out to meet him with Timbrels
and Dances, and she was his only Child. Jephthah seeing her, rent his Clothes,
and told her his Vow. But she was very well satisfied, since God had delivered
his Enemies into his hands. So she went with her Companions two Months into the
Mountains to bewail her Virginity. After which her Father did with her
according to his Vow.

CHAP. XII.
The Ephraimites quarrel with Jephthah for not calling them to the War, and
raise War against him. But he overcame 'em, and discovering many of 'em by
their pronunciation, that they could not say Shibboleth, he put 'em to Death;
and so at that time there fell forty two thousand of them. Then Jephthah died,
having judged Israel six years. After him Ibzan judged Israel seven years.
After him Elon judged Israel ten years. After him Abdon judged Israel eight
years.

CHAP. XIII.
The Israelites did evil again, and God delivered 'em into the hands of the
Philistines. Then an Angel appeared to Manoah's Wife, and told her, she should
bear a Son that should be a Nazarite, and he should begin to deliver Israel.
She relates this to her Husband, who prays, that the Angel might come again to
satisfy 'em further about the Child: So the Angel appeared to her again, and
she called her Husband, who enquires of him how the Child was to be ordered,
asks his Name, and offered an Offering to the Lord, in the flame whereof the
Angel ascends; whereby Manoah knew he was an Angel. So the Woman bore a Son,
and called his Name Samson, and the Lord blessed him.

CHAP. XIV.
Then Samson went down to Timnah, and saw one of the Daughters of the
Philistines, and desired his Father to get her for him to Wife: This was of the
Lord, that he might find an occasion against the Philistines. As he and his
Father and Mother went to Timnah, he slew a Lion: then they went down, and he
talked with the Woman, and she pleased him well. Another time as he went to her,
looking at the Carkas^ of the Lion, he found a Swarm of Bees in it and Honey,
and he took some of the Combs and gave to his Father and Mother: So they went
down to solemnize the Wedding for seven days The Philistines provided thirty
Companions to be with him, to whom he propounded a Riddle which if they could
expound within the seven days of the Feast, he was to give them thirty Change
of Raiment; but if they could not, they were to give him so many. The Riddle
was this, Out of the eater came forth meat, an^ out of the strong came forth
sweetness. But they could not find it out. Then they employed hi^ Wife to pick
it out of him; who at last prevailed by her importunity, and on the seventh day
he told it her, and she told it to the Bridemen. So before Sun set they
resolved hi^ Riddle, saying, What is sweeter than Honey, and what is stronger
than a Lion? And he said, If you had not plowed with my Heifer, you had not
found out my Riddle. So he went among the Philistines, and slew thirty of 'em,
and gave thirty change of Garments to the Bridemen. And he went away to his own
Fathers House displeased; whereupon his Wife was given to one of the Bridemen.

CHAP. XV.
Samson went to visit his Wife, but was repulsed by her Father; whereupon he
caught three hundred Foxes, and tied 'em tail to tail, with Firebrands between
'em, and put 'em into the Philistines Corn, and burnt it all up, and their
Vines and Olives; which the Philistines understanding the Reason of, came and
burnt her and her Father. Then he took that occasion also, and smote 'em with a
great Slaughter: Whereupon the Philistines came to take him, and the Men of
Judah bound him with two new Cords, and delivered him to them. But he brake the
Cords, and with the Jaw Bone of an Ass slew a thousand of them. After which he
was exceeding thirsty, and called upon God, who made the Water spring out of
the ground for him, wherewith be was revived.

CHAP. XVI.
Then he went to Gaza to an Harlot's House, and the men of the City watched for
him all night to have slain him. But at Midnight he took the Gates of the City
and carried 'em away upon his Shoulders. Afterward he fell in love with
Delilah, to whom the Lords of the Philistines promised a great Reward, if she
could prevail with him to discover wherein his great Strength lay; who after he
had deluded her several times, at length told her how that he was a Nazarite,
and had never been shorn; but if his Hair was cut, his strength would depart
from him. Then she made him sleep in her Lap, and cut off his Hair, and called
for the Philistines, who took him and put out his Eyes, and brought him to
Gaza, and put him in Prison there. But on a Festival day they called for him to
make 'em sport: But he laying his Hands upon the Pillars that supported the
House, and calling upon God for Strength, pulled down the House upon 'em, and
thereby slew more than he had done in all his Lifetime.

CHAP. XVII.
Micah a Man of Ephraim had an House of Idols, and an Ephod and Teraphim, and
made one of his Sons his Priest. But a Levite coming thither to seek
employment, he hired him to be his Priest.

CHAP. XVIII
The Tribe of Dan seeking to gain part of their Inheritance, which they had
never yet been possessed of, sent some Men to make a Discovery of the Land, who
in their Journey lodged at Micah's House, and found the Levite there, who was
of their acquaintance, whom they desired to enquire of God concerning the
Success of their Journey. He returns an Answer of encouragement to 'em. So they
went to Laish, and found the People there very secure. So they acquainted their
Brethren with it, and six hundred of 'em set forward upon this expedition, and
came to Micah's House, and stole away his Gods, and persuaded the Priest to go
along with 'em. But Micah pursued 'em with a great Outcry for his Gods; but
they answered him roughly, so that he was feign to be gone. Then they came to
Laish, and smote it, and burnt it, and built another City which they called
Dan, and set up Micah's Graven Image there, where it remained till the
Captivity of the Land.

CHAP. XIX.
In those days a certain Levite took a Wife, who played the Whore, and returned
to her Father's House: But her Husband followed her thither to bring her again;
and her Father entertained him kindly. At last they went away and came to
Gibeah, and an old Man invited 'em into his House; but the Men of the City
beset the House, and would have the Levite brought out to abuse him: But he
brought out his Concubine to them, and they abused her all Night, and in the
Morning she came and fell down dead at the old Man's Door. Then her Lord
carried her home, and divided her into twelve parts, and sent to every Tribe a
part of her; and they were all mightily concerned at it.

CHAP. XX.
Then all the Congregation assembled at Mizpeh, resolving before they departed
to inflict exemplary punishment to the Men of Gibeah; and accordingly sent to
the Tribe of Benjamin to deliver up the Offenders to be put to death. But they
refused to deliver 'em up, and mustered up all their Forces to fight with
Israel. Then the Tribe of Judah, by God's appointment, went first to fight
against Gibeah. But the Men of Benjamin slew of 'em two and twenty thousand:
Whereupon the Men of Israel wept before the Lord, and sought further direction
from him. Then he commanded 'em to go up again against Benjamin; but they slew
eighteen thousand more. Then all the People of Israel humbled themselves
greatly with fasting and weeping, and enquired farther of God; who bad 'em go
up, and on the morrow he would deliver the Benjamites into their hand. Then they
set Ambushments, and went up again against Benjamin; and when the Benjamites
came out against 'em, they made as if they fled, and so drew the Benjamites
from the City. Then the Ambush rose up, and entered into the City, and set it on
fire; which when the Benjamites saw, they were amazed, and fled, and the
Israelites slew twenty five thousand of them, and burnt their Cities: Only six
hundred Men escaped, and hid themselves in a Rock four Months.

CHAP. XXI.
Afterward when the People considered what was done, and that there was a
Tribe cut off, they repented, and consulted how they might repair that loss:
Wherefore they sent and slew all the Men and Women of Jabish Gilead, because
they had not come to their assistance against Benjamin; only they saved all the
Virgins alive, which were four hundred. Then they sent and called for the six
hundred Benjamites that had hid themselves, and gave 'em these Virgins for
Wives. But still two hundred wanted Wives: Therefore they permit 'em to go to
Shiloh, where was a Feast kept, at which the Virgins used to come out to dance
and make merry, and to catch 'em Wives of these Virgins; which accordingly they
did, and so all departed home.

RUTH.
CHAP. I.
IN the days of the Judges there was a Famine in the Land of Judah, whereupon
Elimelech with his Wife Naomi and two Sons, went to sojourn in the Land of
Moab; where the Man died, and his two Sons took 'em Wives, Orpah and Ruth; but
the two Sons died childless. Then the Famine being removed, Naomi returned to
her own Country with her two Daughters-in-law, and came to Bethlehem.

CHAP. II.
Now there was in that City a rich Man called Boaz, of the Kindred of
Elimelech, into whose Field Ruth happened to go a gleaning: So Boaz finding her
there, enquired who she was; and understanding that she was Naomi's
Daughter-in-law, he spoke kindly to her, and gave order to his Servants to
treat her civilly: So she gleaned ^here till the end of Harvest.

CHAP. III.
Naomi considering Boaz's relation to her Husband, and his kindness to Ruth,
advises her to go at Night and lie down by Boaz in the threshing-floor, which
she did, and in the Night perceiving some body there, and asking who it was,
she makes a motion to him to take her to be his Wife, being a near Kinsman.
This he takes very kindly from her, and in the morning sends her away with a
good deal of Corn before it was light.

CHAP. IV.
The next day Boaz goes to the Court or Common Hall, and propounds to a nearer
Kinsman of Elimelech's the marrying of Ruth, which he refusing, Boaz takes her
to be his Wife, by whom he had Obed the Father of Jesse, the Father of David.

I. SAMUEL.
CHAP. I.
A Certain Levite called Elkanah had two Wives, Hannah and Peninnah; the latter
had Children, but the former was barren. He going yearly to worship and to
Sacrifice of Shiloh, gave to Peninnah and her Children Portions, but to Hannah
his best beloved, he gave a worthy Portion; but she being reproacht by Peninnah
for her Barrenness, was grieved, and did not eat, but went to the Temple and
prayed and wept sore, and vowed, That if God would give her a Son, she would
dedicate him to the Lord, and he should be a Nazarite. Eli the High Priest,
observing her Lips to move, but not hearing her Words, thought she had been
drunk, and reproves her for it; to whom she replied, That she was only pouring
out her Soul before the Lord; then Eli blessed her. So she went away and was no
more sad. When she came home she conceived and bare a Son, and called his Name
Samuel; and when she had weaned him, she brought him to the House of the Lord
in Shiloh, and told Eli that was the Child for which she prayed, whom now she
devoted to God's Service as long as he lived. And

CHAP. II.
Indicted a Song of Praise in token of her thankfulness for this mercy. After
this she had several other Children. Now the Sons of Eli were very profane
Persons; for they forced the People to give 'em what parts of the Sacrifices
they pleased, and more than the Law required; so that Men abhorred the Offerings
of the Lord; and also lay with the Women that came to worship at the
Tabernacle; and yet for these prodigious Lewdnesses their Father reproved 'em
but very gently and tenderly; and therefore God sent a Prophet to him, to
threaten him with heavy Judgments upon his Family, and the High Priesthood
should be translated to another.

CHAP. III.
All this while Samuel ministered to the Lord, and one Night God called to
Samuel, and revealed to him his purpose of laying aside Eli's House from being
High Priests, and reducing them to a mean condition, because his Sons made
themselves vile, and he restrained 'em not. In the morning Eli asked him what
God had said to him, and charged him to conceal nothing from him: So Samuel
told him all; whereupon he uttered this submissive Speech, It is the Lord, let
him do what seems him good.

CHAP. IV.
At that time there was War between the Israelites and the Philistines, and the
Philistines prevailed, and slew about four thousand Israelites. Then the
Israelites fetched the Ark into the Camp to save 'em from the Philistines, and
the two Sons of Eli went along with it: But the Philistines overcame 'em again,
and slew thirty thousand, among which were Eli's two Sons, and also took the
Ark. Then a certain Man ran to Shiloh with these Tidings to Eli, who sat by the
way side watching and trembling for the Ark; and when the Man mentioned the
Ark's being taken, he fell backward and brake his Neck. Phinehas's Wife also
upon these Tidings fell in travel, and named her Child Ichabod, and so died.

CHAP. V.
The Philistines having taken the Ark, brought it to Ashdod, and set it by
Dagon their God; but the next morning Dagon was fallen on his Face to the
Earth: So they set him up again; but the next morning he was fallen again, and
his Head and Hands broke off; and also God smote the Men of Ashdod and the
parts adjoining, with Hemorroids. So they carried the Ark to Gath, and God
smote them also with Hemorroids: Then they sent it to Ekron; but they desired
it might be sent to its own place again, for the hand of God was heavy upon 'em.

CHAP. VI.
Then the chief of the Philistines consulted with the Priests and Diviners,
what they should do with the Ark, who advised to send it back with a
Trepass Offering, viz. Five golden Hemorroids, and five golden Mice, which
they did, and put them in a Coffer, and set the Ark and Coffer in a new Cart
drawn with two Milch-Kine, who took the strait way to Bethshemesh; which when
the Men of Bethshemesh saw, they rejoiced, and the Levites took down the Ark
and the Coffer, and they clave the Wood of the Cart, and offered the Kine for a
Burnt-Offering ^o the Lord. But the Lord smote fifty thousand of the Men of
Bethshemesh for peeping into the Ark; so they sent to the Men of Kirjath-jearim
^o fetch it. And

CHAP. VII.
The Men of Kirjath-jearim brought the Ark to the House of Abinadab, where it
remained twenty years. Samuel exhorts the People to put ^way their false Gods,
and repent of all their ^ins; so they fasted and wept in Mizpeh. Then ^he
Philistines hearing they were there, came up against them; whereupon they
desire Samuel to cry unto God to save 'em; which he did, and God heard him; for
as he was offering a Burnt-Offering, the Lord thundered against the Philistines
and discomfited them. So they were subdued all the days of Samuel; and he
judged Israel all his days, and went every year in Circuit to several Cities to
administer Justice among 'em. But

CHAP. VIII.
Samuel's Sons, whom he made Judges under him, were corrupt; whereupon the
Elders of Israel came to Samuel, and desired him to make 'em a King, as other
Nations had: But this displeased Samuel, and he prayed to God for direction.
God, tho he interpreted it as a rejecting of himself, yet permits Samuel to
comply with their desire, but withal bad him acquaint 'em what manner of usage
they must expect from a King, and how he would employ his Power to tyrannize over
'em and oppress 'em; yet still they persist in their desire, so God bids him
yield to their Importunity.

CHAP. IX.
Now Kish of the Tribe of Benjamin had a goodly Son, whose Name was Saul; and
Kish having lost his Asses, sent his Son to seek 'em. He having sought 'em in
many places without success, at last came to Samuel to enquire of him after
'em. Now God had told Samuel the day before, that there would come to him a Man
of Benjamin, whom he should anoint to be King. So Samuel meeting with him,
invites him to a Feast with the chief of the City, and set him in the uppermost
place, and afterward walked abroad with him. Then

CHAP. X.
Samuel took a Vial of Oil, and anointed him to be King, and told him the Asses
were found, and that in his return homewards he should meet a company of
Prophets, and the Spirit of the Lord should come upon him, and he should
Prophecy with 'em; and that he should go to Gilgal and tarry there seven days,
till Samuel came to him to tell him what he should do. All which came to pass
accordingly; so that it was said, Is Saul also among the Prophets? Then Samuel
called the People together to Mizpeh, and sets 'em to cast Lots to find out who
should be their King; and the Lot fell upon Saul; but he had hid himself, and
could not be found. But God told 'em he was hid among the Stuff; so they sent
and fetched him, and proclaimed him King. But some Mal-Contents despised him,
and brought him no Presents; but he took no notice of it.

CHAP. XI.
After this Nahash the Ammonite came up and besieged Jabesh-Gilead. Then the
Rulers sent a Message to him, That if they had not Relief within seven days,
they would deliver the City up to him. Saul hearing of this, sent to call all
the People to him; and they came all unanimously: Then he sent word to
Jabesh-Gilead, That to morrow he would come and relieve 'em. So they came early in
the morning and fell upon the Ammonites, and quite routed 'em, so that two of
'em were not left together. Hereupon all the People went to Gilgal, and
confirmed Saul King there before the Lord, and sacrificed Sacrifices of
Peace Offerings, and rejoiced together.

CHAP. XII.
Hereupon Samuel expostulates with 'em concerning their desire of a King, and
first testifies his own Integrity, that he had not misbehav'd himself in his
Government of 'em, nor given 'em occasion to desire a Change: And to convince
'em of their sin in desiring a King, he called upon God, and he sent unusual
Thunder and Rain; whereupon they were greatly afraid, and acknowledged their
sin. But Samuel encouraged 'em, and told 'em, God would not forsake his People,
neither would he cease to pray for 'em; only bids 'em be sure to fear God: But
says he, If you still do wickedly, you shall be consumed, both you and your
King.

CHAP. XIII.
Jonathan having smitten a Garrison of the Philistines, they raise a great Army
to fight with Israel, so that the People were afraid and hid themselves; but
Saul was with his Lifeguard at Gilgal, and tarried seven days for Samuel
according to his appointment; and when Samuel came not, and the People began to
steal away from him, he offered a Burnt-offering, and as soon as he had made an
end of offering, Samuel came, and rebuked him sharply for not staying the full
time that God had commanded, which if he had done, God would have established
him upon the Throne for ever; but now his Kingdom should not continue, for God
had sought him another, one after his own Heart, whom he would make King; and
Samuel departed from him. Then the Philistines sent out several Parties which
spoiled the Israelites, and suffered 'em not to have any Weapons, nor Smiths to
make any.

CHAP. XIV.
Then Jonathan and his Armor-bearer went over to a Garrison of the
Philistines, and by a Sign gathered that God would deliver 'em into their
Hands. And accordingly Jonathan and his Armor-bearer slew several of 'em,
which caused an extraordinary trembling all over the Host, so that they fell a
killing one another; which the Watchmen perceiving, Saul and the People with
him got together to pursue them, and Saul, that they might not be diverted from
the pursuit, adjur'd 'em not to eat any thing till the Battle was ended. But
Jonathan, not hearing the Oath, and being faint, eat some Honey; but the People
durst not do so, and therefore were very faint; and when they came to eat, were
so greedy, that they eat the Blood with the Flesh. Afterward Saul enquired of
God whether he should any further pursue the Philistines; but God answered him
not: Whereupon he concluded there had been some transgression among 'em, and
cast Lots to find it out; and the Lot falling upon Jonathan, Saul would have
put him to Death, but the People rescued him. So Saul fought against all his
Enemies, and prevailed; and when he saw any strong and valiant Man, he took him
to him.

CHAP. XV.
Samuel, by Gods appointment, sends Saul utterly to destroy the Amalekites,
both Man, Woman, and Child, and all their Cattle. So Saul smote 'em, and took
their King Agag, and utterly destroyed all the People, but spared the King and
the best of the Cattle, and of the Prey. Whereupon God tells Samuel, That he
repented of making Saul King: Then Samuel went to Saul, and reproved him
severely for not obeying the Voice of the Lord: And whereas Saul pretended they
kept the best of the Cattle for Sacrifice, Samuel tells him, that To obey is
better than Sacrifice, and to harken than the fat of Rams, and that Rebellion
is as the sin of Witchcraft: And because he had rejected the Word of the Lord,
God had also rejected him from being King: And as Samuel turned about to go
away from him, Saul laid hold on the Skirt of his Mantle and rent it: at which
Samuel said, God has rent the Kingdom from thee this day, and given it to a
Neighbor of thine that is better than thou. Then Samuel commanded Agag to be
brought to him, and he hewed him in pieces before the Lord in a Sacrifice to
him.

CHAP. XVI.
Then God commanded Samuel to take an Horn of Oil, and anoint one of the Sons
of Jesse, and to go to Bethlehem to offer Sacrifice, and to call Jesse and his
Sons to the Sacrifice, that the Design might not be perceived by Saul. So Jesse
being come, and making seven of his Sons pass before Samuel, he said it was
none of them that his business was withal. Then he called the youngest, who was
keeping of Sheep, and when he came, Samuel anointed him in the midst of his
Brethren. And the Spirit of God came upon him, and departed from Saul, and an
evil Spirit troubled him; whereupon he sent for David to play before him, and
so the evil Spirit departed from him.

CHAP. XVII.
After this the Philistines and Israelites set their Battle in array one
against another, and there was a Valley between 'em. Then a Champion of the
Philistines, a Giant, whose Name was Goliath, came and stood between the two
Armies, and challenged any of the Israelites to fight with him, and defied
their Armies. Thus he did forty days together: At last David being sent by his
Father to his three eldest Brethren that were in the Army, to carry 'em some
Provision, and see how they did, hearing the vaunting, blasphemous Speeches of
this Philistine, and being told that whosoever could kill him, the King would
give him his Daughter, and make him a great Man, David undertakes to sight with
him: So Saul sent for him, and told him he was a very unequal Match for the
Philistine: But David told him how he had slain both a Lion and a Bear, and
that God who had delivered him from them, would also deliver him from this
Philistine. So he took only his Shepherds Staff and a Sling in his Hand, and
went against the Philistine. But when the Philistine drew near and saw him, he
despised him. But David told him, he came to him in the Name of the Lord of
Hosts, who would deliver him into his hand, and discomfit their Host, that all
the Earth may know there is a God in Israel. So David slang a Stone which sank
into his Forehead, and he fell down. Then David ran and took Goliath's own
Sword and cut off his Head: Whereupon the Army of Israel set upon the
Philistines, and routed 'em; and David brought the Head of Goliath in his hand
to Saul. Hereupon

CHAP. XVIII.
Jonathan entered into a strict League of Friendship with David, and loved him
as his own Soul. And David was set over the Men of War, and accepted of all the
People. And as David returned from the Slaughter of the Philistine, the Women
came out of all the Cities, saying, Saul has slain his thousands, and David
his ten thousands; for which Saul envied him from that day forward; so that the
next time that the Evil Spirit came upon Saul, and David played before him, Saul
threw a Javelin at him to have slain him: But David avoided twice out of his
Presence; and he was beloved by all the People; and also Michal Readiness Daughter
fell in love with him for her Husband; to which Saul readily consented,
requiring only an hundred Fore-skins of the Philistines for a Dowry, designing
thereby to have him slain by the Philistines. But David and his Men slew two
hundred Philistines, and brought their Foreskins to Saul. So Readiness Jealousy
of David still increased. And

CHAP. XIX.
Saul spoke to Jonathan his Son, and all his Servants, to kill David; which
Jonathan acquainted David with, and bids him hide himself, and then vindicates
David to his Father; whereupon Saul swear to him not to hurt him; so they were
reconciled again. Then David made War with the Philistines again, and overcame
'em: And the Evil Spirit came upon Saul, and David played before him, and he
threw a Javelin again at him; but David slipped aside and escaped. But Saul sent
Messengers to watch him in his House; then Michal his Wife let him down through a
Window, and laid an Image in the Bed, so that when Saul sent for him, they
found only an Image. So David came to Samuel to Ramah, and Saul hearing of it,
sent Messengers once and again to take him; but when they came to the place
among the Prophets, they fell a prophesying also; and Saul going thither
himself, prophesied in like manner; wherefore they say, Is Saul also among the
Prophets?

CHAP. XX.
So David fled from thence and came to Jonathan, and advises with him about the
best way for his safety; and they agree that he should absent himself from the
Feast at the New Moon, and see how Saul resented it. Then they went out into
the Field together, and renewed their Covenant of Friendship, not only for
their Persons, but for their Posterity; and Jonathan gave him a Signal, whereby
he should know his Fathers Affection toward him. So when the New Moon was
come, and David's Place was empty two days together, Saul enquired the reason
of it, and Jonathan made an excuse for him. Whereupon Saul fell into a great
Rage, and reviles him, and threw his Javelin at him. Then Jonathan rose from
the Table in great anger, and went into the Field, and discovered all to David;
so they parted.

CHAP. XXI.
Then David came to Ahimelech the Priest at Nob, who entertained him, and gave
him the Sword of Goliath. From thence he went to Achish King of Gath, where he
feigned himself mad, so that Achish cares not for his Company.

CHAP. XXII.
After this David was feign to fly to several places for shelter, and Saul
complained to his Servants of their unfaithfulness, that they would not discover to
him where David was. Then Doeg told him of David's coming to Ahimelech, and of
Ahimelech's kindness to him. So Saul commanded his Footmen to slay all the
Priests; but they refusing, he commanded Doeg to do it, who slew all the
Priests at Nob, and put all to the Sword that were in the City; only Abiathar
one of Ahimelech's Sons, escaped, and went and told David of it.

CHAP. XXIII.
Then David went to Keilah, and smote the Philistines, and saved Keilah. Saul
hearing he was there, gathered the People together to besiege him. Then David
enquired of God whether the Men of Keilah would deliver him up to Saul; who
answered, They would. So he departed out of Keilah, and went into the
Wilderness of Ziph; and Jonathan came to him thither, and strengthened his
hands, and they renewed their Covenant again. Then the Ziphites informed Saul
that David hid himself there; so Saul and his Men went to seek him. Then David
came into the Wilderness of Maon, and Saul followed him thither, and compassed
the Mountain where he was: But in that very nick of time came a Messenger to
Saul to acquaint him, that the Philistines had invaded the Land: So Saul left
following of David, and went against the Philistines. But

CHAP. XXIV.
After Saul was returned from following the Philistines, he pursued David
again, and went to the Wilderness of Engedi, and there went into a Cave to
cover his Feet; and David and his Men were in the sides of the Cave. Then David
privily cut off the Skirt of Readiness Robe, for which afterward his Heart smote
him. When Saul went out of the Cave, David called after him, and told him how
it was in his power to have slain him; and to convince him thereof, showed him
the Skirt of his Garment that he had cut off: Whereupon Saul acknowledged
David's Innocence and his own Fault, and made him swear not to cut off his
Posterity; and so departed.

CHAP. XXV.
David went into the Wilderness of Paran, and hearing of a rich Man, one Nabal,
that had a Sheep-shearing, he sent some of his Servants to him for some
Provision; but Nabal gave 'em ill Language, and sent 'em away empty; whereupon
David resolved to destroy him. But one of Nabal's Servants told his Mistress
Abigail of David's Message, and his Masters Answer: So she took a Present to
pacify David; and as she went she met David, and excuses the matter to him,
and begs his pardon, and acceptance of that Present, and tells him she was well
assured that God would avenge him of all his Enemies, and then it would be no
grief to him that he had not shed Blood causless, nor avenged himself. Herewith
David was well satisfied, and blesses God for her advice, and accepts her
Present, and her Person. So when Abigail returned home, the next morning she
told her Husband these passages; whereupon his Heart died within him; and about
ten days after God smote him that he died; which when David heard of, he sent
Messengers to Abigail to become his Wife, which she accepts of, and went with
'em.

CHAP. XXVI.
The Ziphites give Intelligence again to Saul where David was: So Saul came
down to seek him. But David and Abishai went to Readiness Camp by night, and found
'em all fast asleep: So Abishai would have had David given him leave to have
slain him; but David would not, only took his Spear and a Cruise of Water, and
went to a Hill a good way off, and called to Abner, and upbraided him for his
carelessness, and speaks also to Saul to convince him of his innocence:
Whereupon Saul acknowledges his Fault again, and blesses him.

CHAP. XXVII.
David desparing of freedom from Readiness persecutions, flies to Achish King of
Gath, who gave him Ziklag to dwell in. Then he invaded the Geshurites and
Amalekites, and slew all the People, and took their Cattle, and returned, and
came to Achish; who asking him, Whither they had made an inroad? David tells
him, It was against the Land of Judah; whereupon Achish now thought him sure to
his Interest.

CHAP. XXVIII.
The Philistines going to War against Israel, Achish takes David along with
him, and makes him Captain of his Lifeguard. When Saul saw the Philistines
Army he was afraid, and enquired of the Lord, but he answered him not. Then he
went to a Woman at Endor that had a Familiar Spirit, and bids her call up
Samuel; who asked him, Why he had disquieted him? Saul answered, God has
forsaken me, therefore I have called thee to know what I must do. Then said
Samuel, The Lord will deliver Israel with thee into the hands of the
Philistines, and to morrow Thou and thy Sons shall be with me. Then Saul was
afraid and fainted: But his Servants and the Woman constrained him to eat
something to refresh himself withal.

CHAP. XXIX.
When the Commanders of the Philistines mustered their Forces, and saw David
there with Achish, they were much displeased, and caused him to be dismissed,
for fear he should turn to their Enemies. So David and his Men departed.

CHAP. XXX.
When David was come to Ziklag, he found that the Amalekites had smitten it,
and burnt it, and carried away all their Wives and Children; whereupon David
was greatly distressed, for the People spoke of stoning him; but he encouraged
himself in the Lord his God, and enquired of God what he should do; who bad him
pursue after 'em, and he should overtake 'em, and recover all: And accordingly,
finding 'em making merry, he smote 'em all, and recovered all they had lost,
and also all the rest of the Spoil they had gotten; of which he sent Presents
to all his Friends in Judah that had assisted and relieved him in his distress.

CHAP. XXXI.
Then the two Armies joined Battle, and the Philistines prevailed, and slew
Readiness three Sons, and wounded Saul himself; whereupon he fell upon his own
Sword and slew himself. The next day when the Philistines came to strip the
slain, they found the Bodies of Saul and his three Sons, and cut off Readiness
Head, and put his Armor in the House of Ashtaroth, and fastened his Body on the
Wall of Bethshan. But the Men of Jabesh-Gilead went by Night and took away his
Body, and the Bodies of his Sons, and burned 'em, and buried their Bones under
a Tree at Jabesh.

II. SAMUEL.
CHAP. I.
AN Amalekite brings tidings to David, that the Israelites were overthrown, and
that Saul and Jonathan were dead; and withal tells him, that Saul being fallen
upon his Spear, he himself stood upon him and slew him. Whereupon David
commands him to be slain for killing of Saul. Then David lamented the Death of
Saul and Jonathan with a Song.

CHAP. II.
After this, by God's Direction, David goes up to Hebron, where the Men of
Judah made him King over them. But Abner, Readiness General, made Ishbosheth,
Readiness Son, King over the rest of the Tribes. Then Joab and Abner met and
fought a Battle, wherein Abner was beaten, and Asahel pursuing after Abner,
Abner turned back and smote him that he died. But Joab and Abishai pursued
still after Abner, till Abner called to Joab, and checks him for his hot
pursuit; whereupon he sounded a Retreat.

CHAP. III.
After this there was long War between David and Ishbosheth; but David still
waxed stronger and stronger, and the House of Saul grew weaker and weaker;
during which time Abner went in to one of Readiness Concubines, for which being
reproved by Ishbosheth, he was much displeased, and revolts to David, and
promises to bring all Israel to him; and accordingly persuades all the chief of
the People to be for David, and came himself to promise him his assistance. But
Joab persuaded David that he was not sincere, but intended only to deceive him,
and therefore sent Messengers to Abner to bring him back, and pretends to talk
friendly with him, but smote him that he died: At which David was exceedingly
disturbed, and clears himself from any guilt therein, and makes a great
mourning for him.

CHAP. IV.
When Ishbosheth and the Men of Israel heard of Abner's Death, they were much
concerned; and Ishbosheth's Party growing very weak, two of his Captains came
and slew him, and carried his Head to David, thinking thereby to curry favor
with him; but David caused 'em both to be slain for their treachery to their
Lord, and took Ishbosheth's Head and buried it.

CHAP. V.
Then the Heads of all the Tribes came to David, and made him King over all
Israel, and he went to Jerusalem, and took the strong hold of Sion, and dwelt
there, calling it the City of David. Then Hiram King of Tire sent him Workmen
and Materials, and he built him a House. Then the Philistines came to make War
with him, but David smote 'em twice together.

CHAP. VI.
Then David gathered all the chosen Men of Israel together, and went to fetch
the Ark from the House of Abinadab, and they set it upon a new Cart, and Uzza
and Ahio drove the Cart. And David and all the People played before it. But when
they came to Nachon's Threshing-floor, the Oxen stumbled and shook the Cart;
whereupon Uzza put forth his Hand to hold it from falling; but God smote him
for his rashness, and he died there. Then David was afraid to bring it to his
own House, but lodged it in the House of Obed-Edom; and God blessed Obed-Edom
and all his House; which being told to David, then he brought up the Ark to his
own City with great gladness, sacrificing Oxen and Fatlings as they went along;
and David danced before it, which Michal spying, despised him in her Heart. So
they placed it in a Tabernacle which David had made, with great joy and
feasting. But Michal came out to meet David, and derided him for his undecent
Carriage, as she interpreted it, for which God smote her with Barrenness.

CHAP. VII.
David being now at rest from all his Enemies, bethinks himself of building a
House for God, and acquaints Nathan with it, who encourages him thereto. But
that night God sends Nathan to David to tell him, That not himself but his Son
should build him an House. Whereupon David acknowledges Gods great goodness to
him, and prays that his House may be blessed, as he had promised him.

CHAP. VIII.
After this David subdues the Philistines, Moabites, Hadadezer, and the
Syrians, and took the Shields of Gold from the Servants of Hadadezer, and
brought 'em to Jerusalem, and exceeding much Brass from his Cities, and
dedicated to the Lord all the Treasures that he took from any of the Nations,
and the Presents that were sent him; and God prospered him exceedingly, and he
administered Justice to all the People.

CHAP. IX.
David remembering the Covenant between him and Jonathan, enquires after his
Posterity; and hearing of Mephibosheth, sends for him, gives him all the Land
that belonged to Saul, entertains him at his own Table, and gives Ziba charge
to manage all his concerns for him.

CHAP. X.
David hearing that the King of Ammon his Friend was dead, sent Ambassadors to
his Son to condole with him; but he treated 'em very rudely, and sent 'em away:
Whereupon David sent Joab against 'em to chastise 'em for their Insolence; and
Joab put 'em to flight, and the Syrians also, who came to their assistance; and
so again a second time; whereupon they made peace with Israel, and became
Tributaries to 'em.

CHAP. XI.
After this David sends Joab to besiege Rabbah, but himself tarried at
Jerusalem; and one Evening walking upon the top of his House, he spied a
beautiful Woman bathing her self; so he sent for her, and lay with her, and she
conceived, and acquainted David with it; who thereupon sent for her Husband
Uriah from the Siege, and bad him go down to his own House and refresh himself;
but he staid among David's Servants: Whereupon David sent him to Joab with a
Letter to set him in a place of danger, that he might be slain; which was done,
and David had notice of it. So when the days of mourning were past, he sent and
took Bathsheba to be his Wife, and she bare him a Son. But this displeased the
Lord.

CHAP. XII.
And he sent Nathan to David, who by a Parable of a rich Man that had many
Flocks, and a poor Man that had but one Ewe Lamb, yet the rich Man took the
poor Man's Ewe Lamb to dress for a Traveller that came to him, causes David to
pass Sentence against himself. Then Nathan tells him, Thou art the Man, and
threatened him, That the Sword should never depart from his House: Whereupon
David confesses his sin, and Nathan tells him, It was pardoned; but because of
the Scandal of it, the Child should die; which came to pass accordingly.
Afterward Bathsheba bare another Son, whom David called Solomon. And the Lord
loved him, and sent by Nathan and called him Jedidiah. Then Joab sent to David
to come to the Siege of Rabbah, that he might have the honor of taking it;
which he did; and set the Kings Crown on his own Head, and took much spoil, and
tortured the People, and so came back.

CHAP. XIII.
After this Amnon fell in love with his half Sister Tamar, and by Jonadab's
Advice feigns himself sick, and desires that his Sister Tamar might come and
attend upon him. So David sent her to him: Then he took hold of her, and forced
her, and ravished her, which when he had done, he turned her out of Doors; so
she went away crying, and met with her Brother Absalom, who quieted her, and
kept her in his House, and hated Amnon for this, but concealed it. And having a
Sheep-shearing, he invited all his Brethren to it, and in the midst of their
mirth his Servants slew Amnon; whereupon they all fled away, and Absalom fled
to his Father-in-law, and was there three years, so that David longed to see
him.

CHAP. XIV.
Whereupon Joab employs a Widow of Tekoah, a subtle Woman, who by a Parable of
her two Sons slaying one the other, and David promising her to indemnifie the
Manslayer, and secure him from the Revenger of Blood, fetches about the matter
so, as to incline David to recall Absalom, and bids Joab send for him. So he
brought him to Jerusalem; but David would not see him, but commanded him to go
to his own House. So he dwelt there two years, and saw nor the King; whereupon
he sent for Joab to plead with the King and make his Peace; which he did, and
brought him into his Presence, and he was admitted into favor again.

CHAP. XV.
After this Absalom inveigled the People by his flattering and fair Speeches,
and stole away their Hearts from his Father, and under pretense of a Vow, gets
leave to go to Hebron, and gathered the People to him there, and had Ahitophel
for his Counselor, and the People flockt to him from all parts; which David
hearing of, flies from Jerusalem, and they carried the Ark with him, but he
sent Zadok with it back again; and hearing that Ahitophel was with Absalom, he
prays God to turn his Counsel into Foolishness; and also sent Hushai his Friend
to offer his Service to Absalom, that he might defeat Ahitophel's Counsel, and
give him intelligence by Zadok and Abiathar.

CHAP. XVI.
As David traveled along, Zibah came to him with Presents, and slandered his
Master Mephibosheth; whereupon David gave him all Mephibosheth's Lands.
Afterward Shimei met him, and reviled, and cursed him, and cast stones at him;
which David takes patiently, owning Gods hand in it; and that, since his Son
sought his Life, no wonder if a Stranger used him so. Then Absalom and all his
Party came to Jerusalem, and called a Council what they should do; and
Ahi^ophel counseled him to go in to his Fathers Concubines, which would make
the Breach between 'em irreconcilable; so he went in to them in the sight of
all Israel.

CHAP. XVII.
After this Ahitophel counsels Absalom to pursue David speedily, and to give
him no time to recruit himself, and so they should make short work of it. But
Hushai advises rather to gather all the People together, and so to oppress him
by their multitude; and this Counsel Absalom hearkened to, which Zadok gives
David notice of. But when Ahitophel saw that his Counsel was rejected, he went
and hanged himself.

CHAP. XVIII.
David draws up the Army for the Battle, and intends to go with 'em himself,
but the People hindered him; so he sat in the Gate as they passed out, and gave
'em a charge to deal gently with Absalom. So the two Armies met, and David's
Men made a great Slaughter among Absalom's; and they met with Absalom, and
found him hanging by the Head in the thick Boughs of an Oak; which one told
Joab of, who came presently and stabbed him to the Heart. Then Joab sounded a
Retreat, and they cast Absalom into a Pit. Then Ahimaaz and Cushi ran to carry
the Tidings to David; which when he heard, he fell into a great Passion of
Lamentation, saying, O my Son Absalom; my Son, my Son Absalom; would God I had
died for thee, O Absalom, my Son, my Son.

CHAP. XIX.
So David took no joy in the Victory, but turned it into Lamentation, and the
People stole into the City, as being ashamed of what they had done. Whereupon
Joab goes and chides him for his Carriage, and causes him to show himself to
the People in a more cheerful Temper. Then all the People were at strife who
should show most forwardness in recalling the King: So the King returned, and
the Tribe of Judah came to meet him at Jordan: And Shimei came to beg his
pardon, and obtained it; and Mephibosheth came likewise to meet him, and gave
him an account why he went not with him, and how his Servant Zibah had
slandered him: But however the King gave Mephibosheth but half his Lands again,
and gave the other half to Zibah. Barzillai also came to him, and the King
invited him to go with him to Jerusalem, but he excused it by reason of his
Age: So the King dismissed him, and took his Son Chimham into his Service. Then
the Men of the other Tribes came and expostulated with the Men of Judah for
fetching the King back without them; but the Men of Judah were too hard for 'em.

CHAP. XX.
Upon this Quarrel one Sheba draws all the Men of Israel away from David, and
raises a Rebellion against him. Then David makes Amasa General, and appoints
him to pursue after Sheba. But Joab, under pretense of Friendly Discourse with
Amaza, slaies him. Then Joab and Abishai pursue after Sheba, and came to Abel,
and besieged him there: But a wise Woman gets his Head to be thrown over the
Wall to Joab; so he drew off his Forces, and returned to Jerusalem.

CHAP. XXI.
Then there was a Famine for three years together; and David enquiring of God
the reason of it, was told, It was because Saul had slain the Gibeonites. So
the Gibeonites being demanded what satisfaction they would require, desired only
that seven of his Sons should be de delivered to 'em, to be hanged before the
Lord, which was done accordingly. Then David commanded that the Bones of Saul,
and Jonathan, and these seven should be all buried together in the Sepulcher of
Kish. After this David and his Men had four Battles with the Philistines,
wherein four valiant Men of David's slew four Giants of the Philistines.

CHAP. XXII.
When God had thus delivered David out of the hands of all his Enemies, he
composed a Psalm of Thanksgiving for God's powerful deliverance and manifold
blessings.

CHAP. XXIII.
And likewise toward the Close of his days professes his Faith in Gods
Promises, and the Covenant he had made with him. After which follows a
Catalogue of David's Worthies.

CHAP. XXIV.
God being angry with Israel, permitted Satan to tempt David to number the
People: So he sent Joab about it; and though Joab dissuaded him from it, yet
David's word prevailed. So Joab brought the number of 'em: But David's heart
smote him for it, and he confessed his sin to God, and begged pardon: But in
the morning God sent Gad to him, to choose whether there should be seven years
of Famine; or, to flee three months before his Enemies; or, three days
Pestilence; and he chose this last. So God sent a Pestilence, and there died
seventy thousand Men. And when the Angel stretched out his hand over Jerusalem,
as he was by the threshing place of Araunah, David seeing of him, intercedes to
God for mercy. So Gad appointed him to build an Altar there. Then he came and
bought the Threshing-floor of Araunah, and built an Altar there, and offered
Burnt-Offerings and Peace Offerings. So God was entreated, and the Plague was
stayed.

I. KINGS.
CHAP. I.
DAVID being old, Adonijah aspires to the Kingdom, and gets Joab and Abiathar
to assist him; whereupon Nathan advises Bathshebah to go and acquaint the King
with it, and claim his Promise, That Solomon should succeed him; and while they
were talking, he would come in and second her. So Bathshebah went unto David, and
told him, that notwithstanding his Promise, That her Son Solomon should sit
upon the Throne, Adonijah had made himself King without his privity, but yet
all people expected that he should appoint his Successor. While she was
speaking, Nathan came and told him the same things. Then David renewed his Oath
to Bathshebah, That Solomon should sit upon his Throne; and accordingly gave
order that Solomon should be set upon his own Mule, and Zadok the Priest and
Nathan the Prophet should anoint him King over Israel, and proclaim him with
sound of Trumpet, and then set him upon the Throne. And so they did; and the
People rejoiced with such shouting that the Earth rang again; which when
Adonijah and his Company heard, they were all afraid, and dispersed themselves;
and Adonijah went and took hold on the Horns of the Altar, and capitulated with
Solomon, who upon condition of his good behavior promised him indemnity, and
so dismissed him.

CHAP. II.
Then David charged Solomon to walk in the ways of God, and keep his
Commandments that he might prosper, and God might confirm the Kingdom to him
and his Seed after him. He gave him a charge also concerning Joab, that because
he was guilty of Blood, he should not let his hoary Head go down to the Grave
in peace: That he should show kindness to the Sons of Barzillai: That he should
remember Shimei's cursing of him in the day of his distress, and in his Wisdom
reward him for it. So David died, and Solomon sat upon the Throne. Then
Adonijah came to Bathshebah, and prays her to ask Abishag for him of her Son
Solomon; which she did. But Solomon looking upon it as a seditious motion,
sends Benajah to him, who put him to death. He put out Abiathar also from being
High Priest, and confined him to his Country House at Anathoth. These passages
being related to Joab, he knowing his own guilt, fled to the Altar, and there
he was slain. Then he called for Shimei, and confined him to Jerusalem, and
that if he passed over the Brook Kidron he should die. So he dwelt there many
days. At last two of his Servants running away to Achish King of Gath, he went
thither to fetch 'em back again; which being told Solomon, he puts him in mind
of all his former wickedness, and his own gentle dealing with him, which he
having abused, he commands him to be slain.

CHAP. III.
Solomon married Pharaoh's Daughter. He loved the Lord, and offered at Gibeon,
a great High Place, a thousand Burnt-Offerings; and there God appeared to him,
and bid him ask what he would: So he ask't an understanding Heart to judge the
People, and to discern between good and evil; wherewith God was so pleased,
that he gave him not only an extraordinary Understanding above all that were
before or after him, but also such Riches and Honor as none else had. Then
came two Women to him, which had each of 'em a Son; one of which dying, they
both lay claim to the living Child; whereupon Solomon commanded the living
Child to be divided between 'em; which one of 'em yielding to, but not the
other, Solomon thereby gathered which was the right Mother, and assigned the
living Child to her; which Decision made him renowned all over Israel.

CHAP. IV.
Solomon had twelve Officers, who served each Man his Month, and made Provision
throughout all Israel of what was needful for the maintaining his Court after a
most splendid and magnificent manner: For he spent daily almost an hundred
Quarters of Wheat, Thirty Oxen, an hundred Sheep, besides Deer, Fowl, and the
like. And God gave him a most comprehensive knowledge of all things both Divine
and Humane; so that he was wiser than all Men, and spoke three thousand
Proverbs, and a thousand and five Songs; and of all Animals and Vegetables, so
that People came from all parts of the Earth to hear his Wisdom.

CHAP. V.
Solomon designing now to build the Temple, sends to Hiram King of Tire to
furnish him with Timber of Cedar and Fir, and Workmen for it, and in lieu
thereof Solomon furnishes him with Wheat and Oil yearly; so they had Timber and
Stones for it.

CHAP. VI.
In the fourth year of Solomon's Reign they began to build the Temple, which
was about thirty six yards long, twelve yards broad, and eighteen yards high;
with a Porch of about seventy two yards high. All the materials were fitted and
prepared before hand, so that no noise of Tools was heard about it. It was seven
years in building.

CHAP. VII.
Solomon built also an House for himself, and a Porch for Judgment; and several
other Houses, both for himself and his Queen, Pharaoh's Daughter. Then he sent
and fetched Hiram from Tire, who made all manner of Vessels and Utensils for the
Temple, of Gold, Silver and Brass, as the Molten Sea, the Lavers, etc. and the
Pillars.

CHAP. VIII.
All things being thus fitted and finished, Solomon assembled all the Nobility
and Gentry to fetch up the Ark out of Sihon, and carry it into its place,
within the Holy of Holies. And when it was set there, the Glory of the Lord
filled the House. Then Solomon blessed God for performing his Word unto David
in giving him a Son to build an House to his Name; and prays for the
continuance of his mercy to him, and that he would hear Prayers upon any occasion
whatsoever made in, or toward that place. Then he offered a Sacrifice of two
and twenty thousand Oxen, and an hundred and twenty thousand Sheep, and they
kept the Feast of Dedication a Fortnight together, and then the People went to
their own Homes.

CHAP. IX.
After all this God appeared again to Solomon, and told him he had heard his
Prayer, and would do as he desired; and that he would establish his Throne for ever
upon condition of his Obedience; but in case of Disobedience, he would cut off
Israel out of the Land, and destroy the Temple. At the end of twenty years
Solomon gave Hiram King of Tire twenty Cities in the Land of Galilee, but he
did not like 'em, and so returned 'em to him again; whereupon he repaired and
enlarged 'em, and caused the Children of Israel to dwell in 'em. He repaired
also several other Cities, and built Store-Cities, and did all that he desired.
And he had a Navy which went to Ophir for Gold.

CHAP. X.
The Queen of Sheba hearing of Solomon's extraordinary Wisdom, came to hear and
try him with hard Questions. She came with a very great Retinue, and many rich
Presents, and discoursed with him about all things she desired satisfaction in;
and he resolved all her doubts, and gave her full satisfaction in every thing.
When she had viewed and considered all particulars about him, his Buildings,
his Furniture, his Attendants, and the magnificence of his Court in all
respects, she was even astonished with Admiration; and tho Fame uses to be
lavish enough of its Tongue, yet she tells him, Tho more was told her than she
believed, yet half was not told her of what she found. Then she made him great
Presents of Gold, Spices and precious Stones. He likewise gave to her
whatsoever she desired, and so returned into her own Country. Then Solomon made
two hundred Targets of beaten Gold; and three hundred Shields of Gold, and a
great Ivory Throne damask't with Gold, and gathered Charets and Horses in great
abundance; and he made Silver in Jerusalem as Stones, and Cedars as
Sycamore-trees.

CHAP. XI.
Solomon, notwithstanding all these extraordinary Gifts and Favors to him, both
inward and outward, and God's appearing twice to him, loved many Women of the
Heathen Nations, and took him seven hundred Wives, and three hundred
Concubines, and did so dote upon 'em, even in his old Age, that they turned
away his Heart from God, so that he tolerated the public Exercise of their
Idolatrous Worship; whereupon God was angry with him, and threatened to rend the
greatest part of the Kingdom from him in his Sons days, and give it to his
Servant; and stirred up several Adversaries against him; and likewise by the
Prophet Ahijah the Shilonite declared to Jeroboam, that held give him Ten
Tribes, and Solomon's Posterity should have but one Tribe, (besides the Tribe
of Judah) because he had forsaken him and worshipped strange Gods. So Solomon
having Reigned forty years, died, and was buried in the City of David.

CHAP. XII.
Then all the Tribes met together at Shechem, and Jeroboam came along with 'em;
and they petitioned Rehoboam to ease 'em of their Taxes, which Solomon had
imposed on 'em. He takes three days time to consider of it, and advises with
his Fathers old Counselors: They persuade him by all means to humor the
People, and comply with their desires at present, which would be the way to
oblige 'em to him for ever after. But this Counsel he liked not, and therefore
consulted with some young, giddy Persons, his Companions and Flatterers, and
they advise him to answer 'em roughly, and tell 'em, That his little Finger
should be thicker than his Fathers Loins; and whereas his Father had chastis'd
'em with Whips, he would chastise 'em with Scorpions: And this Counsel he followed,
being forsaken of God, and left to his own folly and rashness) and answered 'em
accordingly. Whereupon ten of the Tribes immediately revolted from him, and
chose Jeroboam for their King; and only the Tribe of Judah and Benjamin stuck
unto Rehoboam. Then Rehoboam raised an Army of an hundred and fourscore
thousand to reduce 'em to their obedience. But God sent the Prophet Shemajah to
forbid 'em to fight against their Brethren, but to return to their own Homes,
because it was Gods doing. And so they did. Then Jeroboam, fearing lest if the
People went up to Jerusalem to worship, their Hearts might in time be alienated
from him, and they might submit to Rehoboam, made two golden Calves, and set
'em up, one in Dan, the other in Bethel, for the People to worship, and built
High Places, and ordained Priests, and appointed Feasts, and so changed and
innovated the Worship of God in all the parts of it.

CHAP. XIII.
Jeroboam standing by the Altar at Bethel to burn Incense, a Prophet was sent
out of Judah by God to denounce Judgments against the Altar, which should be
executed by King Josiah, who should burn the Bones of the Idolatrous Priests
upon it, and defile it; and in token of the truth of this Prophecy, the Altar
should be rent in twain. When Jeroboam heard this, he stretched out his hand to
lay hold on him; but immediately his hand withered, so that he could not pull
it in to him again, and also the Altar was rent in twain. Then Jeroboam
entreated the Prophet to pray for him, that the use of his hand might be
restored to him again; which he did, and his hand was healed: whereupon
Jeroboam invites him to go home with him; but he refused, being forbidden by
God to eat or drink, or return the same way he came. Now there was an old
Prophet that dwelt in that City, and his Sons told him all these passages; then
he went after him, and invited him to go back with him; which he refusing, as
being forbidden by God, the old Prophet told him, That he was commanded by an
Angel to bring him back; but he lied to him. So he went back, and did eat and
drink in the old Prophets House. Then as they sat at Table, the Word of the
Lord came to the old Prophet to threaten this other for his Disobedience. So as
he went away, a Lion met him and slew him; which being noised in the City, the
old Prophet went and fetched his Body, and buried it in his own Grave, and
commanded his Sons to bury him there by the Prophet, because all his
Threatenings against those Idolatrous places should come to pass. But
notwithstanding all these Providence, Jeroboam continued his Idolatrous
practices, which in the issue proved the ruin of him and his Family.

CHAP. XIV.
Jeroboam's Son Abijah being sick, he sends his Wife in disguise to Ahijah the
Prophet to enquire concerning his recovery. But God told Ahijah who she was,
and what was her Errand. So when she came to the Door, he said, Come in, thou
Wife of Jeroboam; and bids her tell her Husband, That because he had provoked
God by his Idolatry, God would cut off all his House, and his Child should die,
and all Israel should mourn for him, because in him only of all the House of
Jeroboam some good thing was found; and he would root up Israel out of their Land,
because of the sins of Jeroboam, who made Israel to sin. So when she came back
to the Threshold of her House the Child died. Thus Jeroboam Reigned twenty two
years and died. During his time the People of Judah under Rehoboam provoked God
with their Images, High Places, Groves, and the like sins: So in the fifth year
of his Reign Shishak King of Egypt came up against Jerusalem, and took away the
Treasures of the Lord's House, and of the Kings House, and the Shields of Gold,
instead whereof Rehoboam made Shields of Brass. At last he died, and was buried
in the City of David.

CHAP. XV.
Rehoboam being dead, Abijam his Son succeeds him, walking in all the sins of
his Fathers. He Reigned but three years, and died, and Asa his Son Reigned in
his sted. Asa did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, and destroyed
Idolatry, and deposed his Grandmother Maacha from being Queen-regent. Then
there was War between him and Baasha King of Israel; so he hired Benhadad King
of Syria to take his part; so they made a League together, and Benhadad smote
some of the Cities of Israel. In his old Age he was troubled with the Gout in
his Feet, and sought to the Physicians more than to the Lord. He Reigned forty
years, and died, and Jehosaphat Reigned in his stead. 2 Chronicles. 14. and 15. and
16. In the days of Asa, Zerah the Ethiopian came against him with an Army of a
Million of Men: Then Asa cried to the Lord for help, and he gave him Victory
over the Ethiopians; so he destroyed their Cities, and carried away much Spoil.
At their return toward Jerusalem, the Spirit of the Lord came upon Azariah,
and he exhorted them to cleave fast to the Lord, saying, The Lord is with you
while you be with him, and if you seek him he will be found of you, but if you
forsake him, he will forsake you. Hereupon they cleansed the Land of Idols, and
entered into a Covenant to seek the Lord God of their Fathers; and that
whosoever would not do so, should be put to death. So the Lord gave 'em rest
round about. Afterward upon the League that Asa made with Benhadad, Hanani the
Seer came and reproved him for it; and because he did not trust in the Lord,
who had delivered the Ethiopians into his hand, therefore he should have but a
troublesome Reign from that time forward: For this Asa was angry with him, and
put him in Prison, and at the same time oppressed the People. In his second
year Nadab the Son of Jeroboam began to reign over Israel, and he reigned two
years; and Baasha conspired against him, and slew him, and reigned in his
stead, and smote all the House of Jeroboam; yet he continued Jeroboam's
Idolatry. Whereupon

CHAP. XVI.
The Word of the Lord came to Jehu the Son of Hanani against him, That because
he continued in the sins of Jeroboam, therefore as he had cut off Jeroboam's
Posterity, so he would cut off his. Then he died, and Elah his Son reigned in his
stead; and his Servant Zimri conspired against him, and slew him, and all the
House of Baasha. But within a few days the Soldiers made Omri King, who went
and besieged Tirzah where Zimri was, and took it; at which Zimri went into the
Palace, and set it on fire, and burnt himself in it. Then some of the People
made Tibni King; but Omri prevailed against him, and so reigned alone. He
bought a Hill, and built a City upon it, and called it Samaria, which was
afterward the Seat of the Kings of Israel. But he walked in the way of
Jeroboam. He died, and Ahab his Son reigned in his stead, and did evil above
all that were before him, and took to Wife Jezabel, and worshipped Baal, and
built a Temple for him in Samaria, and provoked the Lord to Anger more than all
the Kings before him.

CHAP. XVII.
In his time God sent Elijah to declare to him, There should be no Rain for
some years, but according to his Word. Then God sent him to the Brook Cherith,
where he was fed by Ravens. And when that Brook was dry, God sent him to
Sarepta to be sustained by a Widow there, who tho she had but a little Meal in
a Barrel, and Oil in a Cruise, yet that still held out, and supplied her
Occasions, till there was plenty in the Land. Afterward her Son dying, Elijah
prayed unto God, and restored him to Life again.

CHAP. XVIII.
After three years God commands Elijah to show himself to Ahab, and tells him
he would send Rain. So Elijah went to Ahab, who, as soon as he saw him, said, Art
thou he that troubles Israel? To whom Elijah replied, I have not troubled
Israel, but thou and thy Fathers House, in that ye have forsaken the
Commandments of the Lord, and have followed Baalim. Then he desired Ahab to
gather all the People together to Mount Carmel, and all the Prophets of Baal;
which was done. Then said Elijah to them, If the Lord be God, follow him; but
if Baal be God, then follow him. Then he bids the Prophets of Baal take one
Bullock and lay it upon Wood, and put no Fire under; and he would do the like with
another Bullock; and the God that answered by Fire, should be owned for the
true God. And they did so; and called upon their God from Morning till Noon;
but none answered. Then Elijah derided 'em, so that they used all imaginable
importunity; but still none answered. Then he called the People to come about
him, and he repaired an Altar of the Lord, and made a Trench about it, and laid
the Bullock upon it, and caused Water to be poured thrice upon the Sacrifice,
till the Trench was filled. Then he called upon God, and God sent Fire which
consumed the Sacrifice, and Wood, and Stones, and lickt up the Water in the
Trench. Then all the People acknowledged, That this was the true God. Then
Elijah bad 'em slay all Baal's Priests, which they did. Then he bad Ahab get
him up, because much Rain was coming. Then he went up to the top of Carmel, and
prayed earnestly to God for Rain; after which a small Cloud appeared, which
presently overspread the Heavens, and there fell abundance of Rain. And Ahab
rode in his Charet to Jezreel, and Elijah ran before him.

CHAP. XIX.
Ahab telling Jezabel what Elijah had done, she swore she would have his Life by
the next day; whereupon Elijah went and s^t under a Juniper Tree in the
Wilderness, and prayed to God to take away his Life. But God sent an Angel to
encourage him, who made Provision for him that he might eat and drink; and he
traveled in the strength of that Food forty days together, till he came to
Horeb, where God appeared to him, and questions with him what he did there. He
replied, That they had forsaken God's Covenant, slain his Prophets, and left
none but himself, and they sought his Life too, so that he was fain to fly for
it. Then God sends him to anoint Hazael to be King of Syria, Jehu to be King of
Israel, and Elisha to be Prophet in his room; and withal tells him, That there
were seven thousand left in Israel who had not bowed the Knee to Baal. After
this meeting with Elisha, he threw his Mantle upon him; who presently left his
former employment and followed him, and ministered to him.

CHAP. XX.
Then Benhadad King of Syria came and besieged Samaria, and putting very hard
terms upon Ahab, he calls a Council of all the Grandees, who advise him to
stand out. Then there came a Prophet from God to Ahab to promise him Victory;
which came to pass, for they slew the Syrians with a great Slaughter, but the
King escaped. Then the Prophet came to him again, and bid him prepare for
another War, but that he should have the Victory in that also. And so it came
to pass; for the Children of Israel slew of the Syrians ten thousand in one
day. And at Aphek a Wall fell on twenty seven thousand more, and slew 'em. And
Benhadad fled, and hid himself in the City: But his Servants persuaded him to
send a very submissive Message to Ahab, and to lay himself at his Mercy; who
thereupon pardoned him, and made a League with him, and sent him away. Then a
Prophet was sent to him, who by a Parable of a Prisoner taken in Battle, and
escaping from him to whose custody he was committed, makes him first pass
Sentence against himself, and then denounces Judgment against him for letting
the King of Syria go.

CHAP. XXI.
After this Ahab was very earnest to buy Naboth's Vineyard of him; but he
refusing, Ahab was much displeased, and would eat nothing; which Jezabel
observing, and understanding the reason of, contrives to write Letters to the
Rulers of Jezreel to proclaim a Fast, and suborn Witnesses, who should accuse
Naboth of blaspheming God and the King, and so put him to death Which being
done, Ahab went to take possession of the Vineyard. But God sent Elijah to
denounce Judgments against him; which when Ahab heard, he humbled himself, for
which God respites part of the Judgment from his days to his Sons.

CHAP. XXII.
After this Ahab making War with the King of Syria engages Jehosaphat to assist
him; but Jehosaphat was desirous to know the Mind of God in it, and therefore
would have him send for some Prophet: Hereupon Ahab sends for all the Prophets
of Baal, who promised good Success. But Jehosaphat not being satisfied with
this, desires that some Prophet of the Lord might be inquired of. So he sent
for Micajah; and he at first, in a way of derision, answers as the Prophets of
Baal had done. But being required to speak in good earnest, he then foretells
that Ahab should be slain, and the People scattered; which came to pass; for he
was slain by an Arrow as he was sitting in his Charet; and his Charet being
washed in the Pool of Samaria, the Dogs lickt up his Blood, as they had done
the Blood of Naboth, according to the threatening of the Prophet. So Ahab died,
and his Son reigned in his stead. In his time Jehosaphat began to reign over
Judah, and he did that which was right in the eyes of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 17. So
the Lord was with him, and established his Kingdom. He was very zealous and
courageous in the ways of the Lord; for in the third year of his Reign he sent
some choice Priests and Levites all over his Kingdom to teach the People the
Law of God; and with them several Princes to countenance 'em: Whereupon God so
blessed him, that all the Nations round about him became Tributaries to him, 2 Chronicles. 20. After his return from the expedition with Ahab, Jehu the Prophet
reproves him for his joining with him. Then he set Judges throughout all the
Land, and charged 'em to execute Judgment and Justice impartially, 2 Chronicles. 20.
After this the Moabites and Ammonites made War with him; whereupon he
proclaimed a Fast to ask help of the Lord, and himself prayed to the Lord
against them before all the People. Then the Spirit of the Lord came upon
Jahaziel, who bids 'em not be dismayed, for God would fight for 'em against
their Enemies. Whereupon Jehosaphat encouraged the People, saying, Believe in
the Lord, so shall you be established; believe his Prophets, so shall you
prosper. So the Lord made their Enemies to rise up and slay one another; so
that when the Men of Judah came, they found 'em all dead Bodies, and took
abundance of Spoil, and great Riches from 'em. After this did Jehosaphat join
his Navy with the Navy of Ahaziah, a wicked King of Israel. Then he died, and
Jehoram his Son reigned in his stead. In the seventyeth year of Jehosaphat,
Ahaziah the Son of Ahab began to reign over Israel, and he served Baal
according to all that his Father and Mother had done.

II. KINGS.
CHAP. I.
AHAZIAH having fallen through a Lattice and hurt himself, sends to Baalzebub to
enquire concerning his recovery. But God sent Elijah to meet the Messenger, and
to tell him, that he should not recover. The Messengers returning with this
Message, Ahaziah enquires what manner of Man he was; and by their description
of him, concludes it to be Elijah, so sends a Captain with fifty Men to fetch
him. When they came to him, he called for Fire from Heaven and consumed 'em
all; and so he did a second time: Then a third Captain being sent, he falls
down before Elijah, and begs him to spare his Life, and the Life of his Men: So
the Angel bad Elijah go with him; who reproved the King for sending to
Baalzebub, and told him he should surely dye; which came to pass, and Jehoram
his Son reigned in his stead.

CHAP. II.
God intending to take up Elijah into Heaven by a Whirlwind, Elijah bids
Elisha tarry there where he was, because he must go on an Errand God had sent
him about. But Elisha would not leave him; so they came to Jordan, and Elijah
with his Mantle smote the Waters, and they were divided, so that they passed
over on dry ground. Then Elijah bad Elisha ask what he should do for him, who
said, Let a double portion of thy Spirit be upon me; which Elijah promised he
should have, if he saw him when he was taken from him. At last, as they went
on, a Charet and Horses of Fire parted them asunder, and Elijah was taken up
into Heaven by a Whirlwind; which Elisha saw, and cried, My Father, my Father,
the Charets of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof. But Elijah's Mantle fell from
him, which Elisha took up, and divided the Waters of Jordan with it, as his
Master Elijah had done; which when the young Prophets saw, they owned him for
their Master in the room of Elijah. The Waters about Jericho being naught,
Elisha threw Salt into 'em, and healed 'em. Afterward going up from Bethel, he
was reviled by some Children; but he cursed 'em in the Name of the Lord, and
there came two Shee-Bears, and tore forty two of them.

CHAP. III.
Jehoram King of Israel continued the Idolatry of Jeroboam, but not of his
Father and Mother in serving Baal. The King of Moab refusing to pay his yearly
Tribute, Jehoram gathered together his Forces, and invited Jehosaphat to his
assistance; to those two Kings, and the King of Edom went to the War against
Moab; and being in the Wilderness, they were all ready to perish for want of
Water. But hearing that Elisha was in the Army, these three Kings went to him;
but he slighted the King of Israel, and told him, That if it had not been for
Jehosaphat, he would not have taken any notice of them; but out of respect to
him he tells them, That the Valley should (...) full of Water, and also that God
would deliver the Moabites into their hands. And so it came to pass in the
Morning that the Valley was filled with Water, which appeared to the Moabites
like Blood, so that they concluded these Kings and their Armies had slain one
another, and therefore they rose up to the Spoil. But when they came to the
Camp of the Israelites, the Israelites put 'em to flight, and beat down their
Cities, and besieged Kitharaseth. Then the King of Moab sallied forth to have
broken his way through the Quarters of the King of Edom, but he was driven back;
then he took his Eldest Son and offered him for a Burnt-Offering upon the Wall;
whereupon they raised the Siege.

CHAP. IV.
As Elisha was returning home, a certain Prophets Widow met him, and made her
moan to him, that her Husband had left her in debt, and there was nothing to
pay, so that the Creditors were about to seize upon her two Sons for Bondmen.
Then he had her borrow empty Vessels, and pour out of the Pot of Oil which she
had in the House into the Vessels till they were full, and then sell the Oil,
and pay the Debt. Elisha was wont to come often to the House of a great Woman
in Shunem, who entertained him very kindly; whereupon understanding she had no
Child, he calls for her, and tells her, that she should have a Son; which came
to pass. This Child, when was he grown up, fell ill and died. Then she took him
and laid him on the Bed where Elisha used to lie, and rode in all have to
acquaint him with it; who went with her, and went into the Chamber where the
Child lay, and prayed to the Lord, and stretched himself upon the Child, and
the Child waxed warm, and he revived, and he delivered him to his Mother. At
Gilgal the Pot being set on to make some Broth for the Prophets, they happened
to put in some unwholsom, unsavory Herb, so that they could not eat of it; but
Elisha cast a little meal into the Pot, and so made the Broth sit for use. A
Present being brought him of twenty Barley Loaves, with them he fed an hundred
Men.

CHAP. V.
Naaman General of the Army of the King of Syria, was a Leper, and hearing by
an Hebrew Maid, That there was a Prophet in Samaria that could cure him, he
procures a Letter to the King of Israel that he might be cured of his Leprosy.
When the King of Israel read the Letter, he thought it was only a Trick to pick
a quarrel with him; but Elisha hearing of it, sent to the King to send this
person to him. So when Naaman and all his Retinue came to Elisha's Door, he
only sent one to him to bid him go and wash in Jordan seven times, and he
should be cured. Naaman took this for a great Affront, and so went away in a
Rage. But some of his Servants argued the matter with him, and persuaded him,
so that he went to Jordan and dipped himself seven times in the River, and was
perfectly healed. Then he came back to the Prophets House, and acknowledged the
God of Israel to be the true God, and offers him a Reward, but he refused it.
Then he begged pardon for the Idolatry he had been formerly guilty of, and
Elisha dismis'd him with a friendly farewell. But Elisha's Servant Gehazi ran
after Naaman, and by a Lie got two Talents of Silver, and two Changes of
Raiment, which he hid in the House, and came to his Master. But his Master
asking him where he had been, he told another Lie, and excused what he had done
before; but his Master knowing what was done, told him, That the Leoprosie of
Naaman should cleave to him and his Seed for ever.

CHAP. VI.
One going to cut some Timber for the use of the Prophets, which grew near
Jordan, his Ax Head fell into the River, which he was much concerned at,
because it was borrowed; and complaining of it to Elisha, he threw in a stick
to the place where it fell, and the Ax Head did swim, and so he had it again.
The King of Syria making appointments to surprise the King of Israel at several
places, Elisha still warned him of 'em, and so saved him. The King of Syria
thinking his own Servants had betrayed his Counsels, was much troubled at it;
but understanding it was Elisha's doing, he sent a great Company to Dothan, who
compassed the City to take him; which his Servant perceiving in the morning,
was greatly afraid: But the Prophet said, Fear not; for they that are with us
are more than they that are with them. Then upon Elisha's Prayer his eyes were
opened, and he saw the Mountain full of Horses, and Charets of Fire round about
Elisha; and also those People were smitten with blindness, so that he led 'em
into the midst of Samaria, and then opened their Eyes; but he would not suffer
the King of Israel to do 'em any hurt, but caused great provision to be made
for 'em, and so sent 'em away. At another time Benhadad besieged Samaria, so
that there was a very great Famine there; and as the King passed along, a Woman
complained to him of her Neighbor, That whereas they had agreed to boil and
eat their Children by turns, this Woman having done her part, the other refused
to perform hers; which the King hearing, rent his Clothes, and imputing all
this Evil to Elisha, he sent one to cut off his Head: But Elisha was aware of
it, and bids the Company that was with him to stop the Messenger at the Door,
and not suffer him to come in. But the King himself followed immediately after,
and upon discourse between 'em, he said, This evil is from the Lord, why should
I wait for him any longer?

CHAP. VII.
But Elisha told him from God, That on the morrow there should be great plenty
in Samaria; which a Lord that was with the King hearing, would not believe;
whereupon Elisha told him he should see it with his Eyes, but not eat thereof.
On the morrow four Lepers venturing into the Camp of the Syrians found that
they were all fled; for the Lord had caused 'em to hear a noise of Charets, and
Horses, and a great Host; whereupon they fled in great have for their Lives.
These Tidings the Lepers brought to the City; so the King sent to discover the
truth of it; and they found it to be as was related. So the People went out and
spoiled the Camp of the Syrians, whereby it came to pass that there was great
plenty, as Elisha foretold. But the unbelieving Lord, being appointed by the
King to keep the Gate, that the People might not all run out of the City, they
were so eager upon the Spoil, that they trod him to death: And so the Prophets
words were fulfilled.

CHAP. VIII.
Elisha warns the Shunamite, whose Son he had raised to life, of a Famine that
was coming: so she went and sojourned in the Land of the Philistines. But when
the Famine was over, she returned again, and came to petition the King for her
Land again; (which it seems was seized upon in her absence) and Providence so
ordered it, that at that very nick of time the King was talking with Gehazi
concerning the Miracles of Elisha, and of his raising a dead Child to Life;
whereupon spying this Woman, he said, This is the Woman, and this is her Son.
So the King appointed an Officer to restore all that was hers. Then Elisha came
to Damascus, and Benhadad being sick, was told that the Prophet Elisha was
there; whereupon he sent Hazael to enquire of him whether he should recover:
Who answered, That as to any thing of his Disease he might recover; but God had
showed him that he should die by other means. Then Elisha fixed his Eyes upon
Hazael, and wept; which Hazael enquiring the reason of, he told him, It was for
the great mischiefs he should do to Israel when he came to be King of Syria;
as, Dashing out their Childrens Brains, and ripping up their Women with Child.
To which Hazael said, Is thy Servant a Dog that he should do such things? So
Hazael came to his Master Benhadad, and told him, that the Prophet said he
should surely recover. But to prevent that, he spread a wet cloth over his
Face, and so stifled him. About this time Jehoram the Son of Jehosaphat began
to reign: He married Ahab's Daughter, and so walked in the ways of the House of
Ahab, 2 Chronicles. 21. He slew all his Brethren, and many of the great Men of the
Land, and made many innovations in Religion for the promoting of Idolatry.
While he was going on in these ways, a Letter was delivered him, written by
Elijah by the Spirit of Prophecy, during his abode on earth, to threaten him
for his wickedness, and tell him, That God would plague him, his Wives,
Children, People, and inflict a Disease upon him in his Bowels, which should
torment him day by day till they fell out. Accordingly God stirred up the
neighbor Nations to distress him, and smote him in his Bowels with an
incurable Disease, so that after two years they fell out, and he died without
being desired, and Ahaziah his Son reigned in his sted. He walked in the way of
the House of Ahab, being his Son-in-Law. He went with Joram King of Israel to
the war against Hazael at Ramoth-Gilead; but Joram being wounded, came back to
be cured in Jezreel, and Ahaziah went thither to give him a Visit.

CHAP. IX.
Elisha sends one of the young Prophets to anoint Jehu to be King of Israel;
so he went to the Camp at Ramoth-Gilead, and singled out Jehu, and anointed
him, with a Command to destroy the whole House of Ahab. Then Jehu telling the
Commanders what had been done to him, they presently proclaimed him King, and
he went toward Jezreel; but being spied by a Watchman, Joram sends to enquire
what was the matter? but Jehu detained the Messenger; then another was sent,
but he was detained also. Then Joram went himself, and Ahaziah with him, and
asked, Is it peace, Jehu? who answered, What peace so long as the Whoredoms of
thy Mother Jezabel, and her Witchcrafts are so many? Joram then perceiving
there was treachery, endeavors to fly away; but Jehu drew a Bow, and slew him,
and bad one of his Captains cast his Body into the Field of Naboth, as God had
threatened he should be served. He slew Ahaziah King of Judah also; and when he
was come to Jezreel, Jezabel looked out at a Window, and upbraided him for
killing his Master. But he commanded her to be thrown down out of the Window,
and he trod her under feet, and the Dogs did eat the greatest part of her. What
was left he commanded to be buried, because she was a Kings Daughter.

CHAP. X.
After this Jehu sent Letters to Samaria, where were kept seventy of Ahab's
Sons, requiring those that had the charge of 'em to bring their Heads to him on
the morrow; which was done. So he slew all that remained of the House of Ahab
at Jezreel; he slew also forty two Princes, the Kindred of Ahaziah. As he was
going to Samaria, he met with Jonadab the Son of Rechab, and took him up into
his Charet, saying, Come see my Zeal for the Lord of Hosts. So he came to
Samaria, and slew all that remained of Ahab there. Then he gathered all the
Worshipers and Prophets of Baal together, upon pretense of offering a great
Sacrifice to Baal, and caused 'em all to be slain, and burnt his Images, and
brake down his Temple. But yet he practiced the Idolatry of Jeroboam, the not
of Ahab. But for what he had done in executing Judgment on the House of Ahab,
God promised to continue his Seed on the Throne to the fourth Generation. He
reigned twenty eight years over Israel in Samaria, and then died, and his Son
Jehoahaz reigned in his sted.

CHAP. XI.
Ahaziah being slain, his Mother Athuliah usurps the Throne, and slew all the
Seed-Royal; only one of them, Joash, was hid in some of the Chambers belonging
to the Temple, six years: And in the seventh year Jehojada the High Priest
brought him out, and proclaimed him King. Athaliah hearing a noise, went to see
what was the matter, and spied Joash standing by a Pillar, and the People about
him rejoicing, and cried out, Treason, Treason. But Jehojada commanded, and
they laid hands on her, and slew her. Then Jehojada made a Covenant between the
Lord, and the King; and the People, that they should be the Lords People; and
between the King and the People. Then they brake down the Monuments of
Idolatry, and slew the Priests of Baal, and they brought the King down out of
the House of the Lord, and he sat upon the Throne of the Kings.

CHAP. XII.
It was in the seventh year of Jehu that Joash began to reign, and he did right
in the sight of the Lord all the days of Jehojada, and caused the Temple to be
repaired. But after Jehojada was dead, the Princes came and flattered him, and
he harkned unto 'em, and they fell to Idolatry again: Whereupon the Spirit of
God came upon Zechariah, and he reproved 'em for their sins; so the King
commanded him to be stoned, and they stoned him in the Court of the Lords
House: And when he died, he said, The Lord look upon it and requite it. After
this Hazael designing to come up against Jerusalem, Joash took all the hallowed
things, and sent 'em to him, and so he departed. But the Servants of Joash
conspired against him, and slew him in the House of Millo, and Amaziah his Son
reigned in his sted.

CHAP. XIII
In the three and twentieth year of Joash began Jehoahaz Son of Jehu to reign
over Israel^ and he followed the ways of Jeroboam; so the Lord delivered Israel
into the hands of the King of Syria, and Jehoahaz besought the Lord, and he
gave them a Savior. Then he died, and Joash his Son reigned in his sted, who
departed not from the sins of Jeroboam. In his days Elisha fell sick, and Joash
came and wept over him, saying, O my Father, my Father, the Charets of Israel
and the Horsemen thereof: And Elisha bad him take his Bow and Arrows, and
shoot; and he shot: then Elisha told him, he should smite the Syrians till he
had consumed 'em. Then he had him take the Arrows and smite upon the ground,
and so he did thrice. And Elisha was angry because he smote but thrice, and
told him he should have smitten five or six times, and then he should have
utterly destroyed the Syrians, whereas now he should smite 'em but thrice. Then
Elisha died and was buried; and afterward some casting a Man into his
Sepulcher, as soon as he touched the Bones of Elisha, the man revived, and stood
upon his Feet. Then Hazael oppressed Israel; but Joash overcome Benhadad the
Son of Hazael, and beat him three times, and recovered the Cities of Israel.

CHAP. XIV.
At this time Amaziah reigned over Judah, and did that which was right in the
sight of the Lord. He slew those that had slain the King his Father, 2 Chronicles.
25.5. etc. He gathered together the Militia of Judah and Benjamin, three
hundred thousand choice men; also he hi^'d than hundred thousand out of Israel:
But a Prophet met him and told him, God was not with the Men of Israel, and
therefore he should send 'em back again; and so he did. After this he fought
against the Edomites, and slew ten thousand, and carried away ten thousand
more, and threw 'em down from the top of a Rock that they were broken all in
pieces. But when he came from the Slaughter of the Edomites, he brought their
Gods, and set 'em up for his Gods, and served them. Whereupon God sent a
Prophet to him to reprove him for it; but he was angry with the Prophet, and
said, Who made thee of the King's Counsel? Forbear: why should thou be
smitten? Then the Prophet told him, that God would destroy him because he
harkned not to his Counsel. Then he sent a Challenge to Joash, but was beaten,
and taken Prisoner, and Joash came to Jerusalem, and brake down part of the
Wall, and plundered the House of the Lord and the Kings House, and so returned
to Samaria. Then he died, and Jeroboam his Son reigned in his stead. Then they
made a Conspiracy against Amaziah King of Judah, and he fled to Lachish; but
they sent after him, and slew him there. And the People made Ahaziah his Son
King in his sted. Jeroboam King of Israel did Evil in the sight of the Lord;
yet God saved them by the hand of Jeroboam, because he saw the Affliction of
Israel that it was very bitter. Then Jeroboam died, and Zechariah his Son
resigned in his sted.

CHAP. XV.
Az^^iah (or Uzaiah) did that which was right in the sight of the Lord. [2 Chronicles. 26 and as long as he sought the Lord, God made him to prosper; for he
fought against the Philistines, and prevailed. God helped him also against the
Arabians; and the Ammonites brought him Gifts. He built Towers in Jerusalem,
and dug many Wells, for he had much Cattle and Husbandry, for he loved it.
He had a great Army of three hundred and seven thousand and five hundred; and
he made many Engines in Jerusalem to shoot Arrows and Stones withal, and was
very strong. But when he was strong his Heart was lifted up to his Destruction;
for he went into the Temple to burn Incense himself; but Azariah the Chief
Priest withstood him, telling him that it pertained not to him, but to the
Priests. Then he was wroth with the Priests. But God smote him with a Leprosy,
so he hastened out of the Temple, and dwelt in a lone House, and Jotham his Son
was his Deputy. Then he died, and Jotham succeeded him.] In his days did
Zachariah the Son of Jeroboam reign over Israel, and he walked in the ways of
Jeroboam the Son of Nebat; and Shallum conspired against him, and slew him, and
reigned in his sted. But Menahem conspired against him, and slew him, and
reigned in his sted. He walked in the ways of Jeroboam the Son of Nebat. Then
Pull the King of Assyria came against him, to whom he gave a thousand Talents of
Silver to settle him upon the Throne. He died, and Pekahiah his Son reigned in
his sted. But Pekah conspired against him, and slew him, and reigned in his
sted. In his days Tiglath-Pilesar King of Assyria took many Towns from him, and
carried the People captive to Assyria. In his days began Jotham the Son of
Uzziah to reign over Judah, and he did that which was right in the sight of the
Lord. He built the higher Gate of the House of the Lord, and Cities in the
Mountains. He fought also with the King of the Ammonites, and prevailed against
'em, and they gave him Tribute, and he became mighty, because he prepared his
ways before the Lord. Then he died, and Ahaz his Son succeeded him.

CHAP. XVI.
2 Chronicles. 28. Ahaz walked in the way of the Kings of Israel, and burnt his
Children in the Fire; wherefore the Lord delivered him into the hand of the
King of Syria, who carried away a great multitude of People to Damascus. Pekah
also the King of Israel prevailed against him, and slew in one day an hundred
and twenty thousand, because they had forsaken the Lord God of their Fathers,
and carried away two hundred thousand persons, and took much Spoil. But the
Prophet Oded met them, and reproved 'em for it, saying, Are there not with you,
even with you, sins against the Lord your God? therefore deliver the Captives.
So some of the Princes withstood them, and would not suffer 'em to bring them
into the City. So the Captives were clothed and fed, and sent to Jericho.
[Esay 7. Then Rezin the King of Syria, and Pekah King of Israel warred against
Jerusalem, but could no prevail against it. And the Lord commanded Esaias to go
meet Ahaz, and bid him not be afraid of them; and bad him ask a Sign: but Ahaz
would not. Then said Esaias, God himself shall give you a Sign: Behold, a Virgin
shall conceive and bear a Son, and shall call his name Immanuel. But withal
tells him, That the Lord would bring upon them the King of Assyria, who should
destroy both his People and their Land.] Yet Ahaz sent Ambassadors to the King
of Assyria to come and help him against the Kings of Syria and Israel, and sent
him all the Silver and Gold that was in the Lords House, and in his own
Treasury. So the King of Assyria went up against Damascus, and took it, and
slew Rezin. And Ahaz went to Damascus to meet him, and seeing there an Altar,
he sent the Pattern of it to Urijah the Priest, who made one after that
fashion, upon which Ahaz offered Sacrifices, and removed the Brazen Altar, and
commanded that this new Altar should be made use of for the daily Sacrifice,
and shut up the Doors of the Temple, and sacrificed to the Gods of Damascus.
Thus in time of his Distress did he trespass yet more against the Lord. Then he
died, and Hezekiah his Son succeeded him.

CHAP. XVII.
In the days of Ahaz began Hoshea to reign over Israel, and Shalmaneser King of
Assyria came up against him and made him tributary. But he sent Ambassadors to
So King of Egypt to help him; which the King of Assyria hearing of, put him in
Prison, and came and besieged Samaria, and took it, and carried the People into
Assyria for their Idolatry and other sins they had been guilty of, and brought
other from Babylon and other places to dwell in the Cities of Samaria. But God
sent Lions among 'em for their wickedness. Then the King of Assyria sent a
Priest to them to teach 'em how to serve the Lord. But they all served their
own Gods, and set up their Images in their High Places. So they served the Lord
and their own Gods too, and so continued to do.

CHAP. XVIII.
2 Chronicles. 29. Hezekiah did that which was right in the sight of the Lord. He
destroyed all the Monuments of Idolatry, and brake in pieces the Brazen
Serpent, because the People burnt Incense to it. He also opened the Doors of
the Temple, and brought in the Priests, commanding 'em to sanctify the House
of the Lord, which they did. Then he gathered the Rulers together, and offered
Sacrifices according to the Law, and praised the Lord with the Words of David
and Asaph, 2 Chronicles. 30. Then he sent Letters to all Israel and Judah, and those
of the twelve Tribes, to come and keep the Passover at Jerusalem, which he
earnestly exhorted 'em to. So they kept the Passover in the Second Month; and
because many did eat otherwise than was written, Hezekiah prayed for 'em, and
the Lord harkned to him, and healed the people. Then he encouraged the Levites
to teach the people, and perform their Duties; and he gave to the Congregation
a thousand Bullocks, and seven thousand Sheep; and the Princes gave 'em a
thousand Bullocks, and ten thousand Sheep: So there was great Joy, and the
Priests blessed the people, and their Prayer came up to Heaven. 2 Chronicles. 31.
Then they destroyed all the Monuments of Idolatry, and so returned home. Then
he appointed the Priests and Levites to wait in their Courses, and commanded
the People to pay 'em all their dues, which they cheerfully did. And he
appointed Officers to dispose of the Titles. And all this he did with sincerity
and diligence. So God was with him, and prospered him. Chapter 18.11. etc. 2 Chronicles.
32. After this Sennacherib King of Assyria took several Cities of Judah; then
Hezekiah repaired the Walls of Jerusalem, and encouraged the People, saying,
With him is an Arm of Flesh, but with us is the Lord our God to help us, and to
fight our battles. Then Sennacherib besieged Lachish, and Hezekiah sent to buy
his peace with him, and gave him all the Gold in the Lords House, and in his
own Treasury; yet Sennacherib continued his Siege, and sent a great Army
against Jerusalem under the command of Rabshakeh, who reviled and blasphemed
the Lord, as if he were not able to deliver them out of the hands of his
Master. He spoke also to the people that they should not suffer themselves to
be deluded by Hezekiah to hold out the Siege, but to yield to him, and they
should enjoy their Lives and Fortunes. But the people answered him not a word.
But some went to Hezekiah and told him what Rabshakeh had said.

CHAP. XIX.
When Hezekiah heard it, he went into the House of the Lord, and sent to Esaias
the Prophet to pray for 'em. Then Esaias bids 'em not to be afraid of his words,
for God would send a Blast upon him, and cause him to return and fall in his
own Land. Then Sennacherib sent Messengers again to Hezekiah, with Letters full
of Blasphemy; and Hezekiah spread the Letter before the Lord, and prayed to be
delivered out of his Hand. Then God sent Esaias with a Message to Hezekiah to
tell him, that his Prayer was heard, and that they should have occasion to
despise Sennacherib, and laugh him to scorn, notwithstanding all his pride and
boastings, for he would turn him back by the way by which he came. So that
Night the Lord sent an Angel which slew an hundred fourscore and five thousand
of the Assyrians. Then Sennacherib returned with shame to his own Land, and
dwelt at Niniveh; and as he was worshipping in the House of his God, his two
Sons slew him. Thus God saved Hezekiah, and Jerusalem; and many brought Gifts
to the Lord, and Presents to Hezekiah, and he was magnified in the sight of all
Nations.

CHAP. XX.
In those days Hezekiah fell sick of a mortal Disease; and God sent Esaias to him
to bid him set his house in order, for he should die. Upon this Hezekiah prayed
earnestly and wept. Then God sent Esaias again to tell him, that he would heal
him, and add fifteen years to his Life; and that he would defend and deliver
the City; and that he should lay a Cake of Figs on the Sore: So he recovered;
and for a Sign that he should recover, and go up to the House of the Lord
within three days, he caused the Shadow to go back ten degrees upon the Dial of
Ahaz. Then the King of Babylon sent Messengers and Presents to him to
congratulate his Recovery; wherewith he being puffed up, showed 'em all his
Treasures. Whereupon Esaias was sent to him to tell him, That all these things
should be carried to Babylon, and some of his Seed should be Eunuchs to the
King of Babylon. To which Ezekiah replied, Good is the word of the Lord which
thou have spoken. So he died, and Manasseh his Son succeeded him.

CHAP. XXI.
2 Chronicles. 33. Manasseh did worse than all the Kings that were before him; for
he restored Idolatry, built Altars for all the Host of Heaven in the Courts of
the Lord's House, used Enchantments, dealt with familiar Spirits, and shed
abundance of innocent Blood; wherefore the Lord threatened to wipe Jerusalem as
a Man wipes a Dish; and tells 'em he was bringing such Evils upon Jerusalem and
Judah, that whosoever hears it, both his Ears shall tingle. And accordingly the
Captains of the King of Assyria took Manasseh and carried him to Babylon. And
in his Affliction he humbled himself greatly before God, and prayed, and he was
entreated of him, and brought him again unto Jerusalem. Then he made a through
Reformation, and repaired the Altar, and commanded the People to serve the
Lord. He died, and Ammon his Son succeeded him. He did evil as his Father had
done, but did not humble himself like his Father, but trespassed more and more.
Then his Sons conspired against him, and slew him in his own House, and Josiah
his Son reigned in his sted.

CHAP. XXII.
2 Chronicles. 33. Josiah while he was young, (about sixteen years old) began to
seek after the God of David his Father, and took care to have the Temple
repaired. And as they were cleansing it, Hilkiah the High Priest found the
Original Copy of the Law written by Moses, and sent it to the King, who caused
it to be read before him, and was much affected with it; especially with the
threatenings against Idolatry, and sent to Huldah a Prophetess to enquire of the
Lord for him; who answered, That God would bring great Evils upon 'em for all
their sins; but as for Josiah, because his Heart was tender, and he humbled
himself before the Lord, he should die in peace, and not see the evil that
should befall 'em.

CHAP. XXIII.
2 Chronicles. 34. Then the King gathered the Rulers, and all the people together,
and went up to the House of the Lord, and caused the Book to be read, and made
a Covenant with the Lord to keep his Commandments, according to what was
written in that Book; and then purged the Temple of all Idolatrous Relics, and
made a general Reformation among 'em. Then he went to Bethel, and brake down
the Altar and High Place, and burnt the Grove, and burnt the Bones of the
Priests upon the Altar, as it was foretold he should do: And so he did likewise
in all the Cities of Samaria, and slew the Priests of the High Places upon
their Altars. 2 Chronicles. 35. Then he commanded and they kept a Passover in a most
solemn manner, so as had not been from the days of the Judges. Notwithstanding
the Lord turned not from the fierceness of his great Wrath against Judah,
because of the Provocations of Manasseh. After this the King of Egypt went to
fight with the King of Assyria at Carchemish, and Josiah went out against him;
but he sent to him to persuade him not to concern himself in that quarrel,
because the War was undertaken by God's Command. But Josiah would not be
dissuaded, but went to fight with him, and in the Fight he was wounded, and
died of his Wounds. Then all the People mourned for him; and Jeremy the Prophet
lamented for him; and the People made Jehoahaz King in his Fathers sted. He did
Evil in the sight of the Lord, and Pharaoh deposed him, and made Eliakim his
Brother King, and changed his Name to Jehojakim, who also did Evil as his
Fathers had done.

CHAP. XXIV.
In his days Nebuchadnezzar came up and made him Tributary; but he rebelled
against him, and the Lord raised up many Enemies of the Nations round about to
destroy them for the sins of Manasseh. Then Nebuchadnezzar came and bound him
in Fetters, and carried away part of the Vessels of the Lord's House to
Babylon, and put 'em in the House of his God. And Jehojakim died, and
Jehojachin succeeded him, and did evil in the sight of the Lord. And the King
of Babylon sent his Servants against Jerusalem to besiege it: But Jehojachin
rendered himself to them, and they carried him to Babylon, with the Vessels of
the Temple, and the people of the Land. And the King of Babylon made Zedekiah
King in his stead. But God in Judgment suffered him to rebel against the King
of Babylon.

CHAP. XXV.
Then Nebuchadnezzar came and besieged Jerusalem; and after two years Siege,
the Famine prevailing, it was taken; but the King escaped by night: But the
Chaldeans pursued, and took him and brought him to the King of Babylon at
Riblah, where they slew his Sons before his Face; then put out his Eyes, and
carried him bound to Babylon. And soon after came Nebuzaradan and burnt the
Temple and City, and brake down the Walls round about, and carried the rest of
the People, (all but the poor, whom he left to husband the Land) and the
remainder of the Vessels of the Lord's House, and several of the chief Men of
the City, to the King of Babylon to Riblah, who slew 'em there. And over those
that remained in the Land he set Gedaliah to be Governor. But Ismael came
privately and slew him. Afterward in the seven and thirtieth year of
Zedekiah's Captivity, Evilmerodac King of Babylon set him at Liberty, and gave
him a daily allowance at his own Table all his days.

EZRA.
CHAP. I.
CYRUS being come to the Kingdom of Persia, proclaims Liberty to the Jews to
return to their own Country, and build the Temple at Jerusalem; and likewise
gives 'em all the Vessels of Gold and Silver belonging to the Temple that
Nebuchadnezzar had carried away, which were great and small, five thousand four
hundred.

CHAP. II.
Hereupon there returned forty two thousand three hundred and sixty; besides
seven thousand three hundred thirty seven Servants. When they came to
Jerusalem, the chief of 'em gave freely for repairing of the Temple.

CHAP. III.
Then Joshua and Zerubbabel built the Altar, and offered the daily Sacrifice
thereon, and all other Sacrifices according to the Law. Then in the second year
after their return, they laid the Foundation of the Temple with great
rejoicing. But some of the ancient Men that had seen the first Temple, wept
when they saw this Foundation laid.

CHAP. IV.
The Samaritans, enemies of the Jews, hearing that they were about to build the
Temple, came and offered their assistance; but the Jews would not accept of it:
whereupon they made Friends at Court, who prevailed to hinder the Work till the
Reign of Darius. The chief of 'em wrote to Artaxerxes, and charge the Jews with
Rebellion; whereupon he sends a Command that the building should cease.

CHAP. V.
But Darius coming to the Throne, the Jews were encouraged by Haggai and
Zechary to set about building the Temple again; which they did, and were
opposed again by the Samaritans, who demand by what Authority they go on with
this work. They allege for themselves the Decree of Cyrus: This they acquaint
the Emperor withal, desiring that search may be made whether there were any
such Decree, and to send 'em his pleasure.

CHAP. VI.
Search being made, the Decree was found, which Darius confirms with a severe
Penalty and Curse upon the Infringers of it. Then the Jews went on vigorously,
and finished the House, and kept the Dedication of it, and kept the Passover at
the time appointed.

CHAP. VII.
Artaxerxes being come to the Throne, in the Seventh year of his Reign Ezra
goes to Jerusalem, having a new Commission from the King to take as many more
Jews with him as were willing to go; and all the Gold and Silver which the King
and his Princes had offered for the Service of the Temple, and whatsoever else
he could collect among the Jews; with Authority to reform all Abuses and
Disorders there, to appoint such Magistrates as he thought fit, to free the
Priests from Taxes, and to punish Offenders.

CHAP. VIII.
Ezra having gathered all his Company together that were to go with him,
appoints a Fast to seek direction, and a blessing on their Journey. Then he
delivered the Vessels and Offerings for the Temple to certain Priests to take
charge of 'em, and carry 'em to Jerusalem. So they came to Jerusalem, and
delivered the King's Commissions to his Leiutenants and Officers, who furthered
the People and the House of God.

CHAP. IX.
Ezra being come to Jerusalem, complain was made to him, that many of the
People, yea of the Priests, had married strange Wives of the Idolatrous Nations
contrary to the Law: This Ezra was mightily affected with, and do largely
confess and bewail their sins unto God.

CHAP. X.
Hereupon a great Congregation were met together, and wept very much for this
sin, and Shecaniah proposes, that Ezra by his Authority should engage 'em in a
Covenant to reform this Miscarriage; who thereupon summons 'em all to
Jerusalem, and enjoin 'em to confess their sin, and put away their strange
Wives; which was done accordingly.

NEHEMIAH.
CHAP. I.
NEhemiah understanding by some that came from Jerusalem, of the great Distress
his Countrymen were in there, and that the City lay in a ruinous condition
still, was exceedingly affected with it, and thereupon fasts, and mourns, and
prays unto God on their behalf. And

CHAP. II.
Being Cupbearer to Artaxerxes, when he came to bring Wine to the King, he took
notice of his sadness, and asked him the Cause of it; he answered, Because the
City, the place of his Father's Sepulchers, lay wast. The King enquired
further, Whether he had any request to make to him upon that occasion. Then he
desired to be sent with Authority to build the City, which the King granted,
and gave him a Warrant to take what Timber he had occasion for out of the
King's Forests. This their Enemies hearing of, were troubled at. But Nehemiah
when he came to Jerusalem, viewed the Walls by Night, to see what repairs were
necessary, and then took order for it. But their Enemies scoffed at 'em.

CHAP. III.
Then they fell to work about repairing the Walls, and several Persons took
their several shares.

CHAP. IV.
This very much disturbed Sanballat and the Samaritans, who fell a scoffing at
'em for it, and conspired together to make 'em cease by force. But Nehemiah set
a Watch to prevent their attempts, and armed the Workmen, and gave 'em
directions how they should govern themselves in case of an Assault.

CHAP. V.
Complaint was made to Nehemiah of great oppression of the poorer sort, by
their Creditors and Usurers; whereupon Nehemiah was very angry with 'em, and
required 'em to restore what they had so injuriously taken from their poor
Brethren; which they promised to do: and to encourage 'em to deal mercifully
and kindly with their Brethren, he tells 'em, That he might have required the
same Allowance that former Governors had, yet he forbore to require it, that he
might not be chargable to 'em; nay, he kept great Hospitality for the
entertainment of those that came to his Table.

CHAP. VI.
Their Enemies hearing that the Walls were repairing, endeavored by several
Contrivances to terrify Nehemiah; but none of 'em took effect; but they
proceeded and finished the Wall.

CHAP. VII.
The City being thus secured, Nehemiah appoints that the Gates should not be
opened till the Sun was up, and that they should be shut in due time, and that
Watch should be kept continually. Then he took an account of the Genealogies of
the Priests and People; and they all made an Offering for repairing the Temple
and City.

CHAP. VIII.
After this they held a solemn meeting for Reading and expounding the Law to
the People, which they were exceedingly affected with, and fell a weeping for
their transgressions of it. But Nehemiah and Ezra comforted them, and bad 'em
rejoice for the goodness of God to 'em. And then they kept the Feast of
Tabernacles according to the Law.

CHAP. IX.
Then they kept a solemn Fast, confessing their sins, and the sins of their
Fathers; and the Levites made a religious acknowledgment of God's goodness and
their own wickedness; and also made a solemn Covenant with God, ( chapter 10.) to
which all the chief among 'em sealed, and engaged themselves to a stricter
Obedience to the Law, and particularly against mixed Marriages, and for
Sanctification of the Sabbath, and for the better payment of their dues for the
maintaining the Service of God in the Temple.

CHAP. XII.
They kept the Feast of Dedication of the Wall of Jerusalem with great gladness
and solemnity. And

CHAP. XIII.
Read in the Law: whereupon they separated the mixed multitude from 'em; and
Nehemiah reformed other abuses, casting out the Household stuff of Tobiah the
Ammonite out of the Chambers of the Temple; causing them to bring their Tithes
and Offerings to the Temple for the maintenance of the Levites; reforming the
profanation of the Sabbath, and causing them to put away their strange Wives;
for all which he prays God to remember him for good.

ESTHER.
CHAP. I.
AHasuerus to show the Glory of his Kingdom, and magnificence of his State,
made a Royal Feast for all his Princes and Nobles, which lasted almost half a
year; and after that, for all the People there present for seven days more.
Queen Vashti likewise made a Feast for the Ladies. On the last day of the Feast
the King sent for the Queen to come to him, that the People might see and
admire her Beauty; but she refused to come. Whereat the King being much
displeased, consulted with his wise Men what penalty was fit to inflict upon
her. One of them answered, Since this example might be so prejudicial to the
Authority of all Husbands, to prevent the Evil thereof, he advised she should
be put away, and another taken in her room; which was done, and Proclamation
made, that every man should bear rule in his own House,

CHAP. II.
Vashti being thus put away, enquiry was made among all the fair Virgins for
one fit for the King. Among others Esther is pitched upon, and brought to the
Apartment to be prepared for the King's Company, where she found acceptance
with the Governor of the House, who presently gave her all things requisite.
And when her turn came to go to the King, she pleased him so, that he Crowned
her Queen instead of Vashti, and made a splendid Feast, and gave royal Gifts
for the greater Solemnity of the Wedding. After this Mordicai (Esther's
Cousin-German) being one of the King's Porters, became acquainted with a
Conspiracy which two of the King's Chamberlains made against him to take away
his Life; which he discovered to Esther, and she to the King, who caused 'em
both to be hanged, and this good Service of Mordecai to be recorded in the
Chronicles.

CHAP. III.
After this the King advanced Haman to be his chief Favorite and Minister of
State; to whom therefore all the people showed more than ordinary Reverence:
only Mordecai refused to do him any honor, (he being an accursed Amalekite)
which Haman taking notice of, contrived the Destruction not only of him alone,
but of the whole Nation of the Jews. And for the more successful effecting of
it, he cast lots to find out the most lucky time, and then addresses himself to
the King to get leave and authority to put his design in execution; which the
King presently granted, and gave him his Ring to seal what Decree he pleased
for this purpose. So the Decree was written and sealed, and sent abroad to all
Countries to kill and destroy all the Jews throughout all the King's Dominions,
on the thirteenth day of the twelfth Month.

CHAP. IV.
When this Decree was published, Mordecai and the Jews were in extreme
distress; and Mordecai sent a Copy of it to Esther, charging her to use her
Interest with the King for their preservation. But she making an excuse in
regard of the danger of going into the King uncalled, he sends her word, That
if she refused, he did not doubt but God would deliver 'em some other way; but
probably God brought her to this place for this very end. Whereupon she
resolves to go to the King whatever came of it; only desires, That all the Jews
at Shushan would seek God by Fasting and Prayer on her behalf, which they did.

CHAP. V.
Then Esther went unto the King, who held out his Golden Scepter to her, and
asked what her business was with him. She desires that the King and Haman would
come to a Banquet that day, which she had prepared for 'em. Which they did: and
then the King asked her again what she had to say to him. She desired the same
favor the next day of their coming to a Banquet, and then she would acquaint him
with her request. Haman as he went home, not meeting with that respect from
Mordecai that he expected, was full of Wrath, but concealed it for the present,
and boasted of his Honor and Wealth to his Wife and Friends; yet he took
little content in all, because of that disrespect he met with from Mordecai:
Whereupon his Wife advised him to make a Gallows of Fifty Cubits high, and the
next day to get leave of the King to hang him thereon.

CHAP. VI.
That Night the King being restless, calls for the Chronicles to be read to
him, and lights upon that Story, how Mordecai had discovered a Conspiracy
against him, and enquires what Honor had been done to Mordecai for it: They
answered, None at all. Then the King asks, Who was in the Court; they said,
Haman, (who was now come to beg leave to hang Mordecai.) The King sends for
him, and asks him, What shall be done to the Man whom the King has a mind to
honor? Haman thinking this could be none but himself, directs Honor enough in
several particulars. The King commands him to do all this immediately to
Mordecai, which he was feign to do in spite of all his regret. But as soon as
he had done, he hastened home to acquaint his Wife and Friends with what had
befaln him. They conclude, That if Mordecai, before whom he had begun to fall,
were a Jew, he should certainly fall before him. Then Messengers came to hasten
Haman to the Banquet.

CHAP. VII.
The King and Haman being come to the Banquet, the King renews his instance to
Esther, to know her request. She then begs that her Life, and the Life of her
People might be given her, which were all destined to destruction. The King was
mightily surprised at this, and fell into a great Rage, and asks, Who durst
presume to do such a thing? The Queen replies, It Is Haman. The King being
enraged, walked into the Garden to cool and quiet himself. Haman in the mean
while prostrates himself to the Queen to beg her favor. The King coming in
again, and seeing him in this posture, says, What, will he force the Queen
before my face? So they took Haman out of the King's Presence; and one told the
King how that Haman had prepared a Gallows fifty Cubits high for Mordecai;
whereupon the King commanded him to be hanged thereupon himself. Which being
done, the King's anger was appeased.

CHAP. VIII.
Then the King gave Haman's House and Estate to Esther, who sets Mordecai over
it; and the King made him also Keeper of the Seal. Then Esther further begged of
the King with Tears, That some course mighr be taken to prevent that mischief
that Haman had designed against the Jews; who gave them leave to frame another
Decree as it liked them. Then they made a new Decree, and sent it into all the
Kings Dominions, to give leave to the Jews to gather themselves together on the
day appointed for the Massacre, and to stand upon their Guard, and to kill and
slay all that should assault them; which caused great rejoicing among all the
Jews.

CHAP. IX.
The day appointed for the slaughter of the Jews by Haman's Decree, being come,
they gathered themselves together, both to defend themselves, and slay their
Enemies: and in Shushan alone they slew five hundred of their Enemies, among
which were Haman's ten Sons: And upon Esther's request, the King gave 'em leave
to do the like again the next day in Shushan; and then thy slew three hundred
more, and Haman's Sons were hanged upon the Gallows. Hereupon they appointed
that the fourteenth and fifteenth days of this Month should be kept yearly, as
days of rejoicing by all the Jews, in memorial of this Deliverance: And this
was confirmed both by Esther and Mordecai

DANIEL. [The six first Chapters of Daniel being Historical, I must, according
to the Rules of my design, give a brief account of 'em.]
CHAP. I.
NEbuchadnezzar, having taken Jerusalem, and carried many of the People
Captives to Babylon, gave commandment to the Master of the Eunuchs, to seek out
some young Men of the Jews of Noble Birth, comely persons, and of good parts,
who might be trained up in the Learning of the Chaldeans, and fitted for the
King's Service. Among others, he pitched upon Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael and
Azariah, who had a portion of Meat and Drink allowed 'em of the King's
Provision. But Daniel and his three Companions refused the Court-dyet, and
contented themselves with Pulse and Water, and yet were found to look better
than those that fed of the Kings Fare. And when they were brought to attend the
King, they were found in all matters of knowledge, wisdom and sciences to excel
all the Magicians and Astronomers that were in the Kingdom.

CHAP. II.
Nebuchadnezzar dreamt a Dream, which caused a great discomposure of mind in
him, but he had forgot it. So he sent for all that were skilled in such matters
to tell him his Dream; but they all agreed that it was impossible for any man
to do. Whereupon the King was very angry, and commanded they should all be put
to death as Impostors. So some sought to bring Daniel and his Fellows within
the compass of that Command. But Daniel desired time, and undertook to give the
King satisfaction, both concerning his Dream, and the Interpretation of it. So
he went home, and he and his Companions sought unto God to reveal this Secret
to 'em, whereby their Lives might be preserved. Then God revealed it to Daniel
in a Night Vision, for which he returned thanks to him. So he desired he might
be brought to the King; which being done, he told the King that none of the
wise Men could reveal this Secret, but God only; and so tells the King both his
Dream, and the Interpretation of it. Then the King promoted Daniel, and his
three Companions upon his request.

CHAP. III.
Nebuchadnezzar made a Golden Image, and commanded all persons whatsoever to
worship it, upon pain of being cast into a Fiery Furnace. Then certain men
accused Daniel's three Companions for not worshipping the Image; so
Nebuchadnezzar sent for 'em to know whether they would worship it or no: but
they gave him a peremptory denial; whereupon in a great rage he commanded 'em
to be cast into the Fiery Furnace. But presently the King saw four Men walking
in the Fiery Furnace without any hurt, and the fourth looked like a Divine
Person. Then he called 'em to come forth, and they came out, and not so much as
the smell of fire had passed upon 'em. Then Nebuchadnezzar made a Decree, that
none should dare to speak against this God: and he promoted these persons.

CHAP. IV.
Nebuchadnezzar dreamt another Dream, which the Magicians could not interpret;
there he relates it to Daniel, concerning a Tree which was commanded to be cut
down, only the Stump was to be left in the Earth; which Daniel interprets of
himself, that he should be driven from among Men, and feed amon the Beasts; but
at last his Understanding should return to him, and he should be restored to
his Kingdom again. Which accordingly came to pass. For walking in his Palace,
and admiring his own greatness, there came a Voice from Heaven, saying, Thy
Kingdom is departed from thee. Whereupon he was driven from among Men, and
lived among the Beast, till his Understanding returned to him, and then he
owned the Sovereignty and Dominion of God, and did extol him, and acknowledged,
That those that walk in pride he is able to abase.

CHAP. V.
Belshazzar, at a great Feast, profaning the Vessels of the Temple by quaffing
and carousing in 'em, there was a hand appeared writing upon the Wall over
against him; whereat he was extremely appal'd, and sends for the wise Men to
read the Writing, but none of 'em could do it. Then the Queen Mother informed
him concerning Daniel, who being sent for, read the Writing to the King, which
contained his doom, That his Kingdom should be taken from him, and given to the
Medes and Persians; which was soon fulfilled; for that Night he was slain, and
his Kingdom possessed by Darius the Mede.

CHAP. VI.
This Darius advanced Daniel to be the prime Minister of State; which the rest
not brooking, and envying him for, since they could find no fault in his
Administration, they laid a Snare for him in matters of Religion; which was
thus. They procure a Decree from the King, that none should ask any Petition of
any God or Man for thirty days, but only of the King. Then they watch't Daniel,
and finding that he prayed to God thrice a day, they accuse him to the King; at
which the King was much grieved, and endeavored all he could to deliver him.
But they urged the Law, and so he was cast into the Lion's Den. But the King
could not sleep all Night, but rose early and came to the Lions Den, and called
to Daniel; who answered him, That God had shut the Lions Mouths that they had
done him no hurt: Whereupon the King commanded him to be taken out of the Den,
and his Accusers to be cast into it; and made an open acknowledgment, That this
God is the Living God, and therefore commanded all to tremble and fear before
him.

JONAH.
CHAP. I.
JOnah being commanded to preach against Nineveh, flies to Tarshish; but God
sent a Storm after him, which continuing, the Mariners cast Lots to find out
who was the cause of it, and the Lot fell upon Jonah: Then he confessed he fled
from the presence of God, and bad 'em cast him overboard, and the Storm should
cease; which tho they were very unwilling to, yet at last were feign to do it,
and then the Storm ceased; but a Fish swallowed Jonah, and he was three days
and nights in the Fishes Belly.

CHAP. II.
Then he prayed to God in the Fishes Belly, and God caused the Fish to vomit
him up upon dry Land.

CHAP. III.
Then God sends him again to Nineveh, and he went and proclaimed, Yet forty
days and Nineveh shall be destroyed. Whereupon they sasted and prayed, and
turned from their evil ways, and God repented of the evil he threatened 'em with.

CHAP. IV.
Whereat Jonah was angry (as making him a false Prophet) and in a pet desires
to die. God, to convince him of his foolish impatience, caused a Gourd to
spring up, which sheltered him from the heat of the Sun; but afterward caused
it to wither. Then Jonah was angry again: but God replied, If thou had pity
upon the Gourd, much more should I have pity upon Nineveh, wherein are more
than sixscore thousand persons that cannot distinguish between their right hand
their left.

The Evangelical History.
Luke 1.
AS Zachary a Priest was ministering in the Temple, an Angel appears to him, and
tells him he should have a Son called John, who should be great in the sight of
the Lord; which he not believing, is stricken dumb. Six Months after his Wife
had conceived, the Angel Gabriel was sent to the Virgin Mary to tell her, That
by the Power of the Holy Ghost she should conceive and bring forth a Son, whose
Name should be Jesus. After this Mary went to visit her Cosen Elizabeth, (the
Wife of Zachary) and as soon as Elizabeth heard Mary's Salutation, the Babe
leapt in her Womb, and both of 'em prophesied concerning Christ. When
Elizabeth's time was come she brought forth a Son, and his Father named him
John, and then he was filled with the Holy Ghost, and prophesied both
concerning Christ and John. Matthew. 1.
Mary being found with Child, her Husband Joseph (to whom she was espoused) had
thoughts of putting her away; but he was warned in a Dream to take her to him
(she being with Child by the Holy Ghost) and told that she should bring forth a
Son, who should be called Jesus. Luke 2.
So Joseph and Mary being brought to Bethlehem, by reason of the Taxing imposed
by Augustus, she was there delivered of a Son, whom she laid in a Manger (there
being no room in the Inn) the news whereof was told by an Angel to the
Shepherds watching their Flocks by Night, and a multitude of the Heavenly Host
were there also, praising God, and saying, Glory to God on the highest; on
earth peace, and good will toward men. Upon this the Shepherds went to
Bethlehem, and found it as it was told them, and they returned glorifying and
praising God. When the Child was eight days old, he was circumcized, and named
Jesus. And when the days of his Mothers Purification were accomplished, they
presented him to the Lord as the Firstborn. At that instant came Simeon and
Anna to the Temple, and prophesied concerning him. Matthew. 2.
About the time of his Birth, some wise Men of the East, seeing his Star, came
to Jerusalem, and enquired for him, that they might worship him; at which Herod
was startled, and sent them privately to find out where he was; they, being
guided by the Star, went to the House and worshipped him, and presented him, and
then returned back another way; which Herod being angry at, sent and slew all
the Children in Bethlehem from two years old and under: But Joseph had carried
Jesus and his Mother before into Egypt, being warned by God in a Dream so to
do. And afterward upon Herod's Death, being warned again, he returned into the
Land of Israel, and dwell at Nazareth. Luke ^.
When Jesus was twelve years old, he went up with his Parents to Jerusalem, and
staid there behind them. They missing of him, went back to Jerusalem, and there
found him in the Temple among the Doctors, hearing them, and asking them
Questions: His Mother seemed to blame him for putting them to such a fright:
But he replied, Wist ye not that I must be about my Fathers business? So he
went with 'em to Nazareth, and was subject to 'em. Luke 3. Matthew. 3. Mark 1.
In the fifteenth year of the Reign of Tiberius Caesar, John was sent to preach
the Baptism of Repentance for remission of sins; whereupon multitudes were
baptized of him, confessing their sins: And when the People were in doubt,
whether he were the Christ or no, he plainly told 'em, He was not the Christ,
nor worthy to untie his Shoes; and gave an honorable character and testimony
of him. Then Jesus came to John to be baptized of him, who knowing how much
greater a Person he was than himself, would have excused it; but Christ put him
upon it: and as Jesus came up out of the Water, the Spirit of God, in the Shape
of a Dove lighted upon him, and a Voice came from Heaven, saying, This is my
beloved Son in whom I am well-pleased. Matthew. 4. Luke 4.
After this Jesus was led of the Spirit into the Wilderness to be tempted of
the Devil; who tempted him to a distrust of God's Providence on the one hand,
and to a tempting of Providence on the other, and to Divel-worship; but Christ
repulses him still by Scripture-arguments: so the Devil departed from him, and
Angels came and ministered to him. John 1.
Jesus being now entering upon his public Ministry, calls some Disciples, as
Andrew, and Peter, and Philip; and seeing Nathaniel, gives a good character of
him. John 2.
Then being invited with his Disciples to a Wedding-Feast, it happened that
they wanted Wine; then he commanded to fill some Water-pots that stood there
with Water, and so draw out, and the Water was turned into Wine. After this
Jesus went up to Jerusalem to the Passover, and finding in the outer Court of
the Temple those that bought and sold Cattle, and Mony-changers, he drove 'em
all out thence, that they might not profane and abuse that holy place to
Merchandise and Fraud. Then the Jews asking him, How he could prove his
Authority to do these things, he replied, Destroy this Temple, and in three
days I Will raise it up. Many other Miracles wrought he at that Feast, so that
many believed on him. John 3.
Nicodemus coming to Jesus, he instructs him in the mystery of Regeneration,
(which before he was ignorant of) and concerning his Passion, and the necessity
of Faith. Mat. 14.
About this time John the Baptist having reproved Herod for taking Herodias his
Brothers Wife, he, by her instigation, put him into Prison; whereupon Jesus
went into Galilee; John 4.
and in his Journey thither met with a Samaritan Woman, to whom he told many
private passages of her Life, and likewise discovered himself to her to be the
Messiah; whereupon she believed, and many people thereabouts to believe in him
also; after which he went on and came into Galilee, where was a Nobleman whose
Son was sick, who came unto Jesus, desiring him to come and heal his Son: Jesus
says, Go thy way, thy Son lives; and as he was returning, they brought him
word that his Son was recovered. Jesus being in Galilee preached, that they
should repent and believe the Gospel. Luke 4.
Being at Nazareth he went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath day, and read in
the Prophet Esaias, and expounded it; and the People wondering at the gracious
Words that proceeded from him; yet he upbraided 'em for their unbelief and
slighting of him; whereupon they attempted to have thrown him down from the top
of the Hill, but he went away from 'em. Mark 1.
Then he came and dwelt in Capernaum, and there was a Man possessed with the
Devil; but Jesus cast him out. Then they went to Simon's House, and his Wife's
Mother was sick of a Fever, whom he took by the hand, lift her up and healed
her. In the Evening they brought to him all that had any infirmities upon 'em,
and he healed 'em all. The next morning rising up before day, he went into a
solitary place to pray; but his Disciples and the People followed him,
importuning him not to depart from 'em: But he traveled throughout all
Galilee, preaching and casting out Devils, and healing all manner of Diseases,
so that multitudes followed him out of all parts thereabouts: Among others a
Leper came to him for cure; Jesus put forth his Hand and healed him
immediately, and bad him show himself to the Priest, and offer what the Law
required in that case. Mark 2.
Another time, being at Capernaum, they brought a Palsy Man to him; and
because they could not come at the door for the throng, they uncovered the
Roof, and let him down in his Bed before Jesus, who thereupon said, Son, be of
good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee. This the Pharisees cavilled at; but
Jesus told 'em, he said it, that they might know he had power on earth to
forgive sins. Mat. 4.
Jesus walking by the Seaside, called Peter, and Andrew, and James, and John;
then entering into a Ship, he taught the People out of it; and afterward, bad
Simon let down the Net for a draught of Fishes: which he did, and they caught a
great multitude of Fishes: but Christ told him, That hereafter he should catch
Men. Mat. 9. Mark 2. Luke 5.
Afterward he called Matthew, or Levi, who made him a Feast, at which was a
great company of Publicans and Sinners, which the Scribes and Pharisees were
offended at; but Jesus answered, They that are whole need not a Physician, but
they that are sick. Then the Disciples of John and of the Pharisees found fault
with his Disciples, because they did not fast as they did: But Christ
vindicates 'em, because as yet they enjoyed his bodily presence; and besides
they were very weak and raw, and it was not a sit exercise for 'em. John 5.
After this Jesus went up to Jerusalem, and seeing an impotent Man, who had
lain at the Pool of Bethesday eight and thirty years for cure, he bad him take
up his Bed and walk; which he did; and it was the Sabbath day, whereupon the
Jews rebuked him for it, and questioned with him about it: and when he told 'em
it was Jesus that had cured him, and bad him do so, they sought to slay Jesus
for it; but he in a long Discourse asserts his Divinity unto 'em. Mat. 12. Mark
2. Luke 6.
Afterward Jesus going with his Disciples through the Corn, they rubbed some of
the Ears in their hands, and eat the Corn; which the Jews cavilled at, because
it was the Sabbath Day: But Christ vindicates 'em by the instance of David's
eating the Shewbread, and the practice of the Priests in killing of
Sacrifices. Another Sabbath being in the Synagogue, there was a Man which had a
lame hand, and they watched him whether he would heal the Man; so they fell into a
great dispute about it, Jesus proving that it was lawful to do good on the
Sabbath day; so he healed him: whereupon they consulted to put him to death,
but he withdrew himself: But great multitudes followed him wherever he went,
and the Devils themselves worshipped and confessed him. Mark 3. Luke 6.
Then he went up into a Mountain, where he chooses and ordains twelve to be
Apostles to preach the Gospel, heal Diseases, and cast out Devils. Here also
multitudes followed him, and sought to touch him, because there went virtue out
of him, and heald 'em all. Mat. 5.
Here he preached unto 'em that which is called his Sermon on the Mount. Mat.
8. Luke 7.
Then coming down, he entered into Capernaum, and a Centurion, who had built 'em
a Synagogue, sent unto him in behalf of a Servant whom he loved, which was sick
of the Palsy. Jesus went along with 'em to heal him; but when he was nigh the
House, the Centurion sent others to him, saying, I am not worthy that thou
should come under my roof; but speak the word only, and my Servant shall be
healed. Jesus wondering, said to those about him, I have not found so great
Faith, no, not in Israel; and to himself, Go thy way, and as thou have
believed, so be it unto thee; and his Servant was healed immediately. Luke 7.
After that going to Nain he met the people carrying one to be buried, the only
Son of his Mother; but Jesus moved with pity, raised him to Life, and delivered
him to his Mother. Mat. 11.
John being told of the great works Jesus did, sent two of his Disciples to
know whether he were the Messiah. While they were present Jesus cured many of
their Infirmities, and bad 'em tell John what they had seen. When they (...)
were gone, he gave a high Character of John; that among them that are born of
Women, there is not a greater Prophet than John the Baptist; and that he was
that Elias that was to come; and yet the Jews cavilled both at him and Christ,
because one came eating and drinking, the other did neither (as other men;) and
thereupon upbraided those Cities where his mighty Works had been done, that
they were worse than Tire and Sidon, and should be punished more heavy than
Sodom and Gomorrha. Luke 7.
Jesus being at Dinner at the House of a Pharisee, a Woman which was a Sinner
came behind him, and washed his Feet with her Tears, and wiped 'em with the
Hair of her Head, and kissed 'em, and anointed 'em with Ointment; at which the
Pharisee was offended: But Jesus vindicated her, that she showed great Love,
because great sins had been forgiven her. Mat. 12.
Afterward Jesus cured one that was possessed with Devils, which the Pharisees
ascribed to Beelzebub: This Christ calls Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, which
should not be forgiven 'em. Then some of the Pharisees desired to see a Sign,
and Christ tells 'em there should be no Sign given 'em but the Sign of the
Prophet Jonah, and that the men of Nineveh. and the Queen of Sheba should rise
up in Judgment against 'em. While he talked with 'em, one told him that his
Mother and his Brethren sought for him; but he said, Whosoever does the Will of
my Father, is my Brother, and Sister, and Mother. Mat. 13. Mark 4. Luke 8.
Afterward he spoke the Parable of the Sower, of the Tares, Grai^ of
Mustard Seed, Leaven, Treasure hid in a Field, a Merchant seeking goodly
Pearls, and a Net cast into the Sea. Matthew. 8. Luke 8.
Jesus being in a Ship fell asleep, and there arose a great Tempest, so that
they were in danger: Then the Disciples came and awoke him, and he rebuked the
Winds and the Sea, and there was a Calm, whereat the People marvelled: And when
he came to Land, he went into the Country of the Gadarenes and Gergasenes, and
met with two Men possessed with Devils exceeding fierce, out of whom he cast
the Devils, and suffered 'em to go into a Herd of Swine, and the Swine ran into
the Sea and were drowned; whereupon all the People prayed him to depart out of
their Coasts. Mat. 9. Mark 5. Luke 8.
Afterward he came into his own City, and there came to him Jairus, a Ruler of
the Synagogue, desiring him to come to his House and heal his only Daughter,
who lay at the point of Death: So Jesus went with him, and the People thronged
him, and a Woman that had an Issue of Blood came and touched the Hem of his
Garment, and immediately she was healed. While he was talking to the Woman,
news was brought to the Ruler, That his Daughter was dead: but Jesus bad him
believe, and she should be made whole; so he went and took her by the hand,
saying, Talitha humi, and she arose and walked. Afterward he cured two blind
Men, and a dumb Man possessed with Devils. Mat. 14. Mark 6.
Then he came to Nazareth and taught there, so that they were astonished; but
he marvelled at their unbelief. Mark 6.
Mat. 10.
Then he sent out his twelve Apostles into Judea, without any provision for
their Journey, because the Workman is worthy of his Hire. And they went about
preaching the Gospel that Men should repent, and healing Diseases, and casting
out Devils Upon Herod's Birthday Herodias dancing, pleased the King so, that
he promised to give her whatsoever she asked; and being instructed by her
Mother, she asked the Head of John the Baptist, which was given her: Then his
Disciples buried his Body, and told Jesus of it. Now Herod hearing of Jesus,
thought it had been John risen again, and he was much perplexed about it. When
the Apostles were returned they gave Jesus an account of their Success; and he
took 'em into a desert place; but multitudes followed 'em, and he taught 'em
and healed their sick, and in the Evening before they departed, he fed the
whole multitude, being about five thousand, besides Women and Children, with
five Loaves and two Fishes: Whereupon some would have made him a King; but he
went away. Then the Disciples went into a Ship, and there arose a Storm, and
about the fourth Watch Jesus came walking on the Sea, which they seeing,
thought it had been a Spirit, and were frighted; but Jesus told 'em it was he.
Then Peter said, Bid me come to thee on the Water; and he said, Come: So he
walked on the Water; but the Wind being high, he was afraid, and beginning to
sink, he cried out, Lord save me. So Jesus took hold of him, and they went up
into the Ship, and the Wind ceased. Then they came to the Land of Gennasareth,
and they laid their sick in the Streets, and as many as touched him were made
perfectly whole. Mat. 15. Mark 7.
Then the Pharisees found fault with his Disciples for eating with unwashen
Hands, and accused them from transgressing the Tradition of the Elders: But
Jesus condemns their Traditions, and charges 'em with Hypocrisy for placing so
much Religion in externals, and declares to all the People, That not that which
enters into a Man defiles him, but that which comes out of a Man. From thence
Jesus went into the Borders of Tire and Sidon, and a Woman of Canaan came to
him for her Daughter, who was possessed with a Devil. Christ at first said
nothing; afterward answered her very ruggedly, calling her Dog; but she
instead of being discouraged, gathered encouragement from thence; whereupon
Jesus admired her Faith, and said, Be it unto thee as thou will; and her
Daughter was cured immediately. Afterward Jesus healed a deaf and dumb Man,
and many others, and fed four thousand Men, besides Women and Children, with
Seven Loaves and a few small Fishes. Mat. 16. Mark 8.
The Disciples having forgotten to take Bread, Jesus charged 'em to beware of
the Leaven of the Pharisees and Sadduces; which they at first understood
Literally; but afterward found that he meant it of their Doctrine. A blind Man
coming to him, he first spate on his Eyes; but that not working a perfect Cure,
he put his Hands again upon his Eyes, and then he could see clearly. Jesus
asking his Disciples whom they took him to be? Peter made an understanding
Confession of him; whereupon Christ gave him the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven.
Then he began to speak of his Sufferings; for which Peter rebuked him. But
Jesus said, Get thee behind me, Satan.

Mat. 17. Mark 9. Luke 9.
About a Week after Jesus takes some of his Disciples into a high Mountain, and
as he prayed he was transfigured before 'em, and there were talking with him
Moses and Elias about his Decease. At this the Disciples were much afraid; then
came a Voice saying, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well-pleased; Hear ye
him. Then came one to him who brought his Son, his only Child, that had a dumb
Spirit, desiring him to do something for 'em. Jesus said, If thou can
believe, all things are possible to him that believes: Then the Father cried
out with Tears, Lord I believe, help my unbelief. Then Jesus commanded the
Devil to come out of him. Tribute being demanded of Jesus, he sends Peter to
the Sea to catch a Fish which had a piece of Money in his Mouth, wherewith he
paid it. Mat. 18. Mark 9.
A Dispute arising among the Disciples who should be the greatest, Jesus takes
a Child into his Arms, saying, Whosoever shall humble, himself as this little
Child, the same is greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven. Luke 9.
Then going toward Jerusalem, the Samaritans would not receive him; whereupon
James and John would have had him given 'em leave to have called for Fire from
Heaven to consume 'em: But he rebuked 'em saying, Ye know not what Spirit ye
are of. John 8.
Jesus being come to the Temple, the Scribes and Pharisees brought to him a
Woman taken in Adultery, and would know of him how she should be punished; but
he seemed not to hear 'em: They asked him again; then he said, He that is
without sin among you, let him first cast a stone at her; whereupon they all
stole away and left him and the Woman all alone: Then said Jesus to her, Go and
sin no more. John 9.
Jesus seeing a blind Man, anointed his Eyes with Clay made of Spittle, and bad
him go wash in the Pool of Siloam; which he did, and came seeing. This being on
the Sabbath Day, the Pharisees were offended at it, and cast the Man out. Luke
10
Jesus by a Parable of a certain Man falling among Thieves, upon whom a
Samaritan had compassion, shows, That every one is to be accounted our
Neighbor, who stands in need of our help. Luke 13.
Jesus on the Sabbath Day healed a Woman which had been bowed together eighteen
years; at which the Ruler of the Synagogue was displeased; but Christ
vindicates himself by their practice of watering their Cattle on the
Sabbath Day; and by the same Argument he vindicates himself again for healing a
dropsical Man on the Sabbath Day. Luke 14.
By a Parable of Persons invited to a Wedding, who all made excuses, he shows
the obstinacy of the Jews, in not receiving the Gospel. Luke 15.
By a Parable of a Prodigal, he shows God's readiness to receive returning
sinners. Luke 16.
By the Parable of the unjust Steward, he teaches us to make use of our Estates
in such a way as may do us good to Eternity: And by the Parable of the rich
Glutton and Lazarus, he teaches, that the Holy Scriptures are the only means
appointed by God to bring men to repentance Luke 18.
By a Parable of an unjust Judge Christ teaches us to use importunity with God
in Prayer; and by a Parable of a proud Pharisee and a Publican, he shows that
humble Sinners are most like to find acceptance with God. Mat. 19.
He condemns Divorce, and shows when Marriage is necessary. He receives little
Children; teaches the young Man how to attain everlasting Life, and how to be
perfect; shows how hard it is for rich Men to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven,
and promises a reward to those that forsake any thing for his sake. Mat. 20.
By the Parable of the Laborers in the Vineyard, he shows, That God is a
Debtor to no Man. John 11.
Lazarus being sick Christ delays to go to him, till he was dead, and then
raises him to life again. He foretells his Passion; by his Answer to the Mother
of Zebedee's Children, he teaches his Disciples to be lowly; and gives two
blind Men their sight. Zacheus desiring to see Jesus, Jesus invites himself to
his House, and brings Salvation to it. By the Parable of the ten Pounds, he
shows the reward of diligence, and the punishment of sloth. Mat. 26.
Mary anoints Jesus, which some of the Disciples condemn her for: but Christ
vindicates and commends her for it. Mat. 21.
Jesus coming nigh to Jerusalem sends two of his Disciples to fetch an Ass,
upon which he rode into the City, and the People straw'd the way with Branches
of Trees, and applauded him as the Messiah: and when he came into the Temple,
he drove the Buyers and Sellers out of it; then went over the City for their
impenitence, and the destruction coming upon 'em by reason thereof. Joh. 12.
Some Gretians desire to see Jesus, whereupon he foretells his Death, and the
efficacy of it, and earnestly exhorts 'em to a confession of him. Mat. 21.
Jesus seeing a Fig Tree, and finding only Leaves upon it, curses it: so it
presently withered away; whereupon he declares to his Disciples the power of
Faith. By the Parable of the two Sons he draws 'em to pass Sentence against
themselves for their disobedience, notwithstanding their profession of
obedience; and by the Parable of the Vineyard let out to Husbandmen, and their
slaying those that were sent to receive the Fruits thereof, he shows the
obstinate impenitency of the Jews, notwithstanding all means, for which God
will destroy their Church and Commonwealth, and set up a Church among the
Gentiles. Mat. 22.
By the Parable of the Marriage Feast for the King's Son, and one that came
without a Wedding Garment, he shows the rejection of the Jewish Nation for
their refusal of the Gospel, and the danger of making profession of the Gospel
without a holy conversation. He shows, that Tribute ought to be paid to Caesar
by the Money which was current among 'em, that had his Superscription upon it.
He confuted the Sadduces, who deny the Resurrection, by that place of Moses
where God said, I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob. He declares unto a Lawyer, That the Love of God and our Neighbor is the
substance both of the first and second Table; and poses the Pharisees with that
difficulty concerning the Messiah, how David could call him Lord, seeing he is
his Son. Mat. 23.
Then he admonishes the People to follow the good Doctrine, not the evil
Example, of the Scribes and Pharisees, and to beware of their Ambition. He
denounces many. Woes against them for their Hypocrisy and Blindness, and
foretells the destruction of Jerusalem, and of the Temple, and the great
Calamities that shall befall the Nation about that time; and thereupon takes
occasion to speak of the last Judgment, and the security of the World before
that time, and therefore exhorts 'em to watch. Mat. 25.
By the Parable of the ten Virgins he further presses 'em to Watchfulness; and
by the Parable of the Talents, to a careful improvement of their Gifts and
Opportunities. Then describes the Process of the last Judgment. John 13.
A little before his Sufferings he washes his Disciples Feer, thereby to teach
'em Humility; foretells and discovers to John by a token that Judas should
betray him; commands 'em to love one another; and forewarns Peter of his
Denial. Mat. 26. Luke 22.
The time of the Passover drawing nigh, the Rulers consult how to take Jesus by
subtilty, and put him to death. Then Sal^ entered into Judas-Iscariot, and he
went and agreed to deliver him to 'em for thirty pieces of Silver. The time
being come for the Passover, Jesus sends his Disciples to prepare it for 'em.
Joh. 14.
Then he comforts 'em against his Departure from 'em. Mat. 26. Luke 22.
Then he eats the Passover with 'em, and at the end of it institutes the
Sacrament of his Body and Blood: John 15.
Declares himself to be the true Vine: John 16.
Comforts 'em against Tribulation by the Promise of the Holy Ghost; and by his
Resurrection and Ascension: Assures 'em that their Prayers made in his Name are
acceptable to his Father; and promises 'em peace in himself, tho they have
Tribulation in the World. Joh. 17.
Then he offers up his mediatory Prayer, wherein he prays to his Father to
glorify him; to preserve his Apostles in Unity and Truth; to glorify them and
all other Believers with him in Heaven. Mat. 26.
Then he came to Gethsemane, and bad his Disciples pray that they might not
enter into temptation. Then his Soul was exceeding sorrowful unto Death, and he
prayed, that if it were possible that Cup of Sufferings might pass from him,
yet with resignation and submission to his Father's Will. Then an Angel came to
him to strengthen him, he being in an Agony, and sweating drops of Blood. But
his Disciples were asleep twice, one time after another; for which he gently
reproved 'em, and made an excuse for 'em. Then came Judas with the Officers to
apprehend him, to whom when he said, I am he, they all fell down to the ground;
but being rison again, Judas came to him and kissed him: so they laid hold on
him; whereupon Peter drew his Sword and cut off Malcus's Ear; but Christ healed
it, and bad Peter put up his Sword. Then all the Disciples forsook him and
fled. Then the Officers bound him and led him to the High Priest, and Peter
followed 'em. Then they suborned false Witnesses against him, and condemned him
to be guilty of death. Then they smote him, spit on his Face, and derided him.
Mean while Peter being charged to be one of his Followers, denied it; and
denied it a second time with an Oath; and being charged again, he began to
curse and swear, saying, I know not the man; whereupon the Cock crew, and Peter
went out and wept bitterly, Mat. 27.
When the Morning was come, they delivered him to Pontius Pilate the Governor,
and accused him of Sedition and Treason; yet Pilate justified him, and said, I
find no sault in this man at all. But still they accused him the more fiercely,
and Pilate sent him to Herod, who questioned with him about many things, but he
answered him nothing at all; whereupon Herod with his Men of War mocked him,
and sent him again to Pilate, who would have released him, because he knew that
for envy they had delivered him; and his Wife sent unto him not to meddle with
him; but at last, through their importunity, he scourged him and delivered him
to be crucified. Then they put on him a Scarlet Robe, and a Crown of Thorns,
and a Reed in his Hand, in derision of his Kingship. When Judas saw that he was
condemned to death, he repented and went and hanged himself. Then they led him
away to be crucified, and compelled one to carry his Cross; and when they came
to Golgotha, they crucified him at the third hour, and set up this Writing over
him, THIS IS JESUS OF NAZARETH, THE KING OF THE JEWS. Then many of the People
reviled him, and the Rulers derided him, and the Soldiers mocked him, and one
of the Malefactors railed on him, for which the other reproved him, and made an
open confession of him, saying, Lord, remember me when thou come into thy
Kingdom. At the sixth hour there was darkness all over the Land; and at the
ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud Voice, Eli, Eli, Iama Sabacthani. After that
the said, It is finished; and crying again with a loud voice, he said, Father,
into thy hands I commend my Spirit; and so gave up the Ghost. Then the Vail of
the Temple was rent, and the Earth did quake, and the Graves were opened, which
when the Centurion watching him, saw, he said, Truly this was the Son of God.
Then a Soldier came and pierced his side with a Spear, and there, came out
Water and Blood. Then Joseph of Arimathea came to Pilate, and begged the Body
of Jesus, and laid it in his own new Tomb. The next day, lest his Disciples
should steal him away, they sealed the stone, and set a Watch. Mat. 28.
Upon the first day of the Week early in morning, some Women that had bought
sweet Spices, name to the Sepulcher to anoint the Body of Jesus therewith; and
there was a great Earthquake; for an Angel came and rolled away the stone and
sat upon it; at which the Keepers became as dead Men. Mary Magdalene entered
into the Sepulcher, but found not the Body; but they saw a Young Man, an Angel,
who told 'em Jesus was risen; and sends 'em to tell his Disciples and Peter,
that he was risen and went before 'em into Galilee. Then they ran, and told all
these things to the Apostles, who believed 'em not. Then Mary Magdalene came to
Peter and John, saying, They have taken away the Lord out of the Sepulcher.
Then they both ran to the Sepulcher, and went in, and found the Linen Clothes
lying; then they went again unto their own Home. Jesus appeared first to Mary
Magdalene as she stood weeping at the Sepulcher; but she knew not that it was
Jesus, till he said to her, Mary. Then she turned her self and said to him,
Rabboni. Then she went and told the Disciples she had seen the Lord; but still
they believed not. Then, as the other Women went to tell his Disciples, Jesus
met them also, and said, Be not afraid: Go tell my Brethren, that I go into
Galilee, and there shall they see me. Some of the Water came to the Chief
Priests and told 'em of all these things; whereupon they hired 'em to say. That
his Disciples came by night and stole him away while they slept. Luke 24.
That day two of the Disciples came to Emmaus, and discoursing of these things,
Jesus drew nigh to 'em and went with 'em, but they knew him not. So they fell
into discourse with him about these things, and discovered some unbelief;
whereupon he reproved 'em for it and expounded unto 'em all things in the
Scriptures concerning himself; and at night as he sat at meat with 'em, he took
Bread and blessed it, and gave to 'em. Then they knew him, and he vanished out
of their sight. Joh. 20.
Again, on the first day of the Week, the doors being shut, as they sat at
meat, he appeared to the Eleven, and said, Peace be to you; and showed 'em his
Hands, Feet, and Side; yet they believed not, for which he upbraided 'em: But
he opened their Understandings to understand the Scriptures, and renewed their
Commission, and gave 'em power to forgive sin. But Thomas not being with 'em
was still unbelieving; whereupon Christ appeared to 'em again when he was with
'em, and bids him thrust his hand into his sides, and be no longer faithless
but believing. Then he cried out, My Lord and my God. Joh. 21.
Some of the Disciples being gone a fishing, and having caught nothing, Jesus
standing on the shore, (but they knew him not) bad them cast their Net on the
right side of the Ship; which they did, and caught a great multitude of Fishes;
upon which John concluded it was the Lord. Then they dragged the Net to Land,
and Jesus bad 'em come and dine. After Dinner Jesus asked Peter thrice whether
he loved him? which he affirming, Christ as often bad him seed his Sheep; and
then foretells him of his Death, and rebukes his curiosity touching John. Mat.
28. Mark. 16. Luke 24.
Then the eleven Disciples went to Galilee, to a Mountain where Jesus had
appointed 'em, where he appeared to 'em, gave 'em Commission to teach and
baptize all Nations, power to cast out Devils and work Miracles; and he led 'em
out as far as Bethany, and lift up his hand and blessed 'em; and while he
blessed 'em he was parted from 'em, and carried up into Heaven. And they
returned to Jerusalem with great Joy, and went forth and preached every where,
the Lord working with 'em, and confirming the Word with Signs. Amen.

ACTS.
CHAP. I.
JESUS being ascended in the Apostles sight, they return to Jerusalem, and upon
Peter's advice, they proceed to the Election of another Apostle in the room of
Judas; and having nominated two, one of 'em, viz. Matthias, was chosen by lot
for the Apostleship, and so reckoned one of 'em.

CHAP. II.
On the day of Pentecost the Apostles being all together, the Holy Ghost came
upon 'em in the likeness of fiery Cloven Tongues, to note his enduing 'em with
the gift of Tongues, whereby they were enabled to speak unto all persons in
their own Language; which Peter shows was not the effect of Wine, as some
supposed, but the accomplishment of former Prophecies, and the Fruit of
Christ's Resurrection, whom he declares to be both Lord, and the Messiah:
whereupon many were converted and baptized, and had Communion in the Doctrine
and Ordinances of the Gospel, and likewise had all things common among 'em.

CHAP. III.
Peter and John going into the Temple, met with a Man lame from the Womb, whom
they restored to the use of his Feet; which the People wondering at, Peter
professes that the Cure was not wrought by their own power, but by the power of
Christ; and thereupon reproves 'em for crucifying him, and exhorts 'em by
repentance and faith to seek pardon of their sins, and Salvation by the same
Jesus.

CHAP. IV.
The Rulers of the Jews being offended with Peter's Sermon, imprisoned him and
John, and the next day examined 'em about it: Peter boldly avouches the Cure to
be wrought by the Name of Jesus, and that by him only they can be saved. But
they command 'em to preach no more in that Name, and threaten 'em if they did.
The Apostles declare this to the Church, who betake themselves to Prayer;
whereupon they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and spoke the Word of God
with boldness, and had all things common among 'em.

CHAP. V.
Ananias and Sapphira his Wife, pretending to put the price of some Land which
they sold, into the common Stock, kept back part of it, for which Hypocrisy
being rebuked by Peter, they fell down dead. The other Apostles also wrought
many signs and wonders, for which they were put into Prison, but are set at
liberty by an Angel, and encouraged to proceed in the preaching of the Gospel;
which accordingly they did, and were apprehended again and brought before the
Council, who consulted to put 'em to Death; but by the advice of Gamaliel they
were saved alive, and only beaten; for which they glorify God, and ceased not
daily to preach Jesus Christ.

CHAP. VI.
Upon a complaint that some of the poor were neglected, the Apostles, that they
might more diligently attend to the great work of the Ministry, chose Seven
Men, nominated by the Brethren, to the Office of Deacons, whom they set apart
for this Work by Prayer and Imposition of Hands. Of these Steven, a Man full of
Faith and the Holy Ghost was one, who disputed with, and confounded his
Opposers: Whereupon they brought him to the Council, and suborned false
Witnesses, who charged him with Blasphemy; but all that sat in the Council
looking steadfastly on him, saw his Face as it had been the face of an Angel.

CHAP. VII.
Steven being permitted to answer for himself to the charge of Blasphemy
concerning the place and manner of their Worship, shows that God was worshipped
rightly by the Fathers before the Tabernacle or Temple were built; and that
Moses himself witnessed to Christ, and that all the Prophets foretold of him,
and thereupon reproves 'em for their murdering of him; for which they were
filled with rage against him; but he looking up to Heaven, saw Jesus standing
on the right hand of God. Then they ran upon him, and stoned him to death, he
commending his Soul to Christ, and praying for 'em.

CHAP. VIII.
A great Persecution arising in Jerusalem, Philip went to Samaria, and preached
the Gospel there, and converted many, and among the rest Simon the Sorcerer;
who seeing Peter and John bestow the Holy Ghost by imposition of Hands, would
have bought the like Power of 'em; but Peter sharply reproved his Hypocrisy
and Covetousness, and exhorted him to repent. After which Peter was sent by an
Angel to instruct the Ethiopian Eunuch who making a Confession of his Faith,
was baptized.

CHAP. IX.
Saul having obtained a Commission from the High Priest to persecute the Church
at Damascus, as he was going Christ calls to him from Heaven, and sends him to
Ananias, by whom he received his sight and was baptized; after which he
preached Christ in the Synagogues: Whereupon the Jews both at Damascus and
Jerusalem laid wait to kill him; but God preserved him from 'em both. Peter
coming to Lydda healed Eneas of the Palsy, who had been bedridden eight years.
At Joppa a certain Disciple named Tabitha fell sick and died. Then the
Disciples sent for Peter, who came and prayed over her, and restored her to
Life.

CHAP. X.
Cornelius a devout Man, being warned by an Angel to send for Peter to instruct
him in the Faith, se^ds two ^f his Servants to Joppa for him, Peter falling
into a France, by a Vision of a Sheet full of all manner of Beasts and Fowls,
which he is commanded to kill and eat, is taught not to refuse Communion with
the Gentiles; whereupon when the Messengers from Cornelius came to him, he went
with 'em, and came to Cornelius's House where many were gathered together to
h^^r the word of God. So Peter preached Christ to 'em; and as he was preaching
the Holy Ghost f^ll upon 'em, whereupon he commanded 'em to be baptized.

CHAP. XI.
Peter being blamed for conversing with the Gentiles, gave an account of that
whole Affair, and the reasons that indi^^'d him thereto; wherewith the Brethren
were satisfied: After which the Gospel was preached up and down with great
success, and particularly at Antioch, where the Disciples were first called
Christians. Thither came Prophets from Jerusalem foretelling a great Dearth:
whereupon the Disciples sent relief to the Brethren in Judea.

CHAP. XII.
About this time Herod killed James, and imprisoned Peter's but an Angel
delivered him; and soon after Herod was smitten by an Angel and eaten of Worms,
so that he died.

CHAP. XIII.
Barnabas and Saul being set apart for the work of the Ministry among the
Gentiles, came to Cyprus, and were ^ll'd or by the Deputy of the Country
Sergius Paulus to preach unto him, but Elymas the Sorcerer with stood 'em; whom
Paul reproved sharply, and struck him blind; whereupon the Deputy believed.
Afterward they came to Antioch, and preached Christ both to the Jews and
Gentiles, and many believed; but the unbelieving Jews raised a Persecution
against 'em, and drove 'em away.

CHAP. XIV.
The like they did at Iconium: At Lystra Paul healing a Cripple, the common
People take 'em for Gods, and would have offered Sacrifice to 'em; but they
forbad it. Thither also the Jews followed 'em, and stirred up the People
against 'em, and stoned Paul, but he recovered; and so they went about
confirming the Churches, and at last returned to Antioch, where they abode a
good while.

CHAP. XV.
There arising a dissension in the Church at Antioch about Circumcision, they
send to the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem about this question, who meeting
together and consulting about it, after much debating the matter, they write
unto the believing Gentiles there, only to abstain from meat offered to Idols,
and from Blood, and from things strangled, and from Fornication, with which
they were very well satisfied. After this there arose a difference between Paul
and Barnabas about taking John Mark along with 'em, whereupon they parted
asunder, and Paul took Silas for his Companion in his Travels.

CHAP. XVI.
Paul in his Travels meeting with Timothy, circumcised him, (his Mother being a
Jewels) and took him along with him, and delivered the Decrees of the Church at
Jerusalem, to the Churches as they passed along. At Troas there appeared to
Paul in a Vision a man of Macedonia, saying, Come over into Macedonia and help
us. So they went to Philippi, where Lydia was converted by Paul, and baptized
with her Household: There also he cast a Spirit of Divination out of a certain
Damsel; for which cause her Masters stirred up the multitude against Paul and
Silas, and the Rulers whipped and imprisoned 'em; but at Midnight they sung
Psalms, and there was a great Earthquake, and all the Doors were opened, and
their Bands loosed; whereupon the Jailor came trembling, and said, Sirs, what
must I do to be saved? Then they preached Christ to him, and he believed and
was baptized and all his House; after which they were let go.

CHAP. XVII.
Paul preaching in the Synagogue at Thessalonica the unbelieving Jews raised an
Uproar against him; so they went to Berea, where the Jews readily embraced the
Gospel: But the Jews of Thessalonica followed 'em thither, and stirred up the
People against 'em; so Paul went to Athens, where he disputed with the
Epicureans, and Stoics, and in the midst of Mars-hill preached God and Christ
to 'em, and the Resurrection of the dead; whereat some mocked but others
believed.

CHAP. XVIII.
From thence Paul came to Corinth, where he was encouraged by a Vision, and
continued there teaching and preaching for a year and six months. During his
abode there he was accused by the Jews before the Deputy, but was dismissed.
Afterward he came to Ephesus, where Apollos preached Christ with great
boldness; but knowing only the Baptism of John, he was instructed more fully by
Aquila and Priscilla.

CHAP. XIX.
Paul at Ephesus gave the Holy Ghost by laying on his Hands, and preached and
wrought many Miracles there for the space of two years, so that the word of God
prevailed mightily; and some that used curious Arts burnt their Books of a
great value. Demetrius for fear of losing his Trade of making Silver Shrines
for Diana, raised an Uproar against Paul, which the Town Clerk appeased, and
dismissed the Assembly.

CHAP. XX.
After which Paul came to Troas, where on the first day of the Week he
celebrated the Lords Supper, and preached till midnight, so that Euticus being
fallen asleep, fell down three Stories and was taken up for dead: but Paul
raised him up to Life again. At Miletus he sent for the Elders of the Church of
Ephesus, to whom he recommended the care of the Flock of which the Holy Ghost
had made them Overseers, and commended 'em to the Grace of God, and so departed.

CHAP. XXI.
At Cesarea Agabus a Prophet foretells how Paul should be bound at Jerusalem,
whereupon the Brethren dissuade him from going thither; but he declared his
readiness not only to be bound, but to die at Jerusalem for the Name of the
Lord Jesus. When he came to Jerusalem he declared to James and the Elders the
success of his Ministry among the Gentiles, who rejoiced at it, and advised him
to purify himself according to the Law, that the Jews might see he was not
such an Enemy to the Law as he was represented to be: So he went to the Temple,
and offered as the Law required: but the Jews finding him there, seized him,
and went about to kill him, but he was rescued by the chief Captain, and
carried into the Castle, who gave him leave to speak unto the People.

CHAP. XXII.
So Paul gave 'em a large account of the manner of his Conversation, and
calling to the Apostleship; but they were much exasperated against him, and the
chief Captain commanded him to be examined by scourging; but he claiming the
privilege of a Roman, is set at liberty, and the Jewish Senate are commanded to
appear before the Captain, that he might know what they had to charge him
withal.

CHAP. XXIII.
Paul pleading his Cause before them, the High Priest commands him to be
smitten; for which Paul threatens him. At last they fall a quarrelling among
themselves, and the Captain commanded him to be brought away, for fear they
should do him some mischief, and brought him to the Castle. The next day some
of the Jews conspired against Paul to kill him; which being discovered to the
chief Captain, he sent him away presently to Felix the Governor

CHAP. XXIV.
Shortly after the High Priest and Elders went down to Cesarea to complain of
Paul, and Tertullus charged him as a seditious Person; but Paul denied the
Charge, and vindicated both his Doctrine and Life: So Felix deferred the
determination of it; and in the mean while sent for Paul, and hearing him
preach concerning Righteousness, Temperance and Judgment, he trembled, and
dismissed him for the present, and left him bound when he was put out of his
place, and Festus put in.

CHAP. XXV.
Festus being made Governor of the Jews, charged Paul with many and grievous
things, all which Paul denied. Then Festus asked him, Whether he would go up to
Jerusalem, and be judged there concerning these things; then Paul appealed to
Caesar: After which King Agrippa came to complement Festus, to whom Festus
related Paul's Case; whereupon Agrippa was desirous to hear him himself; so on
the morrow Festus commanded him to be brought forth.

CHAP. XXVI.
Then Paul related to Agrippa the manner of his Life and Conversation, and how
he was called to the Apostleship; whereupon Festus charged him that he was mad;
but he appealed to Agrippa for the truth of what he said, and almost persuaded
him to be a Christian. Then upon consultation among themselves, they conclude
he had done nothing worthy of Death or of Bonds.

CHAP. XXVII.
Paul having appealed to Caesar is sent to Rome; but he foretold the danger of
the Voyage, and accordingly they met with a great Storm; but God gave unto Paul
the Lives of all that were with him in the Ship; so tho they suffered
Shipwreck, yet they escaped all safe to shore.

CHAP. XXVIII.
The Island upon which they were cast was Melita, where the Inhabitants were
very courteous to them; and seeing a Viper fasten upon Paul's hand, and that he
shuck it off into the Fire without any hurt ensuing to him, they thought he was
a God. Afterward he healed the Governors Father, and many others in the
Island. Then they sailed from thence, and at last came to Rome, where he called
for the Jews, and gave 'em an account of his Appeal; and at a time appointed he
preached Christ and the Gospel to 'em: and so he continued two years, preaching
to all that came to him, and no man forbidding him.

THE END.
The Distance of the Author from the Press has occasioned the following ERRATA.
Page 5. line 1. for X. -- XI. r. XI. v. 10 -- p. 14. l. 2. for Dinah r. God.
p. 36. Lev. X. l. 4. after Drink add Wine. p. 69. Ruth 1. l. 8. for with her
two Daughters, r. with Ruth her Daughter.

Some other small Errors possibly have escaped, which the Reader is desired to
correct.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is newly Published, The Holy Bible, containing the Old Testament and the
New, with Annotations and Parallel Scriptures. To which is annexed the Harmony
of the Gospels: As also a Reduction of the Jewish Weights, Coins and Measures
to our English Standards: And a Table of the Promises in Scripture. By Samuel
Clark. Printed for R. Chiswel and J. Robinson in St. Paul's Churchyard, and B.
Aylmer at the Three Pigeons against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill.


