HIS GRACE The Duke of Monmouth Honored in His PROGRESS In the WEST of ENGLAND
IN AN ACCOUNT Of a most Extraordinary CVRE OF The Kings Evil: Given in a Letter
from Crookhorn in the County of Somerset from the MINISTER of the Parish and
many others.
WE whose Names are under-witten, do certify the truth of a Miraculous Cure
of a Girl of this Town of about Twenty years Age by Name Elizabeth Parcet, a
poor Widows Daughter, who has anguished under the sad afflicted Distemper of
the Kings Evil, Termed the Joint Evil, being said to be the worst Evil for
about Ten or Eleven years time, she had in her right hand Four running wounds,
viz. One in the inside, and three on the Back of her hand, and two more in the
same arm, one above her handwrest, the other above the bending of her Arm, She
had betwixt her Arm-pit and Breast, (a bunch) which the Docters said fed those
six several Running Wounds; the said Distemper was likewise on her Left eye,
insomuch she was almost blind; her Mother despairing for the preserving her
sight, and being not of ability to send her to London, to be touched by the
King, being miserable Poor having many small Children, and this Girl not being
able to work, her Mother desirous to have her Daughter cured, saught to the
Chirurgions for help who tampered with it for a time, but could do no good;
went likewise 10 or 11 Miles, to a Seventh Son, but all in vain; no visible
hopes of a Cure remained, and expected nothing but the Grave.

But now, in this the Girls great extremity. God the great Physician Dictates
unto her, thus Languishing in her miserable, hopeless condition; what course to
take, and what to do for a Cure, which was to go and touch the Duke of
Monmouth; which the Girl told her Mother that if she could but touch the Duke
she should be well, her Mother reproved her for her foolish conceit, but the
Girl did often persuade her Mother that she might go to Lackinton to the Duke,
who then lay at Mr. Speaks, for certainly said she I should be well if I could
but touch him; her Mother slighted the pressing requests of her Daughter, and
the more her Mother slighted it and reproved her, the more earnest was the Girl
for it; in few days after the Girl having notice that Sir John Syd^nham
intended to Treat the Duke at white Lodge in Henton-Park, which this Girl with
many of her Neighbors went to the said Park; she being there timely waited the
Dukes coming: First, she observed the Person of the D. to have knowledge of him
as he was passing into the said Lodge, she pressed in among a Crowd of People, and
caught him by the hand, his Glove being on, and she had a Glove likewise to
cover her wounds, she not being herewith satisfied with this first attempt of
touching his Glove only, but her mind was, she must touch some part of his bare
skin; she weighting his coming forth, intended a second attempt: the poor Girl,
thus betwixt hope and fear waited his motion, on a sudden was news of the D.
coming on, which she to be prepared, rent off her Glove that was clung to the
Sores in such have, that broke her Glove, and brought a way not only the sores,
but the skin: the Dukes Glove, as providence would have it, the upper part hung
down so that his hand-wrest was bare; she pressed one and caught him by the bare
hand-wrest with her running hand; (saying, God bless your Greatness; and the
Duke said God bless you) the Girl was not a little transported with her good
success, came and told her friends that now she should be well, she came home
to her Mother with great joy, and told her she had that touched by the Dukes
bare hand (and that she should now be well) her Mother hearing what she had
done, reproved her very sharply for her boldness, and asked her how she durst
do such a thing, and threatened to beat her for it, she cried out O Mother I
shall be well again, and be cured of my wounds; and as God Almighty the great
Physician would have it, to the admiration of all that know of it, or heard of
it. Her six running wounds in her hand and arm, in four or five days were dried
up, the bunch in her breast was dissolved in eight or ten days, of which now is
no sign: her eye that was given for lost, is now perfectly well, and the Girl
in good health; the marks of her several wounds are yet visible in her hand and
arm, all which has been discovered to us both by Mother and Daughter, and
Neighbors that know her.

Henry Clark Minister of the Parish, Captain James Bale, Captain Richard
Sherlock, John Stacky Clerk, William Pike, Samuel Daubeney, G^orge Strong, John
Greenway, Robert Chislet.

Whoever doubts the truth of this relation, may be satisfied thereof by sight
of the Original under the hands of the Persons before mentioned, at the
Amsterdam Coffe-House in Bartholomew Lane near the Royal Exchange.



LONDON; Printed for Benjamin Harris at the Stationers Arms in the Piazza under
the Royal Exchange in Cornhil. 1680.


