SECOND THOUGHTS; OR THE CASE OF A Limited Toleration, Stated according to the
present Exigence of Affairs in CHURCH and STATE.
Nihil Violentum Durat.
SInce our present Condition more, than ever, Requires our being Strong, and of
a Piece within our Selves; for (besides Domestique misunderstandings) have we
not powerful Neighbors Hovering over us, and perhaps Watching the
Opportunities, which our Weakness and Divisions may give them? And since our
want of Union, and Intestine Animositys chiefly Result from our different
Judgments in Religion, and from the several Consequences thereof, I hope, I
shall not mistake my duty in offering my thoughts to those, who are the Proper
Judges, concerning that so much debated Question of Punishing or Tolerating
Non-Conformists.

On this Subject my Endeavor shall be to speak plainly, like a good English
man, without any Byas of prejudice, or favor to the Persons concerned; and,
whereas many Persons of great Authority may perhaps be of a different Judgment
from mine, in the Point, I am to handle, I beg the favor of my Reader to
believe, that nothing but the Interest of my Country could have Engaged me in a
Question of this Nature, in Opposition to so considerable* a Party, of whose
Abilitles I have a very true and just Veneration.

In the first Place, it must be allowed, that cold it be effected, nothing were
more to be desi^ed, in order to the lasting Happiness of this Nation, than a
Conformity of all Minds, under the same Doctrine, and Worship in Religion; That
so, as our Bodies, and outward Actions are governed by the same Temporal Laws,
our Souls and our Opinions (though in Matters relating to the World) might also
be united under one, and the same Ecclesiastical Discipline, and were England
at present under that happy Condition of Spiritual Union, I should think it
rational and seasonable by the Rigor of Law^, to preserve it in such a State
of Tranquillity, by suppressing all Upstart Innovators, and frighting the
People from the dangerous affectation of Novelty.

But since we enjoy this Universal Harmony only in our Wishes, (diversity of
Opinions in Matters of Religious Worship having held so long a possession in
the Minds of the People) and since the Cockle is so generally spread, and
mingled with the Corn; that it is impossible wholly to root up one without
apparent Danger of destroying the other, I think it behooves us to take our
Measures according to the present State, and Juncture, of our Affairs, and
choose that expedient, which is best for us, and withal is attainable by us in
the Circumstance, we now are in, not that, which (although best in its self) is
not possible for us to attain.

And here (I conceive) lies the Root of their Mistakes, who have lately with so
much Zeal opposed a Toleration: They tell us what should be, not what may be
done; and deliver many Truths concerning the Beauty and Expediency of a General
Uniformity; but their Discourse seems cut out, and made to fit an Vtopian
Kingdom, not England in its present Condition.

For according to true Policy and Reason we ought either wholly to Root out all
Dissenters, or else so to Tolerate them, that they may live at ease and
contentedness amongst us; whereby they may become, if not of the Church, at
least sound Members of the Common Wealth.

Let the Opposers of a Toleration show us a safe and ready way to rid the
Nation of all Non-conformists, though I confess I am no Friend to Force and
Violence, especially in Matters of Conscience, yet I should not obstruct any
Cause, that would certainly produce, so happy an effect: But, if this be
impossible for them to do, and if the Method by them prescribed, and made use
of, serves only to exasperate, not to carry of the peccant Humor, I must
conclude, that the good of the Nation is either not rightly understood, or not
justly pursued by them.

For what can be more Pernicious to the Safety of any Kingdom than to have
within it self so great a Body, as all the Dissenters in England make,
continually exasperated by Penaltys and invaded by a legal kind of Hostility;
who, thus made Enemies by the Law, must by a Natural Consequence be still
watching Occasions of easing and unburthening themselves? What is this but to
Nourish and Foment in our Bowels the Seeds of a Civil War, that want nothing
but an Opportunity (which for Mischief too frequently presents it self) to
Break forth in a consuming Flame?

Perhaps you will say, that a wholesome Violence may Cure their Obstinacy, and
Reduce them to Obedience, and in time make them less Numerous, and so less
Dangerous.

I answer, That Compulsion may bring many Hypocrites, but no real Converts
into our Church: For Conscience is of so Spiritual a Nature, that outward Force
can have no Influence, nor Dominion over it: We cannot Overruled it in our
selves, much less in others. At home in our own Breasts interest cannot Bribe
it, to Judge otherwise of our own proper Actions, than according to that Light
of Nature, or Grace, which God has bestowed upon it: And, although it be
granted in the Case of Non-conformists that their Conscience is Erroneous, yet,
as such it can never be Rectified by Fear, and Force, but only by Conviction of
Judgment.

Hence it may be inferred, that nothing does more Efficatiously dispose and
prepare the Minds of Men for Treason and Rebellion, than by Force to make them
Act against their Conscience in matters of Religion: For they who have once
overcome the Remorse of their God (which is the Case of all such Compliers
without Conviction of Judgment) shall never stick at Breach of Faith with
Prince or Magistrate, when ever the like Motives of Interest or Fear shall
prompt them to it: Whoever therefore shall design to Reduce so great a
Multitude of differing Judgments to an Uniformity of Profession, by the way of
Rigor and Infliction of paenalties, can reasonably expect no better Success,
than to fill the Church with Hypocrites, and the State with Subjects, trained
up, and principled for Rebellion.

Of this Truth we have an Illustrious Example recorded by Sozomen, (Cap. 7.
Hist. Trip.) Constatius Father to Constantine the Great, having many Christian
Soldiers under his Command (himself being a Gentile) resolved to make Trial of
their Temper, and find out amongst them, who were fit or unfit for Trust, and
Employment: Accordingly calling them together, he declared that all such as
would Sacrifice to his Gods, should continue in his Service, but that the
Refusers should forthwith be Casheerd, and might thank his Clemency, that he
proceeded no farther against them. Hereupon when some Obeyed the General, and
some their Conscience; those who preferred Religion to their Interest, he
immediately took into Favor, and Office; and the Temporizing Conformists he
Excluded from all Employment; presuming (says our Author) that such could
never be Loyal to Man, who so lightly had forsaken their God.

From what has been said, We may draw this Conclusion, that where Infliction of
paenaltys prevails in order to an exterior Conformity, in such to their Error
of Judgment it adds Hypocrisy, whereby they become worse Christians and
Subjects, than before; and where it does not so prevail, it lays the Foundation
of a Civil War, by daily Exasperating so great a part of the Nation, or rather
begins it, by continually Invading (though under Color of Law) the Liberties
and Goods of our fellow Subjects.

If it be Replied, that although (being Prosecuted by the Law) they may be
irritated, and disposed for mischief, yet (being Tolerated) they will encreas
in Strength, and by Consequence encreas our Danger.

I answer that how great a Paradox soever it may seem at first sight, yet most
true it is, that (taking the whole Body together of the dissenters, who are
equally concerned in the Prosecution) they are far more dangerous and powerful
to do Mischief, when Prosecuted than when Tolerated: For when they are all in a
suffering Condition they are united together in one Common Cause and Concern of
easing themselves from the pressure they are under; and (being so different in
their other Principles) this is the only point they can eenter in, and Knit
together into a Body, and the only Band that binds them up in a Bundle. But
when they are Indulged, and left Free, (the Cement of a joint Interest being
taken away) they will naturally, and necessarily fall in sunder, and remain as
divided in point of Faction and party, as they are in tenets and principles.

Of this we have a fresh and convincing Example in the late Revolutions, for
before the War, when all Sectaries and Nonconformists lived under the Curb and
penaltys of the Law, and high Commission Court, they were all embodyed together
as Fellow Sufferers in the Common Cause, and appeared to the World but as one
Sect, and were generally known only by the Common Name of Puritans: And to what
Power and Strength they grew by this union, was too fatally known by the Famous
Mischiefs they did. But afterward (having shaken off their Fetters, and clapped
them on their Masters) when they were at ease and prosperity, then did each
Sect apart begin to set up its own Colors; and the Distinctions of the
Presbyterians, Independents, and Quakers, grew visible to the World by their
Divisions and Quarrels amongst themselves.

And I desire it may be observed that Monarchy and the Church were pulled down
by them at that time, when by a preceding prosecution they had been united
together; and that the Church and Monarchy were then again restored when by
Liberty and Prosperity those very Sects were fallen from one another and each
had rankt it self in its own Canton, and Division.

But now it remains to be considered whither these Dissenters and
Nonconformists in Religion, are any ways capable of being made Loyal and
faithful to the Government.

I think there is but one certain Rule to resolve this, and all Cases of a like
Nature: First allowing them to have common Sense, it will evidently follow that
if we can make it their Interest to be good Subjects, they will not fail of
being so, whoever shall assign any Security, but this, for the Peoples
Allegiance, do (in my Opinion) but play with the Wind, and pay us with Words. I
know, that No Bishop no King has past for a Fundamental Maxim with some, and
that English Loyalty cannot consist but in the Church of England, as it is now
established: And I suppose they go chiefly upon this Ground, that true
Allegiance must proceed from a rectified Conscience, and a rectified Conscience
from true Religion.

But I must beg their leave to dissent from them in this Particular.

All Men I confess, should be obedient to their Lawful Governors for
Conscience sake, but all Men are not as they should be.

Mankind in general is constantly true to nothing, but their Interest; how
much that over rules Conscience in all Religions, is but too visible in the
World. Yet I am far from denying, but that many may be found, who by the ty of
Conscience only are sufficiently withheld from the enormous Crime of Rebellion:
But since no other Person can tell (all pretending to it) who these are, and
since every good Security must be apparent and visible; I think in Foroexterno
we ought to exclude Conscience, or rather the pretense of it (which is all we
can know of it in another) from being a sufficient warrantly of Allegiance.

To retourn therefore from this Digression to my former Proposition, let Men be
never so Differing in Matters of Religion, certain it is they will all agree in
this point of being Constant and true to their own Interest: And therefore the
great Art and secret of Government is to make it the Peoples Interest to be
True and Faithful to their Governors.

Now it is apparent that if all these Dissenters in Religion who at present lie
under the Lash of the Law, were so far indulged, that they might live with
Security of their Estates and Liberty of their Persons amongst us, and peacably
enjoy their Conscience in their own way of Religious Worship, it would be
clearly their Interest to be obedient unto, and maintain that Government, under
which they are so Protected: For none are so Dull, but must understand, that
when they are in a quiet enjoyment of their livelihoods, if Disorders and War
should come upon them, they must needs (at least the Major part of them) be
greater Loosers, than Gainers; So that the Public Peace will now become their
private Interest.

And this is the only Basis and Foundation, on which all Government can firmly
be Established.

They who imagine that Unity of Religion is absolutely necessary to Unity of
Interest, must needs fancy to themselves such an Extraordinary Charm, in the
Peoples meeting together on Sundays in the Church, that they cannot fall out
all the Week after: But we find by sad Experience that Persons of the same
Religion (Witness the Wars between Sweden and Denmark, France, and Spain)
Quarrel no less fiercely, than others, who are most distant in their Principles
of Belief: And they are Strangers in the Affairs of the World, who have not
learnt, that Interest and not Religion, makes all the great Enmitys, and amitys
both Public and Private.

Our Neighbors of Holland, who are very Competent Judges in Matters relating
to Public Advantage, and Self-preservation, by their practice sufficiently
show the Conscistency, and expedience of Tolerating different Religions under
the same Government: France affords us the like Presedent; And I fear, till we
follow their Example in England too, I fear we shall not arrive to that Plenty,
and Power, which both those States at present enjoy. For Nature has so placed
this Island, that whenever we are Masters at Sea, we are Umpires of this part
of the World; so that we must always Rise or Fall in Plenty, and Power, as we
increase or decay in Traffic, and Navigation. Now upon a just Calculation it will
appear, that the Sea-fareing Men, and the Trading Part of the Nation, dos in a
great measure consist of Non-conformists; and that much of the Wealth and Stock
of the Kingdom, is lodged in their Hands, who have no great Devotion for the
present Liturgy, and Hierachy of the Church of England.

Wherefore we need go no farther to find out the cause of that general Damp
upon Traffic and Commerce, than the Strictness of our Laws upon that Sort of
People; by which some of them are Disabled, and others Discouraged from
Employing their Industry, and their Stock for Carrying on the Trade of the
Nation.

But whilst upon these Motives, I plead for a Toleration of Non-Conformists;
thereby I intend no more, than a bare Exemption from Penalties, with a Liberty
of Exercising their Religion under such competent Restrictions, as shall be
judged Necessary, both to Secure the Public from a Riot, and Sedition, and to
put a Difference between their Conventions, and the Religious Assemblies of the
Church, Established by Law.

Moreover, I think it necessary, that they should be Excluded from Offices, and
places of eminent Trust, both Civil, and Ecclesiastical: Because, should they
be Admitted to an Equality of Power, and Authority in the Kingdom, their
Oppression, and Natural endeavor to Advance their own Ways in Religion, might
Tempt them to push forwards, and Struggle for the Right Hand of Fellowship; So
as the Peace of the Nation might be Endangered.

I should here have closed up this discourse, did I not find that many Reverend
Members of the Clergy, have been lately great Opposers of a Toleration; which
leads me to Consider, whither the Admission of it be prejudicial to the Safety
and Interest of the Church.

If we call to mind by what means True Religion was first Planted, and
Propagated in the World, we shall find that Force, and Compulsion, had no hand
in the Work: Both the Precepts, and Example of our Great Master, and his
Disciples, are directly Opposite to it: For my part, I think, that Humane
prudence, as well as Christian piety, Obliges their Successors to follow the
same Method of reclaiming Dissenters by Gentleness, and meek Exhortations,
according to the Direction of St. Paul.

For since the chief Design and most incumbent Duty of the Church is to
Convert Misbelievers, and to bring back into the Fold those who have straied
Away; there is nothing so Necessary and Conducing to this Work, as to procure
in the Minds of Dissenters a good Opinion, and esteem of the Charity and
Paternal Care of those, who undertake to Instruct them in the Right Way.

This was the Method of our Savior himself, who began his great Business of
Converting Mankind, by first Obliging the People with Temporal Blessings, that
so he might Win them to Spiritual Happiness; for this Reason he Miraculously
Fed so many Thousands in the Desert, and so often Cured their Bodily
Infirmitys, in order to the Healing, and Nourishing their Souls: But the
Infliction of Corporal punishment or pecuniary Mul^ts, is so far from producing
this effect of Love, and Esteem in their Minds, whom we are to make our
Proselytes, that it constantly begets an Aversion, and Hatred in the Punished
against the Authors and Promoters of this punishment, so that Churchmen must
either necessarily give over the design of Converting Dissenters (which is a
principal part of their Function) or the practice of Abetting the Infliction of
Penalties upon them.

If Excommunication (which is a Seclusion from joining with the Congregation in
Religious Worship) be the proper, and just Punishment of Error in Religion,
according to all the Primitive Rules, and Practice of Christianity, is it not
strangely preposterous, that these Dissenters instead of being shut out, should
be violently forced into the Church, and (even during their Nonconformity of
Judgment) be compelled to a participation in Divine Worship with the Faithful
by all those sharp paenaltys, which the Law inflicts upon Recusancy? Instead of
the Gospel Rule, which Commands us to avoid their company; we set up a Law of
our own, which injoyns our meeting together even in the House of God; whereby
the partys compelled Act no less against their Conscience, than the Compellers
against the plain Letter of Scripture. Methinks in this Case the Example of our
Savior ought to be our Rule, Who in person Whipped out of the Temple those, who
came thither upon the Score of Interest, and nor of Religion, but always used
the most Benign and Gentle means imaginable to Win people into the Church.

What can be more contrary to the Honor, and Dignity of True Religion, than
that it should appear to stand in need of Force to draw Men to it? We show a
mistrust of it is Verity, when we dare not leave Men the liberty of their
Judgment and Conscience in embracing it. Is not this that very Thing,
wherewith formerly we have so often reproacht our Adversaryes? and have we not
other lawful Advantages enough over all Dissenters, and Sects without calling
in the Brachium Saeculare to Confute our Opponents, and using means much more,
becoming a preaching Colonel of Cromwels Army, than a Prelate of the Church of
England? Have we not Truth on our Side, the only Invincible Champion of
Religion? Are we not Established by the Law of the Land, whereas others will at
most be only Suffered? Are not all Ecclesiastical Promotions in our Power, and
Occupation? So that having the strongest Motives on our side both Temporal and
Spiritual, to bring Men fairly to us, why should we keep up a Spanish
Inquisition of Force and Violence, and so discredit and Weaken our Cause,
whilst mistakingly we endeavor by undue means to strengthen it.

Let the Presbyterians meet in their Halls, the Fanatics in their Barns, the
Papists in their Garrets; shall the Church of England Assembled in her
Cathedralls, fear the Competition of Rivals every way so inferior to her in
force of Arguments, and Reason, in exterior Decency, and Gravity, and in the
Credit of Public Authority? It would Argue not only want of Courage, but even
Weakness of Faith, and Reason too, should we be Jealous, that a permission
granted to those Sects, of having Public Meetings would diminish the number of
the Orthodox in our Religious Assemblys; for as all contrarys are best set off,
and distinguished, when together exposed to Public View, we may Presume, that
nothing would more advantageously fill our Churches, and Empty their
Conventicles, than a Liberty given them to appear in a full Light; that so all
Eyes might Judge of the Difference between Order, and Confusion, and between
the Decency of our rational Worship, Modeld according to the best Patterns of
sound Antiquity, and the Homeliness and clownish manner of their Addresses to
Heaven, formed out of their own Fancy by a Cynicall kind of Pride, which Scorns
the Direction of their Primitive Guides.

Let us not therefore give them that only Advantage they have over us, which is
of suffering for their Religion; for if we look into Scripture, we shall find
that Persecution in the Sufferers, is one of the most conspicuous Marks of
Truth, and in the Inflicters of Error; as most evidently appears in the Example
of that great Apostle Saint Paul, than whom before his Conversion, none more
Zealous, and fierce in the Prosecution of Christians, and after his Conversion,
none more Compassionate, and Charitable, toward his dissenting Brethren the
Jews.

THE END.

