THE Religion of an Oath.

A DISCOURSE, PROVING The Danger and Immorality OF Rash and Profane Swearing.

By the late Reverend and Judicious Dr. Claggett.

Reprinted on Occasion of the Parliament's Address to His Majesty to Issue out
His Proclamation against Immorality, etc.

LONDON: Printed for Will. Rogers, at the Sun against St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleetstreet. 1700.

THE Religion of an OATH, etc.
MATTHEW. V. 34, 35, 36, 37. But I say unto you, Swear not at all; neither by
heaven, for it is God's throne: nor by the earth, for it is his footstool:
neither by Jerusalem, for it is the City of the great King. Neither shall thou
swear by thy head, because thou can not make one hair white or black. But let
your communication be, Yea, yea; Nay, nay: for whatsoever is more than this,
comes of evil.


THat Religion and the fear of God, and a sense of his Authority, are
Principles supposed by the Laws of God, is from hence evident, that in great
part the process of our Courts depends upon Testimony given under the
obligation of an Oath; for though the use of an Oath there, is required by
Humane Authority; yet the peculiar obligation it lays upon us to speak the
Truth, is antecedent to all Humane Laws, being founded originally upon our Duty
to God: Wherefore though an Oath in respect of some use and end of it, may be a
Civil Act, yet in respect of the reason whereby it obliges, it is an Act of
Religion; for this reason it is highly conducible to the end of Civil
Government, to maintain a sense of Religion in the minds of men; and
particularly it must be of great use to make them observe those Laws of God,
which are plainly designed to secure the reverence which is due to an Oath, and
to keep men at a wide distance from the danger of Perjury: Such is that Law of
our Savior, which I have read to you, which therefore does not tend more to
the Honor of God, than to the Common Good of Mankind; and this no man can be
ignorant of, who considers what a vast influence the use of an Oath has upon
all the Affairs of Humane Life. This is that whereby we come to conside in one
another about things of the greatest moment to our lives; this is that which is
so often necessary to secure our Properties, to save us from wrong, and to make
even our Enemy to do us right; it is this which all Processes in Courts of
Judicature are governed by, which is supposed to all Administrations of
Justice, and gives an end to all Controversies about matters of Fact, which
will be no otherways decided; it is this which must either direct or misguide
the wisest Magistrates, and make their Sentence it self either right or wrong;
and by which we are either strongly guarded against Injury, or almost
inevitably exposed to it. Of how great consequence therefore must it be to the
good of all men, to have the reverence of an Oath secured, and to make every
man tremble at the thought of Perjury, since the World cannot be well-governed,
nor the Administrations of Justice go forward, without the use of Oaths? And
yet we had better be without them, in as many cases as there are wherein Men
are not afraid to be Forsworn. And yet alas! it is the daily complaint of our
Age, That the fear of an Oath is almost banished out of the World: And although
it be really a thousand times more dreadful to profane the Name of God, by
calling him to be a witness to our Lies, than it would be to play before the
Mouth of a Cannon while it was Firing; yet, if we may believe the Reports which
are sometimes made from Courts of Judicature, there are very few Peasants so
pusillanimous but they are hardy enough to Swear to any thing; and with equal
confidence to contradict one another in the plainest matters, and when under an
equal obligation to speak the Truth, by the Invocation of the dreadful Name of
God. Now if we would enquire how the sacredness of an Oath is grown into such
contempt, I do not question but the common and frequent use of Swearing in our
ordinary Conversation, would be found at least accessory to that dishonor
which is done to God, and that mischief to men by the so frequent Perjuries of
our Age. Oaths are grown so familiar with us, that men have forgotten the
nature and true use of them, and are not sensible, that they call the Divine
Vengeance upon themselves, if their Testimonies be not exactly true; they have
been prostituted to the meanest Services, and profaned by common use; and then
no wonder if the Sacred Obligation peculiar to them be forgotten, when they are
used in those special cases for which they ought to be reserved; therefore if
we would do any thing to recover the fear of an Oath amongst our Countrymen,
we must endeavor to do it by means contrary to those whereby it has been so
generally lost, that is, By abstaining our selves, and not only so, but by
dissuading and restraining others as much as in us lies, from that familiar and
fashionable Swearing which is one of the great reproaches of our Age; to which
end I shall endeavor to explain the meaning and reason of these words of our
Savior.

And in them I shall consider,

1. The Law it self, Swear not at all; but let your communication be, Yea, yea;
Nay, nay.

2. The sanction and reason of this Law, viz. 1. The Authority of our Savior,
But I say unto you. 2. The nature of the thing it self, For whatsoever is more
than this, comes of evil.

In the Law it self we are to consider the Prohibition, and the Precept.

1. The Prohibition; which contains,

1. A general Rule, Swear not at all.

2. Some particular instances whereto the Rule extends, Neither by Heaven, nor
by Earth, nor by Jerusalem, nor by thy head.

3. The Reason why the Rule extends to these Instances; not by Heaven, for it
is God's Throne; not by the Earth, for it is his footstool; not by Jerusalem,
for it is the City of the great King; not by thy Head, for thou can not make
one hair white or black.

Let us begin with the general Rule, Swear not at all. From which words the
Anabaptists and Quakers have contended, That an Oath, or an Appeal to God that
what we say is true, is in no case lawful: I shall here show the contrary, and
prove, that the meaning of the Rule is this, That we are not to Swear in our
common and daily Conversation with Men; and this will appear,

1. By comparing the Prohibition with the Precept.

2. With the particular instances whereunto the Prohibition extends.

1. With the Precept, But let your communication be, Yea, yea; Nay, nay, (i.
e.) Let this be the manner of your ordinary discourse, barely to affirm or
deny, or if need be, sometimes with vehemence, which perhaps is intimated by
the repetition of yea and nay.

Now it is plain, if this be the sense of the Precept, that the Prohibition
does not extend to Cases which belong not to the common and ordinary
Conversation of Men, such as the deciding of Controversies for the security of
the public peace; the assuring of fidelity to the Government, and the
ratifying of Leagues, etc. which are cases properly excepted from this Rule of
an usual and ordinary communication with each other, because they are no part
thereof: But I confess, I do not lay the stress of the proof upon this Argument
only, but on this, together with the second, which is founded upon comparing
the general Rule with the particular instances, whereby the use of it is
explained, neither by Heaven, for it is God's Throne, etc. Our Savior's design
in these words cannot be better understood, than by considering what those
corrupt Principles concerning the matter of Swearing were, which had crept in
among the Jews; and first, as their own Authors tell us, it was generally held
amongst them, that they ought not to Swear by the Name of God in light and
trivial Cases, but they believed it was no Sin to Swear upon any occasion by a
Creature that was a remarkable instance of God's Favor and Providence, as by
Heaven, or by the Earth, or by Jerusalem, or by their Head, which are the
Instances here noted by our Savior. Secondly, some of them, and particularly
the Pharisees, taught, that the Guilt of Perjury was not incurred, when a
falsehood was attested by these kind of Oaths, excepting only in the Cases of
Swearing by the Gold of the Temple, and the Gift upon the Altar; by which Oaths
they acknowledged themselves to be bound, as we find Mat. 23. (i.e.) either to
speak the Truth, or to the Penalty of False-Swearing: Hence, I say, that our
Savior's words, Swear not all, neither by Heaven, etc. being spoken to Persons
who well enough understood the Doctrines and Practices of their Countrymen in
this matter, could not reasonably be thought to have any other meaning than
this, That they ought not to Swear by the Creatures of God in any of those
Cases wherein it is unlawful to Swear by the Almighty himself, (i.e.) in their
usual Communication with one another: For it seems the Jews themselves were not
arrived to that insolence, which it is so dreadful to think that Christians
nowadays should not scruple, of profaning the Name of the Most High God, by
calling him at every turn to be Witness of their talk: And therefore our
Savior found it needless to forbid them Swearing by his Name, for they already
believed that to be an impious thing; but he tells them, they must neither
Swear by Heaven, nor by any thing else; as if he had said, You have been
allowed to liberty of Swearing as often as you please, provided you do not use
the Name of God himself; it is ordinary with you to Swear by Heaven, and Earth,
and by the Temple, and your Lives and Souls, and that in those Cases wherein
you rightly believe it would be a profane rudeness to invoke the Majesty of God
directly; But I say unto you, Swear not at all; you shall not henceforth take
the liberty of using any kind of Oaths in those Cases wherein you are not to
appeal to God himself; but upon all these occasions, whatever you assert, or
whatever you promise, use the simplicity and plainness of some affirmation or
denial. And thus our Savior restrained the licentiousness of those common
Swearers, that thought they might safely Swear by Heaven, and use the like
Oaths at any time, and upon any occasion; and withal corrected that abuse which
the Doctrine of the Pharisees had brought into this Practice, viz. That Men
were not liable to the guilt of Perjury by such Oaths as these were; which I
shall more distinctly show under the third Head. The meaning then of our
Savior's Prohibition is not this, That it is unlawful at any time to Swear by
the Name of God; but that it is unlawful to Swear by any Creature in any Case,
wherein it would be so to appeal directly to the Knowledge and Justice of God
himself.

2. As to those Instances by which the general Rule is explained, it is
observeable,

1. That Swearing by any of the Creatures is forbidden, not only by Heaven and
Earth, which with the rest are particularly mentioned by our Savior, because
these forms of Swearing were most in use amongst the Jews.

2. We are to note, that our Savior calls it Swearing, to use these forms of
Speech in attesting what we say; they are not so many words lost, as we may be
inclined to think, but we bring upon our selves the obligation of an Oath, by
the using of them, as shall presently appear. If indeed any ways of speaking
have obtained amongst us, which look like Swearing, but are not, being
altogether unapt to excite any Thought of Divine Justice, I do not question,
but they are to be laid aside too, because surely the Prohibition of Swearing
at all, excludes not only all real, but all broken, apish and insignificant
Oaths; but if it were not so, one would think that a small measure of Sobriety
and Wisdom should keep a man from debasing and vilifying the acknowledged forms
of speaking that are peculiar to Oaths, by applying them to such senseless
sounds, as make them to signify nothing; It Is a good Rule which a wise man has
given, That all forms, besides those wherein there is an immediate appeal to
God, are better avoided when there is need of Swearing; and when there is no
need, we should not Swear at all, neither by Heaven, nor by any thing else. Let
us now consider,

3. The Reasons why the Prohibition extends to these instances, and the like,
Not by Heaven, for it is God's Throne; and he that swears by Heaven, swears
by the Throne of God, and him that sits thereon, Matthew. 23. Not by the
Earth, for it is his footstool; it is a remarkable subject of his Providence;
and to Swear hereby, is in effect all one as to appeal to God that upholds it
by his Power: Not by Jerusalem, nor any holy place that has a peculiar
relation to God, for the same reason; nor by thy head, for thou can not make
one hair white or black, (i. e.) thou have no power over thy life, and art so
unable to subsist independently upon God, that thou can not so much as alter
the color of thine Hair: Now since thy Head, thy Life and Safety, depends upon
the Divine Providence, to Swear by thy Head, and by thy Life, and consequently
by thy hope of Life and Salvation, is indeed to Swear by him upon whom thou
dependest for thy life, and who only has all power to save and to destroy; so
that the general reason why these Oaths are to be avoided, is because they are
equivalent to formal Swearing by the Creator of all things, and contrary to the
Opinion of the Pharisees, brought an equal Obligation upon him that used them,
with Swearing downright by our Maker: Now they acknowledged, that Swearing
directly by the Name of God, and where that was used, was not lawful in their
ordinary occasions of speaking; our Savior proceeds upon this supposition, and
infers, Therefore it is not lawful to use those other Oaths upon those
occasions, because they implied an appeal to the Justice and the Omnipresence
of God himself. And thus I have endeavored to explain the Prohibition
contained in this Law of Christ.

As for the Precept, But let your communication be, Yea, yea; Nay, nay; it
needs no farther inquiry into the sense of it, the plain meaning of them
already appearing to be this: Content your selves with bare affirming and
denying whatever you have occasion to speak of, without adding thereto any kind
of Oaths and Imprecations.

And thus much concerning the Law it self, which one would think were as easy
to be practiced, as it is to be understood; and certainly it is great pity that
any man should need much persuasion to keep it; but if it should be so, we do
not want Arguments clear and strong enough to prevail with any considering
Person; and these are contained in the Sanction of this Law; which is the
second thing I am to speak to, and which I have already told you is founded,

1. Upon the Authority of our Blessed Lord and Savior.

2. Upon the Reason of the Law itself.

1. The Authority of our Savior, who established this Law by these words, But
I say unto you. I do not find any such express Prohibition of Swearing in
ordinary Conversation as this, before our Savior's time; not but that I think
the unlawfulness of that liberty which here he abridgeth his Disciples of,
might by good consequence be inferred from the Writings of Moses, and the
Prophets; but what need we look for any other Rule in this matter besides this,
which is so plain and express, and which we have received from the Son of God
himself? There can now be no dispute, whether we may lawfully Swear in those
Cases wherein an Oath is needless; for our Lord's Command is so full against
it, that a question has been made, though upon no just ground, Whether it be
lawful for a Christian to Swear at all? Now if the sense of our Savior's
Authority can prevail with us to do any thing in obedience to him, it will not
fail to govern us in this matter, where the performance of his Will is so easy,
and the violation of it is not rewarded by any gain or pleasure, nor solicited
by any Temptation that can fasten upon our sensual Lusts and Appetites; nor can
be resolved easily into any other Cause, but a Spirit of Contradiction to the
Gospel of our Lord; which may make us astonished, that in an Age pretending to
the Worship of God, in a Nation formed into a Christian Church, so many should
be found of almost all Qualities and Degrees, who bid defiance to the Authority
of our Savior, by refusing to make so small an acknowledgment of it, as the
keeping of a Law so easy as this; that we should thus put into our Discourse a
peculiar Character, to let the World know, that we are no Christians, though we
were Baptized into the Name of Christ; lest it should not be observed by our
practices, that we should take care to discover it by our language, that we are
none of those who believe Jesus to be the Son of God: If we had no other
reason, but the Will of our Lord and Savior to rule us in this matter, that
certainly should be enough to conclude us; he that should want a farther
obligation, deserves to be ranked with Heathens and Infidels; and yet the thing
which our Savior here forbids, is evil in it self too, and contains many foul
and detestable Immoralities in its own nature; and therefore the common
Swearer's Sin, how enormous must it needs be, who refuses to do a very small
matter to avoid so great a guilt! That the heinousness whereof may yet farther
appear, I shall proceed to the

Second Consideration under this Head, viz. The Reason of the Law it self,
which is contained in these words, Whatsoever is more than the plainness of
affirmation and denial in common discourse, comes of evil; I will therefore
endeavor these two following things.

1. To make it appear what those evil dispositions are which this practice
implies.

2. To examine the pretenses that are only possible to be alleged in excuse of
it. Now if men are led to it by no good Principle; if the dispositions
thereunto are wholly evil; if evil be implied in the very pretenses brought to
excuse it; nothing can be farther desired to demonstrate that this is to be
concluded, viz. That it is an Immorality to Swear in our Communication; and
whatsoever is more than that simplicity of Language which our Savior's Rule
confines us to, comes of evil.

The true Principles and Causes inclining men to this practice, are these:

1. Want of Reverence toward God.

2. Carelessness of avoiding the Crime of Perjury.

3. Immodesty and Pride.

4. Lightness and vanity of mind. And indeed there must be all these things
together to make up a common Swearer; for if he either had reverent Thoughts of
God, or feared to be Forsworn; or if he had but a little modesty and good
manners, or any tolerable measure of a steady and serious spirit, any one of
these things would secure him.

1. Customary Swearing betrays great irreverence toward God; for unless a man
had very mean and dishonorable Thoughts of God, how durst he make so bold with
him, as to affirm nothing so silly, and transact nothing so trivial and mean,
but he must summon God to be his Witness? Reverence of the Deity is always
expressed by separating holy things from vile and common uses; and because an
Oath is an appeal to the Knowledge and Justice of God, it is greater rudeness
to press it to unnecessary Services, than it would be for the meanest of People
to call the King out of his Throne to hear every idle Tale they brought against
one another. If an Oath be an holy thing, let us use it as we do those holy
places, which we do not put to all Employments, but reserve them for their
peculiar use. What a contempt of Religion would it be for men to bring their
Markets into the House of God, and pretend to sanctify their worldly Affairs
and Pleasures, by transacting them in the place of his Worship? I do not see
but it is altogether as irreligious to mix our talk with Oaths upon every
occasion; for hereby we make as cheap with God, as by prostituting any other
Sacred thing to a common and trivial use.

2. It argues a man not to fear that horrid Crime of Perjury; for if he were
afraid of it, how cautious and deliberate would he be, e're he ventured to
affirm any thing upon Oath? He would consider whether it were exactly true,
whether it were certain, or only probable; whether he was not liable to
mistake, or misinformation, in the case, and many other things which are often
necessary to come under consideration with that man that trembles at the
thought of Perjury; but the light is not more clear at midday, than that
common Swearers trouble themselves with none of these Thoughts; what they say
at a venture, they boldly Swear; what they rashly utter, they as rashly add
Oaths and Curses to; their habit of Swearing makes them not one jot the more
wary in their talk; and the slipperiness of their Tongues, not at all the more
afraid of an Oath; which is a plain Argument, that they have little
apprehension of Perjury, and are not afraid to be Forsworn; for I say, Did we
ever find that those who are given to Swearing, are more deliberate and slow to
speak than other men? Do they weigh their words with more exactness? Do they
refrain from looseness of talk, and dissoluteness of Mirth and Jollity more than
those who are content to speak upon their honest word? No, but on the contrary,
they are usually more free and prodigal of their discourse; their words are
guided with less consideration and judgment, and their Tongues hang more loosly
in their Heads than is observable in other men; nay, it is well known, that
they are then most plentiful of their Oaths, when they are least able to govern
their talk with discretion, (i. e.) when they are drunk either with Wine or
Passion; and what numerous Perjuries then in all likelihood are these men
guilty of! nay, it is not improbable but some of them may be Forsworn every day
they rise; for though men may please themselves with thinking that they do but
swear in jest, yet the obligation of an Oath is not to be laughed away; when
men swear they will do this or that, which it may be they intend not at all; or
that such a thing is true, which they know is false, they are nevertheless
guilty of Perjury, for not minding that they are so, since a Sin cease not to
be what it is, merely by the stupidity of a man's Confcience; but all that can
be said in this case is, That they are not apprehensive of the guilt, nor
afraid of the crime of Perjury, which is that Immorality that I charge the
common Swearer withal; and this St. Austin was so sensible of, that the reason
which he assigns why our Savior prohibited unnecessary Oaths, was this, ne
perjuri smus, lest we should be forsworn, which every man is in apparent danger
of, who promiscuously adds Oaths to his Talk, as I have already noted. And
doubtless he that refuses to secure himself from Perjury that way which our
Savior has prescribed, declares plainly enough that he is not so careful
against it, as a due sense of the foulness of that Sin would make him. That in
the busness of an Oath men are obliged to proceed with great care and
deliberation, is a thing so plain, that I should be ashamed to go about the
proving of it: And I am confident, if men would tie themselves to weigh the
Truth of every thing they affirmed, before they would venture to Swear to it,
they would spare a great many of their Oaths; and if they found it were exactly
true, they would be immediately sensible, that it deserved not so solemn a
confirmation, and be ashamed of the vanity of doing so great a thing to no
purpose; which is a consideration that I shall by and by more particularly
offer. In the mean time,

3. Needless Swearing argues Immodesty and Pride, and an arrogant spirit. Few
things are more unseemly in a man, than to affirm every thing with confidence,
and to be peremptory in all his talk, for this is to impose upon his Company,
and leave no room for any body to be of another mind; and such Companions are
shunned by all wise Persons, as being void of that modesty and sobriety which
make men sociable and conversible; but what shall we say to those who are not
only positive and dogmatical in their common discourse, but assert every thing
almost which they say, upon Oath? Certainly in this kind of Behavior there is
as much ill Manners toward men, as there is rudeness toward God; for what
greater instance can be given of an imperious and a peremptory temper, than to
seal our talk with Oaths, and leave no room for another to doubt of what we
say, under the pain of accusing us of Perjury? A modest and wise man, when he
delivers his judgment in many things, where possibly he might, without fear of
being accused of Arrogance, be peremptory and conclusive, yet chooses to
declare himself with that reservedness, as may invite another man to show all
his reasons to the contrary, without fear of displeasing him; and this we all
know is a great Ornament to any man's Conversation, and of excellent use to
maintain peace, and good will, and good correspondence in all Societies; But
light is not more contrary to darkness, than the custom of Swearing is to this
human and gentle temper; wherefore it betrays immodesty and arrogance.

Lastly, it proceeds also from great vanity and lightness of spirit, which
appears in these two plain instances of it.

The first is, in making no difference between matters of serious importance
and consideration, and such as are frivolous, and of little consequence; in
treating those with the same spirit and behavior, that are suitable only to
these, which is an undoubted argument of childishness, and a frothy mind; this
is that which the Swearer is apparently chargeable with; for otherwise how
could he in the same light humor, wherein he is delivering something to make
the Company laugh, presume to profane so sacred a thing as an Oath is, by
accompanying a poor silly Jest with it? Does the taking of an Oath require no
more seriousness than is necessary to the telling of a Tale? Or can it be fit
to tie so grave a thing to a sentence, which if it were written down, would
within an hour after, perhaps, appear hatefully ridiculous? And yet nothing is
more common with those that allow themselves in this Sin.

Secondly, It is an Argument of vanity to take more pains for the confirming of
what we say, than the thing does at all deserve. It is plain, that the greatest
part of our Conversation with one another by discourse and correspondence, does
not require any solemn confirmation of the truth of our words; much less the
Testimony of an Oath; which being the greatest security we can give, he must be
a very lightheaded Companion that will throw it away at every turn, who cannot
tell what was done yesterday, or make a Promise to his Friend or Acquaintance
about the ordinariest matter, but out comes an Oath, or a Curse, to bind his
words withal: Methinks I could convince any man of ordinary sense, that there
is that levity and madness implied in this custom, which if it were but seen in
other things, would bring a man within the danger of Bedlam; for suppose a man
were to make a Promise to his Friend of that kind which ordinarily happens in
our Conversation, as that he would give him a Visit, or a Meeting where he
should appoint, but for the present would not suffer him to go, till he had
gotten an hundred of his Neighbors together to be Witnesses of his Promise;
what a ridiculous Fancy would this be? And if a man should ordinarily do thus,
he were likely enough to be begged, if any thing were to be gotten by it; for
nothing is more plain, than that the ordinary assurance of a man's word is
sufficient for these matters, and will either pass for them, or he had as good
be banished out of human Society, or sent to some other place at least, where
being not so well known, he may be the better trusted; but it is as clear as
when the Sun shines, that he that will not make such a Promise under an Oath,
nor let his Word go without calling God to witness it, by invoking his Justice
and Vengeance if he falsifies, (for that is the meaning of an Oath) he does
really ten thousand times more to confirm his Promise, than if he had summoned
Town and Country together, than if he had gotten all Mankind, nay, and all the
Angels in Heaven together to be Witnesses between him and his Neighbor. Can
there readily be a more ridiculous vanity thought of than this, to give away
the best security I can afford of my fidelity, upon every trifle? I wish all
those who have been guilty of this Sin, would so endeavor after an ordinary
Reputation amongst men, as to be ashamed of it for the future.

Thus have I shown what those evil Principles are from whence Swearing in
ordinary Conversation proceeds. It comes of irreverence toward God,
carelessness of being Forsworn, Immodesty and Arrogance, Lightness and Vanity of
spirit; that is to say, if a man has either the fear of God, or a detestation
of Perjury, or Modesty, and good Manners, or any Sobriety and Seriousness, any
one of these things will be sufficient to keep him from using needless Oaths,
and therefore the common Swearer is destitute of them all; and consequently it
must needs be a foul Immorality, which grows out of a Complexion of all those
evil Principles that are contrary to these good and virtuous dispositions.

I am in the

Second place, to examine the pretenses that are only possible to be alleged
in the excuse, or for the mitigation of this Crime; and if I can show, that
evil is implied in these also, the conclusion will yet be more evident, That
whatsoever in our ordinary Conversation is beyond affirmation and denial,
comes of evil. I do not think that any excuses will be heard for that man who
goes on in any known sin, much less in his behalf who lives in the violation of
so plain and easy a Law as this which forbids common Swearing; but because
there are many given to this sin, who are ready to excuse themselves presently
when they are admonished, and to ask your pardon, if you seem to be offended
and grieved, and then think that they have given you reasonable satisfaction,
as they hope they have done the like to God, by confessing that truly they
ought not to swear in this fashion, and God forgive them for it, but yet they
go on still to do the same thing; one would think there were some notable
Temptation to this sin, which would go very far to extenuate the guilt of it,
and which rendered the avoiding of it so very difficult, that all the regard
which could reasonably be expected to be given to that Law of God which forbids
it, is to confess our fault, and cry God's mercy every time we commit it; and
that a good-natured man ought to be very well satisfied with the
acknowledgment. I have already shown, that this is a Sin which stands in need
of an excuse as much as any: I shall now show, that there is none less capable
of an excuse, by examining what is usually pretended for it. I never heard that
any Swearer ever fancied his Oaths to be for his Health, or his Wealth; that
they prolong his Life, or increase his Estate; that they give the Wine a
brisker flavor, or bring the Gamester any good luck; that they ease him of his
pains, or set off his Pleasures. I suppose you are all sensible, that these
pretenses would be very ridiculous, and truly they are not much better that
follow; as,

First of all, That they are an Ornament to a man's discourse; that they set
off his language; and if they are well placed, they make a sentence run the
better. I should have been ashamed to mention this excuse, but that they say it
goes a great way with some people. Now this very excuse betrays
Fantasticalness, and Pride, and comes of a foolish affectation to be counted a
Wit, which every body almost knows to be an argument of a mean and degenerate
spirit; the reason why at any time Oaths and profane Talk are affected for this
purpose, is, because they are sometimes observed to surprise the Hearers, which
makes the profane Person conceit that his Wit is acknowledged, when in truth it
is only the extravagance and boldness of his Talk that is wondered at. Folly,
that is something out of the road, is more commonly apt to provoke laughter,
than a surprizal that is truly ingenious; and therefore for a man to have an
Opinion of himself, merely because he is able to make the Company stare upon
him, arises from nothing but a mixture of Pride and Ignorance: As to this
particular matter of Swearing, it is plain that an Oath signifies only to the
affirming or denying of what is said, but adds nothing to the weight of the
sense, or to the style wherein it is expressed; it may startle a modest man, but
it cannot please any wise man, because it neither mends the matter, nor helps
the phrase. But is it not strange, that that should go for Wit, which the very
basest of the People can make use of with as much freedom and discretion, and
with as good a grace as a man of the best quality and breeding can do? for the
truth is, there is nothing required to this kind of pleasantness, but to get
ones forhead furnished with Impudence: which if the meanest Peasant be capable
of, he is then qualified for a good Companion, merely by having a memory large
enough to take in half a dozen Oaths, and a Tongue in his Head to use them as
occasion serves; which, experience shows, may be done without any natural
Sagacity, or Rules of Art.

2. It is sometimes pretended by common Swearers, though I think but rarely,
That men will not believe them without an Oath: and what is this but to
confess, they have been so notoriously given to Lying, that no body dares trust
them upon their bare word? for a man that is known to make conscience of
speaking the Truth, finds no difficulty of creating a belief of what he says
amongst any of his Friends, without making any appeal to God. Besides, the Oath
of a common Swearer gives indeed but very little assurance of the truth of what
he says; if I know a man to be afraid of an Oath, his Oath shall satisfy me
beyond any other testimony that he can give; and upon the Oath of such a man, a
Court of Judicature may proceed with confidence; but what regard can reasonably
be had to his Oath above his simple and bare word, as we use to say, who is
known to swear upon all occasions? if he does not lie, it is well, but of this I
have no peculiar assurance by his Oath, because it is as ordinary with him to
swear, as to speak; and therefore in Athens, a Common Swearer's Oath was not
allowed, nor accepted of in their Courts; and sometimes the testimony of a man
of known Probity and Honor was admitted without it; this last seems to be
imitated by the wisdom of our Laws, which suppose the Asseveration of a Peer to
be equivalent to the Oath of another man; and therefore for another man to
Swear needlessly, is to disparage the Reputation of his Fidelity; but for a man
of Honor to do so, is to renounce his Privilege; and for any man to do thus,
is not only to bring the honesty of his Word, but the truth of his Oath also
into question.

3. The most usual excuse framed for the extenuation of this Impiety, is that
of sudden Passion; thus when some men are a little provoked, or when they are
surprised with some unexpected good Fortune, or any unlook'd-for misadventure
befalls them, either their Rage or their Joy bursts out presently into Oaths,
and they pretend they cannot help it; for they have no other way to discharge
their minds, and give vent to their Passions, but by Cursing and Swearing; now
is not this a plain confession, that they have lost the government of
themselves, and have no rule over their own spirits? So common it is for men,
while they are framing an excuse for one sin, to betray themselves guilty of
another; what greater argument can lightly be given of an impotent mind, than
that every petty accident is able to bereave one of all consideration, and make
him cease to be his own man till the fit is over? And the truth is, though
Passion be brought in to mitigate the business, yet it is plain enough, that
any trifling occasion is able to set these men a swearing, that make this
excuse for themselves; when provocation is alleged to mollify this Crime, one
would think it must arise from no less a cause than if he should find his house
in flames, or his friend attempting the honor of his bed; but upon
examination, this same emotion and heat of spirit, is pleaded for the begging
of your pardon, when a man swears upon the most trifling and inconsiderable
occasions: And what can excuse that childishness and impotency of mind to which
these men have thus given themselves over? But let never such extraordinary
causes of joy, or grief, or anger, happen, it is an unmanly thing to set no
bounds to these Passions, and they are never less unbridled, than when we make
such undue expressions of them, as Oaths and Curses are; St. James gives us
this Rule, Above all things, my brethren, swear not, neither by heaven, neither
by the earth, nor by any other Oath, James 5.12. But the particular Case
wherein he thought this Rule was useful, was that of Affliction, for he had
before exhorted them to whom he wrote, to take the Prophets for an example of
suffering affliction, and of patience, and particularly recommended to them the
meekness and patience of Job for their imitation, ver. 10, 11. But if they
could not perfectly equal such great examples as those were, yet at least he
strictly enjoins them not to be transported so far into Anger and Impatience as
to break forth into Oaths: But above all things, my brethren, swear not, but
keep your selves within the bounds of modest and Christian Language; and that
they might see that he allowed them to have a sense of the good and evil of
this World, and was far from thinking it a Virtue to be stupid, and dull, and
unconcerned about either the Comforts, or the Calamities of human Life; he
directs them how they may convert the Passions which are thereby excited, to an
excellent and profitable use; Is any man among you afflicted, let him pray; Is
any merry? let him sing Psalms, ver. 13, 15. If any man be overtaken with
worldly misery, let him turn himself to more devout and earnest Prayer, that
God would either remove his burden, or give him patience under it; if he be
surprised with some new blessing, let him break forth into the Praises of God,
to whose Bounty and Goodness he stands obliged for it. Thus to improve the
excitations of joy and grief within us, is a demonstration that our Passions
have not overwhelmed our Reason and Understanding, but left us the free use of
our selves, to do what becomes us as Men and Christians; but in either case to
lash out into Oaths, is a plain token of an impotent mind, that has no rule
over it self, but is hurried away by intemperate Passions, which is matter of
so much shame to a reasonable Creature, and much more to a Disciple of Christ,
that we should blush to confess so much evil against our selves, as to make it
the excuse of any other Sin.

4. If Swearing be excused under the notion of a compliance with the custom of
other men who are our Friends and Companions; this pretense indeed carries a
show of civility and kind nature; but for all that, is the silliest that can
readily be thought of, and the making of it argues a mean and degenerate mind;
for although in things of an innocent and indifferent nature it is commendable
for men to remit of their own way and humor, and to suit themselves to the
customs and manners of those whom they converse with; yet to be complaisant in
all things without exception, is the way to grow as profligate and vile as the
Devil would wish any man to be; for what wickedness could want Authority, if
this pretense were once admitted? What is this but to proclaim, that a man has
lost all sense of difference between good and evil? And that he has left off
to judge all things according to their own nature; that he has no more use
left for his Reason; that his Conscience is no longer in his own keeping, and
that he is now fit to herd with the Beasts that follow the foremost without
discretion? The Laws of Truth and Goodness are immutable; and another man's
violation of them, gives me no dispensation to do so too; I may not prostitute
my Conscience to the Lusts of other men, who are to be governed by the Laws of
God as well as I; if they call my resolution not to provoke my Maker, an
humor; in this matter I were a Fool not to be tenacious of my own humor; in
this case there can be no reason why he that is in the right, should go over to
him that is wrong, unless he that sets the evil example could change the nature
of things, and make evil not to be evil, and sin and punishment to be other
things than what they are.

Lastly, The common way of excusing rash Oaths, by pleading an habit, implies
the greatest evil of this nature that can be; for this is but to confess that a
man is guilty of this sin in the highest degree, an evil custom being the
height of wickedness.

Thus both by showing what those dispositions are which lead to common
Swearing, and by considering the excuses that are usually framed in the behalf
of it, I have discovered the Immorality thereof, and that it comes of evil.

I might here add the Authority of Wise men, who had no particular Revelation
to guide themselves by, and yet condemned this practice, and dissuaded all men
from it; for these Persons could discover the evil of it only by the light of
Natural Reason, which they could not have done, if it had not been evil in its
own nature. Plato wrote smartly against Swearing upon light causes; Hierocles
tells us, It is a dishonor to truth to confirm it lightly with an Oath.
Epictetus gives this advice, Avoid Swearing altogether, if thou can; if not,
as much as thou can. In a word, The wise and sober Heathens were generally of
this mind, That an Oath was to be reserved for Cases of necessity; and the
practice of common Swearing was not in use amongst any but Stage Players and
Slaves; nor do we ordinarily meet with Oaths in any of their Writers, excepting
the Comedians, and some of their dissolute Poets; but the grave men and
Philosophers took not the liberty themselves, and dehorted others from it. And
this may serve to confirm us in the belief of its Immorality; for what so many
wise men agreed in condemning, seems to be condemned as evil, by reasons common
to all men, and possibly such as I have offered to your consideration; so great
a shame and ignominy it is to Christians to allow themselves in a Custom so
easy avoidable, that is condemned by the light of Nature, however by the
Authority of the Son of God, whose Disciples we profess our selves to be.

Thus have I finished what I had to say upon this subject, having been willing
to say all that was any way proper to oppose a custom tending so manifestly to
the dishonor of our Nation, and the discredit of our Church, and the scandal
of Christian Society, and finally, to the ruin of Men's souls for ever; for
without universal obedience to the Laws of Christ, whereof this is one which I
have been preaching to you, we cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; for
which reason if I had chosen any other Command of our Lord and Savior to
discourse upon, I had been as vehement in urging you to the obedience of that,
as I have been in pressing this.

Now the God of mercy grant that we may walk before him blameless, and be holy
in all manner of Conversation as becomes the followers of Jesus; To Him with
the Father and the Holy Spirit be ascribed all honor, praise, and glory, now,
and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

