A True and Full Narrative OF Those two never to be forgotten DELIVERANCES: One
From The Spanish Invasion in 88. The other from The Hellish Powder Plot:
November 5. 1605. Whereunto is added The like Narrative of that signal Judgment
of God upon the Papists, by the Fall of the House in Blackfriars London, upon
their fifth of November, 1623.

Collected for the Information and Benefit of each Family, by Sam, Clark,
formerly Pastor in Bennet Fink.

Behold the wicked travelleth with iniquity, and has conceived mischief, and
brought forth falsehood.

He made a Pit, and dug it, and is fallen into the ditch which he made.

His mischief shall return upon his own head, and his violent dealing shall
come down upon his own pate.

Psalm. 7.14, 15, 16. London, Printed for J. Hancock, and are to be sold at the
three Bibles, being the first Shop in Pope's Head Alley, next to Cornhill. 1671





TO THE HONORABLE And His much Honored Friends EDWARD RVSSEL, Esquire Son to the
Right Honorable FRANCIS Earl of BEDFORD. AND TO The Lady PENELOPE, His prudent
and pious Consort.
SIR, MADAM,
I Take the boldness to present you with these Narratives, not for that they
are new, or supposing your selves to be strangers to them: but as a Testimony
of my Gratitude for these favors I have received from you: The high Heavens
may be seen in the lowest valleys: So may a large heart in the least Gift. But
truly though the Gift be worthless, yet so is not the matter contained in it,
which sets forth such eminent and signal deliverances as no Church or people in
these latter Ages of the world have received; And there must be a recognition
of Gods mercies, or else there will neither follow estimation, nor retribution:
Hence Micah 6.5. O my people (says God many hundreds of years after) remember
now what Balack King of Moah consulted, and what Balaam the Son of Beor
answered him from Shittim unto Gilgal, that ye may know the righteousness of
the Lord. If there be not such a recognition of former deliverances, we that
should be as Temples of his praise, shall be as graves of his benefits. Our
souls indeed are too like filthy Ponds, wherein fish die soon, and frogs live
long: Rotten stuff is remembered, memorable mercies are forgotten; whereas the
soul should be as an holy Ark; the memory as the pot of Manna, preserving holy
truths and special mercies; as Aarons Rod, fresh and flourishing. Oh! let us
imitate that man after Gods own heart! If the Lord will be David's shepherd, he
will dwell in Gods house to all perpetuity, Psalm. 23.1, 6. If God deal
bountifully with him, he will sit down and bethink himself what to render for
all his benefits, Psalm 116.7, 12. A Christian counts all that he can do for
God by way of retribution, but a little of that much he could beteem him; and
thinks nothing more unbeseeming him than to bury the mercies of God in
oblivion. His two mites of Thankfulness and Obedience he daily presents, and
then cries out as that poor Grecian did to the Emperor, If I had a better
present thou should be sure of it.

What then may we judge of those persons in our days, who labor to extenuate,
yea annihilate these deliverances? that would have no public commemorations of
them, that study how to invalidate them, and to blot out the remembrance of
them? To render good for evil is Divine: Good for good is Humane: Evil for evil
is brutish: But evil for good is Devilish. Yet alas! how ordinary an evil is
this among us, to abuse our deliverances to Gods' dishonor? But Do ye thus
requite the Lord, O foolish people, and unwise? Is not he thy Father? he has
bought thee, etc. Deuteronomy. 32.6. Should we not remember that good turns aggravate
unkindnesses, and our offenses are not a little increased by our obligations?
Ungrateful persons are like the Snake in the Fable, who said to the Countryman
when he had showed it kindness: Summum praemium pro summo beneficio est
ingratitudo. Ingratitude is the greatest reward of the greatest benefit.

How many such Snakes have we amongst us, that return evil for good, and
unkindness for kindness? Is not this to fight against God, with his own
weapons? as David did against Goliath: as Jehu did against Jehoram: and as
Benhadad did against Ahab, with that life that he had lately given him? for the
preventing whereof (if it may be) are these things published, being almost worn
out of remembrance more than the very names of them. Besides, though they may
be found in larger volumes, yet are they not so fit for every Family: And as I
have presumed (honorable and beloved) to publish them udder your protection,
so I doubt not but they will find the better entertainment for the same. My
earnest desire and prayer for you is that the God of Peace will fill you with
all joy and peace by believing, multiplying his Blessings upon you and yours:
And that you would afford me a room in your Albe among those that

Sir, Madam, Love, honor and serve you. Sam. Clark.
From my Study in Thridneedle Street, October. 22. 1657.
THE SPANISH INVASION A Commemoration of that wonderful, and almost miraculous
Deliverance afforded by God to this Nation from the Spanish Invation, Anno
Christi, 1588.
THe year one thousand five hundred eighty eight, was foretold by an Astronomer
of K^n^ngsberg, above one hundred years before, that it should prove a
wonderful year: and the German Chronologers presiged, that it would be the
Climacterical year of the world, which was in some measure accomplished in that
glorious and never to be forgotten Deliverance vouchsafed by God to us in
England, and in that fatal overthrow of the Spanish Navy; A true Narrative
whereof follows.

But that we may the better see what induced the Spaniard to make this hostile
Invasion, we must be informed: both who were the inciters, and by what
arguments, and artifices, they stirred him up thereunto.

The Inciters were the Pope, and some traitorous English Fugitives who were
entertained in Spain, and at Rome. The design was, The Conquest of England;
which had been hindered for the space of ten years by reason of the Spanish Wars
in Portugal. The Arguments were, that seeing God had blessed the King of Spain
with admirable Blessings and Successes; had given him in Portugal, the East
Indies, and very many rich Islands belonging to the same; that he should
therefore perform somewhat that might be acceptable to God (the giver of so
great and good things) and most worthy the Power, and Majesty of the Catholic
King: That the Church of God could not be more gloriously, nor meritoriously
propagated, than by the conquest of England, extirpating Heresy, and planting
the Catholic Roman Religion there. This War (they said) would be most just and
necessary; considering that the Queen of England was excommunicated, and
persisted contumacious against the Church of Rome. That she supported the King
of Spains Rebels in the Netherlands, annoyed the Spaniards with continual
depredations; surprised, and sacked his Towns in Spain, and America, and had
very lately put the Queen of Scots to death, therein violating the Majesty of
all Kings.

Again, that this War would be no less profitable than just; For hereby he
might add to his Empire other flourishing Kingdoms, extinguish the Rebellion in
the Low Countries, hitherto fomented and supported from England; secure his
voyages from both the Indies, and abate his vast expenses in convoying his
Indian Fleets both forward and backward: For proof whereof (they suggested)
that the English Navy was neither for number, nor greatness, nor strength
comparable to that of Spain; especially having the Portugal Fleet now annexed
unto it. That England was not fortified, and it wanted Commanders: Soldiers, a
Cavalry, and Ammunition; was bare of Wealth, and Friends. That there were many
in all parts of it addicted to the Romish Religion, and would upon the first
opportunity join their forces with his. In brief, that so great was the
strength of the Spaniard, and so unmatchable was their valor, that no man
durst oppose against them, and therefore they might confidently assure
themselves of victory. Moreover, that now an opportunity was afforded by God
himself to the King of Spain to effectuate this great design, having no cause
to fear any other enemies, by reason of a Truce lately concluded by him-with
the Great Turk, and the French (his old enemies) being now embroiled in Civil
Wars at home. They persuaded him likewise that England was an easier conquest
than the Netherlands: For that he had a shorter cut to it by Sea, and that an
open Sea: neither was it so fortified with Cities, Castles, etc. as the
Netherlands were: and that England being once conquered, the Netherlands would
soon follow of course, having lost their best supporter.

These, and such like arguments prevailing with the King of Spain, in the next
place they held a serious Consultation about the manner of Invading England.
Don Avares Bassano, Marquess of Sancta Cruce; who was to command the Armado,
advised that some Port-Town in Holland, or Zealand should suddenly be surprised
by the Prince of Parma's Land Forces (who was then Governor of the Netherlands
under the King of Spain) and by some Spanish Ships sent to assist him by Sea,
that so the great Fleet might have an Harbor from whence to begin their
Invasion: with whom agreed in opinion the Prince of Parma himself, who was very
forward to promote this expedition. But others opposed this by reason of the
difficulty, danger, expense of time, and vast charge that it would require.
They held that with the same charge England might easier be won, and that the
Conquest thereof would be assured, if a well-appointed Army out of Spain, and
the Low-Counties might be landed at the Thames mouth, and London (the
Metropolis of England) surprised by a sudden assault. And this opinion, as the
more probable, prevailed. And then again it was advised by some, that War
should first be denounced by an Herald, both to remove suspicion and jealousy
from neighbor Princes, and to drive our Queen to call in foreign Forces to
assist Her: hoping that according to the insolent manner of mercenaries, they
would raise mutinies, and spoil the Country, which would make the Queens
Subjects evil affected toward Her, so that all things would grow into
confusion in England. But this motion was not hearkened to by men grown fierce,
insolent, and confident of their own strength, only they desired the blessing
of the Pope upon their Armado, and the prayers of the Catholics to God and the
Saints for good success. And to strike the greater terror into the hearts of
the English, They set forth Books with printed Maps, wherein was expressed the
greatness of their Preparations in each particular, which indeed was so great
in Spain, Portugal, Italy, and Sicily, that the Spaniards themselves were
amazed at it, and procured the Pope to Christen it by the name of the
Invincible Armado.

Now that the wonderful power and mercy of God to us in this poor Nation, in
protecting us against the same, may the more gloriously appear, I shall in the
next place set down what their preparations were for Ships, Mariners,
Land-Souldiers, Ammunition, and other provisions for the carrying on of so
great an undertaking.

The Spanish Navy, being the best appointed for men, munition, and all manner
of provision, that ever the Ocean saw, had been five years in preparing,
consisted of one hundred and thirty Ships, whereof these were the principal.

The Admiral Gallion of Saint Martins, of a thousand Tun burden, had in her one
thousand seventy and seven Mariners, three hundred Soldiers, fifty Canon, etc.

The Gallion of Saint John's, of one thousand and seventy Tun, had in her one
hundred and sixty Mariners, two hundred and thirty one Soldiers, fifty Canon,
etc.

The Gallion of Saint Mark of seven hundred and ninety two Tun, had in it one
hundred and seventeen Mariners, two hundred and ninety two Soldiers, etc.

The Gallion of Saint Phillip, of eight hundred Tun, had in it one hundred and
seventeen Mariners, four hundred and fifteen Soldiers, forty Guns, etc.

The Gallion of Saint Lewis, of eight hundred and thirty Tun, had in it one
hundred and sixteen Mariners, three hundred and seventy six Soldiers, forty
Guns, etc.

The Gallion of Saint Matthew, of seven hundred and fifty Tun, had in it fifty
Mariners, one hundred and seventy seven Soldiers, forty Guns, etc.

The Gallion of Saint James, of five hundred and twenty Tun, had in it one
hundred Mariners, three hundred Soldiers, fifty two Guns, etc.

The Gallion of Florence, of nine hundred and sixty one Tun, had in it one
hundred Mariners, three hundred Soldiers, fifty two Guns, etc.

The Gallion of Saint Christopher, of three hundred fifty and two Tun, had in
it ninety Mariners, three hundred Soldiers, thirty Guns, etc.

The Gallion of Saint Bernard, of three hundred and fifty two Tun, had in it
one hundred Mariners, two hundred and eighty Soldiers, thirty Guns, etc.

A Ship of Saint Angelo, of seven hundred sixty and eight Tun, had in it one
hundred and fourteen Mariners, three hundred and twenty three Soldiers, thirty
Canons, etc.

The Gangrine, of one thousand one hundred and sixty Tun; had in it one hundred
and ten Mariners, three hundred Soldiers, thirty six Canons, etc.

The Ship Saint James, of six hundred and sixty Tun, had in her one hundred and
two Mariners, two hundred and fifty Soldiers, thirty Guns, etc.

The Manuel, of five hundred and twenty Tun, had in her fifty four Mariners,
one hundred and thirty Soldiers, sixteen Guns, etc.

The Saint Mary, of seven hundred and 7 Tun, had in her fifty Mariners, two
hundred and twenty Soldiers, thirty Guns, etc.

But I need not reckon up the rest. They had in all one hundred and thirty
Ships, containing Ffty seven thousand, eight hundred and eight Tun; wherein
were Eight hundred and forty five Mariners, Nineteen thousand two hundred and
ninety five Soldiers, and two thousand and eighty eight Gally-slaves. And so
confident were the Spaniards that England should pay the shot, that they spared
no cost for furnishing it forth with all things necessary. For which end they
provided of Bullets for great shot two hundred and twenty thousand. Of Powder
four thousand and two hundred Kintals, every Kintal containing a hundred pound
weight: of Lead for Bullets a thousand Kintals: of Match a thousand and two
hundred Kintals: Muskets seven thousand: of Partisans and Halberts ten
thousand: with store of Murdering pieces, double Canon, and Field pieces for
the Camp: they had also store of Furniture for Carriages, Mules and Horses; so
that they were sufficiently provided both for Sea and Land. Bread and Biscuit
ready baked, and Wine laid aboard for six months provision. They had moreover
six thousand and five hundred Kintals of Bacon; three thousand of Cheese,
besides other Flesh, Rise Beans, Pease, Oil, and Venegar, with twelve thousand
Pipes of fresh water. They had also store of Torches, Lamps, and Lanthorns,
Canvas, Hides, and Lead to stop Leaks: Whips and Butcherly Knives to murder and
torment the poor English. In a word, the Army was thirty two thousand strong,
and cost the King of Spain thirty two thousand Ducats every day.

In this Army were five Regiments of old Spanish Soldiers of the Tertio's of
Naples, Sicily, and the Tercera's, commanded by five Masters Del-Campo: The
first was Don Diego de Piementel, a Knight of the Order of Saint John, and
Brother to the Marquess of Taveras: The second Colonel was Don Francisco de
Toledo, brother to the Earl of Orgas: The third Don Alonzo de Luzon: The fourth
Don Nicholas de Illa: The fifth was Augustine Mexia; each Colonel having in his
Regiment thirty two Companies, Besides the Castilian, and Portugal Bands, each
of them having their peculiar Commanders and weapons.

The General of this mighty Army (the Marquess of Sancta Cruce being now dead)
was Don Lodovicus Peers, the Duke of Medina Sidonia of the Order of the Golden
Fleece. The Admiral was Don John Martinez de Richald: The Marshal Don Francisco
Bovadille: Others were chief Counselors for the War, and Don Martin Alarcon
was Vicar General for the holy unholy Inquisition, in whose train were a
hundred Monks and Jesuits: and Cardinal Allen was appointed the Superintendent
of Ecclesiastical matters throughout England, who fearing to be unprovided,
translated Pope Sex^us his Bull into English, that it might be the sooner
published upon the arrival of the Spanish Fleet in this our Nation. Of
voluntary Adventurers, there were a hundred and twenty four Noble men, and
Gentlemen of all the greatest houses in Spain, hoping to be well paid with the
Lands and Riches of England.

The Prince of Parma also in the Netherlands, by the King of Spains Command;
built Ships, and very many flat bottomed Boats, each of them big enough to
carry thirty Horse, with Bridges fitted to them to ship and unship the Horses:
He hired Mariners from East-Germany, set many thousands on work to dig and
deepen River; from Antwerp to Gaunt, and to Bruges: lading three hundred small
Boats with Munition and Victuals. Two hundred more flat-bottom'd Boats were
made, though not so big as the former, which lay ready in the Haven of Newport,
besides thirty seven Ships of War at Dunkirk: He prepared Piles sharpened at
the nether ends, headed with iron, and hooked on the sides to pile up the
mouths of Rivers: At Graveling he provided twenty thousand empty Casks with
cords, and other furniture to make floating Bridges to stop up the Havens*
beside an infinite number of fagots: He shipped likewise a great abundance of
Saddles, Bridles, with other furniture for Horse, and Horses also for
Carriages, with Ordnance and other provisions for War.

Near unto Newport he had lying under the command of Camillo thirty Companies
of Italians, two of Walloons, and eight of Burguignons every company containing
a hundred men: At Dyxmew he mustered eighty companies of Netherlanders, sixty
of Spaniards, sixty of High Dutch, among which were seven hundred fugitive
English under the command of Sir William Stanley, who of all others were held
in greatest contempt: neither was Stanley, nor the Earl of Westmoorland, not
others which offered their service and counsel once heard, but for their
treachery to their Country barred from all access, and as most unfortuate
conductors, worthily with detestation rejected. At Conick also he quartered
other four thousand, and at Watene nine hundred horse, commanded by the
Marquess of Guast. And to this land-service came the Duke of Pastrana, supposed
to be the King of Spains base son: the Marquess of Buorgon, one of the Duke
Ferdinands sons: Don Vespasian Gonsaga of the house of Mantua, a great
Soldier, who had been Viceroy of Spain: Don John de Medices, bastard of
Florence: Don Amadeus, bastard of Savoy, with many others of the like quality.

Neither was Sixtus Quintus, Pope of Rome, any ways backward to show his
diligence, and devotion to this intended invasion; but sent abroad his Crusado
(as he used to do against the Turks and Infidels*) wherein out of the treasure
of the Church he gave plenary Indulgences, and pardon of all their sins to
every one that contributed his assistance hereunto: and for the furtherance of
this enterprise, himself undertook to contribute a million of Gold, the one
half presently down, the other half when any notable Haven in our land should
be won: yet with this Proviso, that the Crown of England should be held as
Feudatory to the Sea of Rome; in earnest whereof he bestowed upon the King of
Spain his Apostolical Benediction, and the Title of Defender of the Faith: He
sent also Cardinal Allen into the Low Countries, and renewed the Bulls of Pius
the fifth and Gregory the thirteenth, whereby Queen Elizabeth was
excommunicated, deposed from her Throne, and her Subjects absolved from all
allegiance to her.

Thus we see what preparations were made both at Sea and Land; at Rome, in
Spain, and the Netherlands, for the subduing of England, extirpating the
Gospel, and subjugating us under the yoke of Spain: now let us see what
provision and preparations our Queen made to dispel this black cloud that hung
over our head: And truly the first thing that she did was most Christian; For
as when Jehosophat was threatened with the like danger. 2 Chro. 20.3. He sought
the Lord and proclaimed a fast; so did She, requiring all her subjects to
humble themselves by fasting and prayer, knowing that these are the best
weapons of the Church, that they by them might seek unto the Lord, and say in
the words of Jehosophat, O Lord God, art not thou God in Heaven? and rulest not
thou over all the Kingdoms of the Earth? and in thine hand is there not power
and might, so that none is able to withstand thee? O our God, will thou not
judge them? For we have no might against this great company that comes against
us, neither know we what to do, but our eyes are upon thee. But in the second
place, knowing that Prayers without endeavors and means are like Rachel,
beautiful but barren, that She might not be taken unprovided, She prepared with
all diligence as strong a Fleet as She could, and all things necessary for War;
and She that in discerning men's parts and abilities was of a most sharp
judgment, and ever most happy, having the free choice in her self, and not by
the commendations of others, assigned to every office by name the best and
fittest men.

The charge of her Navy she committed to Charles Howard of Effingham, Lord
Admiral of England, of whose skill she had had former experience, and whom she
knew both by his Moderation and Nobility, to be wary in providence, valiant
industrious, and of great authority among the Seamen, and well beloved of them:
Her Vice Admiral she made the famous Sir Francis Drake, and these she sent to
the West parts of England; and for the Guard of the narrow Seas, she appointed
Henry Lord Seimore second son to the Duke of Somerset, whom she commanded also
to lie upon the Coasts of the Low Countries, with forty Ships, to watch that
the Prince of Parma might not come forth with his forces: By Land She commanded
the General forces of the Realm to be mustered, trained, and put in readiness
in their special shires, for the defense of the whole, which accordingly was
done, and whereof the Lord Robert Dudley Earl of Leicester was appointed
Leeutenant; twenty thousand whereof were disposed along our South Coast for the
guard thereof: besides which, she had two Armies; one of which consisting of a
thousand Horse, and twenty two thousand Foot, was encamped at Tilbury near the
Thames mouth, whither the enemy fully intended to come: The other which was led
by the Lord Hunsdon, consisted of thirty four thousand Foot, and two thousand
Horse, which were to be the Guard of the Queens person: Her self in courage far
surmounting her sex, as another Zenobia or rather Deborah, led forth the Lords
Host against this great Sisera, and her Soldiers valiant and skilful, both for
courage and quick dispatch, might well be compared to those Gadites that came
to aid David, whose faces were like the faces of Lions, and were compared to
the Roes in the Mountains for swiftness.

Arthur Lord Gray, Sir Francis Knolles, Sir John Knorris, Sir Richard Bingham,
and Sir Roger Williams, all gallant men, and brave Soldiers, were appointed to
consult about managing the Land Service: These advised that all the commodious
landing places for the enemy, as well from Spain, as from the Low Countries
should be manned and fortified, as Milford Haven, Falmouth, Plimmouth,
Portland, the Isle of Wight, Portsmouth, the open coast of Kent, commonly
called the Downs, the Thames mouth, Harwich, Yarmouth, Hull, etc. and that the
Trained Bands throughout the Coast Shires, should meet upon a signal given to
defend the said places, and do their best to prohibit the enemies landing. But
in case he should land, that then they should leave all the Country round about
wast, that so they might find nothing for food, but what from their Ships they
should carry upon their shoulders, and that they should hold the enemies busied
both night and day with continual Alarms, but not to hazard a Battle till more
Commanders with their Companies were come together.

Some suggested also to the Queen, that the Spaniards abroad were not so much
to be feared as the Papists at home; for that the Spaniards would not attempt
the Invasion of England, but upon confidence of aid from them: She thereupon
committed some of them to prison at Wisbeach in the Fenns; by her Letters also
she directed Sir William Fitz-Williams, Lord Deputy of Ireland what he should
do.

The King of Scots she put in mind to beware of the Papists and Spanish
Factions: By her frequent Letters she wrote to the States of the United
Provinces not to be deficient in assisting her what they could.

But amongst these preparations for War on both sides, Philip King of Spain, to
cast a mist over her Majesty's eyes, and to rock her into a sleep of security,
importuned by all means the Realms unto peace, employing the Prince of Parma to
be his instrument therein, who dealt earnestly by Letters with the help of Sir
James Crofts, a privy Counselor, and a man much addicted to peace, as also by
Andrew Van Loey, a Netherlander, that a treaty of Peace might be entered upon,
affirming that he had Warrant thereunto from the King of Spain. Our Queen
measuring other Princes by her own guileless heart, gave ear to this deceitful
lullaby, little suspecting that a deadly snake could be hid in so fair a
Garden; yet resolved to treat of Peace with her Sword in her hand, neither was
the Prince of Parma against her so doing.

In the month therefore of Feb. Commissioners were sent into Flandeas, Henry
Earl of Darby, William Brook, Lord Cobham, Sir Jamis Crofts, Valentine Dale,
and John Rogers Doctors of the Law, who arriving there, were received in the
Prince of Parma's name with all courtesy; who thereupon sent away Dale
presently to him to know where the place of meeting should be, and to see his
Commission from the King of Spain: the place he appointed to be near Ostend,
the Town it self being then in the English hands; and as for his Commission, he
promised it should be produced at their meeting: Only he wished them to hasten
the matter, lest any thing should happen in the interim to interrupt the
treaty: and one Richardot, which stood by him, said more openly, That he knew
not what in the mean time might be done against England. Which being reported
to the Queen, She sent Rogers to the Prince to know whether there was any
design for the Invading of England, as he, and Richardot by their words seemed
to imply: The Prince answered that he had never any thought for the Invading
England, when he wished the Treaty to be hastened, and was angry with
Richardot, who denied that any such words had fallen from him.

Commissioners for the King of Spain were Maximilian Earl of Aremberg, Governor
of Antwerp, Richardot President of Artois, with some other Civilians.

These stayed at Bruges, and for all their pretended haste, much time was
cunningly spun out about the place of their meeting, which should have the
Precedence, and what hostages should be given for security of the
Commissioners: yet at length the Spaniards yielded to the English Precedence,
both in going and sitting: and the place wars in Tents near unto Ostend.

The demands for the Queen were, that there might be a surcease of Arms, with a
present and undelayed Truce, she mistrusting the Spanish preparations at Sea:
The sending away of foreign Soldiers out of the Low Countries for Englands
security: A restitution of such sums of money as the Queen had lent to the
States, and which the King had promised to restore: That the Netherlanders
might enjoy their ancient liberties, and privileges, nor be governed by a
stranger, but by a Native Prince: That they might have liberty to serve God
with Freedom of Conscience: And lastly, that the Articles of the Pacification
of Gaunt, and other like treaties might be observed; which things if they were
granted, she would condescend upon reasonable conditions to deliver up the
Towns in the Netherlands, which she then had in possession, that it might
appear that she had not for her own advantage, but for the necessary defense of
the Netherlands, and her self taken up arms.

To these the Spaniards replied, that touching their preparations at Sea, they
did assure them that it nothing concerned England. That to send away the
Soldiers, the King could not resolve till the Netherlanders had submitted
themselves to him. Concerning their privileges, that it appertained nothing to
the Queen, neither should She prescribe to the King a Law. And so far was he
from tolerating Religion, that he would not so much as hear thereof, otherwise
then he had allowed to other Towns that had submitted to his obedience. And as
for those Towns which had been taken from the King, and the money expended about
them, They said that the Spaniard might demand as many Myriades of Ducats to be
repayed to him by the Queen, as he had expended upon the Low Country War, from
the time that She supported the revolting Netherlanders, and took them into her
Protection.

About this time went Dale by the Queens command to the Prince of Parma, and
mildly expostulated with him about a Book lately published by Cardinal Allen,
That English Renegado, wherein he exhorted the Nobility and People of England
and Ireland to join with the Spanish Forces, under the conduct of the Prince of
Parma, to execute the Popes sentence already published by his Bull against
Queen Elizabeth; wherein she was declared an Heretic, Illegitimate, cruel, for
putting to death the Queen of Scots, etc. And her subjects absolved from their
Oath of Allegiance, and commanded to aid the Prince of Purma against Her. (And
indeed there was a great number of these Bulls and Books printed at Antwerp,
from thence to be dispersed all over England.)

The Prince denied that he had ever seen any such Book, or Bull, neither would
he undertake any thing in the Popes name; howbeit that he must obey his Prince.
But for the Queen of England, he protested that he did so honor her for her
Virtues, that next to the King his Master, he esteemed Her above all others,
and would be ready to do Her service. For the manifestation whereof he said
that he had persuaded the King to condescend to this treaty of peace, which
would be more advantageous for the English than for the Spaniards: For (said
he) if the Spaniards be overcome they will soon recover their loss; but if You
be overcome, your Kingdom, and all is lost: To which Dale made this reply: Our
Queen is provided with strength sufficient to defend her Kingdom, and you your
self in your wisdom may foresee that a Kingdom cannot be lost with the fortune
of one Battle; seeing the King of Spain after so long Wars, is not able to
recover his ancient inheritance in the Netherlands. Be it so (said the Prince)
These things are in the hands of the Almighty.

After this the Commissioners contended with mutual debates, and replies, still
twisting and untwisting the same thread. For when the English pressed that a
Toleration of Religion might be granted for the United Provinces, at least for
two years; It was answered, That as the Spaniard demanded not this for the
English Catholics; so they hoped the Queen in her wisdom would require nothing
of him which might be against the Honor, Oath, and Conscience of the Spaniard.
When they demanded the money due from the States of Brabant to our Queen; They
answered, that it was lent without the Kings Knowledge or Warrant; and that the
accounts being cast up, how much the said money was, and how much the King had
disbursed about the War, it would soon be known to whom the most ought to be
repayed. With such answers as these they dallied with the English
Commissioners, till the Spanish Fleet was come within the view of England, and
the thundering of the Ordnance was heard from the Sea, which put the English
Commissioners into some suspicion and fear, having no hostages for their safe
return. But they received a safe conduct from the Prince of Parma (who had in
the mean time drawn down all his Forces to the Sea coast) and so were conducted
to the borders near Calice. Thus came this Treaty to nothing, undertaken by our
Queen (as was conceived) to divert the coming of the Spanish Fleet: and
continued by the Spaniard to surprise England unprovided, and at unawares So
both sides put the Foxes skin upon the Lions head.

And now we are come to speak of this Invincible Armado, which was the
preparation of five whole years at least. It bare it self also upon Divine
assistance, having received a special Blessing from the Pope, and was assigned
as an Apostolical Mission for the reducement of this Kingdom to the obedience
of the Sea of Rome: and in further token of this holy Warfare, there were
amongst the rest of the Ships, twelve, called by the names of the twelve
Apostles. The Gallions and Galliasses were of such a vast size, that they were
like floating Towers and Castles, so that the swelling waves of the Sea could
hardly be seen; and the Flags, Streamers, and Ensigns so spread in the wind,
that they seemed even to darken the Sun, and to threaten destruction which way
soever they turned.

On the nine and twentieth day of May this Fleet set sail out of the River
^ayo, bending its course toward the Groin in Galizia, the place appointed for
the general Rendezvous, as being the nearest Haven unto England: But whilst
they hoysed and spread abroad their proud sails to the wind; God, who is an
enemy to such Nimrod-like undertakings, and hating such hostile actions,
suddenly manifested his displeasure, and poured out revenge by a sudden and
hideous tempest, which drove the Duke of Medina, the General, back again into
the Groin; eight other of the Ships being dispersed on the Seas, had their
Masts broken, and blown over board; besides three other Portugal Galleys which
were driven upon the Coasts of Bayon in France, where, by the valor of one
David Gwin, an English slave, and the help of other slaves, French, and Turks,
they were delivered into the hands of the French, and they freed themselves by
the slaughter of the Spaniards, amongst whom Don Diego de Mondrana was one.

About the same time the English Admiral, and Vice Admiral, who had in all
about one hundred Ships, whereof fifteen were Victuallers, and nine Voluntaries
of Devonshire Gentlemen, hearing for certainty that the Spanish Fleet was ready
to hoise up their sails, resolved to put forth from Plymouth, and to meet, and
fight them by the way; but were so met with by the same wind, that they could
not get past the Syllies, and thence also were forced by the Tempest to return
into their former harbor, to refresh their Ships, and Companies; only some of
their Scouts at Sea descried some of the Spanish Ships, which likewise had been
dispersed with the storm: but before the English could come near them, the wind
vereing about, carried them back to the Groine, where there rest of their Fleet
lay in harbor.

Intelligence being brought that the Saaniards were in want, their great Ships
dispersed, and the rest sorely shaken with the storm, and their men dying by
multitudes of the Pestilence; the Lord Admiral Howard intended with the first
Northerly wind to take advantage, which coming about upon the eighth of July,
he lanched forth, and bore his sails almost within the sight of Spain,
purposing to surprise their weather-beaten Ships, and to fight them upon their
own Coast. But then the wind suddenly changing into the South, and he wisely
foreseeing that the enemy might pass by without his discovery, that the Seas
might be stormy, or his Fleet wind-bound, and that whilst he thus lay abroad,
his service might be more necessary at home, and that his work was to defend
the Coasts of England, he therefore presently returned and anchored his Fleet
in the Haven at Plymouth, suffering his men to refresh themselves upon the Land.

At the same time there came more confident advertisement (though false) not
only to the Lord Admiral, but to the Court, that the Spanish Fleet could not
possibly come forth again that year, upon which reports (a dangerous matter in
State affairs) so confident was our Queen, that she sent for four of her
biggest royal Ships to be brought back to Chattam: But the Lord Admiral
suspecting the worst, by a mild and moderate answer retarded it, desiring that
nothing might be lightly believed in so weighty a matter, and that he might
retain them though at his own charge. Wherein indeed a special providence of
God did appear, for just at that time news was brought to the Lord Admiral by
one Captain Thomas Flemming, that the Spanish Fleet was entered into the British
Seas, commonly called the Channel, and was seen near unto the Lizard point,
which came thus to pass.

The Spanish ships being new rigged, and their wants supplied, their King still
hot on his former resolutions, instantly urged and hastened his Commanders to
put forth again to Sea, which accordingly they did upon the eleventh of July
with the same South wind which (as was said before) brought back our Navy into
Plymouth; and so having a more favorable Gale, with brave shows, and full
Sails, they entered our Channel, where casting Anchor, they dispatched certain
small Pinnaces to the Prince of Parma, to signify their arrival and readiness,
and to command him in the name of their King to forward his charge for that
service.

July the twentieth about noon, this terrible Fleet was descried by the
English, coming forward amain with a South-west wind. It was a kind of
surprise: For that (as was said) many of our men were gone to land, and our
ships ready to depart: Nevertheless our undaunted Admiral towed forth such
ships as he could get in readiness into the deep Sea, not without great
difficulty, certainly with singular diligence, and admirable alacrity of our
Mariners, cheered up with the Admirals own presence and assistance among them
at their halserwork, the wind blowing strongly into the Haven.

When they were forth they saw the Spanish ships with lofty Towers like
Castles, in front like an half moon, the horns whereof stretched forth in
breadth about seven miles, sailing (as it were) with labor to the winds, the
Ocean groaning under them; so that though with full sails, yet they came but
slowly forward. They seemed as it were to make for Plymouth; but whether their
Commission was otherwise, or because contrary to their expectation, they saw
the English ships out of the Harbor, they steered by toward Calice, hoping to
meet with the Prince of Parma: The English willingly suffered them to pass by,
that they might the more commodiously chase them in the Rear with a fore-right
wind.

July the twenty first, the Lord Admiral of England sent before him a Pinnace
called the Defiance, to denounce war by discharging her Ordnance, himself
following in the Ark-Royal, set upon the Admiral (as he thought) of the
Spaniards but it proved to be Alonzo de Leva's ship, where fire, smoke, and
loud thundering Cannons began the parley; and rending Bullets most freely
enterchanged betwixt them, were fiery messengers of each others minds. Soon
after came up Drake, Hawkins and Forbusher, playing with their Ordnance upon
the hindmost Squadron of the Enemies, which was commanded by Rechalde, who
labored all he could to stay his Men from flying for shelter to the Fleet,
till his own ship being much battered with shot, and now grown unserviceable,
was with much difficulty drawn into the main Fleet. At which time the Duke of
Medina gathered together his whole Fleet, scattered here and there by the
English, and hoising more sail, kept on his intended course toward Callice;
neither indeed could he do otherwise, the wind favoring the English, and
himself finding the inconvenience of their great and high built ships, powerful
to defend, but not to offend; to stand, but not to move; whereas on the
contrary their enemies were nimble, and ready on all sides to annoy them, and
as apt to escape harms themselves, being low built and so easily shot over.
Hereupon he caused them to gather themselves up close in the form of an
half moon, and to slacken their sails that their whole Fleet might keep
together. But our English Admiral having maintained an hot fight for the space
of two hours, thought nor good to continue it any longer, thirty of his ships
scarce coming to the work, the rest being as yet scarce gotten out of the
Harbor.

In this first days fight the Saint Katherine, a Spanish Ship, having been
sorely battered and much torn, was taken into the midst of their Fleet to be
repaired: And an huge Ship of Biscaie of Don Oquendoes, in which was a great
part of the Kings treasure, began to be all in a Flame by force of Gunpowder,
which was fired on purpose by a Flemish Gunner, for being misused by them: But
the fire was soon quenched by the assistance of some other ships sent in to her
help. All this while the Spaniards for want of courage (which they called
Commission) did what they could to decline the fight, casting themselves
continually into Roundels (their strongest ships walling in the rest) in which
posture they made a flying march toward Callis: yet in the former medly a
great Gallion, wherein was Don Pedro de Valdez, Vasques de Silva, Alenzo de
Saias, with other Noble men, being sore battered with the English shot, in
avoiding whereof she fell foul upon another ship, and ere she could be cleared
had her foremast broken off, which so hundred her sailing, that she was unable
to keep way with the rest of the Fleet, nor were their friends of courage to
succor these distressed Lords, but left both ship and them in this sudden and
unexpected danger. But the night coming on, our Lord Admiral supposing that
they had left neither men nor Mariners aboard within her, and fearing to lose
sight of the Spaniards, past by her, and followed the Lanthorn which he
supposed to be carried by Sir Francis Drake, as it was appointed, but that
brave Knight was eagerly pursuing five great Hulks which he took to be of the
Spaniards, but when he came up, and haled them, they proved Easterlings and
friends, and so were dismissed: yet by this mistake of his, the greatest part
of our Fleet, wanting the direction of his light, was forced to lie still: so
that he and the rest of the Fleet till toward night, the next day, could not
recover sight of the Lord Admiral, who all the night before with two other
ships, the Bear and the Mary-Rose followed the Spanish Lanthorn.

July the twenty second; Sir Francis Drake espied the aforementioned lagging
Gallion, whereupon he sent forth a Pinnace to command them to yield, otherwise
his bullets without any delay should force them to it: Valdes, to seem
valorous, answered, that they were four hundred and fifty strong; that himself
was Don Pedro, and stood on his honor, and thereupon propounded certain
conditions: But the Knight returned this reply, that he had no leisure to
parley, if he would immediately yield, so; otherwise be should soon prove that
Drake was no dastard. Pedro hearing that it was the fiery Drake (whose name was
very terrible to the Spaniards) that had him in chase, presently yielded, and
with forty of his companions, came on board Sir Francis his Ship, where first
giving him the Conge, he protested that he and all his were resolved to have
dyed fighting, had they not fallen into his hands, whose valor and felicity
was so great, that Mars and Neptune seemed to wait on him in all his attempts,
and whose noble and generous mind toward the vanquished, had often been
experienced even of his greatest foes. Sir Francis to requite his Spanish
Complements with English Courtesy, placed him at his own table, and lodged him
in his own Cabin: the residue of that company he sent to Plymouth, where they
remained prisoners for the space of eighteen months, till by payment of their
ransoms they obtained their liberty: But Drakes Soldiers had well paid
themselves by the plunder of the ship, wherein they found 55000 Ducats of ^old,
which they merrily shared amongst them. The same day Michael de Oquendo,
Admiral of the Squadron Guypusco, and Vice Admiral of the whole Fleet, suffered
no less a disaster; whose ship being one of the greatest Gallions, fell on
fire, and all the upper part of the ship being burnt, most also of the persons
therein were consumed: howbeit the Gunpowder in the hold not taking fire, the
ship fell into the hands of the English, which, together with the scorched
Spaniards therein, was brought into Plymouth, a joyful spectacle to the
beholders. All this day, the Duke of Medina labored securely to set his Fleet
in order; To Alphonso de Leva he gave in charge to join the first and last
squadron together; To every ship he assigned his quarter to ride in according
to the form prescribed in Spain, commanding them upon pain of death not to
desert their stations. Glitch, an Ensign-bearer, he sent to the Prince of Parma
to acquaint him with his condition.

July the twenty third, early in the morning the Spaniards taking the benefit
of a Northerly wind, when they approached right against Portland, turned about
against the English; but the English, nimble, and foreseeing all advantages,
soon turned aside to the VVestward, each striving to get the wind of the other,
which at last the English got, and so they prepared themselves on each side to
fight; and the English continued all day from morning till night to batter
those wooden Castles with great and small shot: The fight was very confused and
variable, whilst on the one side the English bravely rescued the London ships
that were hemmed in by the Spaniards, and on the other side the Spaniards as
stoutly delivered Rechalde being in danger* Never was there heard greater
thundering of Ordnance on both sides, the chiefest fight being performed on this
day; yet notwithstanding the shot from the Spanish ships for the most part flew
over the English without hurting them, only Cock an Englishman dyed with honor
in the midst of his enemies in a little ship of his. The English ships being
far the lesser, charged that Sea-Gyant with mavelous agility, and having
given them their broad sides flew off again presently, and then coming up,
levelled their shot directly without missing those heavy an unweildy ships of
the Spaniards. But the Lord Admiral would not hazard a fight by grappling with
them, as some unadvised persons would have persuaded him: For he considered
that the enemy had a strong Army in the Fleet, whereas he had none; that their
ships were more in number, of bigger burden, stronger, and huger built, so that
they could not be boarded but with extreme disadvantage: He foresaw also that
the overthrow would turn to a greater damage than the victory would avail him:
For being vanquished he should have brought England into extreme hazard, and
being conqueror he should only have gained a little glory to himself for
overthrowing the Fleet, and beating the enemy. On this day the sorest fight was
performed, wherein, besides other remarkable harms which the enemy sustained, a
great Venetian ship with some other smaller were surprised, and taken by the
English, and the Spaniards were forced for their further safety to gather
themselves close into a Roundel, their best and greatest ships standing
without, that they might secure those that were battered and less.

July the twenty fourth, the fight was only between the four great Galliasses,
and some of the English ships, the Spaniards having great advantage, theirs
being rowed with oars, and ours (by reason of the calm) having no use of their
sails, notwithstanding which they sorely galled the enemy with their great and
chain shot; wherewith they cut in sunder their tacklings, cables, and cordage
to their no little prejudice. But wanting powder which they had spent so
freely, and other provision to maintain the fight, the Lord Admiral sent some
of his smaller ships to the next Ports of England to fetch supply; which
stirred up jealousies in the heads of many, that we should thus want upon our
own Coasts. In which Interim a Council was called, wherein it was resolved that
the English Fleet should be divided into four squadrons, and those committed to
four brave Captains, and skilful Seamen, whereof the Lord Admiral in the
Ark-Royal was chief: Sir Francis Drake in the Revenge led the second: Captain
Hawkins the third: and Captain Forbusher the fourth. Other most valiant
Captains there were in others of Her Majesty's Ships, as the Lord Thomas Howard
in the Lion, the Lord Sheffield in the Bear, Sir Robert Southwel in the
Elizabeth, Captain Baker in the Victory, and Captain George Fenner in the
Gallion-Leicester: It was also further appoined that out of every squadron
certain small vessels should give you a charge from diverse parts in the dead
time of the night, but the calm continuing, this design could not be effected.

July the twenty fifth, being Saint James day, the Spaniards were arrived
against the Isle of Wight, where was a most terrible encounter, each shooting
off their whole broad sides, and not above sixscore yards the one from the
other: There the Saint Anne, a Gallion of Portugal, which could not hold course
with the rest, was set upon by certain small English Vessels, to whose rescue
came Leva and Don Diego Tells Enriques with three Galliasses: which the Lord
Admiral himself and the Lord Thomas Howard in the Golden Lion, rowing their
ships with their boats (so great was the calm) charged in such sort with their
roaring Canons, that they had much ado, and that not without loss, to save the
Gallion, from which time forward none of the Galliasses would undertake the
fight. The Spaniards reported that the English the same day beat the Spanish
Admiral in the utter squadron, rending her sore with their Great Ordnance, and
having slain many of her men, shot down her main Mast, and would have much
endangered her, but that Mexi^ and Rechalde came in good time to her rescue.
That the Spanish Admiral, assisted by Rechalde and others, set upon the English
Admiral, which happily escaped by the sudden turning of the wind. That
thereupon the Spaniards gave over the pursuit, and holding on their Course,
dispatched again a Messenger to the Prince of Parma, to join his Fleet with all
speed to the Kings Armado, and withal to send them a supply of great shot. But
these things were unknown to the English, who wrote that from one of the
Spanish ships they had shot down their Lanthorn, and from another the
Beak-head, and that they had done much hurt to the third; that the Non-parrella
and the Mary Rose, had fought a while with the Spaniards; and that other ships
had rescued the Triumph, which was in danger: The truth is, they had so sorely
battered those huge wooden Castles, that once more they forced them for their
further safety to gather themselves into a Roundel.

July the twenty sixth, the Lord Admiral, to encourage and reward the Noble
Attempts of his gallant Captains, bestowed the Order of Knighthood upon the
Lords Howard and Sheffield, Roger Townsend, John Hawkings, Martin Forbusher,
and others: And yet the vain glorious and boasting Spaniards caused a report to
be spread in France, that England was wholly conquered by them. It was resolved
by our men that from thenceforth they should assail the enemy no more till they
came to the British Frith, or strait of Callis, where the Lord Henry Seimore
and Sir William Winter, with the ships which they had for the guard of the
narrow Seas, waited their coming; and so with a fair gale from the South West
and by South, the Spanish Fleet sailed forward, the English Fleet following it
close at the heels. And so far was it from terrifying our English Coasts with
the name of Invincible, or with its huge and terrible spectacle, that our brave
English youth with an incredible alacrity, leaving parents, wives, children,
kinsfolk, and friends out of their entire love to their native country, hired
ships from all parts at their own proper charges, and joined with the Fleet in
great numbers, amongst whom were the Earls of Oxford, Northumberland and
Cumberland: Thomas and Robert Cecil: Henry Brook: Charles Blunt: Walter
Raleigh: William Hatton: Robert Carey: Ambrose Willoughby: Thomas Gerard:
Arthur Gorges, and many others of great note.

July the twenty seventh, the Spanish Fleet making forward, toward evening,
came over against Dover, and anchored before Callis, intending for Dunkerk
there to join with the Prince of Parma's forces, well perceiving that without
their assistance they could do nothing: They were also warned by the Pilots,
that if they proceeded any farther it was to be feared lest they should be
driven by the force of the tide into the Northern Ocean. The English Fleet
following up hard upon them, cast Anchor so near that they lay within Culvering
shot; at which time the Lord Henry Seimore, and Winter joined their ships to
them, so that now the English Fleet consisted of one hundred and forty sail,
all able ships to fight, sail, and turn about which way soever they pleased.
Yet were they not above fifteen that sustained the greatest burden of the
fight. From hence once more the Duke of Medina sent to the Prince of Parma to
hasten forth his long expected, and much desired forces: with which messengers
many of the Spanish Noble men went to land, having had enough of the Sea;
amongst whom was the Prince of Ascoli, the Kings base son, who returned to his
ship no more; and indeed well it was for him, for that his Gallion was
afterward cast away upon the Irish Coast, and never returned to salute Spain.
These messengers earnestly prayed the Prince of Parma to put forth to Sea with
his Army, which the Spanish Fleet should protect, as it were under her wings,
till it was landed in England. And indeed the Prince of Parma, hearing the
best, and not the worst of this voyage, made all things ready that lay in his
charge, whose hopes were so fixed upon Englands Conquest, and the glittering
Diadem upon Queen Elizabeth's head did so dazel his ambitious eyes, being
assured by Cardinal Allen that he was the man designed to be crowned therewith,
that neglecting the Coronet of the Low Country Government, he transferred the
charge thereof upon Count Mansfield the Elder, and having made his vows to the
Lady of Hall in Heinault, he was already in conceit no less than a King. But
the date of his reign was soon expired, and his swelling tide fallen into a low
shallow ebb: For the day following in his march to Dunkirk, he heard the
thundering Ordnance ringing the passing peal of his hopes and title, and the
same evening had news of the hard success of the Spaniards, the hoped advancers
of his dreamed felicity; and indeed do what he could, he could not be ready at
the Spaniards call: His flat-bottomed boats for the shallow Channels leaked;
his provision of victuals proved unready, and his mariners (having hitherto
been detained against their wills) had withdarwn themselves: there lay also
watching before the Havens of Dunkirk and Newport, whence he was to put forth
to Sea, the men of War of the Hollanders and Zelanders, so well provided with
great Ordnance and Musketeers, that he could not put from the shore unless he
would wilfully cast himself and his men upon eminent perils and dangers of
destruction: and yet he being a skilful and experienced Commander, omitted no
means, being inflamed with a desire to conquer England.

But Queen Elizabeth's foresight prevented both his diligence and the credulous
hope of the Spaniards. For by Her command the next day after the Spaniards had
cast Anchor, the Lord Admiral made ready eight of his worst ships, filled with
wildfire, pitch, rosin, brimstone, and other combustible matter: their
Ordnance were charged with bullets, stones, chains, and such like things, fit
instruments of death; and all the men being taken out, upon the Sabbath day,
July the twenty eighth, at two of the clock after midnight, were they let drive
with wind and tide, under the guidance of Young and Prowse, amongst the Spanish
Fleet. And so the Pilots returning, and their trains taking fire, such a sudden
thunderclap was given by them, that the affrighted Spaniards, it being the dead
time of the night, were amazed, and stricken with an horrible fear, lest all
their ships should have been fired by them. And to avoid this present mischief,
being in great perplexity, they had no other remedy to avoid these deadly
engines, and murdering inventions, then by cutting their cables in sunder, the
time being too short to weigh up their Anchors, and so hoising up their sails
to drive at random into the Seas: in which have and confusion the greatest of
their Galliastes fell foul upon another ship, and lost her rudder: and so
floted up and down, and the next day fearfully making toward Callis, ran
aground upon the sands, where she was set upon by the English. This Galliass
was of Naples: Her General was Hough de Moncado, who fought the more valiantly,
because he expected present help from the Prince of Parma: But Sir Amias
Preston gave such a fierce assault upon her, that Moncado was shot dead with a
bullet, and the Galliass boarded, wherein many of the Spaniards were slain, and
a great many others leaping into the Sea were drowned, only Don Antonio de
Matiques, a principal Officer, had the good hap to escape, and was the first
man that carried the unwelcome news into Spain, that their Invincible Navy
proved vincible. This huge bottom manned with four hundred Soldiers, and three
hundred slaves, that had in her fifty thousand Ducats of the Spanish Kings
treasure, fell into the English men's hands; a reward well befitting their
valor, who sharing it merrily amongst them, and freeing the miserable slaves
from their fetters, would have fired the empty vessel: but Monsieur Gourden,
Governor of Callis, fearing that the fire might endanger the Town, would not
permit them to do it, bending his Ordnance against those which attempted it.

Had not this politic Stratagem of the fireships been found out, it would
have been very difficult for the English to have dislodged them; for those huge
ships had their bulks so strengthened with thick planks, and massy beams, that
our bullets might strike, and stick, and yet never pass through them: So that
the greatest hurt which our English Canon did, was only by rending their Masts
and tacklings.

The Spaniards report that the Duke of Medina, when these burning ships
approached, commanded the whole Fleet to weigh Anchor to avoid them yet so, as
having shunned the danger, presently every ship to return to her former
station, which accordingly he did himself, giving a signal to the rest to do
the like, by discharging one of his great Guns; but in this general
consternation the warning was heard but of a few, the rest being scattered all
about which for fear were driven some into the' wide Ocean, and other upon the
shallows of Flanders.

July the twenty ninth, after this miserable disaster, the Spaniards ranging
themselves into the best order they could, approaching over against Graveling,
where once again the English getting the wind of them, deprived them of the
convenience of Callis road, and kept them from supply out of Dunkirk, from
whence rested their full hope of support. In the mean while Drake aad Fenner
played incessantly with their great Ordnance upon the Spanish Fleet, and with
them presently joined Fenton, Southwel, Be^^^on, Cross, Riman, and lastly the
Lord Admiral himself, with the Lords, Thomas Howard, and Sheffield: On the
other hand, the Duke of Medina, Leva, Oquenda, Richalde, and others of them,
with much ado got clear off the shallows, and sustained the charge as well as
they could, yet were most of their ships pitifully torn and shot through, the
fight continuing from morning till night, which indeed proved very dismal to
the Spaniards; for therein a great Gallion of Biscay perished, the Captains
whereof to avoid ignominy; or to be reputed valorous, desparately slew each
other. ^n which distress also two other great ships presently sunk. The Gallion
Saint Matthew under the command of Don Diego Piementelli, coming to rescue Don
Francisco de Toledo who was in the Saint Philip, was, together with the other,
miserably torn with shot, their tacklings spent, and their bulks rent, so that
the water entered in on all sides, which sight was maintained against them by
Seimore and Winter; In which distress they were driven near Ostend, where again
they were shot through and through by the Zelanders: Their desparate condition
being known, the Duke of Medina sent his own skiff for Don Diego Piementelli,
Camp-master, and Colonel over thirty two Bands: But he in a Spanish Bravado
refused to leave his ship, and like a Soldier assayed every way to free
himself: But being unable to do it, he forthwith made toward the coast of
Flanders, where being again set upon by five Dutchmen of War, was required to
yield, which finally he did unto Captain Peter Banderdness, who carried him
into Zeland: and for a Trophy of his victory hung up his Banner in the Church
of Leiden, whose length reached from the very roof to the ground: Another also
of the Spanish ships coasting for Flanders, was cast away upon the sands.

Francisco de Toledo also, being likewise a Colonel over thirty two Bands in
the other Gallion, taking his course for the coast of Flanders, his ship proved
so leak, that himself with some others of the chief betook themselves to their
skiff, and arrived at Ostend, the ship with the residue being taken by the
Flushingers.

The Spaniards now finding their welcome into England far worse than they
expected, were content to couch their Fleet as close together as they could,
not seeking to offend their enemies, but only to defend themselves, and the
wind coming to the South-west, in the same order they passed by Dunkirk, the
English still following them at the heels. But left the Prince of Parma should
take this advantage to put forth to Sea, the Lord Admiral dispatched the Lord
Henry Seimore with his squaron of small ships to the Coast of Flanders, to join
with those Hollanders, which there kept watch under Justin of Nassau, their
Admiral: This Holland Fleet consisted of thirty five ships, furnished with most
skilful Mariners, and twelve hundred Muskiteers, old experienced Soldiers,
whom the States had culled out of several Garrisons: Their charge was to stop up
the Flemish Havens, and to prevent intercourse with Dunkirk, whither the Prince
of Parma was come, and would fain have adventured forth, though his men were
unwilling, hearing how their friends had been entertained at Sea: Only the
English fugitives, being about seven hundred in number, under that treacherous
Knight, Sir William Stanley, were very forward to be the first that should
assault England.

July the 31 betimes in the morning the North-west-wind blew hard, and the
Spanish Fleet labored by that advantage to return to the narrow strait, but
were driven toward Zeland: whereupon the English gave off the chase, because
they saw them carried almost to their utter ruin; for they could not but run a
ground upon the sands and shallows near Zeland: but the wind turning presently
into the South-west and by West, they sailed before the wind, by which means
they were cleared of the shallowes, and so that evening they called a Council
what to do, and by consent it was resolved to return into Spain by the Northern
Ocean: for that they wanted many necessaries, especially great shot; their
ships also were pitifully torn, and there remained no hope that the Prince of
Parma would or could bring forth his Fleet.

The Armado having now gotten more Sea-room for their huge bodied bulks, spread
their Main sails, and made away as fast as wind and water would give them
leave: More fearing the small Fleet and forces of the English (though far
inferior to them) then standing upon terms of honor either for the credit of
their Commanders, or their Invincible Navy: But surely if they had known the
want of Powder ours sustain^d (a fault inexcusable upon our own Coasts) they no
doubt would have stood better to their tacklings: But God in this, as in all
the rest, infatuated them, and would have us to acknowledge that our
deliverance was by his own gracious Providence and power, and not by any
strength or policy of our own.

The Spanish Fleet being now carried forth into the deep, they directed their
course Northward, and our English Admiral followed them, lest they should
attempt to put into Scotland, against whom they now and then turned head, but
stood not to it: Yet most men thought they would return, whereupon our Queen
with a manly courage took a view of her Army and Camp at Tilbury, and walking
through the ranks of Armed men placed on both sides, with a Leaders Truncheon
in her hand, sometimes in a martial pace, and other sometimes like a woman,
incredible it is how much she strengthened and encouraged the hearts both of
her Captains and Soldiers with her speech and presence. But contrary to
expectation, the enemies with their sails spread, betook themselves to an
absolute flight, and leaving Scotland on the West, they bended their Course
toward Norway, being ill advised therein, (but their necessity urged, and God
had infatuated their Counsels) thus to adventure to put their shaken and
battered bottoms into those black and dangerous Seas: Neither was the Climate
heathful for the crazed Bodies of the Spaniards, over-beaten, and tired with
wants, they being now entered the fifty seventh degree of Northerly Latitude;
from whence our Lord Admiral returned, leaving only some Scouts to discover
their success.

When the Prince of Parma came to Dunkirk, the Spaniards entertained him with
opprobrious speeches, as if in favor of Queen Elizabeth, he had neglected his
opportunity, and willingly overthrown so hopeful a Design. The Prince to give
them some satisfaction punished his Purveyors of Victuals, yet withal laughing
in his sleeve at the insolency of the Spaniards, having heard them formerly to
make their boasts that whithersoever they went they carried assured victory
along with them, and that the English durst nor once abide to look them in the
face.

The Spaniards (as was said even now) being freed from the English that had
haunted them like their Ghosts, consulted most seriously what was next to be
done: they were very tender of the Popes Credit, who had prophesied, that this
attempt would be fortunate and successful: The wrath of King Philip of Spain
was to be feared, his vast Expenses being thus lost, and his hopes frustrated:
other Adventurers would be undone: the glory of the Spaniards would be laid in
the dust: the Invincible Navy become a scorn, and England would still be
England, not lorded over by the Spaniards, if without further attempt they
should return into Spain. But on the other hand they considered that 5 thousand
of the Soldiers were slain: a multitude of their Survivors lay sick or maimed
upon their hands: Twelve of their greatest ships were sunk, lost, or taken:
their Cables, Masts, and Sails were cut; rent and broken with the English shot:
Their Anchors left in the road of Callis: their victuals failed: Their fresh
water was spent: and their enemies no less fierce, undaunted, and successful
than at the first: The Prince of Parma though long in preparing, yet still
unready, and kept in by the Dutch, Queen Elizabeth's firm Allies: which
circumstances wisely balanced, the vote went current for their hastening to
Spain.

But withal knowing that the King of Scots (fast knit in affection and blood to
our Queen) would yield them no supplies; and having as little hope that Norway
would afford them any, they cast all their, Horses, and Mules overboard, for
the sparing of their fresh water: and so framing their course to sail about
Cathenes, and the Coasts of Ireland, they steered between the Orcades and the
Isles of Far unto the sixty first degree of Latitude: From whence the Duke of
Medina, with his best stored ships, took Westward over the main Ocean toward
Biscay, and at last arrived safely in Spain: where for his welcome, he was
deposed from all his authority, forbidden to come at Court, and commanded to
live private, neither could he give satisfaction by his bad excuses, albeit he
imputed it to the treachery of his Mariners; to their ignorance; and small
experience of those Northern Seas. The want of succors from the Prince of
Parma; the Tempests, Shipwracks and ill fortune: but not a word of the
judgment of God, upon that Giant-like undertaking to enslave all England to
the Spanish yoke.

The residue of the Ships, being about forty in number, fell nearer with the
coast of Ireland, intending to touch at Cape Clare, well hoping there to
refresh themselves, and supply their wants: but the winds proving contrary and
tempestuous upon those dangerous Seas, many of their ships perished upon the
Irish shores, and amongst others a great Galliass, wherein Michael de Oquendo
was Commander, and two other Venetian ships of great burden, besides thirty
eight more, with most of the Spaniards contained in them Such as got clear off
the danger, put forth to Sea: some of which by a strong West Wind were driven
into the English Channel, where some of them were again set upon and taken by
the English, others by men of Rochel in France; and some arrived at New Haven
in Normandy: So that of one hundred thirty four ships that set fail out of
Lisboa, only fifty three returned into Spain: Of the four Galliasses of Naples
but one: of the four Oallions of Portugal, but one: of the ninety one Callions,
and great Hulks from diverse Provinces, only thirty three returned, fifty eight
being lost. In brief, they lost in this voyage eighty one vessels, thirteen
thousand, five hundred and odd Soldiers. Prisoners taken in England, Ireland,
and the Low Countries were above two thousand: Amongst those in England, Don
Pedro de Valdez, Don Vasques de Silva, and Don Alonzo de Says, and others were
kept for their ransom. In Ireland Don Alonzo de Luzon, Roderigo de Less, and
others of great account: In Zeland was Don Diego Piementelli: To be brief,
there was no famous, or noble family in all Spain, which in this expedition
lost not a son, brother, or kinsman. And thus this Armado which had been so
many years in preparing, and rigging with such vast expense, was in one month
many times assaulted, and at length wholly defeated with the slaughter of so
many of her men, not one hundred of the English being lacking, nor one small
ship of theirs taken, or lost, save only that of Cocks: and having traversed
round about all Britain, by Scotland, the Orcades and Ireland, most grievously
tossed, and very much distressed, and wasted by storms, wracks, and all kinds
of misery, at length came lamely home, with perpetual dishonor: whereupon
Medals were stamped in memory thereof: A Fleet flying with full sails; with
this inscription, Venit, vidit, fugit, It came, it saw, it fled: Others in
honor of our Queen, with flaming ships, and a Fleet in a great confusion, and
this Motto, Dux faemina facti, A woman was conductor of the fact.

In the aforementioned wracks above seven hundred Soldiers and Sailors were
cast on land in Scotland, who (upon the intercession of the Prince of Parma to
the King of Scots, and by the permission of Queen Elizabeth) were after a years
time sent over into the Low Countries: But more unmercifully were those
miserable wretches dealt withal, whose hap was to be driven by tempest into
Ireland: Some of them being slain by the wild Irish (their old friends) and
others of them being put to death by the command of the Lord Deputy: For he
fearing lest they might join with the Irish to disturb the peace of the Nation,
commanded Bingham, Governor of Connaught to destroy them: but he, refusing to
deal so rigorously with those that had yielded themselves, He sent Foul,
Deputy-Marshall, who drew them out of their lurking holes, and cut off the
heads of above two hundred of them; which fact the Queen from her heart
condemned, and abhorred as a fact of too great cruelty. The remainder of them
being terrified herewith, sick and starven as they were, committed themselves
to Sea in their shattered vessels, and were many of them swallowed up by the
waves.

The Spaniards charged the whole fault of their overthrow upon the Prince of
Parma, as if in favor to our Queen he had wilfully and artificially delayed
his coming to them: But this was but an invention, and pretention given out by
them, partly upon a Spanish envy against that Prince, he being an Italian, and
his Son a Competitor to the Kingdom of Portugal: But chiefly to save the scorn
and monstous disreputation which they and their Nation received by the success
of that enterprise: Therefore their colors, and excuses (forsooth) were, That
their General by Sea had a limited Commission, not to fight till the Land
Forces were come in to them, and that the Prince of Parma had particular
reaches and ends of his own to cross the design.

But it was both a strange Commission, and a strange Obedience to a Commission,
for men in the midst of their own blood, and being so furiously assailed, to
hold their hands, contrary to the Laws of Nature and necessity. And as for the
Prince of Parma, he was reasonably well tempted to be true to that enterprise,
by no less promise than to be made a Feudatory or Beneficiary King of England
under the Seignory (in chief) of the Pope, and the protection of the King of
Spain. Besides, it appeared that the Prince of Parma held his place long after
of the Govenment of the Netherlands, in the favor and trust of the King of
Spain, and by the great employments and services that he performed in France.
It is also manifest that this Prince did his best to come down, and put to Sea:
The truth was, that the Spanish Navy, upon those proofs of Fight which they had
with the English, finding how much hurt they received, and how little, hurt
they did, by reason of the activity and low building of our ships, and skill of
Seamen; and being also commanded by a General of small courage and experience,
and having lost at first two of their bravest Commanders at Sea, Pedro de
Valdez, and Michael de Oquenda, durst not put it to a Battle at Sea, but set up
their rest wholly upon the Land enterprise. On the other side, the
transportation of the Land Forces failed in the very foundation; For, whereas
the Council of Spain made full account that their Navy should be Master of the
Sea, and therefore able to guard and protect the Vessels of Transportation:
When it fell out to the contrary, that the great Navy was distressed, and had
enough to do to save it self, and that their Land Forces were impounded by the
Hollanders. Things (I say) being in this state, it came to pass that the Prince
of Parma must have flown, if he would have come into England, for he could get
neither Bark, nor Mariner to put to Sea. Yet certain it is that the Prince
looked for the coming back of the Armado even at that time when they were
wandering, and making their perambulation upon the Northern Seas.

Thus we see the curse of God and his threatening in Scripture accomplished:
They came out against us one way, and they fled seven ways before us: making
good (even to the astonishment of all Posterity) the wonderful Judgments of God
poured out commonly upon such vast and proud aspirings.

After this Glorious Deliverance of our Land by the Power of the Omnipotent,
and the wild Boar repelled that sought to lay waste Englands fair and fruitful
Vineyard, our Gracious and Godly Queen (who ever held Ingratitude a Capital
sin, especially toward her Almighty Protector) as she had begun with Prayer,
so she ended with Praise, commanding solemn Thanksgiving to be celebrated to
the Lord of Hosts at the Cathedral Church of Saint Paul in her chief City of
London, which accordingly was done upon Sabbath day the eighth of September: at
which time eleven of the Spanish Ensigns (the once badges of their bravery,
but now of their vanity and ignominy) were hung upon the lower battlements of
that Church, as Palms of Praise for Englands Deliverance: a show no doubt more
pleasing to God than when their spread colors did set out the pride of the
Spaniards, threatening the blood of so many innocent and faithful Christians.

Queen Elizabeth her self, to be an example unto others upon Sabbath the twenty
fourth of September, came from her Palace of White Hall in Westminster, through
the streets of London (which were hung with blew Cloth, the Companies of the
City standing in their Liveries on both sides with their Banners in goodly
order) being carried in a Chariot drawn with two Horses to St. Paul's Church,
where dismounting from her. Chariot at the West door, she humbled her self upon
her knees and with great devotion, in an audible voice She praised God as her
only Defender, who had delivered Her self and People from the bloody designs
of so cruel an enemy. The Sermon then preached tended wholly wholly to give all
the glory to God, as the Author of this wonderful deliverance: and when that
was ended, Her Majesty Herself, with most Princely and Christian speeches
exhorted all the people to a due performance of those religious services of
thankfulness which the Lord expected and required of them.

About the same time the Fair being kept in Southwark, the Spanish Flags were
hung up at London Bridge to the great joy of the beholders, and eternal infamy
of the Spaniards proud attempts, as irreligious as unsuccessful. But the solemn
day appointed for Thanksgiving throughout the Land was the nineteenth of
November being Tuesday, which accordingly was observed with great joy and
praising of God; and well it were if it had so continued still, being no less a
Deliverance than was that of Purim amongst the Jews, which they instituted to
be kept holy throughout their Generations.

The Zelanders also to leave a memorial of their thnakfulness to God, and their
faithfulness to our Queen, caused Medals of Silver to be stamped, having
engraven on the one side the Arms of their Country; with this inscription,
Glory to God alone, and on the reverse, the pourtracture of great Ships, under
written, the Spanish Fleet, and in the circumference, It came, It went, It was,
Anno 1588. In other medals also were stamped ships floating, and sinking, and
in the reverse, Supplicants upon their knees, with this Motto, man proposes,
God disposes, 1588. The Hollanders also stamped some medals with Spanish ships
and this Motto, Impius fugit nemine sequente: the wicked fly when none pursues.

Our Queen, to show her gratitude as well to the instruments as to the Author
of this great Deliverance, assigned certain yearly Rents to the Lord Admiral
for his gallant service, and many times commended him, and the other Captains
of Her Ships, as men born for the Preservation of their Country. The rest she
graciously saluted by name as often as she saw them, as men of notable deserts,
wherewith they held themselves well apaid, and those which were wounded,
maimed, or poor, She rewarded with competent pensions.

The Lord of Hosts having thus dispelled this storm, the Queen dissolved her
Camp at Tilbury, and not long after the Earl of Leicester ended his days,
having been a Peer of great estate and honor, but liable to the common destiny
of Great ones, whom all men magnify in their life time, but few speak well of
after their death.

THis Admirable Deliverance was congratulated by almost all other Nations,
especially by all the reformed Churches, and many Learned Men celebrated the
same in Verse, amongst which I shall only mention two: The first was that Poem
made by Reverend Mr. Beza; Translated into all the chief Languages in
Christendom, to be perpetuated to all ensuing Posterity. It was this.

STraverat innumeris Hispanus classibus aequor,
Regnis juncturus Sceptra Britana suis
Tanti hujus rogitas quae motus causa? superbos
Impulit Ambitio, vexat avaritia.
Quam been te Ambitio mersit vanissima ventus;
Et tumidae tumidos Vos superastis aquae!
Quam been Raptores Orbis totius Iberos
Mersit inexhausti justa vorago Maris!
At tu, cui venti, cui totum militat Aequor,
Regina, O mundi totius una decus:
Sic regnare Deo perge, Ambitione remota,
Prodiga sic opibus perge juvare pios;
Vt te Angli longum, longum Anglis ipsa fruaris,
Quam dilecta bonis, tam metuenda malis.
SPaines King with Navies great the Seas bestrew'd,
TO augment with English Crown his Spanish sway:
Ask ye what caused this proud attempt? 'twas lewd
Ambition drove, and Avarice led the way.
It Is well; Ambitions windy pufflies drowned
By winds, and swelling hearts by swelling waves:
It Is well; those Spaniards who the Worlds vast round
Devoured, devouring Sea most justly craves.
But thou O Queen, for whom Winds, Seas do war,
O thou the Glory of this Worlds wide Mass,
So reign to God still, from Ambition far,
So still with bounteous aids the Good embrace:
That Thou may England long, long England Thee enjoy
Thou terror of all Bad, Thou Good men's joy.
The other is that, made by Mr: Samuel Ward of Ipswich.
OCtogesimus Octavus, Mirabilis annus
Clade Papistarum, Faustus ubique piis.
IN Eighty eight Spain armed with potent might
Against our peaceful Land came on to fight:
The Winds, and Waves, and Fire in one conspire
To help the English, frustrate Spains desire.
FINIS.
THE Gunpowder Treason: Being A Remembrance to England, OF THAT Ancient
Deliverance From that Horrid PLOT, Hatched by the Bloody PAPISTS, 1605. Tending
to revive the Memory of the FIFTH OF NOVEMBER to every Family in this NATION:
That all sorts may be stirred up to real Thankfulness, and transmit the same to
their Posterities; that their Children may know the reason why the Fifth of
November is Celebrated; that GOD may have Glory, and the PAPISTS perpetual
Infamy.

The LORD is known by the judgment that he executeh, but the wicked is snared
in the work of his own hands. HIGGAION SELAH.

Psalm. 9.16. By Sam. Clark, Pastor of Bennet Fink, London.

London, Printed for J. Hancock, and are to be sold at the three Bibles, being
the first Shop in Pope's Head Alley, next to Cornhill. 1671.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
LEast the Remembrance of so signal a Mercy, and Deliverance vouchsafed by God
both to our Church and State should be buried in Oblivion, I have (at the
request of the Bookseller) presented thee here with a true and faithful
Narrative of that Grand Work of Darkness forged in Hell, and by Satan suggested
to some Popish Instruments, who envying the peace and prosperity of our Church,
and progress of the Gospel, had designed at one blow to overthrow both: And
that nothing might be wanting to complete that horrid wickedness, their purpose
was to have charged it upon the Puritans, thereby hoping to free themselves,
and their Religion from the imputation of so heinous a crime.

Now that the memorial of a Mercy of such public and general concernment
should not be forgotten, we have the Word of the Eternal God to be our Guide
therein, when the Lord had by his Angel destroyed the first born of Egypt, and
spared Israel, He instituted the Feast of the Passover to continue the memorial
thereof through their Generations, Exodus 12.11, 12, 14, 26, 27. says Moses to
them, when your Children shall say unto you, What mean you by this service? Ye
shall say, It is the Sacrifice of the Lords Passover, who passed over the
houses the Children of Israel, when He smote the Egyptians, and delivered our
houses. And how careful good Mordecai was to continue the remembrance of that
great Deliverance of the people of God from Destruction plotted, and contrived
by that wicked Haman, appears Esther 9.20. etc. where they did not only
celebrate those present days of their Deliverance with Feasting and Gladness:
but he, together with the rest of the Jews ordained, and took upon them, and
their Seed, and upon all such as joined themselves unto them, so as it should
not fail, that they would keep those days in their appointed time every year,
and that those days should be remembered, and kept through their Generations,
every Family, every Province, and every City, and that those days of Purim
should not fail from amongst the Jews, nor the memorial of them perish from
their Seed, etc. And truly the remembrance of this great Mercy has the more
need to be revived at this time, when some noted persons amongst us begin to
lessen, and decry it, and wholly to lay aside the observation of that day,
though enjoined by Act of Parliament, and made Conscience of by most of the
Godly People of the Nation. I have also been induced the rather to make this
brief Collection of the Story, because, though it be published by others; yet
it is in larger Volumes, which are not every ones money; whereas for a small
matter every family may get and keep this by them for the benefit, and
satisfaction both of themselves and children, that so the Lord may not lose of
his Glory, nor they (for want of information) fail of their duty. I shall
conclude with that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 107.8. O that men would praise the
Lord for his Goodness: and for his wonderful Works to the Children of Men:
which is the hearty desire of

Thine for thy spiritual Good, Sam. Clarke.
October. 1657.
THE DELIVERANCE OF OUR CHVRCH and STATE FROM THE Hellish Powder Plot. 1605.
THe Plot was to undermine the Parliament House, and with Powder to blow up the
King, Prince, Clergy, Nobles, Knights, and Burgesses, the very confluence of
all the flower of Glory, Piety, Learning, Prudence and Authority in the Land:
Fathers, Sons, Brothers, Allies, Friends, Foes, Papists and Protestants, (...)
blast.

Their intent, when that irreligious achievement had been performed, was, to
surprise the remainder of the Kings Issue, to alter Religion and Government,
and to bring in a foreign Power, Sir Edmond Baynam, an attainted person (who
styled himself Prince of the damned Crew) was sent unto the Pope as he was a
temporal Prince to acquaint him with the Gunpowder Plot: and now to the Plot it
self.

The Sessions of Parliament being dissolved, July the 7th. Anno Christi, 1605.
and prorogued to the seventh of February following* Catesby being at Lambeth,
sent for Th^mas Winter; who before had been employed into Spain, and acquainted
him with the design of blowing up the Parliament House, who readily
apprehending it, said, This indeed strikes at the root, only these helps were
wanting; a House for residence, and a skilful man to carry on the Mine: But the
first, Catesby assured him was easy to be got; and for the man, he commended
Guy Fawkes, a sufficient Soldier, and a forward Catholic: Thus Robert
Catesby, John Wright, Thomas Winter, and Guy Fawkes had many meetings, and
conferences about this business, till at last Thomas Percy came puffing in to
Catesby's Lodging at Lambeth, saying, What Gentlemen, shall we always be
talking, and never do any thing? You cannot be ignorant how things proceed? To
whom Catesby answered, that something was resolved on, but first an Oath for
secrecy was to be administered: for which purpose they appointed to meet some
three days after, behind Saint Clements Church beyond Temple Bar; where being
met, Percy professed that for the Catholic cause himself would be the man to
advance it, were it with the slaughter of the King, which he was there ready to
undertake and and do.

No Tom (said Catesby) thou shall not adventure thy self to so small purpose;
if thou will be a Traitor, there is a Plot to greater advantage, and such an
one as can never be discovered: Hereupon all of them took the Oath of Secrecy,
heard a Mass, and received the Sacrament, after which Catesby told them his
Devilish Devise by mine and Gunpowder to blow up the Parliament House, and so
by one stroke with the destruction of many to effect that at once which had
been many years attempting: And for case of conscience to kill the innocent
with the nocent, he told them that it was warrantable by the Authority of
Garnet himself, the superior of the English Jesuits, and of Garrard and
Tresmond (Jesuitical Priests likewise) who by their Apostolical Power did
commend the fact, and absolve the actors. The Oath was given them by the said
Garrard in these words; You shall swear by the blessed Trinity, and by the
Sacrament you now purpose to receive, never to disclose, directly nor
indirectly, by word, or circumstance, the matter that shall be proposed to you
to keep secret, nor desist from the execution thereof until the rest shall give
you leave.

The Project being thus far carried on, in the next place the first thing they
sought after was an house wherein they might begin their work, for which
purpose no place was held fitter than a certain edifice adjoining to the wall
of the Parliament House, which served for a withdrawing room to the Assembled
Lords, and out of Parliament time was at the dispose of the Keeper of the
place, and Wardrobe thereto belonging: these did Percy hire for his Lodgings,
entertaining Guy Fawkes as his man, who changing his name into Johnson had the
Keys, and keeping of the Rooms. Besides this, they hired another house to lay
in Provision of Powder, and to frame, and fit wood in for the carrying on the
Mine, which Catesby provided at Lambeth, and swear Robert Ke^es into their
Conspiracy, whom he made the Keeper of those Provisions, who by night conveyed
the same unto Fawkes.

The appointed day for the Parliament being the seventh day of February, It was
thought fit to begin their work in October before: But Fawkes returning out of
the Country, found Percys Rooms appointed for the Scottish Lords to meet in,
who were to treat about the union of the two Kingdoms, whereupon they forbore
to begin their work: But that Assembly being dissolved upon the eleventh of
December, late in the night they entered upon the work of darkness beginning
their Mine, having tools aforehand prepared, and baked meats provided, the
better to avoid suspicion in case they should send abroad for them.

They which first began the Mine were Robert Catesby Espuire, the
Arch-Contriver and Traitor, and ruin of his name, Thomas Percy Esquire, akin
to the Earl of Northumberland, Thomas Winter, John Wright, and Guy Fawks
Gentlemen, and Thomas Bates, Catesby's man, all of them well grounded in the
Romish School, and earnest laborers in this vault of Villainy, so that by
Christmas-eve they had brought the Mine under an entry adjoining to the wall of
the Parliament House, underpropping the earth as they went with their framed
timber, nor till that day were they seen abroad of any man.

During this undermining, much consultation was had how to order the rest of
the business when the deed should be accomplished: the first was how to
surprise the next heir to the Crown: for though they doubted not but that
Prince Henry would accompany his Father, and perish with him, yet they
suspected that Duke Charles, as too young to attend the Parliament, would
escape the train, and perchance be so carefully guarded, and attended at Court
that he would be gotten into their hands hardly, but Percy offered to be the
remover of this rub, resolving with some other Gentlemen to enter the Dukes
Chamber, which by reason of his acqaintance he might well do, and others of his
like acquaintance should be placed at several doors of the Court, so that when
the blow was given, and all men in a maze, then would he carry away the Duke,
which he presumed would be easily done, the most of the Court being then
absent, and for such as were present, they would be altogether unprovided for
resistance.

For the surprise of the Lady Elizabeth, it was held a matter of far less
difficulty, She remaining at Comb Abbey in Warwickshire with the Lord
Harrington, and Ashbey, Catesby's house being not far from the same, whither
under a pretense of hunting upon Dunsmore Heath, many Catholics should be
assembled, who knowing for what purpose they were met had the full liberty in
that distracted time to provide Money, Horses, Armor and other necessaries for
War, under pretense of strengthening, and guarding the heir apparent to the
Crown.

Then it was debated what Lords they should save from the Parliament, and it
was agreed that they should keep as many as they could that were Catholics or
favorers of them: but that all others should feel the smart, and that the
Treason should be charged upon the Puritans to make them more odious to the
World.

Next it was controverted what foreign Princes they should make privy to this
Plot, seeing they could not enjoin them to secrecy, nor oblige them by Oath,
and this much troubled them. For though Spain was held fittest to second their
Plot, yet he was slow in his preparations, and France was too near and too
dangerous to be dealt with, and how the Hollanders stood affected to England
they knew very well. But while they were thus busying themselves, and
tormenting their brains, the Parliament was adjourned to the fifth day of
October ensuing, whereupon they brake off both discourse and work till
Candlemass, and then they laid in powder, and other provisions, beginning their
work again, and having in the mean time taken into their company Christopher
Wright, and Robert Winter; being first sworn, and receiving the Sacrament for
secrecy; the Foundation Wall of the Parliament House being very hard, and nine
Foot thick, with great difficulty they Wrought half through; Fawkes being their
Sentinel to give warning when any came near, that the Noise in Digging might
not be heard.

The Laborers thus working into the Wall, were surprised with a great fear,
and casting away their digging Tools, betook themselves to their Weapons,
having sufficient shot, and powder in the house, and fully resolving rather to
dye in the place than to yield or be taken. The cause of this their fear was a
noise that they heard in a Room under the Parliament House, under which they
meant to have Mined, which was directly under the Chair of State; but now all
on a sudden they were at a stand, and their countenances cast each upon other,
as doubtful what would be the issue of this their Enterprise. Fawkes scouted
out to see what he could discover abroad, and finding all safe and free from
suspicion, he returned and told them that the noise was only occasioned by the
removal of Coals that were now upon Sale, and that the Cellar was to be let,
which would be more commodious for their purpose, and also would save their
labor for the Mine. Hereupon Thomas Porcy under pretense of stowage for his
Winter Provision and Coals, went and hired the Cellar, which done they began a
new conference, wherein Catesby found the weight of the whole work too heavy
for himself alone to support: for besides the maintenance of so many persons,
and the several houses for the several uses hired and paid for by him, the
Gunpowder and other Provisions would rise to a very great sum, and indeed too
much for one man's Purse. He desired therefore that himself, Percy, and one more
might call in such persons as they thought fit to help to maintain the charge,
alleging that they knew men of worth and wealth that would willingly assist,
but were not willing that their names should be known to the rest. This
request, as necessary, was approved, and therefore ceasing to dig any further
in the Vault, knowing that the Cellar would be fitter for their purpose, they
removed into it twenty Barrels of Gunpowder, which they covered with a Thousand
Billets, and five hundred Faggots, so that now their Lodging Rooms were cleared
of all suspicious Provision, and might be freely entered into without danger of
discovery.

But the Parliament being again prorogued to the Fifth of November following,
these persons thought fit that for a while they should again disperse
themselves (all things being already in so good a forwardness, and that Guy
Fawkes should go over to acquaint Sir William Stanley, and Master Hugh Owen
with these their proceedings,) yet so, as the Oath of Secrecy should be first
taken by them. For their design was to have Sir William Stanleys presence so
soon as the fatal blow should be given, to be a leader to their intended
Stratagems, whereof (as they thought) they should have great need, and that
Owen should remain where he was, to hold correspondency with foreign Princes,
to allay the odiousness of the fact, and to impute the Treason to the
discontented Puritans.

Fawkes coming into Flanders found Owen, unto whom, after the Oath, he declared
the Plot, which he very well approved of; but Sir William Stanley being now in
Spain, Owen said that he would hardly be drawn into the business, having Suits
at this time in the English Court: yet he promised to engage him all that he
could, and to send into England with the first, so soon as their Plot had taken
effect: Upon this, Fawkes to avoid further suspicion, kept still in Flanders
till the beginning of September, and then returning, received the Keys of the
Cellar, and laid in more Powder, Billets and Faggots, which done he retired
into the Country, and there kept till the end of October.

In the mean time Catesby and Percy, meeting at the Bath, it was there
concluded that because their number was but few, Catesby himself should have
power to call in whom he would to assist their design, by which authority he
took in Sir Everard Digby of Rutlandshire, and Francis Tresham Esquire of
Northamptonshire, both of them of sufficient state and wealth: For Sir Everard
offered fifteen hundred pounds to forward the Action, and Tresham two thousand.
But Percy disdaining that any should outrun him in evil, promised four
thousand pounds out of the Earl of Northumberlands Rents, and ten swift horses
to be used when the blow was past. Against which time to provide Ammunition,
Catesby also took in Ambrose Rookwood, and John Grant, two Recusant Gentlemen,
and without doubt others were acquainted also with it, had these two grand
Electors been aprehended alive, whose own tongues only could have given an
account of it.

The business being thus forwarded abroad by their accomplices, they at home were
no less active: For Percy, Winter, and Fawkes had stored the Cellar with thirty
six Barrels of Gunpowder, and instead of shot, had laid upon them bars of
Iron, logs of timber, massy stones, Iron Crows, Pick-axes, and all their
working tools: and to cover all, great store of Billets and Faggots, so that
nothing was wanting against that great and terrible day. Neither were the
Priests and Jesuits slack on their parts, who usually concluded their Masses
with prayers for the good success of their expected hopes, about which Garnet
made these Verses, Gentem aufert perfidam credentium de finibus:
Vt Christo lauds debitas persolvamus alacriter.


And others thus. Prosper Lord their pains that labor in thy cause day and
night: Let Heresy vanish away like smoke: Let their memory perish with a crack
like the ruin and fall of a broken house.

Upon Thursday in the evening, ten days before the Parliament was to begin, a
Letter directed to the Lord Monteagle, was delivered by an unknown person to
his footman in the street, with a strait charge to give it into his Lords own
hands, which accordingly he did: The Letter had neither date, nor subscription,
and was somewhat unlegible, so that the Nobleman called for one of his servants
to assist him in reading it; the strange contents whereof much perplexed him,
he not knowing whether it was writ as a Pasquil to scare him from attendance at
the Parliament, or as a matter of consequence, and advice from some friend:
Howsoever, though it were now supper-time, and the night very dark, yet to show
his loyalty to his Sovereign, he immediately repaired to White Hall,and
imparted the Letter to the Earl of Salisbury, then principal Secretary, and
they both presently acquainted the Lord ^hamberlain therewith, who deemed the
matter not a little to concern himself; his Office requiring him to oversee all
the places to which his Majesty was to repair: Hereupon these two Counselors
showed the Letter to the Earls of Worcester and Northampton, and all concluded
(how slight soever the contents seemed to appear) to acquaint the King himself
with the same, which accordingly was done: and the Letwas as follows: My Lord,
OVt of the Love I bear to some of your friends, I have a care of your
preservation: Therefore I would advise you as you tender your life, to devise
some excuse to shift off your attendance at this Parliament: For God and man
have concurred to punish the wickedness of this time. And think not slightly of
this Advertisement, but retire your self into your Country, where you may
expect the event in safety. For though there be no appearance of any stir, yet
I say they shall receive a terrible blow this Parliament, and yet they shall
not see who hurts them. This Counsel is not to be contemned, because it may do
you good, and can do you no harm: For the danger is past so soon as you have
burnt the Letter; and I hope God will give you the grace to make a good use of
it, to whose holy protection I commend you.




His Majesty after reading this Letter, pausing a while, and then reading it
again, delivered his judgment, that the style of it was too quick and pithy to
be a Libel, proceeding from the superfluities of an idle brain, and by these
words, That they should receive a terrible blow at this Parliament, and yet not
see who hurt them; he presently apprehended, that a sudden danger by a blast of
Gunpowder was intended by some base villain in a corner, though no
Insurrection, Rebellion, or desperate attempt appeared: and therefore wished
that the Rooms under the Parliament House should be thoroughly searched, before
himself or Peers should sit therein: Hereupon it was concluded that the Lord
Chamberlain (according to his Office) should view all the Rooms above and
below: but yet to prevent idle rumors, and to let things ripen further, it was
resolved that this search should be deferred till Monday, the day immediately
before the Parliament, and that then it should be done with a seeming slight
eye to avoid suspect.

According to this conclusion, the Earl of Suffolk, Lord Chamberlain, upon
Monday in the afternoon, accompanied with the Lord Monteagle, repaired into
those under Romes, and finding the Cellar so fully stored with Wood and Coals,
demanded of Fawkes, the counterfeit Johnson, who stood there attending as a
servant of small repute, Who owed the place? He answered that the Lodgings
belonged to Master Thomas Percy, and the Cellar also to lay in his Winter
Provision, himself being the Keeper of it, and Master: Percy's servant:
whereunto the Earl, as void of any suspicion, told him that his Master was well
provided against Winter blasts: But when they were come forth, the Lord
Monteagle told him that he did much suspect Percy to be the Inditer of the
Letter, knowing his affection in Religion, and the friendship betwixt them
professed, so that his heart gave him (as he said) when he heard Percy named,
that his hand was in the Act.

The Lord Chamberlain returning, related to the King and Council what he had
seen, and the suspicion that the Lord Monteagle had of Percy, and himself of
Johnson his man, all which increased his Majesty's jealousy, so that he
insisted (contrary to the opinion of some) that a narrower search should be
made, and the Billets and Coals turned up to the bottom: and accordingly the
search was concluded to be made, but under color of searching for certain
Hangings belonging to the house, which were missing and conveyed away.

Sir Thomas Knevet) a Gentleman of His Majesty's Privy Chamber) was employed
herein, who about midnight before the Parliament was to begin, went to the
place with a small, but trusty number of persons: And at the door of the
entrance to the Cellar, finding one (who was Guy Fawkes) at so unseasonable an
hour cloked, and booted, he apprehended him, and ransacking the Billet, he
found the Serpents nest stored with thirty six barrels of Powder, and then
searching the Villain, he found about him a dark Lanthorn three Matches, and
other instruments for blowing up the Powder: And being no whit daunted, he
instantly confessed his guiltiness, and was so far from Repentance, as he
vowed, that had he been within the house (as indeed he was but immediately come
forth from his work) he would certainly have blown up the House with himself
and them all: And being brought before the Council; he lamented nothing so much
as because the deed was not done, saying, that the Devil, and not God was the
discoverer of it.

As desperate were Catesby, Percy, and the rest, who seeing the Treason
discovered, posted all into Warwickshire, where Grant, and his associates had
broken open the Stables belonging to Warwick Castle, and taken some gaeat
horses out of the same, to forward their hoped for great day. At Dun-Church Sir
Everard Digby had made a match for a great hunting, that under pretense thereof
they might seize upon the Lady Elizabeth then at Comb Abbey, but when by those
which posted from London they were informed that they were discovered, and
pursued, being struck with a great fear; not knowing whither to sly, they
desperately began an open Rebellion, pretending that they did it for the cause
of Religion, all the Catholics throats being intended to be cut, and so
trooping together they wandered through Warwickshire, being pursued by Sir
Richard Verney, the then High Sheriff, and from thence they went through
Worcestershire into Staffordshire, their servants, and followers being about
eighty men, who also stole away many of them from them. Thus ranging about, and
finding no resistance, they rifled the Lord Windsors house of all the Armor,
Shot, Powder, and all other Warlike Provisions: but the weather being rainy,
and the Waters somewhat high, the Powder in carriage took wet, and so became
unserviceable.

For their last refuge they betook themselves to Holbach House in
Staffordshire, belonging to Steven Littleton, whither they were pursued by the
High Sheriff of Worcestershire, who not knowing of the Treason, and thinking it
to be only some fray, or riot, sent his Trumpeter unto them, commanding them to
render themselves to him His Majesty's Minister: But their consciences
witnessing what the Sheriff knew not, answered, that he had need of greater
assistance than of those few that were with him, before he could be able to
command or control them: and so they prepared for resistance, and having laid
two pounds of the said Powder into a Platter to dry in the chimney, one coming
to mend the fire, threw in a Billet, whereby a spark flew into the Powder,
whose sudden blast was so violent, that though so small a quantity, it blew up
the roof of the house, scorching the bodies and faces of Catesby, Rookwood, and
Grant, and some others, whose consciences now told tdem that God had puished
them justly with Powder, who with Powder would have destroyed so many. Being
dispirited with this accident, yet like desperate men, they resolved to die
together, set open the Gates, and suffered the Sheriffs men to rush in upon
them, and presently both the Wrights were shot down dead: Rookwood and Thomas
Winter were very sorely wounded, Catesby and Percy desperately fighting back to
back, were both shot through, and slain with one Musket bullet: the rest being
taken, were carried prisoners to London, being all the way gazed at, reviled,
and detested by the common people for their horrid, and horrible Treason: and
so at last they received the just guerdon of their wickedness.

Thus you have seen this work of darkness by the watchfulnes of Gods providence
detected, and defeated, and the contrivers of mischief fallen into the pit that
they dug for others: Now let us see also how cunningly they contrived the
transferring the Odium of it upon the Puritans.

There was one Mr. Pickering of Tichmarsh-Grove in Northamptonshire that was in
great esteem with King James. This Mr. Pickering had a horse of special note
for swiftness on which he used to hunt with the King. A little before the blow
was given, Mr. Keys, on of the conspirators, and brother in Law to Mr.
Pickering, borrowed this horse of him, and conveyed him to London upon a bloody
design, which was thus contrived. Fawkes upon the day of the fatal blow was
appointed to retire himself into St. Georges fields, where this horse was to
attend him to further his escape (as they made him believe) so soon as the
Parliament House should be blown up. It was likewise contrived, that Mr.
Pickering who was noted for a Puritan, should that morning be murdered in his
bed, and secretly conveyed away: As also that Fawkes so soon as he came into
St. Georges fields to escape, should be there murdered, and so mangled that he
could not be known: whereupon it was to be bruited abroad that the Puritans had
blown up the Parliament House, and the better to make the World believe it,
there was Mr. Pickering with his choice Horse ready to make an escape, but that
stirred up some, who seeing the heinousness of the fact, and him ready to
escape, in detestation of so horrible a deed, fell upon him, and hewed him in
pieces, and to make it more clear, there was his horse, known to be of special
speed, and swiftness, ready to carry him away, and upon this rumor a Massacre
should havy gone through the whole Land upon the Puritans. When the contrivance
of this Plot was thus discovered by some of the Conspirators, and Fawkes, who
was now a Prisoner in the Tower made acquainted with it, whereas before he was
made to believe by his companions that he should be bountifully rewarded for
that his good service to the Catholic cause, now perceiving that on the
contrary his death had been contrived by them, he thereupon freely confessed
all that he knew concerning that horrid conspiracy, which before all the
tortures of the rack could not force him unto.

The truth of all this was attested by Mr. William Perkins, an eminent
Christian and Citizen of London to Dr. Gouge, which Mr. Perkins had it from the
mouth of Mr. Clement Cotton that made our English Concordance, who also had it
from the Relation of Mr. Pickering himself.

FINIS.
A Narrative of the visible hand of God upon the Papists by the Downfall in
Blackfriars London. Anno Christi, 1623.
ON the Lords day, October the twenty sixth according to the English* account:
but November the fifth according to the Popish account* a common report went
far and near, that one Drurie, a Romish Priest (a man of parts, and eminent
gifts) would preach that day in the afternoon in a fair house in Blackfriars
London, whither all that would might freely come to hear him.

Upon this report very many, Protestants as well as Papists, Scholars as well
as others, assembled thither about three a clock in the afternoon; That mansion
house was now inhabited by the French Ambassador: and the Sermon was to be in a
Garret, into which there were two passages: One out of the Ambassadorus
withdrawing Room which was private, the other more common without the great
Gate of the said Mansion House.

Under this Garret was another large Chamber which one Redyate, another Romish
Priest, had hired for himself: Unto whom Papists frequently repaired to hear
Mass, and make confessions. Under this room was the aforesaid withdrawing
chamber of the Ambassador: supported with strong Arches of stone being
immediately over the entrance into the great House: And at the South end of the
Garret and on the West side thereof, there were Bed-chambers and Closets which
other Priests had hired for themselves: The Bedchamber at the South end was
severed from the Garret only by a partition of Wanscote which was taken down
for the Sermon time: The length of the Garret from North to South was almost
sorry foot, the breadth about sixteen foot: The two aforesaid passages met on
one pair of stairs leading to the Garret which had only that one door leading
into it.

More came to this place then possibly it could hold, so that many for want of
room returned back again; Others went into the aforesaid Redyates Chamber, and
tarried with him. The whole Garret, Rooms adjoining, door, and top of the
stairs were as full as they could hold. In the Garret were set chairs and
stools for the better sort: most of the women sat on the floor, but most of
the men stood thronged together: In all, about two hundred were there
assembled. In the midst was a table and a chair for the Preacher.

All things thus prepared, and the multitude assembled, about three of the
clock the expected Preacher, having on a Surplice, girt about his middle with a
linen girdle, and a tippet of Scarlet on both his shoulders, came in, being
attended by a man that brought after him his book and hourglass.

As soon as he came to the table, he kneeled down with show of private devotion
for a little while; then rising up, and turning himself to the people, he
crossed himself, took the book (which was said to be a Rhemish Testament) out
of his man's hands, and the hourglass being set on the table, he opened the
book, read the Gospel appointed by the Remish Calendar for that day, being the
twenty first Sunday after Pentecost: The Gospel was in Matthew 18, 23, etc. The
Text being read, he sat down, put on a red cap over a white linen one turned
up about the brims: He made no audible Prayer, but having read his Text, which
was the Parable of forgiving debts, he spoke something of the occasion of it,
and then propounded these three special points to be handled 1. The debt we owe
to God. 2. The mercy of God in forgiving it. 3. Man's unmercifulness to his
Brother.


Having insisted some while of the misery of man by reason of the debt wherein
he stands bound to God, he passed on to declare the rich mercy of God, and the
means which God has afforded to his Church, for partaking thereof: Amongst
which he reckoned up the Sacaments, and especially pressed the Sacrament of
Penance, as they call it.

When he had discoursed on these points about half an hour, on a sudden the
floor whereon the Preacher and the greatest part of his Auditory were, fell
down with such violence, as therewith the floor of the Chamber under it, where
Redyate and his company were, was broken down with it, so that both the floors,
with the beams, girders, joyces, boords and feelings, with all the people on
them, fell down together upon the third floor, which was the floor of the
French Ambassadors withdrawing Chamber, supported with strong arches as
aforesad.

There being a partition on the South side of the middle Chamber which reached
up to the floor of the Garret and supported it, that part of the Garret which
was beyond the partition Southward, fell not, so as all the people thereon were
safe, only they had no way to get forth: for there was but one entrance into
the Garret, which was at the North-West corner. Hereupon some through
amazement, would have leaped out at a window almost forty foot from the ground:
but the people without, telling them of the certain danger if they leaped down,
kept them from that desperate attempt: At length by breaking a wall on the
West Side they discerned Chambers adjoining thereto, and so by creeping through
that hole into the Chambers, they were saved: So were all they that stood on
the stair-head at the door leading into the Garret: For the stairs were without
the Room, and nothing fell but the floors, neither walls nor roof.

Also amongst those that fell, many escaped; for some of the timber rested with
one end on the walls, and with the other on the third floor that yielded not,
and so both such as abode on those pieces, and such as were directly under
them, were thereby preserved. Amongst the multidude that fell, there was a
Minister who (through Gods Providence) fell so between two pieces of timber, as
that the timber kept his upper parts from crushing, and holped him by his
clasping about the timber to pull out his feet from amongst the dead corpses.

Amongst others, the present preservation and future destruction of one Parker
was very remarkable. This Pa^ker was a factor for the English Seminaries, and
Nuns beyond Sea, especially at Cambre; and he had so dealt with two of his
brothers here, that he had got from one of them a son, and from the other a
daughter to send them to religious houses (as they call them) beyond Sea. This
Parker at this time took his Nephew, a youth of about sixteen years old to the
aforementioned fatal conventicle, where Drury preached: and both Parker and his
Nephew fell with the rest: The youth there lost his life, but Parker himself
escaped with a bruised body, being a corpulent man: yet so far was he from
making a good use of his deliverance, that with much discontent he wished that
he had dyed for his Nephew, saying, That God saw him not fit to dye amongst
such Martyrs: Such are Romes Martyrs. But the preservation of the wicked, is
but a reservation to future judgment: For about ten days after, as this Parker
was shooting London Bridge, with his aforesaid Niece, whom he was conveying
beyond Sea, they were both cast away and drowned in the Thames. Judge by this
(O Parents!) whether God is well pleased with disposing your Children to Popish
Education.

Others there were that were pulled out alive, but so bruised, or so spent for
want of breath, that some lived not many hours, others dyed not many days after.

The floor of the Chamber immediately over this where the Corpse lay, being
fallen, there was no entrance into it but through the Ambassadors Bedchamber,
the door whereof was closed up with the Timber of the floors that fell down,
and the walls of this room were of stone, only there was one window in it with
extraordinary strong cross bars of iron, so that though Smiths, and other
workmen were immediately sent for, yet it was more than an hour before succor
could be afforded to them that were fallen down.

Passage at length being made, I had access into the room (says Doctor Gouge
the relater of this story) and viewing the Bodies, observed some (yet but few)
to be mortally wounded, or crushed by the timber: Others to be apparently
stifled, partly with their thick lying one upon another, and partly with the
dust that came from the cieling which fell down.

On the Lords day at night when they fell they were numbered ninety one dead
bodies; but many of them were secretly conveyed away in the night, there being
a pair of water-stairs, leading from the garden appertaining to the house, into
the Thames. On the morrow the Coroner and his Inquest coming to view the
bodies, found remaining but sixty three.

Of those that were carried away, some were buried in a Burying place within
the Spanish Ambassadors House in Holborn, amongst whom the Lady Web was one,
the Lady Blackstones daughter another, and one Mistress Udal a third: Master
Stoker, and Master Bartholomew Bavin were buried in St. Brides Parish. Robert
Sutton, John Loccham, and Abigail Holford in St. Andrews Holborn. Captain
Summers wife in the Vault under Black Friars Church, and her woman in the
Churchyard. For the Corpse remaining, two great pits were dug, one in the
fore Court of the said French Ambassadors house, eighteen foot long, and twelve
foot broad; the other in the garden behind his house, twelve foot long, and
eight foot broad. In the former pit were laid forty four Corpse, whereof the
bodies of the aforesaid Drury and Redyate were two: These two wound up in
sheets, were first laid into the pit, with a partition of loose earth to fever
them from the rest. Then were others brought, some in somewhat a decent manner
wound up in sheets, but the most in a most lamentable plight, the shirts only
of the men tied under the twists, and some linen tied about the middle of the
women, the rest of their bodies naked, and one poor man or woman taking a Corpse
by the head, another by the feet tumbled them in, and so piled them up almost
to the top of the pit. The rest were put into the other pit in the garden.

Their manner of burial seemed almost as dismal, as the heap of them, when they
lay upon the floor where they last fell. No obsequies of funeral Rites were
used at their burial. Only the day after, a black Cross of wood was set upon
each grave, but was soon by Authority commanded to be taken down.

When they were thus interred, thorough search was made about the cause of the
falling of the timber: The timber of each floor was laid together, and the
measure of the Summers that brake was taken. The main Summer which crossed the
Garret was ten inches square: Two girders were by tenants, and mortaises let
into the midst of it, one just against another: the Summer was knotty where
the mortaises were made, whereupon being over-burdened, it knapped suddenly
asunder in the midst.

The main Summer of the other floor that fell was much stronger, being thirteen
inches square, strong and found every where, neither did the girders meet so
just one against another; yet that also failed, not in the midst as the
uppermost, but within five foot of one end, and that more shiveringly, and with
a longer rent in the timber then the other. For this Chamber was almost full
with such persons as coming too late, went into Redyates Chamber: Besides, it
did not only bear the weight which lay on the upper floor, but received it with
a sudden knock, and so the massy timber shivered in two, and the people were
irrecoverably before they could tear any such thing, beaten down into the third
floor which was above twenty foot from the first.

It Is true, we must not be rash in censuring, yet when we see judgments
executed on sinners in the act of their sin, when they are impudent, and
presumptuous therein, not to acknowledge such to be judged by the Lord, is to
wink against clear light, Psalm. 9. 16. God is known by the judgments which he
executes. Shall Nebuchadnezzar, while he is vaunting of his great Babylon, be
berest of his wits?

Shall Herod, whilst he is priding himself in the flattering applanse of the
people, be eaten of worms? Shall Haman, whilst he practicing to destroy all
the people of God, be hanged on a Gallows fifty foot high, which he had
prepared for Mordecai? Shall the House where the Philistines met together to
sport with Sampson, fall upon their heads? Shall these and such like judgments
overtake men in the very act of their sin, and yet be accounted no judgments,
no evidences of Gods revenging Justice, or signs of his indignation? Truly
then we may deny all Providence, and attribute all to chance: But add hereto,
that this fell out upon their fifth of November, and it will be as clear as if
written with a Sunbeam, that the pit which they dug for others, they
themselves fell into it.

Doctor Gouge, who relates this Story in his Extent of Gods Providence, thus
writes.

I do the more confidently publish this History, because I was an eyewitness
of many of the things therein related, and heard from the mouths of such as
were present at the Sermon, the rest. For upon the first hearing of the
destruction of so many persons as by that Dowosal lost their lives, our
Constables presently caused the Gates of our precinct (it being surrounded with
walls and Gates) to be shut, and raised a strong Guard from amongst the
inhabitants to keep the house where this accident fell out, and to prevent
tumult about it. Thus through the favor of the Constables, and Watch, who were
all my neighbors, I had the more free and quiet access to view the dead
bodies, and to inform my self of all the material circumstances about that
accident: which I did the rather, because the Bishop of London that then was,
sent to me to inform my self thoroughly of all the business, and to send him a
narration thereof under my hand; whereupon I did not only view matters my self,
but caused Carpenters to search the timber, to take the measures both of the
timber and the rooms. I was also present with the Coroner and his Inquest at
their examining of all circumstances about the business. And the Archbishop of
Camerbury sending to me to come to him, and to bring with me the best evidence
I could, I got the foreman and others of the Jury, and four persons that were
present at the Sermon, and fell down with the rest, but by Gods providence
escaped death, and one that stood without the door, within hearing, but fell
not, all these I got to go along with me to Lambeth, where I heard the witness
which they gave to the ArchBishop about this matter. One that fell with the
rest, and escaped death, was Master Gee a Preacher in Lancashire: two others
were a son and servant to a Citizen in Pater noster Row: The rest were men of
good understanding; able to apprehend what they saw and heard, and to relate
what they conceived.

FINIS.

