Look about you, For the Devil that you fear is in you: OR, THE RIGHT DEVIL
UNFOLDED:

1 In his Desent. 2 In his Form. 3 In his Education. 4 In his Qualification. 5
In his Place and nature of Torment.
With many other Divine Secrets, never from the beginning yet extant till this
Last Witness, so beneficial both for the Seed of Cain, and the Seed of Faith.

Written by Laur. Claxton.

John 8. 44. Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye
will do, etc.

He that commits sin, is of the devil, etc.

1 John 3. 8, 9. Whosoever is born of God, does not commit sin, for his seed
remains in him, and be cannot sin, because be is born of God.

LONDON: Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by William. Learner, at the
Blackamoor near Fleet-bridge. 1659.

THE EPISTLE.
To you the Seed of Faith, the only beloved Family of the Lord of Glory, your
poor despised Brother, yet heir with you of that immortal endless kingdom,
saluteth you as follows:

IN this Treatise I have brought to public view your grand Opposite Cain, the
father of all the devils children, in which you may take full sight of his
majestical person in this his kingdom, with all his glory appertaining to him;
therefore you that are not only verbally, but really the Seed of Adam, sing
praises to Christ your Savior, that your treasure is not laid up in this
kingdom that shall perish and have an end; and because of poverty here, rejoice
that your riches is in your kingdom yet to come; mourn not because of hatred
here, for this kingdom loves its own; let this rejoice your souls, that every
day you are nearer your Journeys end, and let this elevate your spirits, that
before you be aware, the Lord whom ye love and have long looked for, is a
coming, and will wipe away all tears from your eyes, and sorrows from your
hearts; for believe it, the Lord has recorded all your enemies in his breast,
and will execute vengeance upon them; therefore fear not the credit of this
world, nor the loss of thy life for thy God, but rejoice thou have power over
thy corruptions, I say rejoice for evermore, for our God does love an upright
innocent soul; therefore take heed of hypocrisy, and deceive not thy self in
acknowledging a personal God, and hate to be reformed, for it is life
eternal, not only to be a professor, but a possessor; this is the White Stone
and Hidden Manna, that has so few, and no name, you know what I say; therefore
forget not that first of John 3. 17. I say remember upon what account, and to
whom I speak it, otherwise at the last day thou shall find those sayings in
Matthew 25. 34* etc. fall heavy upon thee.

Now who ever shall peruse this Epistle, and has a desire to read one thing
more then another, then cast thy eye upon this ensuing Index, and there from
Page 1 to 20, and so on, thou shall find by the Figures, what thou most
delightest in; and the Lord give thee understanding in it, and faith to observe
it. Vale.

THE INDEX.
I. YOu have the Introduction of the miraculous Convert* CAP. I. II. The first
descent and true form of the right Devil discovered. From page 1 to 20. III.
Certain notable Queries answered. from p. 20 to 34 IV. The Righteous Rule, by
which you shall find few rich men saved, and that very few, if any of the Seed
of Faith shall be rich in this world. from p. 34 to 49 V. The difference of
rich men. from 49 to 54 VI. The right devil proved by Scripture. from 54 to 65
VII. The devil that tempted Christ interpreted. from 65 to 76 VIII. None but
the Seed of Faith understand the Scripture. from 76 to 81 CAP. II. IX. No Saint
educated like the devil. from 81 to 87 X. Not only a rich, but a poor devil.
from 87 to 91 CAP. III. XI. The light ranting devils quality. from 91 to 100
XII. The dark ranting devils quality. from 100 to 108 XIII. The covetous devils
quality. from 108 to 114 XIV. The vast difference of the two seeds in death.
from 114 to 116 CAP. IV. XV. The Saint-like moderate devils quality. from 116
to 123 XVI. The manner of Christ's coming to judgment. from 123 to 127 XVII. The
place where the devils shall be tormented. from 127 to 130 XVIII. The nature of
the devils torment. from 130 to the end.
THE INTRODUCTION.
ABout the first of February 1657. I took my journey for London, for the
accomplishing of a place then in agitation, and at my arrival there, I was
informed that the two Witnesses that I had often read of in Revelation the
11th, was now to be seen and spoken withal, unto whom I forthwith applied my
self to hear what they could say for themselves; then thinking in my self,
there was none in mortal flesh able to maintain an argument with me, as to
those fundamentals by them published to the world, viz. God, Devil, Heaven,
Hell, Angels, and the mortality of the Soul; but, alas! when I came to John
Reeve, so styled the Prophet of the Lord, which at that time I could not
be^^^ve, and observed his position then stated unto me, which was this, Did I
know the form, nature, and essence of God? Instead of cavelling or improving
the weapons of reason, with which I was well guarded, I was admiring that word
Form, how it was possible God should admit of a Form: to which I replied,
desiring to know what manner of Form he had. His answer was, God was in Form of
a man, clearer then Crystal, brighter then the Sun, swifter then thought: Then
was my soul the more troubled, that God being a man, should be swifter then
thought; This I concluded, it was requisite God should be swifter then thought,
but God having a Form, I could not understand how he should be swifter then
thought; well notwithstanding I was not satisfied, yet at that time little did
I say, only took his book along with me, and to my Chamber I went, perusing
his writing, in which I found such heavenly Mysteries, that the eyes nor ears
of mortal flesh had never writ, seen, or heard the like before; so that now
began the travel of my soul, how I should own this unparalled truth, and hold
my Benefice, which was the only livelihood of my self and five children,
consulting with my reason, it would be well if I could enjoy both; and to that
end I endeavored my self, and to my Benefice went again, improving my parts as
formerly, but the more I labored to preserve my self under that goard of above
an hundred pounds per annum, the more the beams of the eternal God did scorch
and wither my shadow of rest.

Yea, presently after there came in me a mighty conflict which did sift, turn,
yea, search the whole man in me, insomuch that I was as it were in a warlike
posture, whether I had best yield up my Benefice, or hold it at a venture; but
then, even then, was I summoned to give an account of my Stewardship, how I had
spent my life this forty years, and what I did think would become of my Soul,
and what would thy riches and glory here avail thee in the grave, but
especially at the great day of account?

Now friends, I would have you understand that I was in a strait betwixt two,
so that out of hand the spirit of Faith pleaded thus in me, That I had no
Commission to preach, and forthwith must cease, though it was to the loss of my
hundred pound a year; then stepped in the spirit of reason, and pleaded, How
shall my self, with five children subsist, when as this Benefice would
comfortably and honorably provide for us during life. Then, even then, was
death and life set before me, and the spirit of Faith pleaded thus within me,
That whether I had rather enjoy my Benefice, and therein live honorably in this
world, and so be damned to all eternity in the world to come, or whether I
would hearken to that call within me, to forsake my preaching with the benefit
thereof, and trust the Lord with my self and the children? this lay hard upon
me, and so narrowly pursued me, that for the space of three weeks I could not
be at quiet sleeping nor waking, going nor riding, in which time I had no
little conflict to disown the glory of this world, for the glory of God,
supposing my condition to be safe and secure as any man or Parish Priest in the
world whatsoever; and for my doctrine, I was not inferior to any, but more able
to declare the truth which I apprehended to be truth, then the best of them.

Notwithstanding, all this would do me no good, nor in the least silence this
combat within me, but I must cease my trade of preaching, lest a worse thing
befall me; and at that instant it came in my thoughts, Remember me, how here in
this world where now thou live, I was a poor despised Savior, though now a
rich immortal glorious God; and therefore take no care, I will provide for thee
and thine, so far as is requisite for such a one as thou art to be; and withal
remember when thou wast in thy wickedness, not knowing me, then I provided for
thee, How much more now shall I be mindful of thee so far as shall concern thy
good: Many of these refreshings did arise from my seed spring within me, that I
was made willing to disown all, that not long before I had taken great pains to
perfect, and so in submitting to the true light, darkness fled, and the Lord
freely forgave me all that was past, present, and to come, and has every week
more and more enabled me to walk obedient and upright before him, mortifying
sin continually within me, to the only praise of my God be it spoken, that my
calling and election is so firm and sure, that I weigh not the censure of men
nor Angels, but as sure as Christ is the eternal God, I shall at his appearance
reign eternally with him in the heavens; and though in my journey to my bed of
sleep, the grave, instead of riches, I shall meet with poverty; instead of
fullness, want; instead of honor, dishonor; instead of love, hatred; instead of
a good name, all manner of evil terms; instead of friends, foes; yea, may be
such as will persecute me to the graves mouth, yet now all this I matter not,
in that sin is my servant, and Christ is my Master, whom my soul earnestly
craves more knowledge of himself, with assistance of his power to withstand the
despisers of thy person so glorious in my eyes.

Now since the Lord in his own time, has in his free mercy called and chosen
me according to his eternal purpose of old, that I should redeem the time, I
have lost forty years, and for the future, the short time I have to stay in
this present evil world, my God, I doubt not, will enable me to walk holy and
without blame before him till I be called to sleep, or the day of his
appearance change this my poor mortal, to that immortal like himself, either of
which it shall please my God of mercy in his own time and pleasure to call me
unto, I had rather enjoy, then now at this present [mark what I say] then now
at this present, enjoy all the riches and wisdom that ever God gave to Solomon;
so that I can boldly say, Happy, yea, thrice happy am I that the seed of Cain,
that lying murdering devil, who captivated my soul many years a servant to
sin, and all manner of evil, is now disarmed and silent in me, and in room
thereof the seed of Abraham that blessed seed of Faith, has got the victory,
by which I am delivered from the power of the fruits of flesh, and translated
to the fruits of the spirit of Faith in the person of Christ the only true and
everliving God.

After this my remarkable change, being at home, silent and quiet in this my
mortal tabernacle, I was powerfully commanded, yea my seed-spring has certain
times invited me to demonstrate to public view, that point concerning the
Devil; which very title or name Devil, does fright the Devil himself and the
ground of this his fear does arise from the non knowledge of his first rise,
the description of his form, as also his education and qualification, with the
place and nature of his torment: thy ignorance in these things, has produced
matter sufficient for my Genius to recall thy thoughts, as touching thy mistake
of the right Devil, and so according as the true only wise God has revealed
in me, I shall make known th^se in their order, which has not yet been
branched forth, as aforesaid.

CAP. I. The first descent and true Form of the right Devil, discovered.
FIrst, as touching the Devil, his rise and original, I shall infallibly make
known unto thee, and from inspiration show, that subtle beast or Serpent there
spoken of, was no horned beast or creeping Serpent, as the Priests vainly
teach; neither was it any Pippin or Pearmain, or any other sort of Apple that
was so pleasant in Eves eye, or delightful to her taste: No, no, it was that
reprobate glorious Angel, that was far more pleasant and sweeter to Eves taste
then the sweetest fruit whatsoever: therefore I shall demand of the proudest of
his seed now living, what was, or which now of all creatures or things in this
world, is most pleasant in thy eyes, or most in thy soul desiring to taste? Art
thou a man, then is not a woman beautified and richly atired, most pleasant in
thy eyes, and sweetest to thy taste? Art thou a woman, what says thou, is not
a man beautified and richly atired with subtle and sophistical expressions,
most pleasant in thy eyes, and soonest deceived by him?

Even so that reprobate Angelical man, was that subtle Serpent or beast of the
field; mind what you read, that angelman was so pleasant to her taste, that
she took it, and did eat, which is no more then this, That proud, beautiful,
glorious angelman, did by his seeming divine wisdom and Angelical person,
bewitch Eves innocent soul to hearken unto him, and her eyes to dote upon him,
that she admitted him entrance into her body, in which, and by which she found
so much delight (that after that) she enticed her husband, who had copulation
with Eve, as man with woman in these days; so her innocent soul and body being
defiled by that reprobate Dragon-angel, after which her husband Adam going in
unto her, was also defiled, as a sound woman should receive into her body a
diseased man, not only her womb is defiled, but she pollutes her husband also;
as the Pox or Gangreen does eat throughout the whole man, so Eves soul and body
being defiled, did putrify the seed of Adam: From hence it was there came two
seeds, the one pure, the other impure, the one righteous, the other wicked;
Instance, from the womb of Rebecca came two seeds at one travel, blessed Jacob,
and cursed Esau; thus in plainness of terms, I have in short writ to plain
sober-hearted men.

But now from the words of the Scripture, I must speak to the seed of Faith,
that innocent soul-saved generation, and that because the learned of this
perishing world cannot believe, though an Angel should speak from heaven, as
you the seed of the Lord shall hear that seed of this Serpent will hiss, yea,
if possible, sting from his venomous tongue, this infallible interpretation of
these ensuing words; But of the tree of knowledge of good and evil thou shall
not eat of it, for in the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely dye:
Now if you look into the third of Genes, with an eye of Faith, then you may
clearly see what that Tree of Knowledge of good and evil did signify: The
words are these, And the Serpent said to the Woman, ye shall not surely die,
for God does know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be
opened and ye shall be as Gods knowing good and evil: And when the Woman saw
that the Tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to the eyes, and a
Tree to be desired to make one wise, she took of the fruit thereof, and did
eat, and gave also unto her husband, and he did eat. Oh my spiritual brethren,
in that my soul desires your perfection as my own, therefore I would gladly
have you possessed with an infallible understanding between Michael and his
Angels, and the Dragon and his Angels, or between the seed of the woman, and
the seed of the Serpent: Why? because in the knowledge of these two distinct
seeds, sons or generations, depends a general understanding of the spirit of
the Scriptures; therefore let thy ear wait on thy eye, and thy heart on both,
for now I shall unlock that secret Cabinet that has not been opened since the
creation till this last Witness; therefore attend and take notice that it is a
general opinion amongst learned men, that the Serpent which appeared unto Eve,
was one of the beasts of the field which the Lord God had made, and that the
devil was an invisible spirit which entered into the body of the Serpent, and
spoke those subtle speeches through his mouth, and so caused the woman to eat
of the fruit of the natural Tree which the Lord God had forbidden, and tempting
her husband to eat of that fruit with her, it operated that venomous evil in
them, and all mankind. [Note] Oh the gross darkness that possesses the
learned men of this perishing world, you know that the Scriptures are generally
expressed in natural terms, for the manifestation of spiritual things to the
weak comprehension of sinful mortals, and yet notwithstanding, the natural
wisdom of this world would persuade men to understand them exactly in the
letter, because they measure the glorious things of eternity by their rational
learning only, as aforesaid; but to enlighten thy understanding, mind
Scripture-records, how that Christ is called a Lion, a Lamb, a Stone, a Door, a
Way, a Vine, a green Tree, and such like expressions in reference unto
spiritual meanings; also you may read evil-minded men are sometimes called by
the names of Devils, Dragons, Vipers, Serpents, Dogs, Swines, fruitless Trees,
and such like, according to that of John the Baptist, when he said, Now the ax
is laid to the root of the Tree, every Tree therefore that brings not forth
good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire: So likewise you that are
spiritual, may know that, yea, that Angelical reprobate, by whom Eve was
deceived, was called a Dragon, an old Serpent, the Devil and Satan, a Deceiver,
or the Tree of knowledge of good and evil; and such like names suitable unto
his cursed nature; so that the naked truth is this, that Serpent that tempted
Eve, was that Angelical Dragon-devil beforesaid, which the Lord God from the
highest heavens cast down to the lowest earth, where there, as beforesaid, he
bewitched Eves innocent soul; for if you know what you read, you shall find
three prevalent arguments persuading her to consent unto the Serpents language:

1. The Tree was good for meat. 2. It was pleasant to the eyes. 3. It was to be
desired to make one wise.
But before I write of the three secrets hid in the Angelical temptation, give
me leave to speak a little of the dispensation of the secret wisdom of God to
his chosen ones: You that are of the seed of Faith, and none but you, does know
that in the Divine will of the infinite Majesty, there is a twofold operation,
which is this, mind what thou read, this is a great mystery, When the
wisdom of God sees fit to reveal a Divine secret to his own seed, then his
holy Spirit is all active, and when he sees fit to obscure it from them, then
his Divine Spirit is all passive: Why? because for the manifestation of his
infinite power and wisdom, that he can create light out of darkness, yea life
out of death with a glorious advantage: For understand this, that if the
glorious Creator, for the trial of his creature, should leave the most
experimental man that is, to his own inspired light, and suffer him to be
tempted to that evil of murder or adultery, and overcome thereby, he must of
necessity lose that former joy and peace of the divine light or love of God in
him, and in the room thereof, both see and feel nothing but spiritual darkness,
with a secret fear of eternal death, until the light of life appears again,
with a new assurance of a glorious deliverance from that sinful darkness and
fearful death, as aforesaid; truly whatever man shall imagine to the contrary,
as sure as there is a God, this was the condition of both Adam and Eve when
they were defiled with unlawful lust one toward another, by that subtle
temptation of that Serpents counsel, called the Tree of knowledge of good and
evil.

Again, though it is said, It was a Tree to be desired to make one wise, yet
you may know that the soul of Eve was not of a desiring nature after wisdom in
her creation, because she was all divine satisfaction in her self, therefore
that desire of tasting of the fruit of a Tree, to make her wise as Gods, to
know both good and evil, proceeded only from the rational nature of an
unsatisfied spirit of the Angelical Serpent; for this I would have you to
understand, that at that time when Eve was tempted to evil by the Serpent, she
was wholly left to her own strength, and it was the seeming glory of his
Angelical language that over-topped her present light, and begot that desire in
her understanding, through which her soul was moved with a powerful desire to
make trial of his Serpentine counsel, and to taste of his spiritual meat, so
highly exalted by him: Why? because to her received new thoughts, she had not
heard so glorious a language before. Also the Tree was pleasant for sight; yet
before that glittering Serpent appeared, Eve wanted no satisfaction in
beholding the man Adam, but she looking a little too long upon the comeliness of
his form, through his infused Witchcraft, her soul was ravished through his
Angelical person.

Again, it was a Tree whose fruit was to be desired to make one wise as Gods,
to know both good and evil: Now mind the pretended meaning of the serpent in
those words, was this, If she did but taste of the fruit of that Tree, it was
so full of divine virtue, that she could not only be like unto God, but she
would be as a God to her self, also to know all that was to be known, whether
good or evil, within her own soul; but the truth is, the Serpents secret intent
was this, that when she had tasted of that forbidden fruit, she should with him
both know and feel in her own spirit, the difference between light and
darkness, life and death, love and envy, peace and war, good and evil, or God
and devil; likewise observe since Eve, the natural mother of all mankind, was
overcome by lust, through the subtilty of the Serpent, has not many a poor
innocent virgin, or virgin-wife in like manner been deceived through the
comeliness of men's persons, and their Serpentine languages, by persuading them
that they loved them above their own lives, and of giving them such content
they know not of; or if they deny them, it will be their death, yea, telling
them, All men are but one man, and all women are but one woman, and therefore
it is purity to be free unto all, and that they are in the greatest bondage
which are united unto one only; I say, has not these, and such like cursed
counsels, occasioned many innocent soul to betray their virginity, or
virgin-bed unto their perpetual sorrow and shame afterward; Just thus was it
with the virgin-wife Eve, though it may seem strange at the first unto many
that shall read this Epistle; yet you know the Scripture says, That she seeing
the Tree good for meat, and pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to
make one wise, took of the fruit thereof, and did eat; that is, When the
innocent soul of Eve was overpowered with the Serpents subtle language, as
beforesaid, her spirit did consent unto him to come in unto her, and take full
possession of her, to be her God and guide in stead of her Creator: Truly in
this case the Virgin Eve's condition may fitly be compared unto the Virgin
Mary, for you know after the Angel had told her, that without knowing of man,
she should be with child, through the power of the most High overshadowing of
her, how easily was she entreated, not only to have it so, but also how
exceedingly did her soul rejoice with the very tidings thereof? Again, if men
look with a spiritual eye between their Angelical salutations, you may see more
seeming glorious enjoyments in the unclean angel greeting of Eve, then in the
holy Angels saluting of Mary: Again, though men or Angels should gainsay it,
from the spirit of truth it self, I shall declare the very sense of this secret
in plainness of speech [which was this] As soon as ever Eves innocent soul,
through the permissive power of God was overcome to consent to the Serpents
cursed council, his Angelical person entered into her womb through her secret
parts, and being united to her soul and body, his serpentine nature dissolved
it self into her pure seed, and defiled her throughout, and so became
essentially one with her; through which naturally she conceived a Serpent
Dragon devil, into a man child of flesh, blood and bone; and brought forth her
first begotten son of the Devil, yea the very Dragon, serpent, devil himself,
and called his name, according to his nature Cain, or cursed, though ignorantly
she said she had received a man from the Lord: So likewise on the contrary, the
womb of the Virgin-wife Mary was honored with the only wise Angelical God
himself, through which her polluted nature was not only cleansed whilst he was
in her womb, but also by virtue of the Divine power, she was enabled to
conceive his glorious majesty of her seed, into a holy Babe of unspotted flesh,
blood and bone, and in his season to bring forth her first begotten Son of God,
and call his name, according to his nature, Emmanuel, Jesus, or Blessed; so
that you which are truly and inwardly baptized with the true knowledge of the
holy One of Israel, may see in some measure what is meant by the two
Scripture-seeds, the Angelical devil first became a man-child, and the
Angelical God afterward became a man-child: thus the most holy God abased
himself in the very womb of a woman, that he might first or last destroy the
power of that serpentine reason, or lying imagination in all his elect
Israelites.

Thus, if you be not stone-blind, you may clearly see that the serpentine angel
when he tempted Eve, was no homely beast, as men vainly imagine from their
beastly reason, but he was a spiritual body, and appeared unto Eve in form like
unto a glorious God or man. Now if you be unsatisfied as touching the Angelical
serpent, consisting of as large a compass as the person of a man, and yet could
enter into the womb of Eve through so narrow a passage, as is declared by me; I
shall answer thee in those sayings of Nicodemus to Christ, John the third,
where he says, How can a man be born when he is old, can he enter the second
time into his mothers womb, and be born again? As our Lord answered Nicodemus
unto his fleshly question, so likewise from his own light in like manner, I
shall make answer unto this: Though the body of the Angelical Serpent in his
length or breadth was as a man is, yet you may know it was not of a gross
substance as man is, but it was a spiritual body created in another world, for
though the bodies of the mighty Angels are in forms like men, yet you may know
that they shine like unto the Sun or a flame of fire, being formed in a Region
of a more higher nature then this, therefore they are of motion more swifter
then thought, and of a pure, thin, or bright fiery nature; so that with great
ease they pierce through a narrow passage, at the divine pleasure of the
Creator: So likewise it was with that Serpent-tree of knowledge of good and
evil, for though his created purity was become all manner of imaginary
impurities, through his outcast condition, yet you may know that his form was
of a more fiery brightness then that of Adam, or else Eve could not possibly
have been deceived by him, as aforesaid; also his body being spiritual, though
his nature was carnal, there was no let to hinder this descending into her
womb, to bring forth the Creators secret purpose of two generations, coming
through the loins of one woman, to make an everlasting distinction between the
transcendent glory of respection, and shame of rejection.

Again, though the Angelical Serpent descended into the womb of Eve, yet you
may know that his ascending nature was utterly lost; so that in stead of his
ascending upward into that habitation of ravishing glory, from whence he was
cast, he was ignorant of it, and of that God and his mighty Angels, as if he
had never known them in the least; therefore he imagined his serpentine
subtilty, to be the only wisdom then in being, and this world to be the only
heaven: Thus all the seed of Faith may be satisfied, that the Devil that was,
is, or at the resurrection shall so rise, is in the form of a man, and this
Cain, man-devil, in process of time, married and begat sons and daughters, so
that there shall not only be a male, but female devils also; yea, since there
has been, and now is legions, yea millions of legions of his seed, in the
forms of men and women, and that as comely persons as ever were born of a
woman. O then ye seed of Cain look about you, and seriously lay to heart, how
rashly it has, and now at this day is preached, and by you believed, that the
devil was long before man was created, as also that the devil had never the
form or shape of a man, but as it pleased Master Painter to draw him forth in
such a form, that when the devil knows himself to be a devil, thou will see the
cheat of both the Limner and his Picture.

Notwithstanding it has been infallibly proved, that there is no other devil
but what is in men and women, yet it is made known unto me the various pleas
and excuses (why, or wherefore) the generation of Cain have endeavored to find
out a devil before, and without man: First, because that which is a devil, is
in antipathy to God, so a professed enemy to his glorious person; also the very
name devil, is a frightful cursed name, a name that is a terror to all
sober-minded men; therefore to cloak their cursed devilish actions, and that
they may not be noted by the righteous Abels to be devils, this devilish
generation atribute it to a devil without them.

First, It is by them supposed, the devil is a deformed creature, of an ugly
shape, with a cloven foot, etc. and therefore, say they, it cannot be a man or
woman, for they are comely, beautiful creatures.

Secondly, It is by them believed, that the devil can transform himself into
any form, and appear, where, how and when he pleases; therefore it cannot be
that man should be the devil, in that man can do none of these things.

Thirdly, say they, The devil is in hell tormented, and torments all that he
can captivate in his bounds, but we are upon the earth, not tormented, neither
torment we any man.

Fourthly, say they, The devil is a wicked cursed blasphemer against God and
all that is good, yea the devil is a lying, murdering persecutor of the
children of God; therefore it cannot be that man should be this devil, in that
he is a true worshipper of God, and is reverent of his name, no blasphemer, or
persecutor of his people.

Fifthly and lastly, The greatest Appeal the seed of Cain can make for himself,
is this, If there be no other devil but what is in men and women, then, say
they, Kings may be devils, Magistrates devils, Merchants devils, Lawyers
devils, Soldiers devils, Doctors devils, and Preachers devils, and so in
conclusion there may be few other in this world that at the day of judgment
shall be raised, but devils.

From these and such like, has that proud spirit of Reason in them corruptly
imagined a Devil after their own fancy, and have christened him Devil, yea, and
given him a place of abode, either under the earth, in the hollow of the earth,
in the depth of the waters, or in the air, or some place they know not where;
and all this is because they would not have God nor his people take notice that
they are his seed: These and such like, are in some measure satisfactory to the
spirit of Reason, that there is a devil without them, besides them, and
contrary to man's form.

Notwithstanding, it has been sufficiently maintained, nay, against all
Gainsayers proved, what the first descent or rise of the Devil was, which never
any since the foundation of the world could reveal till this Last Witness; yet
for thy further satisfaction, I shall in short answer those thy frivolous Pleas
and Excuses.

First thou pleadest, The devil is a deformed creature, of an ugly shape, with
a cloven foot, etc.

Answer. This is one of the imagined whimsies of the ignorant and learned in
these days; this is one of the Scar-crows and Bug-bears believed, and so
reported by his own seed, that the devil cannot be a man, in that he is a
deformed beast; and yet not any of you dare avouch unto me where, when, and in
what shape thou saw him, but in that thy soul is clothed with that ignorant
dark devil within thee, thou apprehendest and imaginest strange appearances
without thee, insomuch that an old Tree in the night is supposed a devil unto
thee: where this ignorance of a true God and a right devil has taken place, oh
how fearful is that soul of something without it, when the rise of thy fear is
really within thee! As consider, what is the cause that a soul cries out, The
devil, the devil stands before me, waiting to carry me away with him, and all
that are with thee beholds nothing but thy self frighted and tormented by the
devil within thee? for my seed spring declares unto thee, there is no such
thing as is supposed by thee; but that devil that ever was, is, or shall be, is
for the most part as comely a creature as walks in London streets, and has as
neat a foot and a a hand as any Lady in the land, which shall appear more at
large in that Chapter that treats of the seed of Cain, his education or
bringing up.

Again, It is by the Seed of Cain believed man is not the devil, in that, says
thou, the devil can transform himself into any form, and appear how, where, and
when he pleases.

Answer. If this were true, as it is not, it were nothing advantageous unto
thee, in that I can in truth and reality instance one remarkable Devil-man now
living, whose name is John Robins, that did more devilish exployts then any
conceited devil without thee: Sometimes he did present the form of his person
riding upon the wings of the wind, like unto a flame of fire; also he did
present unto some in their beds a great light, like unto a flame of fire over
all the room, that they have been compelled to hide their faces in their beds,
fearing they should be burned; but when they hid their faces in their beds, the
light did appear more brighter then before: also he would present unto them
Half-moons and Stars, and sometimes thick Darkness, darker then any natural
darkness whatsoever: also he did present in the day time his head only without
a body, to a Gentlewoman in her chamber, presenting unto her, to deceive her,
the forms of strange beasts, as namely dragons, and such like: much more might
be spoken of his deceits in this kind, how many great lying signs and wonders
this prince of devils was acted forthfar beyond all his cursed seed, though a
great many more has assumed to raise various appearances, yet notwithstanding
all this the fundamental was in themselves; as thus, A real devil within them,
but an imagined devil without them; and thus their consciences being seared,
they seek to make others in faith with them, that they can raise a devil
without them, which at the great day they shall find it to be a cheat that
shall burn in their souls and bodies more hotter then any fire and brimstone.

Again, thou say, The devil is in hell tormented, and torments all that he
can captivate in his bounds, but we are on the earth not tormented, etc.

Answ. This thy plea thou have received from others as wise as thy self, that
knows no more of a hell without man, then of a heaven within man; for alas poor
deceived soul, thou apprehendst a devil thou knows not what, and a hell thou
knows not where, for the learned or the proudest of his seed little think or
can believe, that their body shall be their hell, and their spirit or soul
shall be their devil, shut up close prisoners on this earth tormented to all
eternity? neither shall you the seed of Cain believe that your cheats,
oppression, adultery, swearing, drunkenness, and persecuting this infallible
truth, with all other of your filthiness, shall be that fuel that shall burn
more hotter then any natural fire in this world? And as touching that, whereas
thou says, We are upon the earth not tormented. Alas pititous soul! though all
the seed of Cain are not tormented alike, by reason of long habit and custom,
through which thy conscience is seared, that no small sin will torment thee,
but there are thousands of thy brood that have an earnest penny of that they
shall be hereafter; otherwise what causes the hideous, doleful sighs, groans
and cries of many of your seed in health, but much more on thy bed of sickness,
concluding in thy self, I am damned, I am damned to all eternity, finding in
thy self no peace, in that thou knows not the God of peace, neither have thou
walked uprightly in doing to others as thou would they should do to thee, but
have either publicly or privately transgressed the Law, by which thy sin is
strengthened, for the strength of sin is the law; and so death which is the
sting of sin, arraigns thee at the bar of thy own conscience, reading within
thy own soul, all thy private evils against God and man, nay from my
seed-spring I speak it, many of this cursed seed are seemingly Saints, and do
live as a people that does righteous things, and in gifts of nature,
heaven-like praying and preaching, to the admiration of all that hears them,
and yet they find in themselves, if they would speak the truth, what sad
torments they undergo while they live on this earth, yea so great in some, that
their torment cannot cease till the soul make away it self: As touching this I
shall remind you of one remarkable accident, which many in London this day can
witness the truth of what I write, Thomas Gun by name was the man, who for
gifts and parts in the Ministry, as also for a civil life, did equalize all the
teachers of the Baptists, if not excel them, and yet at that very same instant
was guilty of adultery, and that for a long time deceived his own soul and the
poor woman, his torment for which could not be satisfied till he took a Pistol
and shot himself to death: thus it was with him, and so with many more little
or much, are in hell, yea on this earth tormented, though nothing comparable to
what thou shall be at the day of Christ's next appearance.

Again, thou say, The devil is a wicked cursed blasphemer against God and
all that is good, yea the devil is a lying murdering persecutor of the people
of God, therefore man is not the devil, because he is a true worshipper of God,
etc.

Ans. If thou understoodst what thou say, I could set to my seal, that
whosoever is a true worshipper of God, is no devil, for indeed none can worship
him, or be reverent of his name, but those that are of the seed of Faith, those
that are eternally preserved in peace here, and glory hereafter; for it is life
eternal to know thee the only true God, without which knowledge, none can
worship him, or be reverent of his name; thus far I agree and set to my seal,
that this man is no devil: but alas, how many of these are in this perishing
world, though millions of thousand thousands make a show and a talk of a God,
yet very few there are that knows him as he is, a glorious personal God, so
that true was that saying from the Lord in Isaiah 10. 22. For though my people
be as the sand of the sea, yet a remnant of them shall be saved: Fear not my
little flock, it is your fathers pleasure to give you a Kingdom: One of a
tribe, two of a City; so few are those that knows the true God, that they are
but a handful to them that knows him not. But now to the Query in hand, The
devil, says thou, is a wicked cursed blasphemer against God and all that is
good; from whence thou concludes man cannot be this devil, in that man is not
so wicked as to curse and blaspheme God; what if I can find out such men that
has, and at this day will curse God to his face? is not this sufficient to
convince thee there is no other devil but what is in man? for I Will assure thee
there is some this day in London, and Country also, that in my hearing has
said, God is a devil, and that he has done that he cannot make good; that God
is a tyrant, a Cock and a Bull, a Horse, and all such like cursed terms; also
that devil-man has said, That if God did damn him, he would damn God; nay, it
has been spoken, That God durst not damn him, and that God was more beholding
to him, then he was to God; Also a man has said, That the blood of Christ was
of no more value then the blood of a dog, if these be not the seed of Cain, and
at the great and terrible day shall be raised devils, then let them say the
Lord spoke not by me; nay, there is a swarm or brood of this cursed seed of
Cain, that deny a God, or at least they make him a cloak for all their
lascivious lust, running after the steps of their father Cain in all manner of
wickedness: And what is their saying, If I can but have my Money-god, let it
come right or wrong its all one to me, I will not put it forth to usury, but I
will spend it freely upon my lust; and as for this glorious personal God, I own
no such God, for what say they, Our God is an infinite formless spirit, or an
infinite nothing, or an infinite all; that is to say, all in beasts, all in
fish, all in fowls, all in herbs, trees, and plants, all in men and their
wickedness too; even thus this cursed seed do believe that just, holy, glorious
God, to be the Author of all their uncleanness, so that true is that saying.
Psalm. 50. 21. Thou thoughtest I was altogether such a one as thy self; but at
the mighty day of my account, thou shall then have all thy sins set in order
before thee, and the sentence of this despised God, pass upon thee.

And whereas thou says, The devil is a murdering persecutor of Gods precious
ones: Well, what devil was that, think you, that from the beginning to this day
persecuted the people of God? was it a devil without man or in man? Surely the
Scripture with our experience, can to any sober man make it appear, it was no
other devil but man: As instance, who persecuted the Prophets of the Lord of
old, was it not the Priests and Elders of Israel? Who was it that persecuted
Christ Jesus? was it not their children the holy devout Jews, that murdered
the Lord of glory? Who persecuted the Apostles? was it not the same generation
of the cursed seed of Cain? Who put the Martyrs to the fire? was it a devil
without a form, or was it not a devil in Queen Marys form? Who is it now that
persecutes the substantial light or life of the seed of faith? is it not the
devil in man, or man-devil? Nay had it not been for the late Lord Protector,
whose soul was merciful to tender consciences: O had it not been that God had
honored him before and above all, in wisdom to go in and out before
Parliaments, and the Priests of this Nation; what a bloody persecuting day had
here been in England? and yet you cry out of the devil for a persecutor, when
it is the devil in you; so that you see there is no other devil but what is
that cursed seed of Cain. O therefore look about you, for the devil that you
fear, is in you.

Now to the last and greatest appeal the seed of Can can make for himself, is
this, If there be no other Devil but what is in man or woman, then Kings may be
devils, Magistrates devils, Lawyers devils, Merchants devils, Soldiers devils,
Doctors devils, and Preachers devils, and so at the day of judgment, few other
but devils shall arise.

Answ. What a Catalogue of great men is here recorded, thou supposing such men
as these, its pity to damn them, or at least God will have more mercy on them,
then on the poor ragged feed of Cain [and that because] of their greatness:
Surely, if possible, thou would turn God from being God, and that because he
says, He will have mercy on whom he will have mercy: And with our God there is
no respect of persons; So that mark what is said, What is a King? what is a
Magistrate? what is a Doctor? what is a Lawyer? what is a Soldier? what is a
Merchant? what is a Preacher? though their houses be full of gold and silver,
and their body richly clad with Jewels and raiment? What is all this to the
Judge of Justice? its but as filthy rags, no nor the persons of such men are
no more esteemed then the dunghill beggar; Nay, what does the Lord say, Not many
wise, not many mighty, not many noble men shall be saved, but the poor
persecuted for his names sake, are his beloved: Again, he says, It is easier
for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, then for a rich man to enter
into the kingdom of heaven: Do you hear, will ye believe, or understand that
these sayings needs no interpretation, however you may slight it, take notice
that what I now say, you shall find it, that since God became flesh, there is
no promise in Scripture to those that truly knows him, and so professes him,
shall be rich in this world; As find me out ten among ten thousand, from the
first of Matthew, to the last of the Revelation, that were true believers, so
living and so dying; I say thou can not find out half that number that were
really of the seed of faith, and rich in this would, so few they were then, and
so few now, that I think it should make the rich of this world to tremble, for
though you can pass the Scripture, with some evations of your own, and defer
the application of them as concerning your selves, yet from my Seed-spring,
this you shall know, that those sayings, It is easier for a Camel to go through
the eye of a needle, then for a rich man to enjoy in his own soul the eternal
truth, there being such antipathy betwixt them, that they accord like two
contrary elements, viz. fire and water, no society till one has conquered the
other: As instance, the riches and glory of this world, it elevates the soul
beyond its bounds, it finds so much content here, that that truth that will not
maintain this perishing fleshly glory, with all its lust and pride; Oh it is as
hard a saying as that of Christ to the young man in the Gospel, when truth
presents it self to a rich worldly man, and yet this man a great professor of
the letter, and makes a great flutter in vain repetition to a God thou knows
not; yet I say, when the eternal truth tenders it self to thy soul, in a poor
persecuted distressed condition, and tells thee I the Lord of glory had not a
bed to lay my head on; and those that will reign with me in that endless glory
to come, must forsake all, and take me for their pattern; and as for the riches
here, make as good shift as thou can, provided thou does as thou would be
done to. Oh says the rich soul, This is a hard saying indeed, for let me be of
what Art or Calling soever, if in that Art or Calling I do righteous things, I
shall be poor enough in this world, for I find in my Art and Trading, that all
men that grows rich, has got it by cheat and deceiving those they have to deal
with; for if a man deal justly, he shall have much ado to maintain his family;
therefore well might the God of all knowledge say, Not many rich, not many
noble, but the poor shall enter in at the straight gate; for the way, the path,
the gate, to the possession of the real durable truth is so narrow, that the
soul with its body must enter in pure and undefiled, not laden with cheats and
deceits, as thousands at this day strives to enter in, and are not able for
want of their certificate, that golden Rule, In doing to others as thou would
others should do to thee: Now if thou say, Where is that man, or how is it
possible for any man to perform this? I answer, I can both show thee the man
and affirm it is possible, for since I have known the true God, and been made
obedient to the rule thereof, mark what I say, I have not to my knowledge, done
that to another, which I would not the same party should do to me; and for the
possibility thereof, it lies in thy power to do, mind what I say, It is as
possible for thee to do justly as unjustly: As instance, thou having a friend
that reposeth confidence in thee, and declares the truth of his business unto
thee, concerning which he entrusteth thee to do for him, as if occasion
require, thou would have him do the like for thee; now the occasion upon which
thou art employed, is a business of great advantage, as a bargain of Land,
Merchandise or otherways, which if thou deal with him as for thy self,
sufficient benefit will acrue thereby; but now in the managing of this his
affairs, thou findst thou can gain for thy self twenty pound more or less,
and yet thy friend shall accomplish his desire, cheaper then if he had
aggitated the business himself; and as touching this thy pretended
plaindealing, and seeming honesty, thou have contrived a way that he shall
never know of it, but account himself as much obliged to thee for this thy
great kindness and just dealing with him, as if it were really so. Now speak
for thy self, was it not in thy power to give him all or no, and deal plainly?
was this any kindeness or just dealing in the least? or has it any relation to
that Golden saying of Christ, Matthew. 7. 12. Therefore all things whatsoever ye
would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them, for this the Law and
the Prophets: No, no, thou would never employ him more, but judge him, and so
look upon him as the ungratefullest man living upon the earth; therefore look
to thy own soul, how it stands related to that golden rule aforesaid, that
whether thou finds in thy self a desire of revenge toward him, or if ever
occasion of such an account be tendered to thee, thou will serve him the like;
I say be thou what thou will, thou may shake hands like Simeon and Levi,
brethren in cheat and deceit; as thou may call to mind one remarkable cursed
rule betwixt buyer and seller, as thus, Suppose thou be the seller, and I the
buyer, I come for such a Commodity which thou have, I ask thee the price that
thou can afford it to live by, thou does protest, as thou intends to be
saved, it cost thee so much, I having no experience, and believing thee, gives
thee thy price, when thou knows, thou have cheated me both in the goodness of
the Commodity, and the price; now judge thou if this be as thou would have
another serve thee? or do thou think for all thy long prayers and heaven-like
carriage, that these ill gotten riches, by which thou art grown great on the
earth, that such as thou shall enter the straight gate, or that thou shall rise
a rich, glorious Saint at the day of judgment? then I may say in vain was it
for me, to forsake a hundredth pound a year, and expose my self and children to
strayts, because I couldnot cheat; for I tell thee, if to do just and unjust be
all one, then I say with Paul, Of all men we are most miserable, when we might
be rich, to live poor here, and be damned hereafter. Oh no, no, as sure as God
is God, thou shall know, that so continuing and so dying as a cheat, shall have
all thy heaven here, and everlasting torment hereafter; therefore wonder not
why it is a hard thing for Kings or great men to be saved, but rather wonder
that any is saved: As take account from Saul the first King of Israel, to the
coming of Christ, and observe seriously how many of them shall arise Saints;
also take notice from Christ, to the reign of the Lord Protector, thou shall
find it is a hard thing to deal justly and be rich in this world; certain it
is, from experience I find it so far different, yea, so contradictory, that
from the seed of Faith I speak it, to deal justly thou cannot be rich, but poor
in this world, and yet what striving here is to be rich, yea wise and great in
this perishing world, not in the least laying to heart that saying of James 5.
1. etc. Go to now ye rich men, weep and howl for your miseries that shall come
upon you; your riches are corrupted, and your garments moth-eaten; your gold
and silver is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a witness against you,
and shall eat your flesh as it were fire; ye have heaped treasure together for
the last days; ye have lived in pleasure on the earth and been wanton, ye have
nourished your hearts as in a day of slaughter, ye have condemned and killed
the just, and he does not resist you.

Now look about you the seed of Cain, and tell me to whom was this spoken, or
whom does this concern, if not the great men of the earth, or rich men of this
world; and yet how few of you do consider that destruction will be the end of
this thy fleshly perishing glory? Alas, what though thou live thirty, forty,
fifty, or eighty years, this know, thy glass is a running, thy brave time will
have an end, and to thy bed of sickness thou must be brought, when then all thy
rich robes and precious Jewels may hang by thee, but thou can not make use
of them, and in room of them death prepares a garment for thee. O then, even
then, is a believers joy, which now is thy sorrow; for in stead of speaking
peace to thee, they will be a witness against thee, yea a declaration of
dreadful things concerning thee, reminding thee of all thy proud thoughts and
lofty looks; as also how thou have spent thy time in pleasure on this earth,
and been wanton in the day of judgment; yea, cruel in the day of mercy in
condemning, yea, killing the Just, that blessed seed of Faith; now if these men
shall be saved, and if those works shall be justified, that is recorded in Mic
3. 11. viz. abhorring judgment, perverting all equity, judging for reward,
teaching for hire, divining for money, grinding the faces of the poor, enriching
themselves in the ruin of others; I say, if such great men as these, that have
here enjoyed all the pleasure and glory of this perishing world, shall enjoy
that immortal ravishing glory in the world to come, then mind what will
follow, then in vain were the Scriptures written, and to no purpose was those
great sufferings of our Lord Jesus, who says, Mat. 19. 29. And every one that
has forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife,
or children, or lands for my names sake, shall receive an hundred fold, and
shall inherit everlasting life; and then in the same Chapter, Christ shows from
the young man's going away sorrowful, How hard a thing it is for a rich man to
enter, yea, says Christ, A rich man shall hardly enter into the Kingdom of
glory: and in verse. 27. when Peter said, Behold we have forsaken all and
followed thee, what shall we have therefore; now you may read his answer was
this, That ye which have followed me in the regeneration, when the Son of man
shall sit in the throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones,
etc.

Now in all these words, expound, or interpret which way ye can to style your
fears of death, and your dreadful portion at the great day, I say from the Lord
of glory you cannot find any color or title in the least that does encourage
or give any admittance to a worldly minded rich man, for if you mind what you
read, you shall find all the promises here, or in Scripture elsewhere, does
only appertain to such that has forsaken all false worships and false
Christ's, and has renounced all unjust ways or means whereby he has enriched
himself, yea he that has slighted a good name with the credit of this world,
and is not only ready to persecute, but be persecuted for that glorious, yet
despised man Jesus; I say from the spirit of Faith, all the promises of the
Lord in Scripture does only belong to these poor despised scum of the earth,
as in these words, Thou Peter, or ye my disciples, or any other of my precious
ones, that has lost all for me, you are those that shall have all gain by me,
you shall have everlasting life, and be with me in my Kingdom, yea in glory
like my self, as mind that saying of James the second chapter and fifth verse,
Hearken my beloved brethren, has not Cod chosen the poor of this world rich in
faith, and heirs of the kingdom, which he has promised to them that love him?

Now what can be said more, or what more would thou have God do for thee?
would thou have him unjust, or contradict his own word? then be content with
thy rich glory here, and let us have our glory with our God; we grudge not at
thy greatness in this world, no nor thou shall not hinder us, or detain us from
our portion of glory to come, thine is almost at an end, ours is yet to come;
and shall never end; therefore be not deceived, thou can not live the life of
the devil here, and live eternally with the Lord hereafter: then, as I said
before, so against men and angels I should say again, that such as I had better
never been born to deprive my self of such a livelihood, as I might not have
been inferior to many, and all to live upright and justly in this my strange
country, which now I am deprived of all; Surely, if it were so as some of Cains
cursed brood does say, and bind it with an oath, That all shall be saved, then
poor Paul, and the poor Prophets, and we in these days, have made a sad
exchange, but as sure as God is God, whosoever thou art, be thou Ranter or
Quaker, King or Beggar, thou shall find at the day of our Saviors appearance,
that thou so dying, shall never be saved; and then if it were possible, thou
would say what I here write, is truth, and such as thou art found liars.

Now one word more to this last plea of the seed of Cain, and so as touching
this point I have done, which is this: If there be no other devil but what is
in man or woman, then thou say, Kings may rise devils, Magistrates devils,
Lawyers devils, Soldiers devils, Merchants devils, Doctors devils, yea and
Preachers Devils, these being for the most part the richest men of this world,
and the Scripture in many places extends it language only against such men,
may cause not only a supposition in the seed of faith, to judge according to
the tenor of the inspired Writ; but also a terror upon the souls of rich men,
in that Christ compares riches to briars and thorns, as in that parable of the
sower, Mat. 13. 22. where he says, And the cares of this world, and the
deceitfulness of riches choke the word, and he becomes unfruitful, riches
being such a snare and deceiver of the soul, may justly, and that not without
suspicion, cause a serious examination, whether riches be not the only
instrument, why or wherefore the true God nor his word does not take root
within thee, where there is so much fullness of the treasure of this world,
there can be no admittance for the treasure of God, ye cannot serve two
masters, and that because the riches of this world is in antipathy to the
riches of heaven, in that one is perishing, the other everlasting, the one
clouds or draws the soul from God, the other expells mists, and draws the soul
to God; so that Christ knowing it was the greatest trial and snare to the soul,
does declare it a hard thing to enter, yea so difficult, that since he took
upon him the form of flesh, there has not, nor now is, not one of ten thousand
knowing the true God, that shall be much troubled with the riches of this
world; for where riches is, there must be a mighty power of faith keeping the
soul in obedience to its God, and that because where there is riches, it
requires the creatures whole attendance, to give all care and diligence that
possible may be, to augment it, or at least to uphold the stock or principle,
in so much that it makes him incapable to cast his whole care upon the God of
endless riches. Now to conclude, there is one thing more of great concernment
to be seriously laid to heart by these rich men, which is this.

First, How thou came to this thy greatness, whether it was by birthright, or
inheritance, as the eldest son.

Secondly, Whether it came by thy accute subtle wit and ripe ingenuity, in
improving thy Art or Calling, by which thou were capable of, by which fleshly
wisdom of thine thou art possessed in thy riches?

Ans. I shall from my seed-spring give thee the result of my thoughts as
touching thee, and as sure as God is God, thou shall find what I write is
truth.

1. For the first, Suppose in my condition, as I am, kindered or friend, should
unexpected by me, give me a thousand pound a year more or less, now it is just
in me to receive it, and possibly as justly I improve it, only here consists
the danger, that if by these riches my soul is drawn from God, and more
delighted in the pleasure of my riches then God, so that I think my self a
great man, and now am grown lofty, hard-hearted, and such like corruption
attends me, in so much that not only my self, but likewise my neighbors, takes
notice that I am not like the man I was before.

So that now thou that has thy greatness successively, is not by Scripture
condemned, provided it prove not a snare or a thorn to choke thy soul, by
having such a deep impression in thy heart, that the infallible truth cannot
take root in thee, only here is the hazard as aforesaid, if thou use it as
though thou use it not, which is no easy thing, yet if thou can make use of
it to the glory of our God, by feeding the hungry, and clothing the naked in
the name of a Prophet or a righteous man; so said, and so done, thou shall have
a Prophets or righteous man's reward, which is eternal life in the world to
come; I say if these things, in the enjoyment of thy riches, are performed by
them, then it may be thou art one of those few of the rich and noble that shall
be saved: But,

2. Thou that have got thy riches by thy subtle wit, is much different from the
other, in that the first was freely given, so that he came justly by it; but as
for thee, thou best knows how thou came to thy greatness; for thou have heard,
as aforesaid, it is a wonder for a man to do just and upright things, and yet
grow rich; therefore the Scripture calls thee to account, and that the more
thou may remember not many years ago thou wast but a poor Journy-man of thy
Trade, not worth a groat, but in debt, and now in these few years thou art
worth thousands.

O friend, deal plainly with thy soul, though thou may hide it from man, thou
can not hide it from God, for thy ways are naked to his glorious piercing
eye, that although thou may blind man with thy fair carriage and sugared
pretenses, seemingly gilt over with holiness and purity of life, yet for all
this our glorious personal God does know, and in thy conscience will read, how
many thou have cheated and murdered to make thy self great by undoing of
others; in this thing are not most of your Doctors over shoes and boots in this
crying sin, in taking a crown for that which cost but six pence, and not only
so, but for want of judgment and mercy, destroys the poor creature, to the
utter ruin of his family, so that thou art of that number that treads in the
broad way, that at last will lead thee to the destruction of thy soul
eternally, yea world without end; and therefore take notice, that God is not
afraid to call thee to account, or that he will be more merciful to thee then a
beggar, because of thy greatness, or that thy white hand or fair face adorned
with Silk, Gold or Silver, shall cause an eye of compassion more to thee
because of that, then to a black deformed creature; No, no, our God thou shall
find, sees not as man sees, neither is his thoughts as man's, if he were,
then had the fair, neat, rich, proud daughters of Sion been respected, but in
stead of a blessing, he blasted all their glory and their bravery, as you may
read at large, Isaiah 3. from the 16 to the end, first repeating how they
walked with stretched-out necks and wanton eyes, walking and mincing as you go,
and making a tinkling with your feet, therefore the Lord in stead of showing
mercy, did smit with a scab the crowns of the heads of the daughters of Sion,
yea, the Lord did discover their secret parts, and took away all their bravery
of tinkling ornaments about their feet, their cauls and round tires like the
Moon, the chains, bracelets and mufflers, the bonnets, tablets, earrings, and
nose-jewels, wimples, and crisping-pins, the glasses and fine linen, the vails,
with the changeable suits of apparel.

O if God were a respecter of persons, here was invitations plenty: but you may
read, that in stead of a sweet smell, he gave them a stink; and in stead of a
girdle, a rent, in stead of well-set hair, baldness: in stead of beauty,
burning; yea, and that with eternal burnings, shall all proud despisers of this
infallible truth undergo, at the great and terrible day of our Saviors
appearance; concerning which I shall open at large in the last Chapter. Thus
much in answer to your Pleas, now I shall prove from Scripture the seed of Cain
to be of the devil.

The devil or Seed of Cain infallibly proved from experience in Scripture.
II. BEcause of the great opposition that may arise up against this glorious
Truth, through the exceeding pride and unbelieve in the hearts of most men,
give me leave to cite a few Scriptures in confirmation of this work in hand: In
the first Epistle of John, the third Chapter, you shall find it thus written,
Not as Cain which was of that wicked one, and slew his brother: Also in the
13th chapter of Matthew it is thus written, He that sows the good seed is the
Son of man, and the field is the world; the good seed are the children of the
kingdom, and the tares are the children of the wicked one, and the enemy that
sows them is the devil. Moreover, in the 8th chapter of S. John, Christ Jesus
the God of Truth speaks thus, Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts
of your father ye will do: he has been a murderer from the beginning, and
abode not in the truth, because there was no truth in him; when he speaks a
lie, then he speaks of his own, for he is a liar, and the father thereof.

My spiritual and rational friends which are sober, was not Cain the first
murdering lying man that ever was born of a woman, seeing no true Christian
can gainsay it? was not that cursed Cain from the beginning, that murdering
devil and father of lies, spoken of by Christ aforesaid, in answer to those
carnal Jews which boasted themselves to be of Abraham's seed? and were not those
lustful murthering-minded Jews or Gentiles which our Lord branded with titles
of serpents, vipers, children of the devil, and such like filthy Canaanites,
which proceeded out of the spirit of cursed Cain that old serpent,
dragon-devil, and father of all the damned in this world, and not from the
spirit of Abraham, though they might proceed from his loins according to the
flesh, through mixtures of seeds in marriages: the sons of God saw the
daughters of men to be fair, and they took of them to be their wives. Again,
though the blessed Israelites and cursed Canaanites are mixed together by
carnal copulation, since the prince of devils became flesh, yet you that are
spiritual may know, that the Lord Jesus that made them both, knew how to
separate them for all their close union, and to call them by names answerable
to their own natures.

As consider, did not the glorious Creator and blessed Redeemer himself, make a
clear distinction between two worlds or generations, when he said, I pray not
for the world, but for them that thou have given me out of the world; can you
therefore that are sober, imagine or think, that there is any spiritual
salvation for these men or women, which the Savior of the world excludes in
his petition: Moreover, it is written, that the Apostles said, We know that we
are of God, and the whole world lies in wickedness: Behold, ye redeemed ones
of the most high God, is i^ not as clear as the light it self, that there is
two distinct whole worlds, according to that saying, Then all Israel shall be
saved: a redeemed world of ele^^ Israelites, and an unredeemed world of
reprobate Canaanites, that were never truly lost in themselves, and therefore
never capable of being found in Christ, accordding to that in the Epistle of
Jude, where it is thus written, For there are certain men crept in, which were
of old ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men, which turn the grace of God
into wantonness, and denying Christ the only Lord, we unto them, for they have
followed the way of Cain, and are cast away by the deceit of Balaams wages, and
perish in the gainsaying of Core: Thus is it not clear unto all such that have
in them any faith in the truth of the Scripture, that there is two distinct
whole worlds, to distinguish between the divine glory of Election, and
everlasting shame of Rejection? a cursed Cain, a blessed Abel; a subtle
serpent, and a simple Saint; a scoffing carnal Ishmael; and a spiritual Isaac;
a bloody minded Esau, and a merciful minded Jacob; a persecuting Saul, and a
prophetical David; a treacherous Judas, and a gracious and glorious Jesus, from
the beginning of the world unto the end thereof; yea, and a blessed Seth born
in the stead of righteous Abel, to bring forth the generation of the just, that
the Lord of eternal glory, might according to the flesh, as well as the spirit,
spring from a spiritual line of his own light of life eternal, and not from a
rational or carnal line of eternal death in chains of utter darkness; which if
it had power, according to its cursed desire, it would destroy God, elect men
and angels, heaven and earth, and all in them, and it self also, rather then be
subject to any, or might not only it self bear rule over all.

But now to the matter in hand, and withal consider what you read, for it
highly concerns you to look about you, that if there should be any evil angels,
or devils living in the air, and a devil amongst them, called Beelzebub the
prince of devils, then I say, what need any man trouble himself with the least
fear of eternal death, what wickedness soever is committed by thee; why?
because if a man is tempted by any devil but what is in his own nature only,
that evil spirit is to be eternally damned, and the man set free; nay moreover,
if sin or evil issued not from man's unclean reason or lying imagination within
him, is it possible, think you, that any man should be tormented, as some men
are, with an inward burning through a secret fear of eternal sufferings rising
in them, from the guilt of former evils committed against the light of their
own consciences; furthermore, seeing all men which live after the flesh, must
die or perish, and that man's own lust is that imaginary devil from whence
proceeds all sin or evil.

Without controversy though men or angels should gainsay it, there are no
other evil spirits, angels, or devils, but unmerciful men and women only:
Again, if envy, pride, covetousness hypocrisy, lust, and such like, be the
devil in man, then are not men and women those devils that are under the power
of those evils? I would fain know from the learned men of this world, whether
there are any other evil angels or devils besides mankind, that lust after
women, or silver, or honor, or revenge, or any kind of evil whatsoever? truly
if those supposed wise men that talk so much of the sublilty of the prince of
the air, that rules in the children of disobedience, could possibly know that
their own imaginary Reason was that evil spirit or prince of all their airy
disputes concerning God, angels, devils, Heaven, hell, eternal glory or shame
to come, which they know not of according to truth, then in stead of their
rejoicing in the approbation of many men in relation unto their natural gifts,
their own spirits would immediately become the principle of all those howling,
groaning serpent-devils spoken of in Holy Writ, even in the sight of elect men
and angels in this mortal life.

Again, is it not against all spiritual or rational sense, that any man, angel
or devil should suffer eternal damnation for the sin of another, or for
another tempting him to sin or evil? Moreover, does it stand to very good
sense, that, yea that creature that is left to himself to be tempted unto sin
or evil, and overcome thereby, and remains under the power of it to their lives
end? its requisite at the great day he should suffer for his own sin, and not
for another iniquity: wherefore, judge you, is it not one of the vainest
things in the world, for any man to think that there is any other evil spirit,
angel, or devil that tempts him to any motion, imagination, thought, desire,
word, or action of rebellion against God or man, but the proud, lying, envious
devil living in his whole man, as aforesaid?

Therefore let no man that professes spiritual light or life in him, for very
shame say, that God can be tempted, or tempt any man unto sin or evil, neither
let him say, that any evil spirit, angel, or devil in the air, or earth, or in
the water, or in the fire, tempts him to commit any sin or evil, but that airy,
watery, fiery, lustful, fleshly devil dwelling in his own body; I say, let him
know [that, yea, that] is the prince of the air, which through the absenting
virtue of the holy Spirit, begets those legions of devils, or lusts in the soul
of man; and it is the true light of the Lord Jesus Christ in all his new born
babes, that crusheth the Cockatrice eggs before they become serpent-devils, to
sting the whole man with fear of eternal death.

So that, understand what I say, those devils which by the powerful word of the
Lord Jesus were cast out of Mary Magdalene, or any other creature spoken of in
Holy Writ, were only all manner of filthy deseases, or violent fiery distempers
in man, that hurried him about any desperate wickedness whatsoever, oftentimes
increasing so powerfully, as you may read in Mark the fifth, that it did not
only occasion him to rend his own body, and break iron chains, but also he is
ready to tear any one in pieces, until the Lord of Glory shined into his
distempered soul, with that golden Grace of true Faith, through which that
imaginary devil is chained up, whereby all his fleshly goods were spoiled of
ever having power in him as formerly, and being now in his right mind at the
glorious feet of Christ Jesus, through his own pure light, leading him into
heavenly raptures, in reference unto his eternal glory, at his visible
appearing in the clouds with all his mighty Angels.

Therefore seriously consider, that if Cain or Abel were both begotten by Adam
upon the body of Eve, as for the most part all men vainly imagine, from one
bare Scripture-record which they understand not, I would know of that man that
is offended with me concerning this point, why Cain was nominated in Holy Writ
to be of that wicked one aforesaid, and branded as an outcast, fugitive,
vagabond, and cursed from the divine presence of the Creator, and cast out of
the natural presence of his parents for ever, and condemned with Balaam and
Core as a perishing castaway? This I am sure of, that no spiritual rational
man that is sober, dare say that either Adam or Eve was that wicked one from
whence the cursed spirit of Cain sprang, why? because there is no such
opprobrious names attributed unto them through the sacred Scriptures; Moreover,
you may know that, yea that wicked one from whence Cains soirit proceeded,
could not possibly have any relation to Adam or Eve, though Cain was conceived
in her womb, and born of her body, and that because there was an absolute curse
denounced upon the Angelical Serpent and his seed in her womb, as aforesaid,
without any after-promise in Holy Writ, for ever being redeemed by the Creator;
but on the contrary, you know there was a gracious promise by the Creator
himself of the Redemption of Adam and Eve, after their fallen estate, with
their whole generation of righteous Abels, Seths, or Abraham's, in that glorious
hidden saying, The Seed of the woman shall break the serpents head.

Now one Scripture more, which shall be against all gainsayers interpreted,
which is this, Matthew the fourth, beginning at the first verse: Then was Jesus
led up of the spirit into the wilderness to be tempted of the devil, and when
he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was afterward an hungered; and
when the tempter came to him, he said, If thou be the Son of God, command that
these stones be made bread: then he answered, Man shall not live by bread
only, but by every word of God, or that word that proceeds out of the mouth
of God: then the devil takes him up into the holy City, and sets him on a
pinnacle of the temple, and says unto him, If thou be the Son of God, cast thy
self down, for it is written, He has given his angels charge concerning thee,
etc.

Again, the devil takes him up into an exceeding high mountain, and shows
him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory thereof, and says unto him,
All these things will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me, etc.

In that these hidden sayings has their dependence on the precedent Chapter, I
must from thence make way to this divine Secret: As if thou could but
understand what thou read, thou shall find, that as soon as ever Christ was
baptized by John, the Holy Ghost fell upon him, that did empower him to
encounter with the devil; in which Dispute we must observe these two
particulars.

1. Who this tempter or devil was. 2. The nature of this temptation.
First, take notice that this tempter was one of the wisest and soberest, yet
subtilest Disputant amongst the Pharisees and Sadduces, and therefore appointed
by them to have conference with Christ, as by and by you shall read; for if you
cast your eyes on John the third, the fifth, sixth and seventh verses you shall
find, there went out to him Jerusalem and all Judea, and all the region round
about Jordan, and were baptized of him in Jordan, confefsing their sins; as
touching these John used no words of reproof or dislike in the least, but when
he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadduces come to his baptism, he forthwith
upbraided them with a sad, yet just sentence, saying, O generation of vipers,
who has forewarned you to flee from the wrath to come? etc. as if he should
have said, Ye are the children or that wicked one, that only comes to dispute
and to cavel, therefore John cuts them short with these words, Bring forth
fruits meet for repentance, and think not to say within your selves, we have
Abraham to our father: Then John proceeds further, and tells them, I indeed
baptize you with water unto repentance, but he that comes after me, is
mightier then I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bare, he shall baptize you with
the holy Ghost and with fire.

Now when the Pharisees and Sadduces heard this, they forthwith commissionated
one of the wisest and subtilest devil amongst them, which by experience they
found was best versed in Scripture, to see if this man-devil could persuade the
Lord Jesus to baptize them with the Holy Ghost and with fire: Now that you may
no longer doubt, but that this tempter or devil was only a man, as aforesaid,
cast thy eye into Deuteronomy 6. and the sixth verse, where it is thus written,
Ye shall not tempt the Lord your God as ye tempted him in Massah, so read Heb.
3. 9. Now tell me friend, who those were that tempted the Lord, were they not
the people of Israel, men and women? So this tempter or devil that I am now
treating of, was only a wise subtle man, as you have already heard, and will
in this temptation be made more apparent.

2. To the nature of the temptation, beginning at these words: Then was Jesus
led up of the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted of the devil. First
mind, the Spirit that led Jesus up into the wilderness, was the Holy Ghost
which came upon him at the baptism of John, a little before the tempter came,
as you may read in the last verse of the third of Matthew. I have found it true
by experience, that whosoever has received the Holy Spirit, cannot be free
from the temptation of the devil, that is, the cavelling, contentious disputes
of unreasonable and unmerciful men: But,

Secondly, in the next place I shall give you to understand, that this
wilderness here spoken of, was not a wilderness yielding fruit for the
supporting of life, where nothing but wild beasts void of reason does inhabit,
as the seed of Cain does imagine, and the learned of that seed do vainly teach:
though this wilderness was the same that John quotes in Mat. 3. 13. saying, The
voice of one crying in the wilderness, prepare ye the way of the Lord, etc. Now
let any sober man judge the black darkness that is over the learned, to think
that John should cry the message of the Lord to a wilderness of wood and wild
beasts, that has no understanding to receive it! and as great a darkness it is
for thee to think that any devil without man, or devil-man, could so far
overcome Christ, as to lead him into such a wilderness, no, no: therefore take
notice that wilderness John preached in, and this wilderness Christ was lead up
into, was only the wilderness of man's heart, whose hearts are as barren as a
natural wilderness that bears no fruit, as unto the true knowledge of things
appertaining unto eternal life: O mind what you read, it was the wilderness of
man's heart, and not such a wilderness as Moses led the people of Israel
through; for neither did John preach, nor was in any such wilderness.

3. Its said, Christ fasted forty days and forty nights, but from what he
fasted is not in the least mentioned, therefore I affirm, that as Moses fasted
forty days and forty nights in the mount from natural food, so did Christ fast
forty days and forty nights in the spiritual, that is, Christ did baptize none
with the Holy Ghost nor with fire, neither did he do any miracle for the space
of six weeks, and the original of this was, that he might be tempted of the
subtle serpentine devilman, as aforesaid, which made that devilman say, If
thou be the Son of God, command that these stones be made bread; however thou
that read may not apprehend this, yet let me tell thee that man-devil did
not mean the hard stones that we tread upon, no more then John when he said,
God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham. Oh what
absurdity is it in any man to think that God would of natural dead stones,
raise them up spiritual living children, no, no: when the devil-man said,
Command that these stones be made bread [which was this] Command this stony
heart of mine, and the stony hard hearts of the Pharisees and Sadduces that
sent me, command them to be made hearts of flesh, by baptizing of us with the
Holy Ghost and with fire, whereby I and others may so believe, that we may
become true bread unto Christ; for in John 4. 32, 34. there says Christ, I
have meat to eat that ye know not of, meaning his dispute with the woman of
Samaria: as touching this, it was his meat and drink to do the will of his
Father, which will was to baptize his Elect with the Holy Ghost and with fire,
without which no man could have eternal life abiding in him.

4. Then the devil takes Jesus up into the holy City, and sets him on a
pinnacle of the temple: Observe that the City and pinnacle of the Temple, were
both in the self same place, yet understand that the Temple and the City
signify one and the same thing; as from the words of Paul, Defile not the
temple of God, whose temple ye are; yea ye are the temples of the holy Ghost,
and the city of the living God, as is recorded in the Corinthians and Hebrews,
and yet you shall find, though the Saints are the City and Temple of God, that
the Scripture calls the Nation of the Jews the holy City; so that I know that
was the holy City that the devil-man took Christ up into, and there in the most
eminent or highest place of the Temple, stated his temptation in the pinnacle,
that is nothing else but the high temptation that this devil used out of his
own high spirit of reason, saying, Cast thy self down, that is, submit unto
this people which in Moses time were the only Nation or City of God, do but
submit to be Governor or King, in condescending to us, there can no harm befall
thee, in that he has given his angels charge concerning thee, thou being the
Son of God and our King, we shall conquer the whole world; but Christ's kingdom
not being of this world, he tells them, as at other times, Thou shall not tempt
the Lord thy God: It might well be called the high temptation of the devil,
that if it had been possible to unthrone Christ of his immortal Crown and
Kingdom, and crowned him King over a mortal, bloody and perishing kingdom, I
say, as in relation to the strength and subtilty of this temptation, a man
might well be called devil.

5. Again the devil takes him up into an exceeding high mountain, and shows
him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory thereof, and says, All these
will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me.

Answ. If you could understand the Scriptures, you shall read it calls rich
wicked men Mountains, and poor believing men Valleys; as says Isaiah chap. 40.
verse 4. Every valley shall be exalted, and every mountain shall be made low:
there is very little of the New Testament to be understood in the letter, but
spirit only; therefore says Christ, My words are spirit and life, so that if
thou could see with an eye of Faith, then thou could with me acknowledge
that this exceeding high mountain which the devil showed Christ, and all the
kingdoms of the world with the glory of them, were all in the devils own heart;
for if you mind the Chief Priests and Rulers, from whence this devil-man was
sent, they in their Council instructed him, that if that Christ to whom he was
sent, would but come and submit, yea, side with them; for submitting you must
understand, is no less then to worship, that if Christ Jesus would but submit
to be their king and governor, then they would assure him he should have all
the kingdoms of the world; for thou being the Son of God, no earthly king can
stand before thee, for in so doing we shall have the rule and government of the
whole world, and the glory thereof, which if thou would but condescend to
this, we could make our words truth, that Herod, Pilate and Caesar would give
place to thy crown and dignity, by which we should become a greater people then
ever we were: these and such like thoughts was in the Priests and Rulers, which
they thought they had so wisely compacted together, as a mountain not only
strong and great, but a high mountain over-topping all other mountains
whatsoever.

So that now you have the interpretation of that Scripture, which till this
last Witness could never be rightly understood, that the high mountain there
spoken of, was the moderate, wise, and high read Consultations in the breasts
of the Rulers, given into a particular, moderate, wise, high, learned man, much
read in the Law and the Prophets, to tempt, and if possible, to persuade Christ
to yield to this his high and learned Position; but you may read this
man-devils mountain was too weak, and too low, for the high immortal God to
rest or cast himself down upon; for to that end he came not into this kingdom
to be King, but to fulfill his own determined will, in destroying him that had
the power of death even the devil, yea, that devil-man that would, if possible,
have deceived God himself, and so returns his positive Answer, Get thee hence,
Satan, for it is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only
shall thou serve, that is, thou ought to be ruled by me, and not I by thee,
therefore depart, my kingdom is not of this world, but of that world which is
everlasting, immortal, and to all eternity. Upon which that man-devil leaves
him, tormented for not prevailing, and Christ refreshed by his Messenger from
his glorious Kingdom above the stars.

Question. If this be infallible what you have here written, then may you ask
me, How comes it the Learned of this world could not, as well as this Witness,
make known this hidden divine Secret, seeing they give themselves wholly to
find out the true interpretation of the Scriptures?

Answ. What ever the Learned of this world dream of finding out the invisible
things of Eternity, by searching into Scripture Records, and comparing them
together, yet know this, the Divine Majesty has locked up all the principal
Secrets of the Scriptures in his own spiritual breast, that he by an immediate
inspiration may dispose of them into the spirits of elect men and angels, most
advantageous for his own glory, and their consolation; therefore mind what you
read, and seriously observe, that the Scriptures runs not in the line of
Reason, but in the line of Faith, Inspiration, or Revelation, according to
those sayings in the Hebrews and other Records: By Faith the divine Work of
Creation, and wonderful Mystery of Redemption was, and is known, with the
immortal eternal Glory, and everlasting shame of men's persons in the end of the
world: but of the contrary you shall never read in any place of Scripture, that
any man in the least knew the things of eternal Glory by any kind of rational
comprehension wharsoever; I confess the natural Reason of man is a very good
handmaid, if it be well qualified with the spiritual dame of divine Faith, for
illustrating of the things of God unto weak comprehensions; but as for truly
understanding the invisible things of God by the highest reason that ever was
in man or angel, it is utterly impossible, as beforesaid, and that because
though the spirit of reason were never so pure, yet you may know reasons nature
is but a desire after the knowledge of the divine nature of that Spirit from
whence reason had its living being: but of the contrary, spiritual Truth or
Faith, is of the divine nature of God himself, and therefore in what soul
soever that Heavenly Seed is sown, it springs up in that spirit all variety
of divine knowledge, with glorious raptures in reference unto life eternal, by
virtue of an intercourse with the eternal Spirit from whence it came. Moreover,
I confess a man that is endued with a Solomonlike gift of natural reason, may
be able to comprehend all words, whether they are spoken in a good form, sense
or language, or no; yea, and such a man may be mighty in disputes about the
glorious things of Eternity; but as for thy real understanding, whether there
were, or be any such eternal things or no, thou have no certain knowledge of
that at all, but thy bare thoughts only, which if equally weighed in that
balance, it may be true, or it may be false, and all this is for want of an
infallibility of Truth it self; therefore though the divine things of the
eternal Majesty be nothing else but spiritual purity, of an infallible truth in
themselves, yet unto that rational wise man, they are nothing but non-sensical
blasphemy or lying tales, till his reason is confounded in him by a true and
heavenly Faith.

Now thou that have perused this Epistle, if thou understandest what thou
read, may behold how infallibly I have proved both by Reason, Faith and
Scripture, that there is no other devil but what is in man and woman; also how
this devil came to be a devil; so that if thou will not, because thou can not
believe, much good may that imaginary devil do thee, yet by the way let me tell
thee one word, which is irrevocable, that thou can not now really, nor at thy
resurrection shall find, or in thy self feel any other devil, but thy soul
only, which if it were possible for thee then to utter thy self, thou would
tell me what now I write to thee, was the naked truth; but then, even then I
shall be far enough from thee, in that I shall be with the Lord above the
Stars; this thou shall find, and this I shall be (as sure as God is God) for
believe me whether thou will or no, I do not write now as formerly I have done,
viz. hab nab, as a man only endued with reason, but take notice I write from
that revealed Seed-spring within me. Now to the seed of Cain his Education.

CAP. II. The Seed of Cain his Education or bringing up, undeniably proved
against any of his tribe that shall oppose it.
AS touching this I shall not need to spend much ink or paper, and that because
not only Scripture, but likewise experience does confirm, that there is none
of the Seed of Faith so honorably educated as the rich sort of the seed of
Cain; for indeed to whom does the wisdom and government of this world belong
to, but to them? and therefore nothing that in the bounds of reason can be
attained unto, but his seed enjoys it, nay, they are so exactly educated in the
affairs of this world, that by their reason they are able to comprehend all
words whether they are spoken in a Philosophical form, sense, or language; nay,
many of them are not only mighty in disputes as touching the Government of
this their kingdom, but they are also able in dispute about the glorious things
of Eternity, though they understand not the matter disputed of in the least;
for as Paul says, 1 Cor 2. 14. Neither can they know them because they are
spiritually discerned; for their education in the greatest knowledge is but
natural, and therein they are able to dictate unto the unlearned of their seed,
laws and rules to preserve this their kingdom in peace among themselves; for
you must understand what wisdom Learning can teach them shall not be wanting,
and the wisdom they attain unto, is not that spiritual or divine Wisdom, for
this only belongs to the Seed of Faith; As read but 1 Cor. 2. 4, 5, and 6
verses, and there you shall hear Paul show the vast difference of the wisdom of
Faith, from the wisdom of flesh; for the wisdom of Cain is a mere cheat, yea,
leads him forth to nothing but pride, oppression and cruelty, for by that
wisdom they put the Lord of Life to death, as in the eighth verse: therefore
you that have eyes may see what this learning and knowledge is the seed of Cain
are tutored in, that it is no other but the wisdom of this world, which is
foolishness with God, and that is the cause they come to tempt or dispute with
the Seed of Faith, whose wisdom is given him by inspiration or revelation, in
the demonstration of the Spirit; I say, because the wisdom of Cain cannot
receive the things of the Spirit of God given this precious soul, O how they
rayl with terms of a fool, an ass, a dunce, a coxcomb, a heretical blasphemer,
an ignoramus, one that has no sense; these and such like terms this cursed
Brood will brand the Seed of Faith with, the only wise men in Christ; for
which cause the Lord in 1 Cor. 1. 19. says, I will destroy the wisdom of the
wise, and will bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent. Where is the
Wise? Where is the Scribe? Where is the Disputer of this world? has not God
made foolish the wisdom of this world? and all because the foolishness of God
in the Seed of Faith, is wiser then that great knowledge in the seed of Cain:
for take this infallible truth along with you, which is this, that the
Scriptures in the life and power of them were never given to the wise learned
men in those days; For, says Christ, to you it is given to know the mystery,
to you my Disciples, or elected Seed of Faith, to you, and for your sakes did I
speak this: and therefore it was the wise, learned Priests and Rulers did
imprison and put to death, not only the Disciples, but Christ also, as
Blasphemers, for publishing this Scripture, which now their wise children do
make a Trade of, and will not only imprison, but, if possible, put to death
the only Witnesses and true Interpreters of this Holy Writ which was given by
inspiration, for the proper use of his blessed Seed of Faith.

Again, the seed of Cain are educated in the fullness and plenty of this world,
insomuch that there is no novelty, delicate or dainty, that by the spirit of
reason can be invented, but for their belly it is prepared; as also no new
antic fashion can be imagined, either of silk, gold, or silver, but their
backs are adorned with it, nay, there is no attendance of men and maidservants
that this their kingdom can afford, but the seed of Cain enjoys it; yea, they
are so tenderly and princely brought up at home and abroad, and so hurried in
their Coaches and Sedans, that if possible the cold wind should not blow on
them, nor the glorious Sun with his beams should scorch them, so careful are
they of their beauty and comely, straight, proper persons, that if possible,
there shall not be a wrinckle on their hands, nor a spot on their faces, unless
it be of their own making, for the more grace of their comely persons; thus
what by art in their wisdom can be invented, shall not in the least be wanting,
if it can be had for gold or silver; and whatever Science, Pastime or Pleasure
their soul can desire, as Hawking, Hunting, Bowling, Shooting, Gaming, at Dice,
Cards, or Tables, or any other delight of Music, Dancing, Courting of Ladies,
with the satisfaction of their greatest lust, and that with the greatest pomp
and state this their heaven can afford; and then in the last place for carriage
and behavior none in this world like unto them, as observe how proud, and
Lucifer-like, their father, they carry their heads, insomuch that they know not
what fashion or colored Perriwig to hang upon it: and when they meet any of
their brethren, O what congeying and bowing with Cap in hand to the ground,
saluting each other with these and such like complementary terms, as, Your
servant, Sir, or, Your servants servant, Sir, or, Madam, and fair Lady, I am
yours to command by night or by day, and that with so much stateliness and
comely behavior, that I wonder thou should be affrighted at the name or
person of the devil, considering what a glorious, proud, majestical creature
the devil is, as aforesaid.

But now if you ask me, Are all the seed of Cain thus educated?

Answ. No: for you may understand some are brought up to one Calling or
another, that some of them do undergo hard labor and great pains, to maintain
themselves with their families, in this their perishing kingdom, so that they
have neither gold nor silver [the dust of this earth] to manage such a fleshly
glorious education, as aforesaid.

And others there are that are educated, yea, brought up servants, yea slaves,
to the great Rabbis of their seed, which none of them have that attendance,
fullness, delights and pleasures as aforesaid; but on the contrary, are deprived
of all that their happiness the other enjoy, insomuch that in stead of giving
relief, they beg relief; in stead of a Bed of Down, they lie on a bed of straw;
in stead of being clothed with silk, they are clad with rags, yea many times
ready to starve for want of food; so that you may behold there is not only
rich, but poor, miserable, ragged devils, that shall rise at the day of our
eternal Gods appearance, so that I say these of all the tribe or generation,
are to be pitied, if pity did belong to them, to consider what affliction they
undergo in this their heaven, and yet be eternally damned hereafter.

Question. But now you may say unto me, and that seemingly affirm, both from my
writing and the Scripture, in that I have before treated much of the rich men
of this world, how hard a thing it is for them to walk in the ways of God, they
being so educated in the pomp and glory of this world; which I say, and your
experience finds it is the greatest thief that steals away the heart of man,
and so makes that soul as difficult, as a woman in travail, to enter into the
life and power of the Gospel; therefore we being poor, and the Scripture says,
the poor receives the Gospel, we much marvel how your writing will be found
truth in Scripture, that any poor should rise devils, when the Scripture says,
it is only the poor that receives the Gospel.

Answer. From this thy curious Query I shall answer thee in those words of
James 2. 5. where it is thus written, Hearken my beloved brethren, has not God
chosen the poor of this world, rich in Faith, and heirs of the kingdom which he
has promised to them that love him? Now if you intend these poor, I affirm
what you say, yea, from my Seed-spring I declare, not one of these poor shall
rise devils, in that these are the Seed of Faith, and educated in the knowledge
of eternal Truth, yea, tutored by the spirit of divine Wisdom: But now tell me
how many of these poor you can find among the poor seed of Cain, for if thou
understandest what thou read, thou shall find, though the Seed of Faith for
the most part are but poor in this world, viz your kingdom, yet mind what the
Holy Writ says, though poor in estate, yet they are rich in faith, so that
these poor by Faith receives the Gospel; therefore take notice of this, it is
not poverty in the outward man that makes thee rich in the inward man; for if
you could discern, by the spirit of Faith you shall find, that the major part
of the poor in this world, are as poor in faith, yea so poor, that they cannot
give thee the least account what God is, or what a rich treasure it is to
believe in God, therefore in stead of loving God, they hate God; as if it were
but recorded how many times in a day at Billings-gate, as also in all the
Streets of London, thou shall hear they are educated in little else but to
blaspheme the name of our glorious personal God, as shall be seen more at large
in the devil his qualification; so that deceive not your selves, and that
because of your beauty or greatness, no nor for your poverty, unless you be
richly clad with that rich Jewel of Faith, for that will manifest who was thy
tutor, and the nature of thy education.

CAP. III. The devil or seed of Cain his Qualification, and how he is acted
forth.
FOr your better understanding of what I shall now write, you shall find this
matter ensuing divides it self into several branches, and not only as touching
his thoughts, words and actions, but there are several distinct actings forth
of this wicked seed in matter of qualification, and yet all makes up but one
seed as unto its original, even the seed of Cain their father: as,

First, some of this seed you shall hear are acted forth to all manner of
uncleanness, yea such as is spoken of in Romans the first, from verse 21. to
the end of the Chapter, For this cause God gave them up unto vile affections,
for even their women did change their natural use into that which is against
nature; and likewise also the men leaving the natural use of the woman, burned
in their lust one toward another, men with men working that which is unseemly:
Of these sorts of devils we have among us at this day, and that not only such
that does take shame for what they have done, but rather will maintain such
gross, foul, filthy acts, and that because, say they, there is nothing that I
can think, speak, or do, but God is the Author of it; so what if I lie with
another man's wife, what harm can be in that? I know no evil in so doing, for to
me all women are but one woman, and this woman, a man, and that man, I man
eternity; and therefore if I lie with twenty, they are but all one to me, and
there being a free consent, what fin can be in this? for what has some in
London said, that it is no more sin for a man to lie with any woman, then a
Cock to tread a Hen, or a Bull to serve a Cow? nay this ranting devil is
qualified and acted forth, saying, till a man can act sin as no sin, he cannot
be free from sin; for thinking this, it is impossible for any man to be free
from these sins, unless he can steal, murder and commit adultery as no sin,
then, and not till then, say they, thou have no power over sin, and so thou
encouragest thy self in all thy impurity, in that, says thou, to the pure all
things are pure, so that nothing is unclean of it self, but to him that
esteems it so, not in the least considering as unto what the Apostle spoke,
that [to the pure all things are pure] from hence including all manner of filthy
acts whatsoever: Now let any of the Seed of Faith judge, if thou art not given
over to a reprobate mind to do those things that are not convenient? for as
touching this, speak thy self, what convenience does appear in any of these thy
destructive actions? for indeed destructive they are, both to thy self, and
them thou have to deal with; witness the tears of many a poor virgin-wife, and
the sad misery many an innocent virgin has undergone by thy devilish
temptation, to the loss of all her friends, the defilement of her own body, and
the eternal hazard of her soul, yet all this is justifiable in thy reprobate
mind, if thou can but satisfy thy lust, and spend her money, that is all
the love that she shall find from thee; and when this pretty deluded creature
comes and tells thee how the case is with her, I am with child by thee, and
thou have spent all my money, what will thou do with me? will thou, according
to thy promise, make me thy wife, and do thy best endeavor to satisfy me for
this wrong thou have done to me?

What is his answer, think you? even this he will reply: Alas, what can I do
for thee? marry thee I cannot, in that I have a wife; and to maintain thee I
cannot, in that I have it not for my self, so thou must provide for thy self as
well as thou can: Now if this poor deceived creature [should reply, and say]
thou toldest me thou wast single, and it was nothing but pure love to me, and
that thou lovedst me above all the world, so I did condescend to lie with thee,
thinking thou would make me thy wife, by which I have not only brought my
self to shame and beggary, but for ought I know, have damned my soul. Upon
these words this Ranting devil breaks forth, saying, A pox take you for a
whore, you are a dark devil indeed, to say thou shall be damned for thy love,
the Scripture commands us to love our neighbor as our self, and therefore we
are to love our neighbors wives, and how can our love be more expressed, then in
kissing, sporting, and lying one with another? and thus they make Solomon and
his writings their pattern, nay, they will engage soul for soul that she shall
not be damned, provided she do not look upon it as a sin; for say they, to lie
with a maid, widow, or our neighbors wife, is no more then to lie with that
woman you call my wife; for I know none lawfully married in this world, but
those only that are one in flesh and spirit, and she that you call my wife,
though I have had many children by her, she is but a whore, and the children
bastards, for we were not contracted in this light and purity aforesaid.

Now let any sober man judge the quality of this kind of devil, that his love
and purity is to destroy and beggar a poor innocent soul, and yet plead for it
as the only truth, saying, It is not I, but the Lord in me; of my self I can
do nothing, and he is all in all, with many such like Scriptures they will
produce, for to satisfy their devilish lust, persuading themselves that God is
an infinite formless Spirit, an infinite Nothing, or an infinite All, in this
their beastly reason, so that well comes in that saying of David, Psalm. 50. 21.
These things have thou done, and kept silence, thou thoughtest I was altogether
such a one as thy self; as if he should have said, Thou thoughtest it was I
that committed adultery, that did cozen and lie with the innocent, thou
thoughtest it was I in thee that moved thee to swear, whore, and cheat thy
fellow mortals; but thou shall know that I am a God, that is not an infinite
nothing, for out of nothing, comes nothing; as also thou shall know, that I am
not an infinite All in thy filthiness, for the day is at hand that I will
reprove thee, and that god in thee, as in Romans 1. thou have changed the truth
of God into a lie, in supposing there is no other God but what is in thee, and
so worship me as a God filled with all unrighteousness, fornication,
wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness, envy, murder, debate, deceit, an
inventer of all evil things.

Thus in part you have heard how this ranting devil is qualified and acted
forth, and that not only to all manner of women, but man burning in lust with
man, and women with women, as before related; and the more it is to be
observed, that what they do in this nature, they affirm it to be just, yea to
do as they would be done unto, for you that knows them, as much as I, shall
find their tongues tipped with these and such like words, but in their actions,
as you have heard, they have sold themselves to commit wickedness, and that
with greediness, never finding themselves more happy then when they are a
whoring or drinking, which to them is a pure truth as any sentence in Holy
Writ; for they do not esteem that sin which the Scripture records for sin, in
that they do not know what to make of that glorious personal God nor his
writing, looking upon it as a History of man's invention; for, say they, the
Scripture is a mere Map of Contradiction, so that such devils of this kind in
their hearts do not believe it no more then another writing, only for fear of
the Law they will say as you say, for what do they affirm, A lie and a truth is
all one to us, and so whatsoever we do, is righteous, just and good, and when
we die, we shall be swallowed up into the infinite Spirit, as a drop into the
Ocean, and so be as we were, and if ever we be raised again, we shall rise a
horse, a cow, a root, a flower, and such like, and so turn the world round as
before; as for hell or damnation it is all here, so if they can but escape
prison, sickness, and want of money, they fear no other hell or torment
hereafter whatsoever.

Now let any sober man consider the devils quality that acts forth this sort of
this cursed seed; and as for their language, if there were a devil without man,
that had any dealings with man, if possible, they would curse and swear that
devil out of his name and wits; for some of this sort when they are in company
with their cursed tribe, what oath or oaths was ever heard by the ear of man,
but they have it, and that with authority from their father Cain they maintain
it, and that seemingly from Scripture, and so will take oath against any one
they have a revenge to, if their false oath will prevail, they will do it. Thus
much of the white, light, ranting devil.

2. The next sort of this cursed seed are qualited and acted forth in most
wickedness like unto the first, only the difference is, the white ranting
devil does approve of all his wickedness to be righteousness, when this black
ranting devil does judge it a sin; and yet though his tongue will rayl on the
white ranting devil, and in what company soever he comes he will speak against
these cursed actions, and that because he does not only know them to be evil,
but he is afraid his wife, husband, children, or parents should know of it, and
not only that, but he is afraid the Law will take hold of him, and so punish
him, if not put him to death for it; these and such like are the motives
inducing him to speak against that with his tongue, which his heart burns and
lusts after: but however all these outward fears attend him, yet this lust or
devil is so desiring after a beautiful maid, or another man's wife, that though
he will say it is a sin, and has read the wrath of God due for it, yet he will
hazard not only his credit in this world, but the loss of his soul in the
world to come; and the ground of this his dangerous attempt, arises from these
and such like thoughts, I may escape as well as others, and I will be sure that
none shall see me lie with any woman, neither does any of my neighbors suspect
me, so that before I will lose the society of such a rare creature, in whom my
soul is wholly ravished with the thoughts of what pleasures and delights I shall
have with her, I will hazard both soul and body; for what says such a sort of
devil as this? as for the world I will play may cards so wisely, that none
shall hear or know of it; and though it be a sin, it is not the greatest,
neither am I the first or shall be the last, and therefore I shall make as good
shift as another, and besides that, I know that God is a merciful God, and
though in my strength and youth of my body, I do now and then break forth a
little, I hope the Lord, if I do but on my deathbed cry him mercy, he will
forgive me.

Ah poor dark deluded soul, do thou think, that when the righteous, just,
upright heart has much ado to find mercy, and yet thou wicked ungodly man
think it is easy for such as thou? no, no: thou shall find, that as in the
strength of nature and health of body, thou have spent thy time in satisfaction
of thy lust, when all that thy pleasure is at an end, then in a small measure
shall be presented unto thee what thou shall be at the day of resurrection: for
alas poor heart, thou think the God of Truth, is like thee, a man of lies,
and by thy corrupt petition to turn the will of God, as with a petition thou
can turn the will of man, but then to thy cost thou shall find he is a God
that changes not; which in the last Chapter I shall show thee at large.

Now to the matter in hand, as touching thy quality and acting forth, in thy
Carriage and Language, that from my Seed-spring I speak it, if there were a
devil without man, as there is not, that devil would tremble to behold thy
carriage, and hear thy expressions; for pride does so much attend thee, that
thou know not how to fashion thy garment, nor which way to hang thy Cloak
upon thee; now being richly clad, thou know not well what to think of thy
self, that whether thou be a god or a man, thy garments so glitter, and thy
heart so proud, and carriest thy head so high, that the poorer sort of thy seed
stands cap in hand to thee, yea, gazing after thee, that thou art so puffed up
with the thought of this, that thou think in thy self none in the world like
unto thee for beauty and proper person, so richly adorned with jewels of gold
and silver, that thou think every one that looks upon thee, admires thee;
from hence it is thy devil or soul is so ravished with the vain glory of this
perishing world, that thou art never better but when thou art abroad showing
thy bravery, with thy servants standing bare head before thee in the open
streets; as also to your Church you go, and what is the lodestone drawing you
thither? only because you would be looked upon as good Churchmen, and to have
the praise of the world, also to show your fine rags as aforesaid, and to see
and be seen who outstrips thee in apparel, or what new fashion is invented,
this, and only this is the greatest lodestone inviting you; otherways if thou
wentest to hear sin reproved, and thereby become humble for that thy rude
carriage and corrupt behavior, then it would appear in thy language, but thou
art so much a stranger to sobriety of speech, that upon every occasion thou
have these and such like expressions, God damn me I will have my will, the
devil take thee for thy pains, what are you mad you damned whore? I think the
devil is in thee: the devil confound me body and soul if I be not revenged on
thee: the devil rot thee, and the pox of God take thee for a pocky devilish
whore, by his life, blood, heart and wounds, I will be the death of thee, with
many such wretched blasphemous expressions, that the moderate devil does even
tremble to hear the language of this dark ranting devil: In these not excluding
the light ranting devil, but as far over boots and shoes are they in these and
such like cursed language, so that before I pass to the next sort of the seed
of Cain, I shall parley a little with thee about these wicked terms aforesaid.

Do not thou desire to be saved? this I am sure thou will acknowledge, and
yet thou call upon God to damn thee, how can thou think to be saved, when
thy tongue will witness, that many times thou have said, God damn me: and
whereas thou says, the devil take thee for thy pains, thou little think
that thou art that devil. Oh friend, time is coming that thou shall find,
thou, and such as thou art, the only devil, and therefore for the time
remember when ever thou says the devil take thee, then thou must take her, or
take him, to whom thou utterest those words, it is thou devil-man, thy self
must take them, and when thou says thou art mad, I think the devil is in thee,
thou speak truth not knowing it, and so when thou says, If I be not
revenged of thee, the devil confound me soul and body, now if thou be not
revenged, as many times thou art not, then thou art justly confounded, and if
thou do revenge thy self, thou art also confounded, in that thou should
leave that to the Lord; For revenge is mine, says the Lord [I will, not thou]
I will as I see cause revenge it, so that in this thou have sealed thy
condemnation; and whereas thou says, the pox of God take thee: ah poor
ignorant soul, thy tongue declares what a corupt ulcerated humor does run in
the veins of thy soul and body, that thou think God like thy self, when he
declares himself a God all holiness and purity, glorious immortal, that no
mortal corruption could in the least touch him; for it is written, Thou will
not suffer thy holy one to see corruption; and that such a devil as thou shall
say the pox of God, when it is really and truly the pox of thy devil lust
within thee, as aforesaid: I told thee how thou would hazard not thy credit
and estate, but thy soul also, for a beautiful, yet pockey creature in whom,
and for whom, thou have not only beggered thy wife and children, but corrupted
thy body, that thy nose or thy bowelts rot within thee, and yet thou so
audaciously shall say, the pox of God, when it is the pox of a whoring lustful
devil thy self, and then in all thy discourse thou must swear by his life, when
thou have nothing to do with it, in that his life is death in thee and to thee,
for thou hate in thy life to be conformable to the life of Christ; and
therefore take notice thou have no share nor benefit in his heart, blood or
wounds, it was never spilt nor wounded for them that are far better qualified
then thou, yet the blood or wounds of the Lord was not for any of the seed of
Cain, but he was only wounded, and spilt his hearts blood for the seed of
Adam, or Abraham, that blessed Seed of Faith; therefore thou wretched soul, let
this my short parley with thee, be for ever a Memento to look into thy soul,
and there thou shall find the devil that tempts or infuseth thee to utter all
this diabolical language; but true is that saying in John, from the blessed
tongue of Christ, Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father
ye will do; for from him to you, comes cursing, oaths and lies, who is the
father of it: As let but any sober man observe their quality in this, and you
shall have them swear, and say, God forgive me whore, and cry, God forgive me:
lie, and say, God forgive me; thus thou think it is nothing, but with one
and the same tongue say and unsay, to lie, cheat, whore, swear, and be drunk,
and only say, I have sinned, God forgive me, and so commit the like wickedness
again and again, and think this will serve thy turn; but alas for thee, the
portion prepared shall at the great day lie heavy upon thee, as read Matthew. 12.
36, 37. verses, I say unto you, that every idle word that men shall speak, they
shall give account thereof at the day of judgment; for by thy words thou shall
be justified, and by thy words thou shall be condemned, for out of thy own
mouth he will judge thee, as thou shall read at large in the next Chapter, that
shall show the place and nature of the devils torment.

3. The next sort of the seed of Cain, are qualited and acted forth to all
manner of covetousness and worldly mindedness, insomuch that thou abhor a
drunkard or any that is given to hospitality, and that because his quality is
quite contrary to thine; for thou art all for toyling and moyling, rising
early, and lying down late, neglecting no opportunity wherein thou may
enrich thy self, when as the other rises up early, and lies down late in
drunkenness, spending and making away that portion which was given thee, so
that thou being covetous, he is no companion for thee; for thou have so much
care in thee, and upon thee, how to make thy self great on this earth, that
unless thou can advantage thy self, thou will not spend a penny; but when
thou have got five pounds, or more, or less, then whatsoever shift thou and thy
family shall make, that shall not be diminished in the least, but to usury it
must go, and then thou pinchest thy belly, and the bellies of thy poor wife and
children, by living so long upon small Beer and flet Cheese, and such like
stuff, that thou increasest thy estate to a vast sum at last, that now the
greatest care and thought of thy heart is, how thou shall secure thy riches
from some of thy seed, that if they should break into thy house, they may not
plunder thee of it, and to that end thou inventest all manner of subtilty to
deceive the deceived, that thou hidest some in the earth, and some on the
housetop, and some in hollow trees, one place or another, that thy brother
serpent may not steal it from thee, or the Law of this thy kingdom impose great
Taxes upon thee; I say, thy care is so much upon this thy perishing earthly
treasure, that thy heart, thy soul, is wholly wrapped up in it, insomuch that thy
sleep and meat goes from thee; that now having what thy heart desires after,
thou art more tormented now then when thou had little or nothing; therefore
remember that of Christ, Luke 12. 15. where he says, Beware of covetousness,
for a man's life consists not in the abundance of the things which he
possesses, and where thy treasure is, thy heart will be also; so that what
will all this thy greatness in this world, and plenty of gold or silver avail
thee, when the tears of the poor are laid naked before thee, and starved for
want of bread, which thou had in abundance? and not only this, but it is
read in thy soul, that thou have enriched thy self in the ruin of others, and
thy conscience tells thee, thou never got this justly, but by fraud and deceit,
by grinding the faces of the poor, and keeping back the hire of the laborers.
As touching this, look about you, ye Tradesmen of all sorts, yea, from the
highest to the lowest, examine your own consciences how often ye have cheated;
and remember this ye Landlords, that oppress the poor Tenants; as also ye
Brokers that grind the faces of the poor, in lending upon usury, or
commodities, and that after forty or fifty pound in the Hundred; I say,
remember this, that no cheater, oppressor, nor extortioner shall enter into the
kingdom of Heaven, and therefore against you I cry woe, woe, woe; for this shall
rise up a witness against thee, and shall eat thy flesh, as if it were fire, as
it is in James the fifth, the first, second, third and fourth verses, and then,
even then, when thou think all is well, and that thou have settled thy estate
to thy hearts content, that now thou fear no want, but can without trouble
cherish up thy soul with the fruits of thy wits and endeavors, and to take thy
pleasure for the time to come, then comes the messenger Death, and deprives
thee of all the happiness of thy riches, and says unto thee, Ah fool, this
night thy soul shall be required of thee, then whose shall those things be
which thou have provided? Luke 12. 20. Now thou have brought thy covetous heart
to perfect what it longed after, and now must thou leave all, and know not
what will become of thy soul on the other side of death, and so in terror and
fear of death thou die, and in torment thou shall rise at the great day, as
in the next Chapter thou shall hear and read at large.

So that I cannot but admire the wonderful wisdom of my God, that
notwithstanding the pleasure and pomp of this world belongs only to the seed
of Cain, yet he gives them a bitter cup to drink at last, which potion makes
the devil afraid and to tremble at the thought of that day, by which they are
not only bridled from their great cruelty and tyranny they would i^^ose upon
the Seed of Faith, but also the thought of death does in some measure out-top
their pleasures and greatness, so that their life in this their only heaven,
is not much better then our life in this our only hell; for though they have
fullness, and such as we have want, yet we have peace, and they have war, yea
oftentimes sad torment to think what will become of their souls, when as the
Seed of Faith knows what he is here, what he shall be in the grave, and what
he shall be at the resurrection, even glorified with his Savior.

So if you seriously lay to heart the vast difference of the Seed of Faith, and
the seed of Cain, upon their bed of sickness or hour of death, it would cause
admiration, as thus: The departure of the seed of Cain out of this world, is as
much as if a Prince should depart, not only from his loving wife and pretty
children, but be banished from his Crown and Kingdom, never to enjoy it more,
and also where he is banished, he is shut up prisoner all the the time of his
life, even so is ^^ death in this world; he must leave, not only all his
society, but the pleasure of this his kingdom, where he had delight as much as
heart could wish, and in the grave his soul and body lies incapable of either
joy or sorrow, and then at the great day of our Saviors appearance, thou shall
be raised up thy body thy hell, thy soul thy devil, shut up close prisoner
world without end.

Now death is unto the Seed of Faith as a Messenger of glad tidings, in that it
frees him from the cruelty and oppression of the devil the seed of Cain, and
take him from all his hardship and wants that he has undergone, by living
uprightly in this strange kingdom, and then he knowing, that all the time he is
in the grave, there is no remembrance of good or evil, and as soon as ever his
God comes, he shall be raised to meet him in the air with his mighty angels,
where he shall have a kingdom that one hours enjoyment of that, will be more
then ten thousand times ten thousand the greatest substance of glory could be
attained unto for ten millions of years in this perishing world. Thus in brief
you have the difference of the two Seeds, what triumph the Seed of Faith have
in death over the seed of Cain: Now to the last sort of this people.

4. The next and last sort of this seed of Cain, you cannot easily, neither for
carriage nor action, find them much different from the Seed of Faith, nay, in
some things they outstrip some of the Seed of Faith, as by and by you shall
hear: For carriage they are very sober, and much given to moderation, that they
are very temperate both in meat and drink, and modest and decent in apparel,
and you shall not hear an oath from them, unless some small petty oath, as they
call it, by faith, or troth, and such like, and that very seldom, for thou art
acted forth to be mindful of thy tongue, lest thou should offend therewith;
and for hospitality and benevolence, thou art no niggard, but free-hearted to
them that thou respectest; and for private and public duties thou art very
observant, and in prayer and singing of Psalms, thou will many times shed
tears, and sigh and groan if thou commit some crime against the Law, and very
vigilant thou art to educate thy children in obedience to that God thou
know, and for thy expressions, they are so seasoned with sugared heaven-like
moderation, so affable and courteous, that thou would, if possible, deceive
God himself.

Now if you say unto me, How can this sort of people be any of the seed of
Cain? I answer: The moderate, hypocritical, Saint-like devil, is of all devils
most to be suspected; for of this sort was that man-devil that came to tempt
Christ; he was not only moderate, as you have him related, but he was well
read in the Scripture, and seemingly holy he behaved himself, otherwise he had
not by the Priests and Rulers been sent to tempt Christ; so that I shall
endeavor to satisfy thee in my Answer, both from experience and Scripture,
which shall be made plain, that all that cries, Lord, Lord, shall not enter
into the Knowledge of the only Lord God; for of this sort of people are these,
as is recorded Matthew 15. 8. This people draws nigh unto me with their
mouth, and honoreth me with their lips, but their heart is far from me, however
you may think it strange, that such a one that will not swear, whore, nor be
drunk, nor take the name of God in vain, but in stead of spending his time
idly, he will be reading the Scripture, and in conference with good men about
the things of God, and in stead of walking in the fields on the Sabbath, he
will be hearing the word preached, and then in the evening when others are
sitting at door, to see and be seen, he will be in his chamber at prayer, and
with his whole family singing of Psalms, or some such like exhortation,
becoming the day, and if thou be an Officer in thy parish, viz* Constable, or
Churchwarden, in stead of tippling in the Alehouse in the Sermon time, thou will rather lose the benefit of that word preached, and spend the time in
searching and peeping into Alehouses, to see if thou can find any of thy
lewd brethren, to punish them for their drunken sins: this thou will do, and
that with delight and pleasure.

This sort of people you may admire should be the seed of Cain, so rise a devil
at the last day, [what must be, must be] the Lord knows who are his, which
with their whole heart walk without hypocrisy before him; for as touching
this, you shall find thy brother before thee was as careful to serve the Lord,
as thou can be; as read Isaiah 58. 2. and so on, Yet they seek me daily, and
delight to know my ways, as a Nation that did righteousness, and forsook not
the Ordinance of their God: they ask of me the ordinance of justice, they take
delight in approaching to God. Do thou hear what a heaven-like character the
God of Truth gives of thy brethren? and if thou do but mind what thou
read, thou shall find five special remarkable notes of a true Believer; and
the first is, they seek me daily, not only the Sabbath day, but every day. 2.
and delight to know my ways, what my will and pleasure is. 3. they ask of me
the ordinance of justice, as though they would do no unjust thing. 4. It was
their pleasure and delight in approaching to God. 5. Neither would they forsake
the outward Ordinance of God: But now one word cuts them out for hypocrites,
and that because all this that they do [was but as a Nation] that did righteous
things: in plain terms, they were not in their heart what was showed by their
tongues; for if you read the antecedent verses, you shall find all this was
but to be taken notice of by God; for if you mind the third verse, you shall
there read their hypocrisy at large: and in the fourth and fifth verses, the
all-knowing God reproving them for their cheating and deceiving in their
hearts; and then in the sixth and seventh verses, tells them wherein their
great error lay, saying, This is the fast that I have chosen, to loose the
bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go
free, and that ye break every yoke, is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry?
that thou bring the poor that are cast out, to thy house? when thou see the
naked, that thou cover him? and that thou hide not thy self from thy own flesh?

These are the qualities of a true Believer, not to speak and prate, but to do;
for behold, to obey is better then all thy hearing, praying and singing, as
James says, Show me thy faith by thy works: Faith is of a doing and working
nature; thou shall not of such hear many vain boasting words, but many merciful
actions; for if you mind that all the judgments that God denounced against
the house of Israel, was for the nonperformance of charitable actions; as read
all the prophets, and where ever you find the Lord contesting with strict,
great professors, it was for neglecting the works of mercy, and therefore he
says in Isa. 1. 15. When ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes
from you, yea, when you make many prayers, I will not hear: and what is the
cause, think you? alas, your hands are full of blood, ye do not seek judgment,
nor rescue the oppressed, neither judge ye the fatherless, nor plead for the
widow, with thousands of these and such like you shall find, and yet thou
make no account of this: for what is thy thought? if I can but carry my self
demure with a Saint like countenance, and go Saint-like in apparel, and carry a
heaven-like outside to the world, behaving my self civil and moderate in my
words, I shall do well enough, though I do not those works of mercy so much
spoken of: I say such as thou, this is thy thought, and this is thy practice,
so to conclude, I shall refer the moderate seed of Cain to the three and
twentieth Chapter of Matthew, where thou shall read thy inward turned outward,
yea, the hypocrisy and cheat of thy heart laid naked before thee, for what
ever woes thou their read against them, that woe concerns thy self: As woe
unto thee moderate, heaven-like Saint, for thou art like unto the whited
sepulchers, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but within are full of dead
men's bones, and of all uncleanness; even so ye also outwardly appear righteous
unto men, but within ye are full of hypocrisy and iniquity: woe unto thee, for
now thou will make a trade of Christ, and his Apostles, yea, garnish the
sepulchers of them as righteous men, and yet at this day will speak evil,
imprison, if not put to death, the true prophets and righteous of the Lord, so
that ye be witnesses to your selves, that ye are the children of them that
murdered the Lord of glory. Ah woe, woe, as thou with the rest, in the next
Chapter shall hear thy doom and endless torment.

CAP. IV. The devil or seed of Cain, the place and nature of his torment.
IN that the face of the Creation is veiled with darkness and ignorance of
Christ's coming to judge both the quick and the dead, therefore I shall treat of
this most needful point, from certain sayings of himself, as read Matthew. 24*
where you shall find, As the light comes out of the east, and shines even to
the west, so shall also the coming of the Son of man be; and as it was in the
days of Noah, so shall it be in the days of the Son of man, they ate, they
drank, they bought, they sold, they married, and were given in marriage, until
the day that Noah entered into the ark, and the flood came and destroyed them
all: so in the days of Lot, they ate, they drank, etc. but in the day that Lot
went out of Sodom, it rained down fire and brimstone from Heaven, and destroyed
them all; So the day of the Lord shall come as a thief in the night, in which
the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt
with fervent heat, the earth also and the works tbat are therein shall be burnt
up, then shall all the seed of Cain mourn, tremble and shake, when they see the
Son of man in the clouds of Heaven with power and great glory, yea, at the
sound of his coming, the devil or seed of Cain will cry to the rocks and
mountains, Fall on us, yea, ye will run into Caves and Cellars to hide your
selves from the presence of that glorious personal God, whom in your life time
ye despised and rejected, yea, scoffing and walking after your own lusts,
saying, Where is the promise of his coming, for since the Fathers and the
Apostles fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning? and
so ye swear, whore and be drunk, yea, cheat, oppress, imprison and destroy the
Seed of Faith, not in the least laying to heart that the day of Christ Jesus,
that glorious God, is at hand, and will come as a thief in the night, yea, as
swift as lightening in the air, insomuch that two shall be in the bed, two in
the field, two in the mill, or wheresoever two or more are together, they shall
not have time to separate themselves, till the Lord of glory take to himself
the Seed of Faith from the seed of Cain.

As sure as the Lord lives, thus it will be very suddenly with this proud,
covetous, lustful, bloody world, that sport themselves about the resurrection
of the dead, and the day of Judgment, saying it is already past, or there will
never be any such day; I say, before ye be aware of it, Christ the King of
Glory will open the firmament of Heaven, and stand in the air, with his mighty
angels surrounding his person, and then by the power of his word speaking, as
he raised Lazarus out of the grave, so will he raise all the Seed of Faith both
dead and alive in the twinkling of an eye, as he did Elias, yea in a moment,
changing our mortal bodies to immortal, like himself; for you read in that day
that Lot departed out of Sodom, the same day it rained down fire and brimstone,
and destroyed them all. Oh what a dreadful and sudden desolation fire makes in
a mortal world in one day! so swift the Lord will appear, that he will make a
quick dispatch, and after all the Seed of Faith, that handful or little flock,
are safely arrived with him in the air, then the Man Jesus with a flood of
fire, will burn all the beauty and glory of this world to ashes or dry sand,
leaving behind the souls and bodies of the seed of Cain then living, with the
souls and bodies of their dead seed raised up, burning together like fire and
brimstone upon this earth, in utter darkness. Having in brief, by Reason, Faith
and Scripture, proved to all sober-minded men, that a day of Judgment will
come, the manner and nature of its coming, now I shall show thee the place where
that seed of Cain shall be tormented, which yet from the beginning, till this
last Witness could never be found out, nor any true, infallible description
given, as touching the place called Hell, though most of the Learned have
attempted, yea stretched the line of reason to the utmost, yet all to no
purpose* for thy father before thee, and thou his learned son, art not in the
least satisfied, and that because thou have not the seed of Faith, which is the
evidence of things not seen, therefore being out of the bounds of reason, thou
writest of it thou know not what, and so to find it thou know not where;
and therefore it is by thee recorded, that place called Hell will be under the
earth, in the sea, or in the bottom of it; if not, thou supposest Hell shall be
in the air, or a place thou apprehendest not; therefore from my seed-spring I
affirm, and that thy own experience shall find, that place of thy torment
shall be even there where thou tookest thy pleasure, that shall be the place of
Hell, even here in this world, on this earth, where now thou walk, shall be
the place of thy endless misery.

For if you observe your own rule in the execution of your Law, when a
malefactor is apprehended for wilful murder, or some such hideous crime, when
he is brought to his Trial, and by your Law found guilty, then the Judge of the
Law passes Sentence, that his body shall be burned or hanged, even in that
place where he committed his bloody, filthy act, and that justly where he spilt
blood, his blood should be required again; even so the Lord of Glory, Christ
Jesus the Judge of the quick and dead, when he comes to Judgment, all you that
have been guilty in the blood of the Prophets, Christ Jesus, and his Disciples,
that have put to death, imprisoned, or any way persecuted the Witness and
righteous of the Lord, that blessed Seed of Faith, I say, where you executed
your oppression and cruelty against the sons of the most high God, even there
will the righteous Judge execute his fury to take vengeance of all his bloody
enemies in this world, in this earth, where thou committedst thy wickedness,
thou shall receive thy sad and dreadful portion, and that world without end;
and therefore deceive not thy self with the vain imaginations of thy spirit of
reason, that though it be as I affirm, yet thou hopest it does not belong to
thee: but what is the cause of thy hopes? thou art neither satisfied in thy
self, nor does it appear to any other, only thou hopest with the rest of thy
seed, but have no assurance in the least, and that because thou find within
thee that thou art guilty, if not of public, yet of private filthiness; so
that, mark what I say, believe it whether thou will or no, thou shall by woeful
experience find, that this beautiful world wherein now thou have thy pleasure,
shall at the day of Christ's next appearance, be, as aforesaid, burnt to ashes
or dry sand, where all the seed of Cain, which in his qualification I have
branched forth into four particulars, shall not need to trouble themselves
about Heaven, and how they shall come to it, for as sure as God is a crystal,
glorious, holy, righteous, personal God, thou that desire with Balaam to die
the death of the righteous, and not to live the life of the righteous, thou
with all thy pretended holiness and unrighteousness, shall be raised no higher
then this earth that now thou treadest upon; for as here thou have taken thy
pleasure, so here shall be thy sorrow; as here thou have been a persecutor of
God and his people, so here thou shall have the vengeance of God upon thee, and
in thee; as here thou have cheated, and burned in thy filthy lust toward
woman, so here shall those lustful actions burn in thy soul and body for ever;
as here thou have sworn and been drunk, so here thou shall have nothing to
quench thy thirst, but even here upon this earth where now thou walk, thou
shall howl, burn and fry to all eternity, when then none shall pity thee.

2. Having showed thee the place where the seed of Cain shall be tormented, now
I shall show thee the manner and nature of thy torment, and therefore attend and
give ear: That after our Redeemer has called up the Seed of Faith, which are
but few in comparison of what shall be left behind, yet I say, after he has
taken that little Flock to himself, then will our long looked for Christ Jesus,
the God of Glory, immediately, yea in a few hours, burn all the riches, beauty
and bravery of this world to dry sand, as aforesaid, insomuch that there shall
not be left the least appearance of a house, herb, tree or plant; for the
Stars, Moon and Sun that gave light and motion to the fruits of the earth, and
moving of the sea, shall become nothing, yea, be put forth as the snuff of a
Candle, and this world shall be as dark as the land of Egypt was for three
days; for if you read Exodus 10. 22, 23. you shall find there was a thick
darkness in all the Land of Egypt three days, they saw not one another, neither
rose any from his place for three days; so that after all is burnt to ashes,
and that which gave life and motion to the earth and sea, is put forth, then
shall the earth bring forth no more fruit, nor the waters run no more, but
become a dark, standing, stinking pool, as it was in the beginning, and all the
seed of Cain then both dead and living, shall be left behind with bodies as
heavy as lead, and as black as pitch, which then their bodies shall be their
hell, and their spirits or souls shall be the devil, shut up close prisoner
together for ever and ever without end; and that fire and brimstone that will
burn, shall be those wicked thoughts, words and actions which in thy life time
where now thou art, thou committedst against the Seed of Faith, yea with a
great hand of pride acted against them, shall be the fuel, as wood and coal is
fuel to the natural fire, so thy wicked lustful actions shall be the only fuel
that shall burn, yea flame more hotter then any natural fire in the hottest
furnace whatsoever, and yet it shall give no light at all, but the flame
thereof shall be of a durty, scalding, burning envious nature, which shall
smoke and fry through thy mouth, thy nostrils, thy eyes, thy fundament,
insomuch that there shall not from the crown of the head, to the sole of thy
foot, be one part free, but tormented throughout thy whole soul and body. And
no sooner has our God caught up his blessed Seed of Faith, but this beautiful
world becomes dark dust or sand, as aforesaid; but then, yea even then, begins
thy kingdom of darkness, wherein thou must continue either sitting, lying,
kneeling, or standing, not being able to move one foot from the place where
thou art raised, but there being locked up to all eternity, never to see thy own
dreadful face, nor the frightful faces of others, their wailing and lamenting
for ever: Considering,

First, as in relation, that thou had so many warnings by such poor despised
ones as I, that has hazared our estates, our liberty, yea life and all, by
publishing such writings, and declarations from the Lord, that there was no
other Devil but such as thou, as now to thy eternal woe, thou caust set to thy
seal is too too true, that if thou had not shut thy eyes, and stopped thy ears,
thou might have foreseen what now thou feel, and not only that, but thy
remembrance shall flame, in that thou did not only slight, scoff, and scorn
such testimonies of truth, but thou persecutedst it to death, this is one thing
that shall burn and never be put out.

Secondly, the remembrance how thou have spent thy time in this perishing
world, shall quicken, and rise afresh within thee, as though they were but then
in doing, for from my seed-spring I speak it, as there is no remembrance of any
thing in the dust, so there is no time to the dead in the grave, for the death
of Adam to his resurrection, though it be thousands of years in respect to the
living, yet to the dead, so long sleep, shall be but as one nights rest, I say
when thou art awaked, it shall be unto thee as no time at all, for though thou
have lain in the grave a thousand years more or less, yet then it shall appear
unto thee as though it was but the last night, and as thou in relation to thy
thoughts, words, and actions died here, so afresh they shall rise with thee
either to thy condemnation, or justification.

O then thou light ranting Devil, that died in the living lust of thy soul, to
deceive the poor innocent virgin, or virgin-wife, and was never better, then
when thou had opportunities to deceive thy own soul, in the undoing of
others, persuading thy self and others it was no sin; but at this day thou
shall know it was a sin, and that personal God which thou in thy life time
despisedst, will now leave thee to thy lustful dealing god within thee, where
thou shall be damned to all eternity.

O then thou dark ranting Devil, that died in the pride and ambition of thy
heart, spending thy time in all wanton wicked sports and pastimes, thy eyes
have stared with fatness of the earth, and thy belly swollen with drunken
healths, yea thy tongue blisterd with cursed oaths, and yet thou knew it to be
a sin, but would not leave it till it was too late, where now God has left
thee to be damned to all eternity.

O then thou coveteous worldly minded Devil, that regarded no other God but thy
bags of gold and silver, and so died in the love and delight of thy riches, not
in the least laying to heart, how many thou have beggered to enrich thy self,
how many thou have murdered to make thy self great, all this thy oppression,
by deceit and extortion, shall rise afresh with thee, yea flame as a hot fiery
furnace, and shall eat your flesh, as if it were fire, where nothing shall
quench it, and that world without end, yea damned to all eternity.

O then thou moderate Saint-like Devil, that carried thy self so holy, and
heaven-like, under which pretense, thou did privately backbite, yea bear
false witness against thy neighbor, through thy Pharasaical prayers, and large
supplications, with reading and singing of Psalms, yea sighing, and groaning,
and lifting up thy hands and eye to heaven, thou did conzen cheat and defraud
thy fellow creature, thinking by thy hypocrisy, to blind honest hearted simple
souls, and so with thy cloak of Religion, thou did privately and subtly
enrich thy self in this world and yet got a name for a good chapman, and a
great professor, when all this while, thou art ignorant of a true Church: and
that glorious personal God; nay if thou be a Priest, or a Ruler, thou will
persecute both God and his People, that knows him as he is, therefore then,
thou, with thy seeming holiness, shall be damned to all eternity.

So to conclude, Let all the seed of Cain look about them, and while it is
called to day, seriously lay to heart, and that because as sure as he will
come, it will be very suddenly, and that such an hour that thou know not,
therefore watch and be ready for such an hour as you think not* for blessed is
that servant whom his Lord when he comes shall find well doing; which none
shall be thus found, but only the Seed of Faith: for as I have told you, all
the seed of Cain shall be taken unawares, yea committing one sin or another,
saying. This day will not be in my time, and therefore I will not leave the
pleasure of this world, not the lusts of my flesh, but I will one year more
refer it, so that Christ will take thee in thy wickedness, and give thee thy
portion with the hypocrites on this earth, clothed with darkness, in which thy
soul and body shall remain with thy sins, kindling and flaming more and more of
a dark envious nature, through which it shall burn perpetually as aforesaid,
causing a howling, with hideous doleful sighs and groans, yea weeping, wailing
and gnashing of teeth for evermore, crying, Woe, woe, woe, that ever I was born to
see this black tormenting day, of which there is no

END.

