There is now Published Proposals for Printing a Large Volume of the Discourses
of this Learned and Judicious AUTHOR,
UPON Original Sin, Repentance, Faith, the New Creature, Earthly-mindedness,
Hearing the Word, Justification by the Righteousness of Christ, Life of Faith,
Faith in Prayer, Christ's Intercession, Taking up the Cross, Man's Insufficiency
to do any thing of himself, etc.

The Undertakers, Tho. Parkhurst, Jonathan Robinson, and Thomas Cockerill, make
these following Proposals.

I. That the Book shall contain Two Hundred and Fifty Sheets, for Paper and
Print the same with the Proposals.

II. The Subscribers to pay Twenty Shillings per Book, viz. Ten Shillings in
hand, and Ten Shillings at the delivery of a Perfect Book in Quires.

III. For the Encouragement of those that will promote Subscriptions (for so
Excellent a Work) for every Six Books, they shall have a Seventh, Gratis.

IV. That as soon as a competent number of Subscriptions are brought in, the
Book shall be finished in or about six Months after.

A DISCOURSE CONCERNING Liturgies.

By the Late Learned and Judicious Divine, Mr. DAVID CLARKSON.

(...) Maxim. in ^ han. ^om. 2. p. 206.

(...) Sic conclud^t. e^. 112. Isid^r. l. 4.

(...). Basil de Jejun. hom. 1. p. 130.

(...). Chrysostom. in 1 Timothy hom. 6. p. 279.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside.
Jonathan Robinson at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard, and Tho.
Cockeril at the Three Legs in the Poultry. 1689.

A DISCOURSE Concerning LITURGIES.
THE Reputation of prescribed Liturgies depends on their supposed Antiquity;
this is their great, their best support. They pretend not to Scripture, nor
will their Advocates maintain, that the Apostles either used such, or left any
order for the composing and prescribing of them.

And it will seem strange to those that reverence Antiquity, that good Reason
should be found for them; if the Ancients for four or five Ages could see none,
in such circumstances as might render it equally visible to them and us.

If they had seen it, it would appear in their practice, there especially where
the Reason is thought to be most cogent, viz. in the administration of the
Sacraments. It is presumed, The Ancient Churches, from the very first Century,
did use such public wholesome forms of sound words, in their Sacramental
Celebrations especially, and afterward in other Holy Administrations or
public Duties, as made up their solemn, devout and public Liturgies. D. G.
Consideration touching Liturgies, p. 8.
that there first of all, there especially, forms of Prayer were (and are to
be) prescribed; and so it will be granted, that if Antiquity be not for them
there, it owns them no where.

By prescribed Forms are meant such as are imposed upon the Administrator, so
as those must be used, and no other, nor otherwise, without adding, detracting,
or transposing. The Favorers of such Forms suppose, they have been the
constant usage of the Church, every where, ever since extraordinary gifts
ceased. Their Opposites judge this has been rather taken for granted, then
proved; and suspect they are (...); and that this opinion had not got
entertainment, but upon a presumption, that things were so of old, because they
are so now; (...). Isid. Pelul. l. 25. ep. 18.

(...). Isid. l. 3. ep. 191.


and that the mistake had not so long prevailed, if it had been sooner examined.

It is not denied, but there were some Forms of Prayer of old, viz. arbitrary
and particular, such as this or that Person composed himself, or made choice of
composed by others, for his use in public. There is an intimation of this
later sort, Can. 23. Con. Carthag. 3. held in the conclusion of the fourth Age;
and it is the first that I meet with. But common Forms (though arbitrary) viz.
such as many Churches made use of in the same words, I cannot discover till
many years after; unless the Lords Prayer be made an instance hereof (...),
etc. Isidor. Pelus. l. 4. ep. 24.
. This indeed was used anciently, but far otherwise then of late, not more then
once at one Assembly, not in Prayers before or after Sermon, not at all in the
Catechumens office, (...). Chryso^l. in Math. hom. 18. p. 139. and Hom. 2. in 2
Cor. p. 553. Amongst other things there recited, which the Catechumens were not
partakers of, this is one. (...). Hence when he is to speak of the Lords
Prayer, he uses the ordinary form of concealment, whereby the Ancients denote
what was peculiar to the fidiles, (...), in 1 Timothy Hom. 5. p. 273. and (...),
in Genesis hom. 28. p. 214, and that the Baptized were admitted to say it
presently after Baptism, in Coloss. hom. 5. p. 122.

Hanc orationem baptizati orant. August. epist. 54.

Vid. Albaspin. observe. li. 1. c. 9. and in him Cyprian, Cyril, Ambrose.

Quam totam Petitionem fere omnis ecclesia dominica oratione concludit. Aug.
ep. 59.


no where in their ordinary Service; but (...) (in 2 Cor. hom. 3.) as
Chrysostom calls the Eucharistical Office; and there commonly in the conclusion
of the Prayer for the blessing of the Elements.

But though they used the words of it there, yet not out of any apprehension,
that Christ did injoin them there to use it. Augustine declares it plainly Aug.
Non te ergo movet Dominus summus Magister, cum orare doceret Discipulos, verba
quaedam docuit, in quo nihil aliud videtur fecisse, quam docuisse quomodo in
orando loqui oporteret? Ad. Nihil me omnino istud movet, non enim verba, sed
^es ipsas cos verbes docuit, quibus and seipsi common^sacerent, a quo q^id
esset orandum, cum in penetralibus, ut dictum est mentis, orarect. Aug, Recte
intelligis. Lib. de Magistro. cap. 1. p. 172. tom. 1. edit. Lugdan.

To the same purpose Beda in Math. 6.

And of late Writers, some of the most eminent, Noluit praescribere filius Dei
quibus verbit utendum sit, ut ab ea quam dictavit formula deflectere non
liceat, Calvin in Math. 6. 9. So Musculus.

Maldonat. sic] Non his necessario verbis; sed hac aut simili sententia -- Nam
non Apostolos orando his ipsis verbis usos fuisse legimus; aliis legimus Act.
24. Neque voluit Christus, ut quotiescunque oramus, ista omnia que hac oratione
continentur peteremus; sed ut omnia, aut aliqua, aut nihil certe his contrarium
peterem, in Matthew. 6. 9.

Cornel. A Lapide.

Grotius in Matthew. 6. 9. (...)] In hunc sensum. Non enim praecipit Christus
verba recitari, quod non legimus Apostolos secisse (qua^quam id quoque fieri
cum fructu potest) sed materiam precum hinc promere, in Luc. 11. docet nos
compendium rerum orandarum, neque enim eo tempore syllabis adstringebantur.

Casaubon, exercit. 235. Christus vero non de praedicatione Dei landum agit;
sed, ut recte monet Augustinus, de modo concipiendi preces privatas.

Mr. Mede conceives that the Disciples understood not that Christ in Matthew
intended it for a Form of Prayer unto them, but for a Pattern and Example only,
etc. p. 5.

And sure they could less understand, by that in Luke 4. that Christ intended
they should use the same words (as in a set Form) since the same words are not
there used.

Hence Jansenius inferrs, that Christ would not have any so careful of the
words, as of the things to be prayed for; itaque ut disceremus in oratione, non
tam de verbis, quam derebus esse anxii, ac de Spiritu orationis, diversis
verbis orationem tradidit, in Luc. 11.


that Christ in the delivery of those Petitions, did not teach his Disciples
what words they should use in Prayer, but what things they should pray for; and
understands it to be a direction for secret and mental Prayer, where no words
are to be used. The coherence in Matthew. 6. led him to explain it of such
Praying, as Christ is speaking of ver. 6. which he took to be mental, and none
deny to be secret.

It is granted also, that diverse Churches had a certain order, wherein they
agreed to administer the several parts of Worship, and particularly the
severals in the Sacraments; so as each had its known and fixed place. An order
there is visible in Chrysostom, in 2 Cor. hom. 18. p. 647. and in Augustine to
Paulinus, epist. 59. quaest. 5. p. 340, 341. This was settled in some Churches
by Custom; and in some there was in time a Rule for it, such is that, Can. 19.
Syn. Laodicen. whose Title in the Latin Copies is, de ordine orationum
Catechumenorum atque fidelium. And in the West, the 27 Canon of the Synod of
Pau, in the beginning of the sixth Age. And it is provided for in general terms
by the Council of Vens Can. in the latter end of the fifth Age.

Besides such direction as is in those Canons, other written Rubricks were not
needful. For the actual disposing of the severals in their proper place, the
(...) served them, of which Can. 22. and 23. Conc. Laodic. (...). in Con. Laod.
Can. in Cod. 126.
This managed by a Deacon, acquainted with the usages of the Church where he
ministered, was sufficient, without other Rubric for that purpose, supposing it
answered that description of its ancient use, which we have in Balsamo.

There was also some kind of Uniformity in their Sacramental Prayers; that is,
a general agreement to pray for the same things, though not in the same words.
They might have said thereof, quamlibet alia verba dicamus, nihil aliud
dicimus. This appeared especially in the general Prayer before the Eucharist.
Therein for whom, and for what they prayed, very many of the Ancients give some
account. Thereby it is manifest, that they prayed for the same persons, (for
all of all sorts) and for the same things, with respect to the various
conditions of those several sorts of persons; and this in variety of
expressions. So that herein was exemplified that of Augustine, Liberum est
aliis atque aliis verbis, eadem tamen in orando dicere, Epist. 121. And this is
the Uniformity in Prayer which Caelestine urges against the Pelagians; Epist.
pro Prosper. and Hilar. c. 11. All Churches through the World agreeing to pray
for those persons, and those things, which were inconsistent with their Tenets.
And that mode of Praying, which as the Author of the Books, de vocatione
Gentium, Praecipit itaque Apostolus, im^ per Apostolum Dominus fieri
obsecrationes, etc. pro omnibus hominibus, pro Regi^us, etc. quam legem
supplicationis it a omnium Sacerdotum, and omnium fidelium devotio concorditer
tenet, ut nulla pars mundi sit, in qua hujusmodi orationes non celebrentur a
populis Christianis. Supplicat ergo ubique Ecclesia Deo, non solum pro Sanctis,
and in Christo jam regeneratis; sed etiam, pro omnibus infidelibus and inimicis
crucis Christi, pro omnibus Idolorum cultoribus; pro omnibus, qui Christum in
membris ipsius prosequuntur; pro Jud^is -- pro Haereticis and Schismaticis --
Quid autem pro istis petit, nisi ut, relictis erroribus suis, convertantur ad
Deum, accipiant fidem, accipiant charitatem, and de ignor antiae tenebris
liberati, in agnitionem veniant veritatis. De voc. Gent. lib. 1. cap. 12.
says, the Lord, by the Apostle, having prescribed, the devotion of all sorts
did concorditer observe.

Such particular and voluntary Forms, such an order in Administering, such an
uniformity in Praying, is not in question; nor am I concerned in common Forms
if arbitrary, though settled by custom. But this is it which is denied, that in
the ancient Church, for many Ages after Christ, such Liturgies, or Forms of
Prayer, were commonly imposed on those who administered the Sacraments, as are
before described.

Or that in the ancient Church, while its condition was tolerable, or its
practice imitable, the common and ordinary way of administering the Sacraments,
was by such prescribed Liturgies and Forms of Prayer, as are before described;
wherein the Administrators had no liberty left to change words or order, to
abridge or enlarge, or otherwise vary from the imposed Models.

If there had been such Liturgies anciently, as are contended for, and are now
in use; Prayers would have been read then, as they are now. But (...), or
preces legere, or de scripto recitare, or any Forms of Speech equivalent, are
Phrases unknown, and not to be found, so far as I can yet discover in any
Writers of the four or five first Ages at least; and therefore the thing was in
all probability not known, nor practiced in those times.

We meet not only with the Reading of Psalms, Theod. l. 2. c. 13. p. 63.
Reading of Lessons; but Reading of the Narratives of the Martyrs Sufferings.
(...). Just. M. Apol. 2.

(...). Con. Laod. Can. 17.


Passiones Martyrum, Con. 3. Carth. Can. 47. Carranz. p. 116. liceat it aque
legi passiones Martyrum, cum anniversarii dies eorum celebrantur, ut in Cod.
Can. 46. Reading of Epistles from some Eminent Persons or Churches; as
Dionysius Corinth. says Clemens Epistle had been Read, as it was wont to be in
their Lords days Assemblies, Eusebius. l. And Athanasius wills those of Antioch to
read the Epistle sent from the Synod at Alexandria, (...), ad Antioch. p. 451.
to 1. And Cornelius was wont to read Cyprians Epistles to the Church at Rome,
Cyp. p. 12. Reading of the Diptyches, (...), Dionys. eccl. Hist. c. 7. (...).
Heyl. antid. 342.

In a word, of the reading of every thing that was wont to be read; but of the
reading of Prayers, not a syllable. We may as soon find a saying of Mass, as
reading of Prayers. None had then the opportunity till since it has been the
happyness of many to merit the commendation which Pliny gave of his Servant
Zosimus, ep. 19. 15.

If their Prayers had been written, and they confined precisely to the words
and syllables of the Writing, as in prescribed Forms, this would have obliged
them to have had the Writing before them, and to have read the Prayers out of
it, to prevent varying from the prescribed Model, since there had been as much
necessity to read then, as there is now.

Besides, Reading and Praying are still represented as distinct things, and
such as were not then coincident. The Deacon, when he called to Reading, was
said, (...); but when to Prayer, (...). Prayer began in Justin Martyrs time
(...), when the Reader had done, Apol. 2. So Anthanasius calls to Praying and
Reading in terms quite different; (...). So Socrates, l. 2. c. 8. p. 545. which
in Theodoret is, (...). Vide D. H. Preface to Psalms, in him Tertull.
l. 2. c. 13. p. 63, 64. And Sozomen, where he shows there was an uniformity in
his time in public Worship; tells us, (...). Vide Just. nov. 6. Soz. l. 7. c.
19. It cannot be found p. 36. c. 4. that the same Prayers or Psalms, yea or the
same Readings were used by all at the same time.

Indeed it cannot be apprehended how they could read their Prayers, who, while
they prayed, had their eyes lift up to Heaven. And that this was the posture of
the ancient Christians in Prayer, there is abundant evidence.

Tertullian thus represents them praying; illuc perspicientes Christiani, Apol.
cap. 30.

And Clemens Alexandrinus strom. 7. (...): We raise our heads (in Prayer) and
lift up hands to Heaven.

To whom we might add Cyprian ad Demetrium.

Arnobius, l. 1. p. 28. Ad Sydera sublevavit and Coelum, and cum Domino rerum
Deo, supplicationum fecit verba, atque orationum colloquia miscere.

And Lactantius. Oculos eo dirigamus, quo illos naturae suae conditio direxit,
lib. 6. Cur igitur oculos in coelum non tollitis, l. 2. c. 2.

So Dionysius of Alexandria, representing to Xystus of Rome the case of that
troubled person, and that, amongst other scruples, he durst not join with them
in Prayer, does it in these terms, (...). Eusebius. l. 7. c. 8. p. 188. Lifting up
the eyes to Heaven, is a phrase, by which Prayer is understood in this third
Age Or shutting their Eves. Origin. contra Celsum. l. 7. p. 362. Astyenus,
(...), Eusebius. l. 7. p. 195.
.

In the fourth Age, this was (...). And when they represented Constantine in a
praying posture, it was with eyes lift up to Heaven. So his Effigies in his
Coins, (...). Eusebius. de vita Constantini, l. 4. c. 15. p. 394. So in his
Palace; (...), id. ibid. Others, (...), in Praises. Vit. constant. l. 4. cap.
29.

Chrysostom observes, from Christ's posture in prayer expressed, Jo. 17. 1.
These words spoke Jesus, and lift up his eyes to Heaven; that thereby we are
taught, when we pray, to lift up both eyes of Body and Mind: (...) p. 890. So
Hillary, Euthymius, Theophylact, Leontius, Ammonius, in Maldonat. on Mat. 14.
19. c. 302.

And Augustine intimates as much, when he tells us upon the same place, Ita se
Patri exhibere voluit precatorem, ut meminisset nostrum se esse Doctoren; he so
prayed, as minding to teach us how we should pray, Tract. in Joh. 103. Tom. 9.
p. 621.

Yea Damascen, upon those words, Joh. 11. 41. Jesus lift up his eyes and said,
Father, I thank thee, etc. observes, propterea oculos sustulisse ut formam
nobis traderet orandi.

Whereby it appears, that, not only, this de facto was their posture in
Praying; but that they thought themselves obliged to it by Christ's Example.

Some Bishops (what may we think of Presbyters and Deacons) could not read,
Blondel. 500. 501.

So that in Damascens time, when set Forms were grown common, this reading was
not in fashion Hereby it appears that Reading of old was not in fashion: None
had then the opportunity, (though since it has been the happyness of many) to
merit the commendation which Pliny gave of his Servant Zosimus. Yet Pliny was
loath his Orations should be read. His reasons, though they concern not the
Ancients, may be considerable to others.
; I will not inquire into the reasons: It may be, that which made Pliny loath
to read his Pleadings, might hinder them from reading their Prayers. What he
suggests, is obvious to each ones reason, and common sense; and whether to some
it be not applicable to pleaders at another Bar, let others judge. Neque enim
me praeterit actiones. Then he says, they are thereby bereaved of many
advantages, which render the plea fervent and available, ut quas soleant
commendare, and the want of which must needs dull the Auditory; quo minus mirum
est, auditorum intentio languescit.

Hortaris ut orationem amicis pluribus recitem, faciam quia hortaris: quamvis
vehementer addubitem, neque enim me praeterit, actiones quae recitantur,
impetum omnem caloremque, ac prope nomen suum perdere, ut quas soleant
commendare, simul and accendere, -- dicentis gestus, incessus, discursus etiam,
omnibusque motibus animi consentaneus vigor corporis, -- Recitantium vero
praecipua pronuntiationis adjumenta, oculi, manus praepediuntur; quo minus
mirum est si Auditorum intentio languescit, nullis extrinsecus aut blandimentis
capta aut aculeis excitata. Plin. ep. 9. l. 2. What would he have said; how
would this wise and judicious Person have aggravated these disadvantages, how
intolerable would this great Orator have accounted the motion; if Cerealis had
moved him, to read the same Oration to his Friends whenever they met, at every
solemn Meeting?

Chrysostom tells us, that in his judgment, it required a greater confidence,
then Moses and Elias had, to pray as they were wont to do before the Eucharist.
(...) De Sacerd. orat. 3. p. 46. Now why such boldness was needful, if they had
the Prayer in a Book before them, and no more to do then read it, I apprehend
not. I never heard of any, who were Masters of the Art of Reading, that found
so much confidence necessary to exercise their faculty upon any Prayer
whatsoever. (...) (...). Epist. (...) p. 118.
in him is equivalent to (...), as Phavorinus, a boldness to express ones self
freely, Epist. (...) 186. No freedom is left him, who must only read what is
prescribed him. Vid. in Ephesians. hom. ult. p. 892. where (...) is (...). Vid. D. H.
N. T. 319. 1. Idem tam commode orationes legit, ut hoc solum didicisse
videatur. Plin. ep. 19. l. 5.

If the Ancient Churches had no written Liturgies, no Books of public Prayers;
they could have no prescribed, no imposed, no nor any common Liturgies, ( viz.
the same in many several Congregations) though not imposed. And if there had
been any such Service Books, it is not imaginable, but there would have been
some notice of them in some of the Writers of those Ages; yet for this, both
we, and those who are most concerned to find it, are still to seek.

We meet not with any mention of such Books, upon such occasions, where it
might be expected they would be mentioned, if any where; and where we might
justly look to find them, if they had been to be found.

Those who give a particular account of the Books, Vessels, and several
Utensils, which were to be found in the Church, make no mention of any such
thing as this. Vid. Dall. de objecto cultus.

Amongst other things, wherewith Athanasius was falsely charged by the Arrian
faction, to make way for his condemnation: Macarius (with reflection upon that
great Person who employed him) is accused, to have leapt upon the Altar,
overthrown the Table, broke the Communion Cup, burnt the Bible; (...). Socr.
Hist. l. 1. c. 20. p. 539.

Now it may well be presumed that Ischyras, the false accuser, encouraged with
hopes of a Bishopric (which was his reward afterward) and so concerned to
swell the charge as big, and render it as odious as he could, would have added
to the rest some indignity offered to the Sacred Liturgy. This had been as
easily alleged as the rest (if the subject had been extant) and might have
been as hainously resented, if there had been such Liturgies, or such opinion
of them, as in our times.

When Gregorius the Arrian Bishop came to take possession of the Bishopric of
Alexandria, and entered a Church by force, of what abuses were offered to all
things therein, Athanasius gives a particular account; the Table, (...), the
Scriptures, (...), the Font, (...), the Wine, the Oil, the Doors and latticed
Partitions, (...), the Candlesticks, the Tapers, (...). Ad Africanos ep. tom.
1. p. 729. But not a word of a Service Book, no more then of a Book of Homilies.

When the multitude of Christians so increased at Constantinople, that it was
thought necessary to dispose of them in several Churches; Constantine takes
care, that those Churches should be respectively furnished with Bibles; and
writes to Eusebius of Caesarea to have them prepared accordingly. Now (let
those that are for prescribed Liturgies be Judges) would it not have been
requisite, that those Churches should have been also furnished with Service
Books; and care taken, that these should have been likewise writ out for them,
if any such had been then in use? Would Constantine have omitted this, if he
had been of their mind; or would not Eusebius (who overlooks nothing of that
nature) have added this in commendation of him, if he had made any such
provision?

Does it not hence appear, that Churches were then thought sufficiently
provided with Books, necessary for Divine Service, when they were furnished
with Bibles? And can it be supposed that Constantine, whose generousness
toward the Church is known to have run out in many superfluities, would have
been deficient in things accounted in any degree necessary?

Eusebius. de vit. Constant. l. 4. c. 34. 'O (...); and cap. 36. p. 401. where we
have that (...).

In the fourth Council of Carthage, it is provided; when the Bishop is
ordained, the Book of the Gospels shall be held over his head, teneat
Evangelio^um codicem super caput and cervicem ejus, c. 2. When the Exorcist is
ordained, a Book of Exorcisms is to be given him; accipiat de manu Episcopi
libellum, in quo scripti s^nt exorcismi, c. 7. When the Reader is ordained, the
Bible, out of which he is to read, is to be delivered him, can. 8. tradet ei
codicem, de quo lecturus est, dicens ad eum; accipe, and esto lector verbi Dei.

But no Book of public Prayers, either used, or delivered, or mentioned, in
the Ordination of Bishop, Presbyter or Deacon, (the only persons who ministered
in the Prayers of the Church) or any other Officer. Yet here, if any where, we
might reasonably have expected to have met with a Service Book, if there had
been any at that time.

One of the first Books for public Service, which I meet with, is the Libellus
officialis in Conc. Tol. 4. Can. 25. an. 633. which seems rather but a short
Directory, then a complete Liturgy, given to every Presbyter at his Ordination,
to instruct him how to administer the Sacraments; least, through ignorance of
his Duty herein, he should offend. Quando Presbyteri in Parochiis ordinantur,
libellum officialem a suo Sacerdote accipiant, ut ad Ecclesias sibi deputatas
instructi accedant, ne per ignorantiam etiam in ipsis divinis Sacramentis
Christum offendant. And many of the Canons of that Council had been needless,
if those Churches had been before furnished with such a Liturgy; since that
would have provided sufficiently for the severals there decreed. Can. 2. 5, 6,
8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.

To ascend a little higher; in the times of the Churches Persecution, in the
beginning of the fourth Age; if there had been such Service Books, why did not
their Persecutors call for the delivery of them, as they did, not only for the
Bible, but for other Church Utensils? ( Vid. Conc. Arelat. Can. 13. in Caranz.
p. 65.) Why hear we of no traditores upon this account? It was not the
Christians belief contained in the Scripture concerning the true God, or the
Gentiles false Gods, that did more exasperate the Heathen against them, then
their Worship. The Jews, whose belief was as opposite to theirs, had a
toleration many times, when the Christians were destroyed. And Origin Neque de
Diis non recte sentire crederentur, eum non fuisse, verum sevitiae causam ex ^o
probat Origines, quod Epicureis aliisque Philosophis, omnem omnino divinam
providentiam tollentibus parcebatur. Grot.
observes, that they were not wont to persecute any for their Opinions, (...),
adv. Cel^. l. 2. p. 68. There were opinions amongst their persecutors
concerning God as scandalous to the Heathen, as those which the Scripture
taught the Christians. The Epicureans wholly denying Divine Providence (...),
Athanas. de incarnatione veroi. p. 38. ^. 1.

(...). Isidor. l. 4. Epist. 57.


, which is Origens instance, Ibid. (...), holding that their Gods were composed
of Atoms, (...) l. 4. p. 169. That there were no rewards nor punishments after
Death; nor any true good, but what is sensible: The Stoics maintaining, that a
Wise Man was equal to their great God Jupiter. Senec. Ep. 73. 74. p. 672. 673.
Solebat Sextius dicere, Jovem plus non posse quam bonum virum. -- Deus non
vincit sapientem felicitate, etiamsi vincit aetate. -- Sapiens tam aequo animo
omnia apud alios videt contemnitque, quam Jupiter: and hoc se magis suspicit,
quod Jupiter uti illis non potest, sapiens non vult. Et Ep. 53. 54. Est
aliquid, quo sapiens antecedat Deum: ille naturae beneficio non suo sapiens
est; suo sapiens. (...). Origin. adv. Cells. l. 6. p. 309.

And the Peripateticks, with other Epicur. in Senec. de benefic. l 4. c. 19. p.
442. Vid. Grot. de jure belli, p. 443. Ib. Cicero, Plutarch, Eusebius. l. 15. c.
5. (...), in Spens. not. in Orig. 16. ^ntimated by Chrysostom in act. (...) p.
911. (...). Vide Down. notas Arist. 10. M^^aphys.
Philosophers, curtailing and confining the Providence of God to generals, or
to the Orb of the Moon, so as Humane affairs were not regarded by him; and all
Humane addresses to him, were to no purpose; (...), Or. p. 156. Or as Justin
Martyr represents them, Dial. cum Tryphone, p. 1. (...).

Nor was it their opinions concerning Worship, delivered in the Scripture, so
much as the exercise of their Worship, which incensed the Gentiles against
them. For diverse of the Heathen held and published opinions highly derogatory
to their Worship; as that of Heraclitus to pray before Images, was as wise an
act, as to talk to a Wall, related, b. 1. Clem. Alexandrin. protrept. (...)
(...), Orig. contr C^ls. p. 375. l. 7.
And Celsus in Orig. l. 1. p. 6. and l. 7. p. 373. And that of the
Pythagoreans, who thought it not fit to pray, because it was uncertain what was
profitable, and so fit to be prayed for, (...), Laert. in Pythag. Or that of
the Philosophers in Justin Martyr, who, denying a particular providence,
conceived God would take no notice of any person, though he sought him night
and day, (...) Dial. cum Tryph. princip. And that of the Peripateticks, that
Prayers and Sacrifices were good for nothing, as Origin represents (...). Orig.
cont. C^ls. l. 7. p. 375.
them, l. 2. p. 68. (...). Who have studied to deserve Aristippus Character,
(...), Diogen. Laert. Aristipp. And that of the Platonists, that there was no
immediate intercourse betwixt Mortals and the Caelestial Gods; but all
addresses were to be made by the mediation of Demons, which was cross to the
practice of the generality of the Heathen, in their Devotions. And what more
vilifies their Worship, then that of Seneca, Quae omnia sapiens servabit,
tanquam legibus jussa, non tanquam Diis grata. And that, sic adorabimus, ut
meminerimus cultum magis ad morem, quam ad rem pertinere Quomodo sint Dii
C^lendi, solet praecipi. Accendere aliquem lucernam Sabbathis prohibeamus:
quoniam ne: lumine Dii ^gent, and ne homines quidem delectantur fuligine.
Vetemus salutationibus matutinis fungi and foribus assidere templorum. Humana
ambitio istis officiis capitur; Deum colit, qui novit, vetemus lintea and
strigiles Jovi far, and speculum tenere Junoni. Non quaerit ministros Deus,
etc. satis illos co^uit, quisquis imitatus est. Senec. ep. ^5. p. 791.

(...). Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. hom. 7. p. 286. (...). Ib. ibid.


. Just such apprehensions as many prudential Conformists have of our Formality
and Ceremonious Worship, yet both complying with the present Modes enjoined,
and making some show of liking what they secretly derided; for which feigned
consent, and not setting up any other way of Worship, they (several sorts of
the Philosophers) escaped then, and ours now well enough.

Now if the exercise of the Christian Worship, which lay, as is supposed, in
the pretended Liturgy, were as odious to the Heathen, as their Tenets
concerning God and his Worship, which lay in the Bible; if there had been any
such Liturgies, why would not the Gentiles have been as zealous, to destroy
them as the Scriptures?

However it may well be supposed, that the delivery of the Christians
Liturgies, if there had been any, would have been required, if not as much as
that of their Bibles, yet more then that of their other Church Utensils. Torti
Prodosis, Eusebius. l. 8. p. 242. Since it is observable, that the Romans, who
forced the Christians upon that crime, for which they were denominated
Traditores, were more zealous against new Liturgies, though Heathenish, then
against new Gods. These they did more then tolerate, those they would not
endure. An instance hereof we have in Livy, Dec. 3. lib. 5. p. 111. Some at
Rome made bold to Sacrifice and Pray in a way not conformable to the Roman
Mode. Mulierum turba erat, nec sacrificantium nec precantium Deos patrio more.
This was hainously resented by all sorts; primo secretae bonorum indignationes
exaudiebantur, deinde ad Patres etiam, and ad publicam querimoniam excessit
res. The inferior Magistrates are sharply taken up by the Senate, because they
did not hinder it; accusati graviter ab Senatu aediles, triumvirique capitales,
quod non prohiberent. And when their endeavors were not effectual to suppress
it; the Praetor is employed therein by the Senate; who, by their order,
commands all the new Liturgies to be delivered in to him by such a day, --
Edixit ut quicunque libros vaticinos, precationesve, aut artem sacrisicandi
conscriptam haberet, eos libros omnes literasque ad se ante C^lend. Apriles
deferret.

We see, they would not tolerate Heathenish Liturgies, differing from what they
used only in Mode and Rites, though conformable as to the substance and object
of their Worship. Would they not be more violent for the delivering up of
Christian Liturgies, more opposite to them every way, if there had been any?
But there is not a word, in the Ancients, of any such demand, or any compliance
therewith, or any censure of such compliance; when the demand and delivery of
other things less material, less offensive to them, and proceeding against the
Traditors, are frequently mentioned.

Augustine alleadges some things frequently prayed for in public, but not as
in the words of any written Liturgy, but of the Administrator, Quando audis
Sacerdotem Dei ad altar, etc. Ep. 107. p. 567. And the same Petitions he
afterward sets down in other words; which signifies, he had them not out of
any prescribed or written Liturgy; for then they (would, they) must have been
the same; Pro incredulis, ut eos Deus convertat ad fidem; but p. 577. Vt
incredulas Gentes ad fidem suam venire compellat. Pro fidelibus, ut in eo quod
esse ceperunt, munere suo perseverent; and p. 578. Vt proficiant in eo quod
esse ceperunt.

Augustine mentions the public Prayers against Pelagians; but no otherwise,
then as he might have alleged the extemporary petitions of such, who seeking
the same things that Christians usually do, use not the same words; and
agreeing in the subject, vary other ways in the expressions; without any
intimation, that they were prescribed or in variable Forms. And elsewhere with
some note of uncertainty, whether they did so pray, or whether those were their
words in public; whereas if they had been in a common written Liturgy, he
would have known it, and might have been positive; or some intimation of
liberty they had to use those words or not, those or others; si voluerimus.

Finally, it cannot with any reason be supposed, but, if there had been such
Liturgies, they would have been made use of against the Errors, and for
deciding the Controversies, wherewith the Church was exercised in the Ages we
are concerned in. To wave others, there were two especially as to which they
might have been this way apparently serviceable; viz. That concerning the
Godhead of Christ, opposed in the first, second, third and fourth Age
especially. And that concerning the (...) of the faithful; and other errors,
with which Pelagius and his adherents troubled the Churches in the beginning of
the fifth Age, and afterward. His Tenet see August. contr. 2 ep. Pelag. l. 4.
c. 2. p. 239.

None will fancy a Christian Liturgy, wherein there is not some acknowledgment
of, or some address to Christ as God, or wherein there is not some confession
of sin, or some petition for pardon, in Prayers proper to the faithful,
something equivalent to petition in the Lords Prayer, forgive us our
Trespasses, and so no Liturgies, wherein there was not evidence enough against
both those errors, and others also of the Pelagians, inconsistent with the
necessity of the grace of God.

And it will be granted, that if those who were judicious had the managing of
those Controversies, if they thought it requisite to make use of Humane
Testimony, they would make choice of that which is most cogent and convictive.

Now they did make use of Humane Testimony, as we find both that unnamed Author
in Eusebius, l. 5. c. ^^. p. 145. who confuting Artemons error, who maintained
Christ was only (...), alleadges Justin Martyr, Miltiades, Tatian, Clemens,
Irenaeus, Melito, and the Hymns composed by the Brethren of old, (...); but not
a word of any Prayers, ancient or written, by Brethren or Fathers; which yet
(by one who, as it is apparent, industriously sought out all sorts of
confirmations) would not have been omitted; as tending as much, if there had
been some written of old; but contributing much more, to the confirming of that
truth, if there had been any enjoined to be publicly and generally used. Also
Athanasius against the Arrians, and Augustine against the Pelagians Athanas.
Syn. ni^. contr. Haer^s. Arrian. decret. tom. 1. p. 240. quotes Theognostus
(...) Also Dionys. of Alexand. and of Rome, with Origin. Elsewhere Ignatius.
, two of the most judicious Writers that those Ages afforded, make use of the
Testimonies of their Predecessors and Contemporaries; but allege not one
passage out of a Service Book, or any Prayers written, or so as to give us
occasion to think there were any such used publicly, and authorized; whereas
they could not but apprehend as well as we, that one clear allegation out of an
ancient and commonly received Liturgy would have been more cogent and
convictive, then any, or all the particular Testimonies, they produce; (since
the judgment of whole Churches, in several Ages too, is far more considerable,
then of many particular persons).

Augustine, and others allege, against the Pelagians, diverse things, which
were frequently prayed for in public; but without signifying in the least
wise, that the Prayers were written or ancient, (which he in Eusebius thought
it requisite to express, concerning the Hymns he mentions) or that they were
generally received, or the same Form, or authorized for the public Service, or
prescribed to be invariably used. Yet in these particulars lay the force and
the advantage of such an allegation; and that which would render it most
considerable, and of far more weight then the Testimony of single Writers: And
therefore undoubtedly would have been insisted on (if there had been any such
thing to urge) by any, who knew how to manage an Argument, or to make use of a
very obvious advantage.

So that we may conclude, either the greatest wits and judgments of those times
were not wise enough to discern the best advantages they had from Humane
Testimony, such as were obvious to every eye; and either could not manage them,
as those of ordinary capacities amongst us can do; or would not improve them,
as the interest of the truth they contended for, and their faithfulness to it
required; and so were either injudicious or unfaithful; or else that they had
no such advantages to make use of, and so no such Liturgies.

Further, if there were such Liturgies, how comes it to pass, that we meet with
no intelligence of any changing of them, or alterations made in them, upon such
occasions, as we may well conceive would necessarily draw on such changes, and
in all probability bring us some account thereof. Quisquis unquam, says one,
Religionem mutavit, and orandi rationem mutavit: nulla unquam Haeresis fuit,
quae non continuo suas essinxerit preces. Mald. in Luc. 11. This being so, we
may expect to meet with frequent mention of rejecting old Liturgies, and
composing new, of altering or correcting them, if the ancient mode of Praying
was by prescribed Liturgies. But I have not yet met with any mention thereof,
no not in those circumstances, wherein, if any where, it might be expected.

The Heresy of Artemon, holding that Christ was a mere Terrene Creature,
having siezed on Paulus Samosatenus ((...)) Bishop of Antioch; the Fathers of
the Council held there, upon that occasion, tell us, in their circular Epistle,
that he prohibited the use of the Psalms sung in the honor of Christ. (...).
Eusebius. l. 7. cap. (...). lib. 24. And would he have tolerated a Liturgy, whose
contents were as much for the honor of Christ? Or can there be supposed a
Liturgy, which had nothing in it for the honor of Christ (...). And if he had
made as bold with a Liturgy, would this have been concealed by those Fathers,
who are so large and particular, in giving an account of all his impieties,
innovations, presumptions, (that the justice of their proceeding against him
might be clear to the world), not omitting those Hymns, which were of less
moment?

When the Arrians so far prevailed, as they had possessed themselves of all the
public Churches, in a great part of the Christian World, the East especially
(so as the Orthodox, reduced to Conventicles, were glad to keep them in private
Houses, Fields, Woods, or where else they could or durst) they had power and
opportunity to make what changes they would; and no less will and forwardness,
showing sufficiently how much they were given to change, and that no respect
would restrain from altering any thing, which crossed their tenet, by the
alterations they made in the Doxology, in the words of Christ for administering
Baptism, yea in the Scriptures themselves, as Ambrose tells us, de Spiritu
Sancto. 3. 11. And remarkably in the universally received Confession of Faith,
since they made a new Creed almost every other year. Socrates gives a
particular account of three in little more then twenty years, Hist. lib. 4. c.
32. p. 604.

And what could restrain this innovating humor (when they had power enough)
from abolishing or altering the supposed Lituries, if they were but tempted to
it, by what they would count a just occasion? And such occasion they had, if
those Liturgies contained any thing in favor of the Eternal Godhead of Christ,
or his equality with the Father, or the Divinity of the Holy Ghost (which the
Semi-Arrians opposed). And some things (if not many) of this tendency they
contained, if they were Christian Liturgies. Why is it then, that we hear not a
word of their changing any old Liturgy, or composing any new; when we hear of
their making bold both with that of greater moment and less? And how is it that
their Antagonists, who thought themselves and their cause concerned, to give a
full account of their innovations, (conceiving their Novelties to be one of the
great advantages they had against them, and improving it, by publishing them to
the World) make no mention of any such thing? In all reason this must be,
because there was no such thing, no occasion for it, no such Liturgies then in
fashion.

We hear also afterward, when Eutychianism was prevailing, what a tumult was
made in Constantinople, what a noise through the World by the adding of one
word or two, (...), to the Trisagion, the Hymn so called. Theodor. Lect.
collect. l. 2. p. 187.

And could more changes be made in settled Liturgies (with whose Forms and
Prayers the people are presumed to have been as well acquainted, and longer
accustomed to them, then to that Hymn) without any noise, without any notice?

Certainly, if they had been abolished, or such alterations made in them, we
should have heard of it, some where or other. And if there were no changes made
therein, upon so great changes of the Christian Religion, it was because there
was none to be changed, no such Liturgies extant.

In general, that they had no such public Liturgies for the administration of
the Sacraments, appears by this; that they thought themselves obliged, with all
care to conceal the Symbols, the Rites, the Prayers used in these
administrations, from the sight and knowledge of all that were not initiated.
The Christians, in the fourth and fifth Ages especially, counted it a heinous
crime, to have any of the Heathen or Catec^^umens acquainted therewith; some of
them make it no less Christianis ipsis minime consecratis sine Sacrilegio
videri non potest. Author sermonum de continentia; not Zeno Veronensis, who
lived about; but one who says in that Sermon, he writ four hundred years after
the Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians was written.
then Sacrilege, (...). Chrysostom. in 2 Timothy hom. 2. p. 338.
one of the greatest crimes, and Council. Herdens.
worthy of the highest censure, prolixiori anathemate.

Hence they durst not administer them in the sight of the (...), nor discourse
of them intelligibly in the hearing of such, nor commit them to writing for
common use; that being the way to have them divulged.

They called Baptism, and the Lords Supper, and the Prayers used therein, with
some other Rites, (...) Sacrae orationis mysterium. Ambros. de fide, ad
Gratianum, l. 5. (...). Theo. loret in Joh. 6. And Chrysosto^ of the words used
in Baptism, (...), in 1 Cor. hom. 40. p. 514. obsecrationum Sacramenta.
Cae^estin epist. c. 11. in Crab. p. 525. Obsecrationum quoque Sacerdotalium
Sacramenta respiciamus, quae ab Apostolis tradita in toto mundo, and in omni
catholica Ecclesia uniformiter celebrantur, 2. Ibid. and in fine operum
prosperi, p. 894. u^iformiter, because they all pray for the same things, viz.
those which he speaks of; that there was every where an uniformity in words, is
apparently false.

(...). Balsam. in Ca^. 126. Cod. (...) Cyr^^ Alixandr. epist. ad ne^tor. cum
12 anathem.

Nos autem qu^ties Sacramenta sumimus, quae per sacrae orationi^ mysterium in
carnem transfigurantur and sanguinem, mortem Domini annuntiam^s. Ambr. de fide,
ad Great. c. 5.

Chrissi corpus and sanguinem dicimus illud tantum, quod ex fructibus terr^^
arreptum, and prece mystica consicratum ^ite sumimus. August. de trinitate 3.
c. 4.

De baptismo Chryso^t. cateches. ad illuminandos. (...)

(...). A^th. quaest. ad Antioch. in Athanas. tom. 2. p. 275.


, and used them according to the import of the word, which in Phavorinus is
(...), and derived (...) as concerned to keep those secrets to themselves, and
confine them to their own breasts, without communicating them to others, either
by action, word, or writing. It is not at all a mystery, says Basil, if it be
exposed to common notice; (...). de Spiritu Sancto, p. 273. It Is a mystery,
says Chrysostom, therefore keep all close, etc. (...). in Math. hom. (...). p.
451. using a like phrase to that, wherewith Orpheus begins the discourse of his
Mysteries, for the divulging of which Diagoras (amongst other crimes of the
like nature) was prescribed.

(...) -- Indeed the Christians came not far short of the Heathen herein, if
they had not a design to overtake them.

Celsus objecting the secrets of Christianity, (...), as matter of accusation.
Origin answers, it was not peculiar to Christians ((...)) to have some things
reserved from common knowledge ((...)). The Heathen had their Mysteries also,
and those both Philosophical and Devotional. He instanceth in both. For the
former, Pythagoras (who himself was obliged to be circumcised, that he might
procure admission to the Egyptian secrets. Clem. Alexandr. strom. 1.) had some
hearers who learnt in secret, such things as were not fit for profane Ears, nor
yet purified; (...), lib. 1. contr. Cells. p. 7. And for the latter, he says,
all the mysteries every where, both in Greece, and amongst the barbarous were
not blamed for being kept secret, (...), p. 8. (...) Basil. de Spiritu Sancto,
c. 27. p. 273.
. And Seneca before him mentions both, where he will have Lucilius observe the
difference between (...) and praeceptum, ep. 95. Idem dicere de praeceptis
possum, aperta sunt; decreta vero sapientiae in abdito, sicut sanctiora
sacrorum tantum initiati sciant, ita in philosophia arcana illa admissis
receptisque in sacra ostenduntur; at praecepta and alia hujusmodi profanis
quoque not a sunt, p. 794. None were admitted to the sight of their Mystical
Rites, but the initiated; others were warned to withdraw So Prudentius in
Apoth. represents the Heathen, excluding Christians from their mysteries,

-- Lotus procul esse and unctus.
. -- Procul, o procul ite profani,
Conclamat vates, totoque absistite luco. Virg. Aen. 6.
(...).

And if they would venture to be present, it was at their peril Tempore
initiorum duo Juvenes Acarnanes, qui non initiati erant, Athenas venerant, and
in Sacrarium Cereris, cum aliis popularibus suis intraverunt, ob hoc tanquam
nefas summum -- caesi sunt, flor. epit.
. As Pentheus in Pausanias Pentheam aiunt; ut foeminarum operta sacra
specularetur, in arborem ascendisse, atque inde omnia conspicatum, quod cum
Bacchae animadvertissent, impetu facto viventem eum lacerasse, ac membratim
discerpsisse, Pausan. l. 2. Livy dec. 4. l. 1. p. 7. vid. sig. infra.
; and those of Acarnania in Livy found it. Nero durst not venture, eleusiniis
sacris, quorum initiatione impii and scelerati voce praeconis submoverentur,
interesse non ausus est. Sueton. ner. c. 34.

They would not speak of them in the hearing of others, (...); He is impious
that speaks of the mysteries to those that are not initiated, says Chrysippus
in Laertius. This was part of Alcibiades crime, mysteria Cereris enuntiavisse
Alciblades absens Athenis insimulatur mysteria Cereris initiorum sacra, nullo
magis quam silentio solemnia enuntiavisse, Justin Hist. l. 5. c. 1. Vid.
Cornel. nepos, in Alcibiad.
. And Augustus, when he was to hear a Cause, wherein these mysteries were
touched, would not let it be opened, till the Company was dismissed Athenis
initiatus, cum postea Romae pro tribunali de privilegio Sacerdotum Atticae
Cereris cognosceret, and quaedam secretiora proponerentur, dimisso Conci^io and
corona circumstantium, solus audiit disceptantes. Sueton. Octav. August. cap.
93. p. 103.

Pausanias of the same, (...), Baeoticis vid. Dionys. Halicarnassens. infra.


.

They would not commit them to Writing. And so we may observe, that when the
Ancient Writers have occasion to deliver any thing particularly concerning
them, they wave it with an (...): So Apollonius of the Samothracian mysteries.

(...),
(...). l. 1. Argon.
Numenius Numenio denique inter Philosophos occultorum curiosiori offensam
numinum, quod Eleusina sacra interpretando vulgaverit somnia prodiderunt, Somn.
Scip. l. 1. c. 2. p. 25.

Tarquinius autem Rex M. T^llium Duumvirum, quod librum secreta civilium
sacrorum continentem custodiae suae commissum, corruptus Petronio Sabino
describendum dedisset, culeo insutum in mare abjici jussit; idque supplicii
genus multo post parricidis lege irrogatum est. Val. Max. l. 1. c. 1. p. 8.


venturing to write of them. understood by a Dream, he had incurred offensam
numinum, as Macrobius tells us. But M. Atelius fared worse, suffering as a
Parricide, for permitting the Sibylls Books in his custody (containing secreta
civilium sacrorum, and used by the Romans as their extraordinary Ritual) to be
transcribed; (...). Dionys. Halicarnass. l. 4.

If they trusted them to Writing, it was in secret Character, such as could not
be understood by those, from whom they were to be concealed (...), etc. Ba^is.
de Spiritu Sancto, c. p. 273. And Leo Philosophus; Laws were not to be writ
obscurely, because they were not mysteries, (...), Novel. 77.
. Literis ignorabilibus, as Apuleius of the Rites of Isis Summus Sacerdos -- de
opertis adytis praefert quosdam libros literis ignorabilibus praenotatos;
partim figuris cujuscemodi animalium, concepti Sermonis compendiosa verba
suggerentes; partim nodosis and in modum rotae tortuosis, capreolatimque
condensis apicibus, a curiositate profanorum lectione munita. Indidem mihi
praedicat quae forent ad usum teletae necessario praeparanda. Metamorph. lib.
11. p. 208.

(...). Dionys. Halicarnass. lib. 1. (...). Synes. infra.

Cyril Catech. 6. p. 60. (...).

(...). Osiridis historia sacris sermonibios mysteriisque celebris est ita ut
periculosum sit eam monimentis and narrationibus commendari. Synes. de
Providentia, p. 123.

(...), Id. ibid. Sect. 1. p. 115. (...) ( monimentis intacta) (...). p. 124.

(...). Ibid. l. 4. p. 144.

(...). Id. epist. 162. l. 4.

(...) Id. ibid. Synes. de Provid. 1^4.

(...), Id. ibid.

(...). Id. 125.

(...). 128.

(...), Id. de insomniis.

The Council of Laodicea, setting down the place and order of those Prayers,
shows us, they were made (...).

(...) adv. Judaeos.


; Ipsa mysteria figurarum cuniculis operiuntur, says Macrobius; and figuris
defendentibus a vilitate secretum, Somn. Scip. l. 1. c. 2. p. 23. Such were the
Egyptian Hieroglyphics, and used on purpose for such concealment; they could
not be understood without a (...) to interpret them; and he explained them not,
but in secret; and there but to some few select Hearers, as the Author of the
Quaest. ad Orthod. tells us; (...) p. 146.

I will not say, the Christians imitated the Gentiles herein, especially if the
practice began so early as Tertullian (which some suppose, because he waves the
mention of the Sacrament, when he had occasion to give the Heathen an account
thereof, in such circumstances, as Justin Martyr before him had plainly
described it). For there is a great zeal visible in his Writings against
complyances with the Heathen. Yet will I not deny, but that this custom amongst
the Gentiles might have some influence upon Christians in after Ages; when it
was thought a good expedient (how rightly experience afterward showed) for
drawing the Pagans over to the, to meet them in some of their observances. And
it is evident, that many usages amongst the Ancients were continued upon other
considerations then those, to which they owed their original.

However, it is undeniable, that such concealments were in use amongst them,
and particularly as to the Prayers which were made in the administration of the
Sacraments, and some other Rites counted mysterious.

None, but the initiated, were permitted to be present at these Prayers; (...),
as Chrysostom, having said before, (...); none but the faithful were to be
present, when they began Eucharistical Prayers. Those that were not fit to
partake of the Mysteries, were not fit to hear the Prayers, (...); they were
warned to depart, (...). And this was done in reference to the Prayers, (...).
Those that were unworthy to see, were unworthy to hear; (...) in Ephesians. Hom. 3.
p. 778, 779.

Adversariis Athanasii, pro crimin^ magno objectum sit, quod de calice
confracto contenderint coram Ethnico, (...), Syn. Alexandrina apud Athanatium
Apol. 2. p. 569. tom. 1. edit. Commel. 1601.

(...). Ibid. p. 571.

So Julius expresses himself, astonished, (...). Epist. in Apol. 2.


So elsewhere he says, the Catechumens were forced away from these Prayers,
(...); they never heard those concealed Mysteries, (...), applying that of the
Apostle to them, (...), etc. in 2 Cor. hom. 2. p. 553.

So for Baptism, the first Council of Orange decrees, the Catechumens should
not come at the Font, Caetechumeni ad Baptisteria nequaquam admittendi, Can.
13. And the pretended Dionysius begins his discourse of Baptism with (...),
Hier. eccl. c. 2.. 1. p. 21. conformably enough to the usage of his times,
though not of the Apostle.

When they have occasion to speak of these Prayers in their Sermons to a
promiscuous Auditory, they decline any recital of them, with their usual
Aposiopesis, Norunt fideles, (...), or (...), so frequent in Augustine,
Chrysostom, Theodoret, as to the Eucharist. For the Prayers in Baptism, see
Chrysostom in Gal. 4. 15. p. 748. in 1 Cor. 15. 29. hom. 40. p. 514. in 2 Cor.
1. hom. 2. p. 555.

Nor might they commit them to Writing; that was the way to divulge them.
Writing was counted a publishing, though but in an Epistle to a private Friend.
So Basil to Meletius, (...). that what he was intimating, might not be divulged
by Writing it, he would acquaint Theophrastus therewith, who should declare to
him all particularly, by word of Mouth, p. 307. As they had their mysteria
chartis non committenda, in Origens phrase; ( in Ep. ad Romans c. 2.) so these
mysterious Prayers were to be kept as secret. To write them, so as strangers
might come to the sight thereof, was not (...), to use them as mysteries, no
more then to recite them in their hearing. What they durst not plainly
pronounce, they would not venture to write; according to that of Clemens
Alexandrinus, strom. 1. (...) By this means they might come to the knowledge of
Aliens. Ruffinus puts this in the account he gives, why the Creed was at first
not written, ( idcirco denique haec non scribi chartulis atque membranis) it
was to be used as a watchword, whereby they might know Friends from Foes, (
interrogatus symbolum, prodat, si sit hostis an Socius.) But if it had been
written, and the Christians got it by reading; the design might have been
frustrated; for this way, the Infidels might have got the word, hac ex
lectione, quae interdum pervenire etiam ad infideles solet. Expos. in Symb. in
Cypr. opera. p. 4.

That which they would have kept secret, they did not commit to Writing, for
the view or use of others. Therefore Baronius says, the way of drawing up
their literae formatae, was not in Writing; because they were concerned to keep
it secret, least it should be counterfeited, existimamus ejusmodi formulam
nequaquam ab eis fuisse scripto traditam -- sed penes Episcopos Catholicos
retentam esse secretam. Ad an. 325. n. 44.

And there wants not direct evidence, that they had not any Prayers thus writ.
Basil says expressly, the words they used in blessing the Elements, (...) were
not written, they had them not (...); and that what they said, both before and
after the Consecration, they had not from any Writing, (...). As much he says
of the Prayers in Baptism; (the words we shall have occasion to produce
hereafter): And so having reckoned the Prayers made in the Administration of
the Sacraments; amongst other things, which of old were kept secret and
unwritten; he tells us the Ancients were well instructed to reserve them, as
mysterious things, in great secrecy, (...); and adds, those administrations, at
which the non-initiated might not be present; how could it be lawful, to expose
the notice thereof by writing them? (...), de Spir. Sancto. c. (...). p. 273.
And all along these Prayers with the other Arcana there mentioned, are (...),
and p. 274. (...) Itaque silentium hoc quodcunque sit no^ opp^ni voci sed
scriptioni; ^t non sit sensus, non debuisse pronuntiari: sed tantum non
debuisse scripto tradi. Chamier, t. 4. l. 6. t. 8. Sect. 26.

Nolebat Basilius eam traditionem (...), atque id periculosum existimabat
(...), Id. Sect. 29.


.

Dionysius (who, though he belyed his name, and would have been thought elder
by some hundred of years then he was, yet has credit in reporting the usages
of the times wherein he really lived) declaring why he, writing of other Rites
and Practices of the Church, declined Cur reticuerit precationes quae in
mysteriis adhibentur, says his Translator, (...) says Maximus his Scholiast.
p. 96. I^ it be said, (...) is to explain or write Commentaries on their
Prayers, not simply to commit them to Writing. Answ. If it were so, this proves
as much what I allege him for, as the other. For this was unlawful, not as
Commentaries, but as Written, it was (...), not to explain or render them
intelligible, but to divulge or make them common, (...). Now they were exposed
to common view by being written, not by being intelligible; for intelligible
they were in the most reserved use of the Church; unless their Prayers were
Riddles, and they offered to God they knew not what for a reasonable service.

Cum and hic, and alii apocryphorum scriptores, sua soleant ad praesentis suo
aevo ecclesiae ritus, mores ac Sermonem effingere; primo plerique eo potissimum
consilio sua figmenta sub vetustiorum nomine edant, ut res sui saeculi novas
falso antiquitatis nomine constituant and confirment; clarum est etiam, ex
istius generis apocryphis magnam utilitatem percipi posse, si diligenter
observetur, quos illi mores, and quos ritus Ecclesiae, and Christianis illis
tribuant de quibus loquuntur. Dallaeus de lib. suppositis Dionys. etc. l. 2. p.
250.


to give an account in Writing concerning the Sacramental Prayers; ((...))
assigns this Reason, (...); it is not lawful to declare them in Writing, being
mystical and secret, (...), as Pachymeres, being secret, and not to be
divulged. To deliver them in Writing would have been, (...) to bring them out
of secrecy into common view, as he expresses it afterward, Hierarch. cul. fin.

For the Latin Church, Innocentius 1. Bishop of Rome may satisfy us. Decentius
of Eugubium consulting him about diverse particulars concerning the Church
Service; Innocent Saepe dilectionem tuam ad Vrbem venisse, ac nobiscum in
ecclesia convenisse, and quem morem vel in consecrandis mysteriis, vel in
caeteris agendis arcanis teneat, cognovisse, non dubium est; quod sufficere
arbitrarer ad informationem ecclesiae tuae, vel reformationem -- nisi de
aliquibus consulendum nos esse dixisses. Praefat. epist. ad Decentium, in Crab,
Conc. tom. 1. p. 452.


in his Epistle in answer thereto, refers him, not to any written orders or
prescriptions, which may well be presumed he would have done, if there had been
any; but to what he had seen practiced at Rome, when he was there. But more
particularly and expressly, Can. 3. he determines that the Presbyter might
anoint the Baptized with Chrism, non tamen frontem ex eodem oleo signare; but
not anoint their Foreheads with it; that being reserved by him (and first by
him) to Bishops: But what words should be used in that Rite, he might not tell
him in writing; verbo vero dicere non possum, ne magis prodere videar, quam ad
consultationem respondere; least he should seem a Betrayer (of the Churches
Arcana) rather then an Adviser. Now if they were thus reserved and cautious in
a Baptismal Rite; as much or more caution would be thought requisite as to the
Lords Supper, which was anciently, in their style and account, secretum
Innocentius negat se tunc temporis, i. e. cum scriberet ad Decentium Eugubinum
debere dicere, Chamier, t. 4. l. 6. c. 8. Sect. 52. least the writing might
have come into the hands of the non-initiated. Populus pars erat (...), pars
(...), illis neque videre licebat, neque audire, and hi satis erant, ut non
auderet omnia literis Innocentius committere, Sect. 53, Vid. Bellar. Sect. 50.


, and (...). And indeed he shows himself no less reserved about the Eucharist;
so we find him, Cap. 1. Cum post omnia quae aperire non debeo, pax sit
necessario indicenda; Those things, which past in the celebration of the
Eucharist, before the salutation of Peace (before which were all the Prayers)
he might not open to him in Writing; and in reference to the whole Cyril (...).
If a Catechumen ask thee what the Teachers say, (...), etc. -- Aegroti vinum
quandoque pollulant; quod si intempellive detur (...), etc.

Catech. 6. (...).


, thus, toward the conclusion, cap. 8. Reliqua vero quae scribi fas non erat,
quum adfueris, interrogati, poterimus edicere. For the rest, which it is not
lawful to write, when thou art here, we may, being desired, declare them. Now,
if to write this in an Epistle to a particular person, who was not only (...),
but, as Nyssen speaks, (...) ( de Christi Baptism.) would have been no less
then prodere, no better then treachery, a betraying the arcana ecclesiae; what
would it have been to have had them written for public use, and exposed in
Common Prayer Books?

I suppose it is hereby manifest, that they were not wont, in those times, to
commit their Sacramental Prayers to such Books or Writings; and I cannot
apprehend, how the Prayers requisite to make up a Liturgy for the Sacraments
could be either prescribed, or of common invariable use, in many Churches, if
they were not so written.

Finally, since they thought themselves obliged to keep the things we speak of
(...). Synes. de provid. Sect. 2. p. 124.

(...). Basil. de Spir. Sancto, c. 27. p. 273. (...). Id. ibid. (...), Id. p.
274.

Lysis the Pythagorean in Synesius, Ep. 151. (...), reproving his Friend for
publishing something.


secret, making account, the order of the Churches, and the reverence due to
those mysteries could not be otherwise secured; we cannot suppose they would
take a course, which would make it next to impossible to conceal that, which
they deemed themselves so much concerned to keep secret.

Now, if their Prayers had been written out, for the use of many thousands, or
many hundred Churches, (indeed the supposition must be for all in the World;
for many are supposed to have some or other, though not all the same) would not
this have been a divulging of them, and a ready way to make them (...)? could
all, of such multitudes of Copies, be kept either from the Heathen, who were so
inquisitive after the (...) of the Christians, as they used all means fair and
foul Quo magis necessarium credidi ex duabus ancillis quae ministrae
dicebantur, quid esset very per tormenta quaerere. Sed nihil aliud inveni, quam
superstitionem pravam and immodicam. Plin. ep. Trajano. 97. Just. Martyr Apol.
1. p. 133.

(...)! Origin contr. Cells. l. 1. p. 8.

Maximus Madaurens. ep. ad Augustine.

Celsus in Origin. (...), l. 8. p. 339.


(sometimes tortures, sometimes odious misinterpretations, sometimes subtle
insinuations) to get the knowledge of them? Or from the Catechumens,
passionately eager to be acquainted with these secrets, any way (...). Clem.
constitut. l. 5. c 26. fine.

Quodam canone uno comperimus, si cui contigisset catechumeno, casu aliquo, ac
fortuito Sacrificiis interesse, aut oculis illa sacrae intueri, eum protinus
sacro font abluendum fuisse. -- A Deo magnum quoddam in se profectum
beneficium arbitrabantur, si casus quidam insperatus tulisset, ut ea
sacrificia, non tam mentis, quam oculis corporis contemplarentur, Albaspin,
observe. l. 2. c. 2. p. 206, 207. Vid. notas in Can. p. 206. Timaheus
Alexandrinus, in respon. Canon. interrogatus, si puellus Catechumenus, vel homo
jam perfectus, dum fieret oblatio, opportune affuerit, ejusque nescius
particeps factus sit, quid debet de eo fieri? Respond. debet illuminari, a Deo
enim vocatus est. In vices. de Bapt. rit. l. 2. c. 5.


though surreptitiously; as for other reasons, so because their acquaintance
herewith would have advanced them immediately into the higher form of the
fideles.

It is no way probable, these Prayers and their other (...) could have been
concealed, if they had been written for common use; and therefore, since they
thought it their duty, to keep them secret; we may conclude, they had them not
thus written, and consequently they could have no prescribed Liturgies for the
administration of the Sacraments.

And the impossibility of concealment, will be more evident, if Liturgies were
to be not only in the hands of the several Ministers, Bishops, Presbyters,
Deacons; but also in the peoples hands; as it was necessary they should be,
unless they were quite other things, then either the modern now imposed, or the
pretended ancient Liturgies; for then the people bear such a part in the
Prayers, as shows their direction by a Book necessary. And some part they had
of old, as appears by Cyril, Catech. mystag. 5. And Chrysostom in 2 Cor. hom.
18. p. 647. Though nothing so much, as in the written Liturgies, nor what they
might not have by custom without Book.

This may suffice for the Sacraments in general, to show how far those that
administered them were from being confined to prescribed Forms.

For the Eucharist in particular, let us view the 23 Canon of the Third Council
of Carthage: Vt nemo in precibus, vel Patrem pro Filio, vel Filium pro Patre
nominet, and cum ad altar assistitur, semper ad Patrem dirigetur oration -- and
quascunque sibi preces aliquis describit, non eis utatur, nisi prius eas cum
instructioribus Fratribus contulerit. That no man, in Prayers, shall name,
either the Father for the Son, or the Son for the Father. And when they are at
the Altar, the Prayer shall always be directed to the Father. And what Prayers
soever any shall copy out for himself, he shall not use them, unless he first
debate them with his discreeter Brethren.

The middle Clause of this Canon evidently concerns the Eucharistical Prayers;
the first and last respect both these, and the Prayers also in other parts of
the administrations; each of them make it plain, that in those times, they were
not under any restraint by imposed Forms.

For the first. Those, who in their Prayers named the Father for the Son, or
the Son for the Father, used not prescribed Forms; for sure the Church would
not prescribe what the Council forbids. And as they used none before, so these
Fathers leave them at liberty, for the future, to use what they thought fit,
only imposing this on them, not to name the Father for the Son, etc.

For the next Clause. If no prayers were used, in the administration of this
Sacrament, but what were prescribed by the Church (and consequently allowed by
the Synod, as duly directed already) it was vain and ridiculous, to make such
an Order, ut semper ad Patrem, that the prayers be always directed to the
Father. This is clearly a restraint upon those, who before had liberty, in
celebrating this Ordinance, to address their prayers to any Person of the
Sacred Trinity; ordering that from henceforth they should direct such prayers
only to the Father. And as it clearly supposes, they were neither limited nor
directed, by any prescribed Forms before; so it leaves them free, to use what
prayers they judged meet, cum ad altar assistitur, provided that they were
addressed only to the Father.

Yea the weaker and indiscreeter sort, of those that officiated, are allowed,
by the next Clause, to use what prayers they would any where make choice of,
with this limitation only, that their more discreet Brethren should first be
conferred with about them. That of Augustine, who was a great part of the
African Councils, at this time, de Baptism. contra Donat. l. 6. c. 25. p. 568.
is the best Comment, which can be desired, upon this passage. Having showed,
that diverse of his Brethren had many things against the Faith, in prayers which
they used in Sacramental administrations; he gives this account of it; Multi
irruunt in pr^ces, non solum ab imperitis loquacibus, sed etiam ab Haereticis
compositas; and per ignorantiae simplicitatem, non eas valentes discernere,
utuntur iis, arbitrantes quod bonae sint. Many light upon Prayers, not only
which are composed by unskilful Bablers, but also by Heretics; and through the
simplicity of their ignorance, not being able to discern, they use them,
judging that they are good. Here we have persons as fit to be confined to
prescribed Forms, as any we can expect to meet with; (such as could neither
make prayers themselves, nor make tolerable choice of prayers made by others;
being so ignorant, as they could not discern an Heretical prayer, when they met
with it). These are circumstances, which might justify the imposition of set
forms, if any could do it. And yet the African Fathers Now since some, angry at
this Canon, (for what reason appears not, unless because it shows what they
would not have seen) would shift it out of the African constitutions; let it be
observed, that it was originally a Decree of the Council at Hippo, as appears
by the brief of its Canons; in which it is the 23. in number of 41. Crab. t. 1.
p. 433. A general Council this was, as we learn by that of Possidonius, Vit.
August. c. 7. Coram Episcopis, hoc illi jubentibus in plenarium totius Africae
Concilium Hippone agebant. Vid. August. retract. lib. 1. cap. 17. And of such
esteem, that, as Baronius tells us, Ceterae quae postea in Africa celebratae
sunt Synodi, ex Hipponensi tanquam Archetypo quodam, complura suerint mutuatae.
Ad anu. 393. n. 5.

And no African Council has fuller approbation, nor that so frequently and
solemnly declared. It was confirmed, by a fu^l Council at Carthage, Caesario
and Attico. Coss. an. 397. So Marianus Scotus mentions it, an. 417. Concilium
Carthagin^nse, ubi Hipponensis Concilii statuta firmantur and inseruntur. And
an abridgment (now spoken of) made of its decrees, that they might be the
better remembered and observed, as the Fathers tell us in a Synodal Epistle;
breve vero statutorum huic epistolae subdi secimus, ut compendio (quae decreta
sunt) recensentes, solicitius observari curemus, in Crab. ^. 1. p. 433. Justel.
notae in Cod. Asr. p. 48, 49. And of Fifty ascribed to this (called Third)
Council of Carthage, Thirty Nine are the same with those of Hippo; and in both
this Canon is the Twenty Three.

It was confirmed afterward (the Canons thereof being recited) not only by the
Votes, but the Subscriptions of the Fathers in the general Council at Milevis,
an. 402. Arcad. and Honor. 5. Coss. Together with the constitutions of the last
mentioned Council of Carthage. Vid. Crab. tom. 1. p. 481, 509. and Justell.
Cod. 218. etc.

It was finally ratified by Two Hundred and Seventeen Bishops in a Council at
Carthage, an. 419. and the approbations and confirmations of it forementioned
are part of the African code, in which the title of Can. 34. is, quod nihil de
Hipponens^ Concilio sit emendandum, in Justel, p. 114. Vid. p. 217. etc.


saw no sufficient reason, to prescribe such Forms to persons so lamentably
insufficient. But, as they did make choice of what prayers they thought good
before; so they leave them at liberty, to use what they made choice of;
providing only, they should first confer with their more able Brethren about
them, that so what was therein erroneous might be amended. And accordingly
Augustine, in the same place, tells us, multorum enim preces emendantur
quotidie, si doctioribus fuerint recitatae; the prayers of many are amended
daily, if they be recited to the more Learned.

There had been no occasion for any part of this Canon, if such Liturgies, as
we speak of, had been in use; or if they had thought fit to have imposed any. A
few words would have served the turn, instead of those they multiply; ( Let no
Prayers be used, in Celebrating the Sacrament, but what the Church prescribes).
But the wisdom of Africa, and the great Augustine, thought that course more
advisable, which is utterly inconsistent with such restraint, and which left
the most insufficient of their Ministers at greater liberty; for such evidently
is the course they take in this Canon. The severals of which, if they can be
reconciled with any kind or degree of confinement to prescribed Forms; then may
we reconcile light and darkness.

That no Ministers were limited to any prescribed Forms, in the administration
of the Lords Supper, is manifest also, by the Seventieth Canon in the
Collection called the African Council; which being the same in effect with that
which passes for the twelfth Canon of the Council of Milevis, runs thus.

Placuit etiam hoc, ut preces quae probatae fuerint in Concilio, sive
praefationes, sive commendationes, seu manus impositiones, ab omnibus
celebrentur; nec aliae omnino contra fidem proferantur; sed quaecunque Collect.
in Cod. Can. 103. p. 281. Vid. Thornd. 244.


cum prudentioribus fuerint collatae dicantur. This also seemed good, that the
Prayers which shall be allowed in a Council, whether Prefaces, or
Commendations, or Imposition of Hands, may be used by all; neither may any
other, against the Faith be used; but all whatsoever, which shall be
communicated with the more discreet, may be used. Where it is observable, that,

1. As much liberty in Praying is left to Ministers by this Canon, as by that
but now insisted on (tho some, upon a conceit it is otherwise, have showed more
favor to this, then that): Those that were so indiscreet, as they could not
discern an Heretical Prayer from another, and so gave occasion of jealousy,
least the Prayers they made choice of might have something in them against the
Faith; were not, by the Decree of that Council, to use such Prayers, till they
were approved by some prudent Brethren: By this Canon, they were not to use
them, unless they were allowed, either by such prudent persons, or else by a
Synod. So that, here they have more liberty, in the choice of their approvers,
and no less upon any other account at all. I have showed already, as much
liberty is granted by the former Canon, as those that are most for freedom in
Prayer do desire; no restraint in either, but upon persons so insufficient, as
should not be suffered to officiate at all, but in Which seems to have been the
condition of those Churches, by the complaint of Aurelius, in a Council at
Carthage, Cum una cum Episcopis suis consedisset, adstantibus Diaconis,
Aurelius Episcopus dixit: Ecclesiarum Dei, per Africam constitutarum,
necessitates mecum optime novit charitas vestra, Sanctissimi Fratres -- tanta
indigentia Clericorum est, multaeque Ecclesiae ita desertae sunt, ut ne unum
quidem Diaconum vel inliteratum (margin. lectorem) habere reperiantur. Nam de
caeteris superioribus gradibus, and officiis tacendum arbitror: Quia (ut Dixi)
si ministerium Diaconi facile non invenitur, multo magis superiorum honorum
inveniri non posse certissimum est, and quotidianos planctus diversarum paene
emortuarum plebium jam non sustinemus; quibus nisi fuerit aliquando subventum,
gravis nobis, and inexcusabilis innumerabilium animarum perauntium ca^sa apud
Deum mansura est. In Crab. Council. tom. 1. p. 502, 503. in Cod. Justelli, p.
165. Aurel. in Con. Carth. an. 401. Tantum autem inopiae Clericorum
ordinandorum in Africa patiuntur Ecclesiae, ut quaedam loca omnino deserta
sunt. In capitulo Conc. Hipponensis, Crab. 4. 1. p. 434.


extreme necessities. In both, the prudent are allowed to use what Prayers, or
mode of praying they thought fit. For they who are esteemed competent judges of
others Prayers, are thereby presumed fit to judge of their own.

2. No Prayers at all are forbidden, but such as were against the Faith; nec
aliae omnino, contra fidem, proferantur; by which we may judge what Prayers
both the Synod and the prudent would allow. They were not so scrupulous about
words, if wholesome, though not accurate; they could better bear with some
incommodious expressions or incongruities of speech, if the prayer was
affectionate, and had such oratory as the great (...). Chrysostom. in Ps. 8. p.
527, 524.

Basil. (...).

Dii non tam accuratis adorantium precibus, quam innocentia and sanctitate
laetantur: gratiorque existimatur, qui de labris eorum puram castamque mentem,
quam qui meditatum carmen intu^erit. Plin. in Panegvr. ad Trajan.

(...). Is^dor. l. 1. ep. 386.


God is pleased to listen to, though the niceness and curiosity of a vainly
critical ear would not be pleased with it. Noverint (says Augustine) etiam non
esse vocem ad aures Dei, nisi animi affectum, ita enim non irridebunt, si
aliquos Antistites and ministros ecclesiae forte animadverterint, vel cum
barbarismis vel solaecismis Deum invocare. De catechizand. rudibus c. 9. tom.
4. pars poster. p. 330. Let them understand, that God attends not so much to
the voice, as the inward affection; and so they will not jeer, if perhaps they
observe some Bishops and Ministers of the Church do call upon God with some
(were these prescribed?) barbarisms and solecisms.

3. Any Prayers that were approved, either by a Synod, or other discreet
persons, might be used, as in other Church administrations, (and in which of
them were not By Imposition of Hands, here is meant, Prayers used when hands
were imposed; manus autem impositio non sicut Baptismus, repeti non potest.
Quid est enim aliud nisi oration super hominem. August. de Baptis. contra Donat.
l. 3. c. 16. p. 406.

Hands were imposed almost in all Prayers, and all Church Administrations; the
Prayers in the first were those for the Catechumens and Penitents, Imposition
of Hands at both.

On Catechumens. Vincentius a Tiberi in Ciprians connecut. primo per manus
impositionem in exorcismo, secundo per Baptismi regenerationem, possunt ad
Christi pollicitationem pervenire. Vid. August. de Baptis. lib. 6. c. 44.
Augustine, nam and Catechumeni, secundum quendam modum suum, per signum Christi,
and orationum manus impositionis puto sanctificari, de peccat. merit. l. 2. c.
26. tom. 1. pars 1. p. 875. In exorcismis impositio manuum, Leo ep. 78. c. 1.
Vid. Conc. Carth. 4. Can. 85,

On Penitents, in admission to Penance; Albaspin. observe. p. 230. 233, 397.
Vid. Cent. 5. p. 665. In exercise of it while under penitence, (...), etc. Con.
Laodic. c. 18. Con. Carth. 4. c. 80.

In Absolution, or reconciling penitents. Cypr. epist. Eusebius. l. 7. c. 2. Leo,
non nisi per paenitentiae medium, and per impositionem episcopalis manus
communionis recipiant unitatem, epist. 77. cap. 6. R^concilientur per manus
impositionem. Con. Carth. 4. c. 76.

In Confirmation. Tertull. Egressi de lavacro perungimur benedicta unctione de
pristina disciplina, dehinc manus imponitur. Cypr. Qui in ecclesia baptizantur
praepositis ecclesiae offeruntur, ut per nostram orationem and manus
impositionem Spiritum Sanctum consequantur, epist. Joviano. Jerome, Ad eos qui
long in minoribus urbibus per Presbyteros and Diaconos baptisati sunt.
Episcopus ad invocationem Spiritus Sancti manum impositurus excurrat, adv.
Luciferian.

In admission of reduced Heretics. Leo, quod si ab Haereticis baptizatum
quempiam fuisse constiterit, erga hunc nullatenus Sacramentum regenerationis
iteretur; sed hoc tantum, quod ibi defuit, conferatur, ut per episcopalem manus
impositionem virtutem Sancti Spiritus conjequatur, ep. 35. cap. 2. ep. 77. c.
7. (...). Dionys. in Eusebius. l. 7. c. 1.

In visitation of sick. Si sort ab aegrotantibus ob hoc peteretur, ut pro iis
in praesenti Deum rogaret, eisque manus imponeret, sine mora pergebat.
Possidon. vita Augustini. He tells afterward of one healed by his laying on
hands, who had a vision for it.

In celebrating Matrimony. Lest applies that of Clem. Alexand. pedagog. l. 3.
(...).

In Ordination, which needs no proof. Sed vid. Con. Carth. 4. can. 2. 3, 4.

In exorcising the possessed. Con. Carth. 4. can. 5. Omni die exorcistae
energumenis manus imponant. Vid. can. 7.

In Baptizing. Clem. constable. l. 7. c. 44. Vid. Vicec. de Bapt. p. 614. 620. and
immediately before, Dionys. Areop. eccl. Hier. c. 2. Vicec. p. 581. Hence
baptism is called impositio manus, p. 8. in abrenunciando sub Antistitis manu,
Tertullian de corona mil. c. 3. post confessionem Fidei. Dionys. Arcop. in
Vicec. 325. eccles. Hierar. cap. 2.

Hence Melitius is, by the Nicene Council, forbidden the exercise of his
Function, in these terms: (...). Synodica epist. Con. nic. in Theodoret, l. 1.
c. 9.


Imposition of Hands used?) so particularly in the Lords Supper, (as the title
of the Canon, de precibus ad altar dicendis, shows) in what Mode, or by what
Person soever they were made. And hence it follows, that either those African
Churches had no common form of Service at all; or else (which serves my purpose
as well) they had none, but such, as with the good leave of those Fathers,
might never have been used by any, either at the Lords Supper, or other parts
of Worship; since any other Prayers, which either a Synod, or other prudent
Ministers should approve, have the placet of this Council.

The inference is just, and cannot be evaded, unless any will say, by the
preces quae probatae fuerint is meant a Liturgy established in those Churches.
But that this would be an unreasonable shift, the Canon it self (a little
further examined) will discover. For

1. An established Liturgy (if there had been any such) was used and approved
already. But the Prayers, here mentioned, were not yet approved, nor were they
to be used, till approved. So the brief of the Canon tells us, ut preces and
orationes compositae, nisi probatae fuerint in Concilio, non dicantur. In Crab.
Council. tom. 1. p. 482. It is provided that the Service to be used, be first
approved in the usual Synod, says a Learned Advocate for such Liturgies, upon
this Canon. Then

2 What is meant by ( quaecunque, what Prayers soever shall be debated with the
more prudent, may be said) in the last clause of the Decree.

1. If we understand by it the supposed Liturgy, it is added vainly, and no
tolerable account can be given why. And besides, some prudent Brethren were to
be conferred with about these Prayers, who were to approve them before they
might be said. (This is clearly and unquestionably the design of quaecunque cum
prudentioribus fuerint collatae, dicantur.) So that if hereby the African
Liturgy be understood, it was such a one, as was not yet allowed to be used,
and possibly never might be. It was at the arbitrament of such Judges, as
those, who were concerned to use them, would choose; whether it should ever
take place in the Church, or no, It might be disused or abolished, either in
part, or wholly; as they thought fit. Such was the Liturgy of these Churches,
no other established, nor otherwise prescribed, if the Canon here speak of it.

But 2. If we understand hereby other Prayers, then such as the imaginary
Liturgy contained; then so much liberty is hereby granted, for the use of those
other Prayers, that the pretended Liturgy might never be used: For these
Fathers authorize any other (with a quaecunque) which prudent Brethren might
think fit for public use. And so leave none under the restraint of any
prescribed Forms, either in other parts of Worship, or ( in precibus ad altar
dicendis) in the Eucharistical Service I am the more satisfied with this
evidence of the African Councils, because Bellarmine has nothing to oppose
here, but what renders it more unquestionable. Chemnitius had alleged, Con.
Afric. can. 70. Milevit. c. 12. to prove, apud veteres ordine ne^lebrandi
fuisse arbitrarium; the order of celebrating the Eucharist of old was
arbitrary. Hinc colligitur, says Bellarmine, non fuisse antiquo tempore
praescriptum certum canonem orationum, qui omnes obligaret, sed permissum
fuisse, ut quisque componeret preces, modo eae analogae essent fidei, de miss.
l. 2. c. 18.

Chemnitius thus, Non enim conceptis verbis praescripta fuit una quaedam certa
forma -- sed liberum fuit uti quacunque forma, modo analoga esset fidei. Examen
pars 2. p. 358.

Bellarmin answers, Canones Conciliorum citatorum non loquuntur de canone
missae; sed de collectis, quae semper fuirant multiplices and vari^, Id. ibid,
p. 817. Where he denies not, but that those African Decrees show, that all
other Prayers, even in the Eucharist, were then arbitrary; only the Canon of
the Mass, says he, they speak not of. And no wonder, since the Canon, which he
is so tender of, was not in being till near two hundred years after these
Decrees were made. And there is not a syllable in them, for the excepting of any
other, more then that. Vid. Albaspin. ante.




In the 12th Canon of that Council, which passes for the 2d of Milevis, for
cum prudentioribus collatae, we have a prudentioribus tractatae Scholium ad
hunc locum in Cod. Pal. (...). Glossa Basilii a Carolo Lu^beo Cl. viro editae,
(...). Justell. obs. in Cod. p. 8.


. A phrase of the same import, signifying the Prayers handled by the more
prudent, i. e. debated, discoursed of, and so examined by them, in order to
approbation (...). Cod. Afr. p. 50.


, if they were found good, or to amendment, if otherwise. And this sense of
tractatae agrees best, both with the other constitutions of those African
Churches, and their practice also declared to us by Augustine. But if any
notwithstanding will thereby understand the Prayers composed by the more
prudent, tractatus being a Sermon in Cyprian, Ambrose, Augustine, Optatus, in
Thornd. 176. and I will thence infer, the more prudent had no more liberty in
Praying then in Preaching. If I should yield this, it would be no great
disadvantage. For, as they were not tied to use Sermons composed by others,
being much below those Worthies, orationes alieno formare ingenio, to owe their
public Discourses to another invention; so they had and took liberty to
Preach, either ex tempore, or upon premeditation; and the former way commonly.

Jerome tells us many Homilies of Origin Quae ab Origin, in auditorio ecclesiae
ex tempore, non tam explanationis, quam aedificationis intention perorata
sunt: sicut in Homillis, sive in oratiunculis in Genesin, and in Exodum, etc.
Ruff. pe^orat. in ep. ad Romans p. 634.

In the Editions of Johannes Grodicius, the title is, Catech^ses extemporant^
ad illuminatos 18. and mystagogicae 5. Vid. Riv. crit. ^. p. 258.


, which he Translated, were Preached, delivered in the Church by the Author ex
tempore. Oratiunculas has 26. ex tempore in ecclesia peroravit Adamantius
Senex. Prolus. in Hom. Orig. in Jes. nav. And Ruffinus speaks the same of
Origens Homilies upon Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus and Romans.

All that we have of Cyrils Bishop of Jerusalem are extemporary Discourses; as
Vossius observes, from the inscription of them, nonne cogitant catecheses (...)
sive extemporales, ut inscriptio indicat? De Symb. p. 38.

And such probably were those, whose occasion and subject was the same sung
before Sermon; as, to omit others, that of Nazianzen, in Ps. 114.

Chrysostom, while Presbyter at Antioch, was advised by Flavianus the Bishop,
to use his extemporary faculty in Preaching, (...), as one of the Writers of
his Life relates it. And he complied with Flavianus herein, (...), they all saw
him Preaching to them ex tempore. Georg. Alexand. vita Chrysostom. p. 179. c.

And such were many of his Sermons at Constantinople, when he was Bishop there;
particularly those upon the Epistles Homiliae in Epist^las ad Ephesios, Philip.
utramque ad, Timotheum and Philemonem, (...), Constantinopolitanis
(accensendae) notae in Chrysostom. hom. 8. p. 227. Commentarii certe mediocres
sunt and ut plurimum, quales illi in Epistolam ad Ephesios, concisi, and (...)
( ut puto). Id. ibid. p. 409.


to the Ephesians, and Philippians; as Sir Hen. Savill, (who deserves so well
of him, and of the World for him) conceives; as also those upon both the
Epistles to Timothy, and that to Philemon; and more then these he intimates to
have seen, (...).

Atticus, Presbyter at Constantinople in Chrysostoms time, and afterward
Bishop there, though far short of his Predecessors accomplishments; yet, by
industry and practice, as Socrates tells us, he attained the faculty of
delivering himself ex tempore to his Auditory; (...). Hist. eccles. l. 7. cap.
2. p. 733.

Jerome had no cure, and so left us no Sermons. But of diverse of the pieces,
which survive him, he was as easily and speedily delivered, as the
forementioned of their popular Discourses. Of one piece of his, he tells us,
Epist. 47. Extemporalis Extemporalis est dictatio, and tanta ad lumen
lucernulae facilitate profusa, ut Notariorum manus lingua praecurreret, and
signae ac furta verborum, volubilitas Sermonum obrueret, Ep. 47.


est dictatio, it was dictated ex tempore, and faster then it could be well
taken in shorthand. And his interpretation (as he calls it) of the three Books
of Solomon, Proverbs, Canticles and Ecclesiastes, was Tridui opus nomini vestro
consecravi, interpretationem videlicet trium Selomonis voluminum. Id. praef. in
Prove.


tridui opus; in which time, one would think the quickest Pen could scarce
write out the Text.

Augustine also, not only in his Conflicts with Adversaries, but also in his
Sermons to the people, used extemporali dictione, as Erasmus Plerumque per
Notarios ex ^re loquentis excepta sunt, cujusmodi sere sunt enarrationes
Scripturarum ad Populum, quas ipse tractatus appellat, aut conflictationes cum
Haereticis, quae olim publitatas apud plebem fieri consueverant. Nec alibi mihi
videtur admirabilior. Quibus medi^cre contigit ingenium, si lucubrandi curam
adhibeatur, excudunt interdum aliquid non contemnendum. Caeterum in extemporali
dictione, tantam adesse mentis perspicaciam, tantam memori^ praesentiam, tam
paratam orationis copiam, non sine perpetua quadam jucunditate, quis non
movetur? Quis hoc hodi^ praestare queat, vel ex istis qui studium omne
collocarunt in paranda dictionis facultate? E^asm. epist. ad Arch. Tolet.
praesixa operibus Augustini.


observes, in whose judgment, he no where more appears admirable then in this;
not that these Discourses are more excellent then his more elaborate Works (as
if he had been, what the Historian says of Tiberius, ex tempore quam a cura
praestantior), but because he could do better on a sudden, then others (though
well accomplished) with time and study. One remarkable instance we have in
Possidonius Cum propositae quaestionis latebras pertractarem, in alium Sermonis
discursum perrexi, atque it a non conclusa vel explicata quaestione,
disputat^onem magis* terminavi advers^m Manich. ^oram errore^, unde nihil.
dicere diereveram, disputaus; quam de iis quae asserere proposueram. Vit.
August. c. 15.


, who tells us in Augustins words, of Firmus a Manichee converted by such a
Discourse, as he never designed before he had begun the Sermon, Vit. August. c.
15. And that seems another, which is entitled concio super gestis cum Emerito
Donat., being occasioned by an acclamation of the people at the Assembly, Tom.
7. pars 1. p. 770.

And those, who having much more work as Pastors, did Preach ordinarily every
day, and some days twice; yea sometimes twice in a forenoon, and thrice in one
day; (as Bishops in those and former times did) it cannot be thought, but many
of their Sermons were born as soon as conceived. Such were their tractates: Nor
was it then thought canting, to ascribe such Discourses to the assistance of
the Holy Spirit. Nazianzen being to discourse of the Holy Ghost, prays for his
assistance, that he might thereby be enabled for the expressions, (...). That I
may open the mysteries of the Spirit, let me have the presence of the Spirit,
to give such expressions as I desire; or if not so much, yet what may be
agreeable to the season, Orat. 44. and says also, they both studied and spoke,
inspired by it. The Spirit, as he adds, blows where it lists, and inspires
whom, and where, and how much he will, (...); accordingly we are inspired, both
to meditate and speak by the Spirit, p. 709.

Thus they did Preach, and thus they might Pray. Nazianzen having given an
account how his Father prayed, in celebrating the Eucharist, adds, (...). Orat.
19. p. 305.

Answerably Ambrose to Forentianus, Epist. 23. l. 4. Docet autem Spiritus
Christi (sicut and Christus) or are discipulos suos; quis autem post Christum
doceret, nisi Spiritus ejus, quem ipse misit ut doceret and dirigeret orationes
nostras? Oramus enim Spiritu, oramus and mente, ut been possit men's orare,
praecedit Spiritus, and deducit eam in viam rectam, ne obrepant carnalia, ne
minora ac etiam majora viribus. Novit enim bonus Medicus quae esca cui apta sit
infirmitati, and cui tempori ad perfectum valetudinis; interdum opportunitas
escae sanitatem reddit, quod si importune aliquis accipiet, aut non
convenienter implicatur periculo. Ergo quia nos nescimus quid oremus, and
quomodo oporteat, postulat pro nobis Spiritus Sanctus.

Their affections excited by the Spirit could help them to expressions without
a Book, and did form their words in Prayer, as Augustine tells us, Quamlibet
alia (quam oramus dominica) verba dicamus, quae affectus orantis, vel
praecedendo format ut clareat, vel consequendo attendit ut crescat. Epist. 121.
Probae, 721. c. 12. And if their affections were not always so active, their
judgment and invention, (which with divine assistance) served them so well on a
sudden with expressions in Preaching, might much more easily help them to words
in Praying.

Let us show this more particularly, in the several Prayers made in the
celebration of the Eucharist. It appears by the 18 Canon of the Council of
Laodicea, that in the latter end of the fourth Century three sorts of Prayers
were used in that administration, (...), after the dismission of Catechumens
and Penitents, (...); the first of these silently, (...); the other two
pronounced, (...). Of which two, one must be the Prayer for all sorts in
general, and the Church in particular, called (...), the general Prayer; for
that such a Prayer was then made, there is evidence enough in Authors both of
Greek and Latin Churches of that Age; the other must be the blessing of the
Elements, called the Prayer of Consecration; for this was never omitted, so
Optatus, Legitimum quod in Sacramentorum mysterio praeteriri non potest. l. 2.
advers. Parmenianum.

Now for the first of these three, viz. That (...), I find no mention of it
elsewhere. Probably Cyril in Junius nor. ad Clem. ep. p. 31.


it consisted only of some secret ejaculations, used by the faithful, while the
offerings or the elements were preparing, to raise their Souls to a posture fit
for that most solemn and sacred Ordinance. However, being a Mental Prayer,
there was no place, and can be no pretense for prescribing words and
expressions for it. Chrysostom (...). Chrysostom. in Ephesians. hom. 3. p. 778.


directs to something of this nature, Hom. 24. in 1 Cor. p. 399.

As to the second, the general Prayer, that this was not made in a set and
invariable form, appears by the Epistle of Epiphanius to John Bishop of
Jerusalem, in Jeromes the 60. p. 466. There was some clashing betwixt these two
Bishops; he of Cyprus being a great zealot against Origin; (as another John of
Constantinople found by troublesome experience). And he of Jerusalem being an
admirer of Origin, and under suspicion to be tainted with his erroneous
Opinions. John had heard, that Epiphanius should intimate, in the Eucharistical
Prayers, that he by name was warped from the Faith; he complains of it; and
that Epistle is Epiphanius's Answer and Apology, in reference to this and other
particulars he was charged with. As to this, he admires, that any should
report, quod in oratione quando offerimus sacrificia Deo, soleamus pro te
dicere, Domine praesta Johanni ut recte credat. This is the occasion. And
hereby it evidently appears, they used occasional Petitions in this Prayer; for
such a Petition is that complained of; and the occasion a suspicion, that John
was inclined to Origens errors. If such liberty had never been used, to pray
in this place as occasion required, who would have been so impudent, as to
raise such a report; or so foolish as to affirm what none would believe, as
being against the constant and unvariable custom of those that celebrated? Who
can think, that the Bishop of Jerusalem would have brought such a charge
against Epiphanius, as would have appeared false to the World at first sight,
and might have been convicted of impudent slander, by the known unalterable
usage of Christians? And why does not he, who designed to burden his Adversary
as much as might be, charge him with transgressing the orders of the Church, to
vent his particular spleen at a Christian Bishop? Is it not evident upon the
whole, that there were no such orders, confineing them to any unvariable form,
in that administration; but that they might, and did, vary in their
expressions, as there was occasion.

This will yet further appear, by Epiphanius's answer. Noli nos in tantum
putare Rusticos, ut hoc tam aperte dicere poterimus, etc. He takes no notice,
that what was objected, was inconsistent with the custom and practice of that
Church, and so groundlesly suggested. He appeals not to the known form, to
which they were precisely confined, refers him not to their Service Book for
his satisfaction; which yet, if there had been any such thing, a duller person
then Epiphanius would have discovered, to have been the best way, to stop the
mouth of his Accuser. He denies not, but they ordered their Prayers according
to such occasions; but only tells him, they were not so rustical, as to do it
so bluntly.

We have, in the English Service Book, a Prayer for the whole state of Christ's
Church, pretended to be answerable to this Prayer we are upon; and indeed the
only Prayer in the Book, that can pretend to any footsteps of Antiquity, so
high as the fourth Age. Now suppose the Bishop of L. should be accused, in that
prayer to prefer such a petition for the Primate of Ireland, Domine praesta I.,
ut recte credat; what course would the Bishop take, to clear himself of this
accusation? Would not the dullest of his Chaplains appeal to the prayer it
self, being invariably used, as the best way to demonstrate the charge was
false; which yet the Bishop of Cyprus, supposed to be just in the same
circumstances, did not offer at? Nay he denies not, etc. ut supra.

But let us proceed with his answer; quando autem complemus orationem secundum
ritum mysteriorum, and pro omnibus, and pro te quoque dicimus, custodi illum
qui praedicat veritatem. Vel certe ita, tii praesta Domine, and custodi, ut
ille verbum praedicet veritatis; sicut occasio Sermonis se tulerit, and
habuerit oration consequentiam: He says, they prayed for all Pastors (all that
preached) which shows it to be the general prayer, wherein they were wont
(...). Clem. Constable. l. 2. c. 51. vid. Lest 190) and for him also; but in what
expressions they did it, he is doubtful. It is but one article of this prayer
he gives an account of. It is the same thing (preaching the truth) and the same
persons, (those that preached) he is telling us they prayed for. And they
prayed but for the same persons and things once in the same prayer; and yet he
cannot tell determinately what words they used, as appears evidently, by his
disjunction vel.

Now Epiphanius celebrated the Eucharist himself thrice a week, as he thought
by Apostolical order; so he tells us, expos. fidei, p. 110. (...). Vid. Albas.

And if he had celebrated it in a set form, could he have been to seek for the
words he used so often? since if either his Memory, or the Prayer Book would
have helped him; and one of them would have helped him to the precise words, if
they had then confined themselves to any, and had had their Prayers either by
heart or in a book; he would never have writ so doubtfully of them, when his
business was to satisfy a captious Adversary.

Would there be any need, for one who has the prayer for all states by heart,
or has the Service Book before him, to express by a distinction, what is there
desired for Bishops, Pastors and Curates? No more would Epiphanius, if the same
mode of praying had been then in use.

To this prayer we may refer what we find of Jerome, who complains that in his
time, the oblations As M. Th. observes, it is called an Oblation ( viz. the
Elements, or the Offerings out of which they were chosen) according to the
style of the most ancient Church Writers; not as consecrated, but as presented
and offered (whether by the people, as the custom was to him that ministered, or
by him that ministered to God) to be consecrated. Serve, p. 379.


were publicly mentioned by the Deacon, and the names of the offerers recited,
yea and the quantity of what they offered, and also of what they promised to
offer, in Ezekiel l. 6. c. 18. Public in ecclesia Diaconus recitat Offerentium
nomina, tantum offert ille, tantum ille pollicitus est. Which he sharply
censures, Placent sibi ad plausum Populi torquente eos Conscientia; they
delight in the applause of the people, whiles their Conscience torments them.
The like complaint he makes in Jer. c. 11. Nunc public recitantur offerentium
nomina, and Redemptio peccatorum recitatur in laudem. Now who can believe, that
a practice, worthy of so sharp a rebuke, was publicly prescribed; or if it had
been prescribed for common use, would have been so severely censured? And
therefore, what can be thought, but that those, who officiated, were left to
their liberty, to use what expressions they thought fit? If there had been a
rule or prescription, limiting them to any thing better; he would have taken
notice of it; and of this usage, as a transgression of the established order.

Pertinent to which is this passage of Augustine; August. de Civit. l. 22. c.
8. Vir Tribunitius Hesperius qui apud nos est, habet in territorio Fussulensi
fundum Zabedi appellatum, ubi cum (afflictione animalium and servorum suorum)
domum suam Spirituum malignorum vim noxiam perpeti comperisset, rogavit nostros
(me absente) Presbyteros, ut aliquis eorum illo pergeret, cujus orationibus
cederent. Perrexit un^, obtulit ibi sacrificium corporis Christi, orans,
quantum potuit, ut cessaret illa vexatio; Deo protinus miserante cessavit. Bl.
286. Vid. in Aug. tom. 2. p. 686.

As also what Chrysostom says, viz. (...). Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. hom. 41. p. 524.
And elsewhere, (...), and after, (...). Chrysostom. in Hebr. hom. 15. p. 515.

Those who had liberty, when they were offering supplications and praises, in
the celebration of the Eucharist, to pray as occasion was offered, and to put
up such Petitions as they thought fit, upon particular emergencies, were not
confined to set forms in that administration.

Cyprians occasional Praises and Prayers, in sacrificiis, upon Lucius return
from banishment; Hic quoque in sacrificiis atque orationibus nostris, non
cessantes, Deo Patri, and Christo filio ejus Domino nostro, gratias agere, and
orare pariter and petere, ut qui Perfectus est atque proficiens, custodiat and
persiciat in vobis confessionis vestrae gloriosam Coronam, qui and ad hoc vos
fortasse revocavit, ne gloria esset occulta, si foris essent confessionis
vestrae consummata martyria. Cypr. epist. l. 3. ep. 1. p. 53.

Add to this, what may be observed in Ambrose, Epist. 33. Ad Marcellinam
sororem. He, whiles he was celebrating, about 387. Spond. p. 2. (missam facere
caepi) and employed, as I suppose, in this Prayer The style of this Prayer, in
diverse Liturgies, runs in the terms we offer. Tho^^d. 380.


( dum offero) understanding what the Arrians were doing, and what had befallen
Castulus; he orders the Prayer suitably to that occasion; Orare in ipsa
oblatione Deum caepi, ut subveniret. [Sequente die, erat autem dominica, post
lectiones atque tractatum, dimissis catechumenis, symbolum aliquibus
competentibus in Baptisteriis tradebam basilicis, illic nunciatum est mihi
comperto, quod ad Portianam Basilicam de palatio Decanos misissent (Ariani) ut
vela suspenderent, Populi partem eo pergere. Ego tamen mansi in munere; missam
facere cepi. Dum offero, raptum a Populo cognovi Castulum quendam, quem
Presbyterum dicebant Ariani, orar^ in ipsa oblatione Deum caepi, ut subveniret.]

He celebrating this Ordinance, and while he was praying before the
distribution, dum offero, having notice what the Arrians were doing at another
Church; he applies himself in this Prayer to that particular occasion; Orare in
ipsa oblatione Deum caepi, ut subveniret; which one, that had been fettered
with prescribed Forms, could not have liberty to do.

Such occasional Petitions, with Thanksgivings of like nature, were used by
Cyprian, in sacrificiis, in these administrations, as appears ( Ep. 4. l. 2. Ad
Mosem and Maximum, p. 41.) Nor can this be understood, of some general
expression constantly used, comprizing Lucius with others; for the occasion was
particular, and such as was not incident every day. And besides, as it had been
a vanity, to tell him of that, which he knew before, being well acquainted with
the supposed common form. So it had been something worse, to speak of that as a
particular respect to him, when it no more respected him, then others.

Proceed we to the third prayer, viz. that for Blessing or Sanctifying the
Elements, (called the prayer for Consecration) which consisted much of
Thanksgiving; and from thence this Sacrament, as is thought, came to be called
the Eucharist. It is of this, that Justin Martyr gives an account, in the words
alleged by others, (...); the President, in like manner, as before, prays and
gives thanks, according to his ability. This praying, according to his ability,
or as he was able, plainly excludes all praying by Forms prescribed, or
composed for him by others, if he either had ability; (which none question in
the (...). Chrysostom. in Ephesians. hom. 6. p. 792.


Pastors of those times) to compose, or was able to conceive a prayer himself.

Many several ways are taken to evade this; no way of one, it seems, satisfying
another amongst themselves; by which we may guess, what satisfaction they are
like to give to others.

Anonym. p. 18. Use of daily public Prayers.


One tells us, it is a complement of Civility, as when we say, Ago gratias, non
quas debeo, sed quas possum; or quantas possum maximas. But, not well pleased
with this (it seems) himself, (at which we need not wonder) he tells us (which
will no more please others) of some, (Learned too) who understand it of giving
God thanks, with as loud a voice, as he is able; (...).

Lestr. Liturg. cap. 7. p. 218.


Another brings an instance, where (...) is thought to be applied to a Form;
This is in Gregory Nazianzen, (...), come let us, as we are able, sing a
Triumph, the Song which Israel sometimes sung, upon the overthrow of the
Egyptians in the Red Sea. But here, by (...), the Song which Israel sung, we
need no more understand the very same words of that Song, then Rev. 15. 3. We
are to understand the same by the Song of Moses. Which Song of Moses, those who
had got the Victory over the Beast, are said as expressly to sing, ((...)): And
yet, that which they sing, consists quite of other words, as appears, ver. 3.
4. And therefore well might D. H. give us leave, (as he does) to conceive, by
the Song of Moses, another Song after that pattern. And so we may warrantably,
by the Song, which Israel sung, in Nazianzen.

The Learned Remonstrant says, in answer to this, that in Justin Martyrs time,
they prayed according to their ability, and yet had a public Liturgy, as we
have, though ours pray according to their ability: (meaning, I suppose, before
and after Sermon.) And so he grants (if I understand him) that they used no
public Liturgy, in celebrating or consecrating the Eucharist; (for of the
Prayer for sanctifying the Elements the Holy Martyr speaks it); and thereby
yields all that we now allege it for, and in effect all that we desire: Since
it will be easy to satisfy the World, that, if they used no public Liturgy,
no prescribed Forms of Prayer, in this part of Worship, they used none, in any.
And (...), Anonym. p. 16.
in this very passage, rendered by themselves in like manner as before; gives
us notice, that as they prayed here, so in like manner they prayed in the other
parts of Worship, which he had given account of immediately before, in Baptism,
in the Lords Supper, in all (...), according to their ability, without any
public, any prescribed Liturgy.

Another, of great Learning, apprehending, it seems, that, to grant they prayed
according to their ability, is to yield all; makes much difference betwixt
(...) and (...) And to show it, explains the Greek by Hebrew, and Justin Martyr
by Maimonides. I suppose, it will satisfy others as well, to have an account
of this phrase, by the Greek Glossaries, or Justin Martyr himself. How much
difference there is between them, Phavorinus shows, when he explains (...) by
(...). His words are (...). So that, according to him, (...) is a defective
phrase, which, when it is represented entire, must be expressed by (...). Let
me add that, in (...), likewise (...) is to be understood, when not expressed,
and all our abilities (as to parts, though not to degrees) there included; for
when any of our abilities, for a work we undertake, is not exercised, and so
contributes not to it, we do it not (...). Answerably, Chrysostom uses (...)
and (...), page 206. ver. 20.
as phrases equivalent, in Genesis hom. 27. And elsewhere in these words, (...).
Tom. 6. p. 759. edit. Savil. What he had expressed by (...), he explains by
(...). And so they differ, no more then the Latin phrases, pro viribus, and pro
facultate; by which Camerarius and Donnaeus render (...), and quantum possum,
or quantum in me est, by which others render (...).

But Maimonides may make the difference evident: Let us see how. He tells us of
one proceeding in discourses, tending to the humiliation of the people,
according to his ability, until he humble their hearts, and they return
perfectly.

It is supposed, that if Justin Martyr had been to express this, he would have
used the phrase (...) not (...): ( Rambams Preacher, making use of his own
abilities and expressions in his Discourses, which the former phrase, it seems,
may include, but not the latter). Well, but J. Martyr, in this very Apology,
has a passage just parallel to this; where he Apol. 2. p. 157.
speaks of the discourses the Christians used, tending to the Conversion of the
Heathen; and they proceeded therein (...), not (...). Therefore, both by the
word and the figure of him that appeared, we exhorting you, as we are able,
know we are unaccountable for the future, although you believe not. So Justin
Martyrs (...), is no other, then our Authors (...); and the (...) in him
prayed, just as he in Maimonides preached; using his own abilities, invention,
expressions in praying, as the other did in preaching. And thus much our Author
must yield, if he will stand to Justin Martyrs, or his own Discourse.

And others in reason will be content, that the Eminent Martyr shall show us
his own meaning. The Christians, in those Discourses (he mentions) whereby they
endeavored to bring the Heathen to the Faith of Christ, used their judgment,
their invention, and certainly their own expressions. They employed all their
abilities in this work; and this was (...); by which we may understand, if we
will admit him to explain himself, what he means, by (...). And how well, they
represent his meaning, who will have him to intend hereby, neither less nor
more, then earnestness in praying.

Hereby I suppose it clear enough, notwithstanding all endeavors to obscure
it; that the principal Prayer, in the most solemn part of public Worship, in
those times, was no prescribed Form. Nor was it any such Form Two Hundred Years
after, as appears by that of Basil; who tells us plainly (in the latter end of
the fourth Age) that no words of such a Prayer were left in writing by any Holy
Men. (...). Thus rendered by Erasmus; Invocationis verba, cum conficitur panis
Eucharistiae, and poculum benedictionis, quis Sanctorum in scripto nobis
reliquit? Which of the Holy Men have left us in Writing the words of a prayer,
at the Consecration of the Eucharistical Bread, and the Cup of Blessing Bishop
Jewels Ap^logy, p. 60. Basil besought God, that he might celebrate with Prayers
of his own making.


? By this it is evident, they were so far from having any prescribed Forms, in
Consecrating the Eucharist, as they had not so much as the words of any such
Form in Writing, to his time, who lived, according to Petavius, till 379.

It will be easily granted, by the Zealots for prescribed administrations, that
there never was any Liturgy, wherein there was not a Form for Consecration
(since they think any part of a Liturgy may be more tolerably omitted then
this; and those that officiate had better be left at liberty any where, then
here) and they will show us such a Form, in all Liturgies extant, Modern or
Ancient, or pretended to be Ancient) therefore they cannot reasonably deny,
while there were no such Forms in Writing, there were no such Liturgies; and so
none in Basils time.

By this also we may discern, what sentence ought to be passed upon those
Liturgies, which go under the names, of Peter, Mark, James, Clemens and Basil
himself too. In them, the mysteries are clearly described; which, he says, the
Ancients thought themselves highly concerned to keep secret. And there we have
(as a most necessary part of them) the Form of Consecration in Writing; which,
he says, no Holy Man ever left in Writing.

In that, ascribed to him, the forgery is more impudent. He having declared his
high approbation of the Ancients practice, in not committing any such thing to
Writing; and upon such reasons, as obliged himself, as much as any, not to run
counter to them herein. He, with them, thought the (...), the reverence due to
these mysteries hereby secured; and another course the way to render them
despicable, (...); as is evident by his discourse, in the place alleged;
(...).

Their Prayers at the Eucharist were long ordinarily, so in Justin Martyrs
time, (...) Apol, 2. p. 162. Not like those of the Monks in Egypt. Pauli 300 a
day (...) forheads. Soz. 397. Moyti^ 50. p. 396. So in Chrysostom, (...). De
Sacerd. orat. 3. p. 16. And elsewhere he says, it required a greater confidence
then Moses and Helias had, to pray in this ministration, (...), p. 46. And why
such boldness was needful, if they had the Prayer in a Book before them, I
apprehend not. However, those that were usually large in this Prayer, were
sometimes brief, when there was occasion; and performed it, (...); which is a
clear evidence, they were not tied to a set Form, but were left to use their
discretion; and ordered their Pra^er over the Elements, so as to be briefer or
more enlarged therein, according as they were disposed, and as occasion
required.

Marcion imitated the Christians herein, (...), etc. Irenaeus l. 1. c. 9. in
Epipha. l. 1. tom. 3. Hier. 34.

This Prayer, of old, consisted much of Thanksgiving. Chrysostom gives an
account of some particulars, for which they gave thanks. And having mentioned
as many, or more, then are to be found in any Eucharistical Form, either in the
Mass Book, or our Service Book, adds, cum his and caeteris hujusmodi gratiarum
actionibus accedimus, in 1 ad Corinth. Homil. 24. implying, they were not
confined to those specified, but enlarged themselves in such like particulars
according to discretion. But I insist not on this, the former evidence is
sufficient.

(...), p. 396. After he had said, (...)

Gregory Bishop of Nazianzen, Father of Gregory called the Divine, having been
much weakened by a Fever, but very desirous to partake of the Lords Supper; by
the help of his Maid, he gets to Church, [ Narrat Nazianzenus, Patrem suum
Sacerdotem ardentissima and diuturna febri exhaustum, ab ancilla aliquando
Synaxis tempore deductum manu in coetum ecclesiasticum, in quo pro more caenam,
sed paucissimis and quibus tum per morbum potuit, verbis consecratam, aliis and
distribuerit, and ex ea participarit ipse quoque. Reversum vero ad lectum,
ciboque parumper ac somno refectum melius statim habuisse, etc. Orat. in funere
patris, cent. 4. p. 421.] and there (...). (...) Naz. orat. in laudem Patris
Gregor. p. 305. Afterward uttering the words of Thanksgiving, as was usual,
and Blessing the People.


; lifting up his feeble hands in Prayer, he cheerfully celebrates the
mysteries, with and for the people, with very few words, such as his weakness
would admit; but (as seems to me) with a most vigorous soul; and afterward,
(...), etc. And this he had from the Holy Ghost, perceived by him, but not
discerned by those that were present: Where, if (...) refer to (...), which
seems most congruous, he tells us those few words, wherewith he celebrated,
were suggested to him by the Holy Ghost; and so neither by a Book, nor by his
Memory. But I need not insist on that. By the former expression it is evident,
that he was briefer, and used fewer words in his Prayers, at this time, before
the administration, then he was wont to do, when in Health. Now they that, in
celebrating this Ordinance, and Blessing the Elements, do pray sometimes
longer, sometimes shorter, as their strength will serve them, are far from
confinement to a certain number of words, which is the thraldom of prescribed
Forms.

For further evidence, that these, and other parts of the Eucharistical
administration, were not under the restraint of prescribed orders, in the
beginning of the fifth Age; let that be observed, which we meet with in the
Epistle of Innocent the 1. to Decentius, written an. 416. to satisfy him (who
was Bishop of Eugubium) concerning many severals, which were then, it seems,
not determined, but under consultation and inquiry; so c. 8. San^ quia de hoc,
sicuti de caeteris consulere voluit dilectio tua.

Particularly, it was inquired, what place in the Eucharistical office should
be assigned to the osculum pacis; whether ante, or post confecta mysteria,
before or after the Consecration of the Elements. Which Innocent satisfies, not
by wondering that he took no notice of the prescribed order, though (since he
was a Bishop in his Precinct, and calls Decentius Clergy Clericos nostros, c.
8.) he might justly have wondered at it, if there had been any such prescript.
But by reason, cap. 1. Pacis osculum dandum est post confecta mysteria, ut
constat populum ad omnia, quae in mysteriis aguntur, atque in ecclesia
celebrantur, praebuisse consensum, ac finita esse pacis concludentis signaculo
demonstrantur.

It was also matter of consultation and inquiry, whether the names of the
Offerers should be recited before or after Prayer, made over the oblation, cap.
2. Whereby it appears there was not then, so much as any common authorized
direction for the order and method of their Eucharistical administration; (much
less any prescribed Forms or Modes; for if they had not so much as a directory,
how far were they from such a Liturgy as is now contended for?) If Decentius
had known any such established order, his enquiry had been needless, and so had
Innocents determination been. He might have referred him to the prescribed
order, as our Prelates would have done in the like case; and said to him, as he
does to two other Bishops, ep. 5. in Crab. 410. concerning the Canons of the
Church, Ecclesiasticorum Canonum norma nulli debet esse incognita Sacerdoti,
quia nesciri haec a Pontifice satis est indecorum; maxim quia a Laicis
religiosis viris and sciatur, and custodienda esse ducatur: Yea, and judged him
unworthy to be a Prelate in his Province, who would make a question of that,
which the Wisdom and Authority of the Church had already determined. But there
is neither mention of, nor reference to any such order, nor any resentment of
his calling it in question. He tells him indeed, it was superfluous; not
because it was already determined, but because his own prudence might discern,
what was most convenient to be done in the case; quod superfluum sit, and ipse
per tuam prudentiam recognoscis.

In the conclusion, he hopes, that in these, and other such like particulars,
which, if determined, amount to no more then the directive part, or Rubric of
a Liturgy; Decentius may instruct, and give some order to others, which they
may imitate, not strictly conform to; Erit autem Domini potentia, id procurare,
ut tuam ecclesiam, and Clericos nostros, qui sub tuo Pontisicio divinis
famulantur officiis, been instituas, and aliis formam tribuas, quam debeant
imitari.

Where it is observable; 1. At this time, there was no settled Form or Order in
that Church. 2. The Order he hopes for, if it comprize all the particulars in
the Epistle, comes to no more then a Direction or Rubric. And 3. This designed
for imitation, not for strict Conformity.

And what liberty there was in those times; and how far they were from
uniformity, appears by the beginning of that Epistle. Si instituta
Ecclesiastica, ^t sunt a beatis Apostolis tradita, integra vellent servare
Domini Sacerdotes, nulla diversitas, nulla varietas, in ipsis ordinibus and
consecrationibus haberetur. Sed dum unusquisque, non quod traditum est, sed
quod sibi visum fuerit, hoc aestimat esse tenendum; inde diversa in diversis
locis vel ecclesiis aut teneri aut celebrari videntur; in Crab, tom. 1. p. 452.
While every one judges, that is to be kept, not which is delivered, but which
seems good to him; here are seen various tenets, and modes of Celebrating, in
the several places or Churches. He speaks as if there were as many ways of
Celebrating, An. 416, (when this Epistle was writ,) as there were places or
Churches; and this variety, in Ordinibus and Consecrationibus, which are his
words immediately before, and is (if I understand him) both in Ordering their
Worship, and Consecrating the Mysteries.

It seems, this pleased not Innocent; the character given him by Erasmus makes
that no wonder; Saevus potius, quam eruditus, and ad damnandum potius, quam
docendum instructior; in Epist. 96. in 2 tom. August. Those of least worth,
when they get power, are usually most narrow spirited and imperious.

As for the traditum est, which he opposes; if he mean by it any Apostolical
Tradition; he alleadges it with the same fidelity, as he mentions Ancient
Tradition for the Roman Supremacy, Epist. 91. to the African Fathers; and as
his next Successors, Zosimus, Boniface, Caelestine, alleged a Canon of Nice
to a Council at Carthage, for the same purpose.

Object. You take notice of traditum est, which was something that ought to
have been observed, and would have left no such liberty.

Answer. Whatever be meant by his traditum est; it was no authoritative general
order, injoyning all to use the same words in Prayer; for if there had been any
such thing, it would not have been universally disregarded.

If there had been any thing delivered, against such freedom in Celebrating, by
Ancient or Modern Authors, worthy of observance; it would have been taken
notice of, by some of those who used this liberty, as well as by Innocent; who
had many contemporaries not inferior to himself: Else that Age was very
unhappy; since nothing of eminency appeared in him, (nor in the Roman Bishops
generally of those times) but his great place, if that impartial Critic
mistake him not, and dictionem, and ingenium, and eruditionem tali dignam
Praesule desiderare cogimur.

Yet he, ambitious to have all dance after the Roman Pipe, though as yet it
gave herein no certain sound; (and indeed their stickling about this and the
Supremacy, was to little purpose for one Age or two) makes that matter of
complaint, which was far from being so with his betters, both then and in
better times. ( Vid. Cypr.) But however he resented it; he has left us
evidence, that in his days, as elsewhere, so in Italy, every one held his own
way, even in Qua in part nemini verecundia and modestia nostra praejudicat,
quo minus unusquisque, quod voluerit, sentiat, and quod senserit, faciat. --
Ostendi quid nos, quantum in nobis est, sentiamus: Nomini praescribentes, quo
minus statuat, quod putat unusquisque praepositus, actus sui rationem Domino
redditurus. Cypr. ad magn. ep. 7. l. 4. Haec tibi breviter -- rescripsimus,
nemini praescribentes aut prejudicantes, quo minus unusquisque Episcoporum quod
putaverit faciat, habens arbitrii sui liberam facultatem, Ep. ad Jubalan. p.
227.

Augustine, without expressing any offense, says the varieties were more then
could be well known. August. retract. l. 2. c. 20.

Libri duo, quorum est titulus, ad inquisitiones Januarii, multa de Sacramentis
continent disputata, sive quae universaliter, sive quae particulariter, i. e.
Non peraeque in omnibus locis servat Ecclesia, nec tamen commemorari omnia
potuerant.

Si instituta Ecclesiastica, ut sunt a beatis Apostolis tradita integra vellent
servare Domini Sacerdotes, nulla diversitas, nulla varietas, in ipsis Ordinibus
and Consecrationibus haberetur. Vid. Praef. ad Conc. 233.


Consecrationibus, and Consecrated as he thought fit. And in fine, there is
reason to think, this Bishop was not so much offended, because they did not use
the same words in Celebrating and Consecrating; as because they did not use the
same Rites and Order; for in these, that Epistle of his is most concerned.

And further, I can see no probability, that at Rome it self, there was any
settled, (much less imposed) Form of Consecration, before Ordo Romanus continet
haud dubie ordinem a B. Gregorio institutum: Nam ut Author est Joannes
Diaconus, codicem Gelasianum, quem de missatum solennibus composuerat
Gregorius, multa subtrahens, pauca convertins, nonnulla adjiciens, in unius
libri volumen redegit, qui ordo postea per universum fere occidentem obtinuit.
Cassand. Liturgic. Praefa. ad ord. Romans p. 92.

In neither of those orders, which Cassander gives us for the ancient Roman
order, the shorter or longer, are there any prescribed Forms of Prayer; but
only a bare relation of the order wherein they proceeded.


that mentioned by Gregory, lib. 7. epist. For if any of the former Bishops had
left behind them any such Prayer, and commended it to be used by that Church
for this purpose; it is not credible, that it would have been recited for the
novel composition of such an obscure person, of whom we can know nothing by
knowing his name. Gregory tells us, that Prayer, (or Canon, as he also calls
it) was made by Scholastious, who, as it is most probable, Bellarmin denies
not, but it is probable, that Scholasticus then lived, utraque probabilis, de
miss. l. 2. c. 19. p. 819. Gregorii igitur aetate, circa An. 590. vixit
consarcinator ille Canonis. Chemnit. exam. part 2. p. 358. Si vero Gregorius
per Scholasticum intelligat certum aliquem hominem, qui aetate ipsius vixerit,
ut adversarii contendant. Bellarm. de miss. l. 2. c. 19. p. 819.

The benediction, it seems to be in Augustine, Epist. 59. p. Vid. page alteram.

Vid. Thornd. serve. 384. 385.


lived about his own time. Some Writers of the Popes Lives, and others, ascribe
indeed several parcels of that Canon to Bishops before Gregory's days; one to
Alexander, another to Siricius, another to Leo, (nor find I more) but whether
they knew better, at such a distance, or ought to have more credit then
Gregory, is easy to determine. And if those parcels be examined, it will
appear, they are nothing to the purpose, or else later then the sixth Age. This
form of Scholasticus, Gregory having Orationem autem dominicam idcirco mox post
precem dicimus, quia mos Apostolorum fuit, ut ad ipsam solummodo orationem,
oblationis hostiam consecrarent. Et valde mihi inconviniens visum est: ut
precem, quam Scholasticus composuerat; super oblationem diceremus; and ipsam
traditionem, quam Redemptor noster composuit, super ejus corpus and sanguinem
non diceremus. Greg. lib. 7. epist. 63.


altered it as he thought fit, and added the Lords Prayer to it; (which, though
it were used no where publicly, but in the Eucharistical Office, in any place;
yet not in that it seems, at Rome, till he introduced it) made use of it in
that Church; where, by custom, it came to be settled, but not by rule, in his
time at least. For, that he neither imposed it, nor had a mind to impose it, is
apparent, by what he writes to our Austin; who, having mentioned the various
Novit Fraternitas tua Romanae Ecclesiae consuetudinem, in qua se nutritum
meminit; sed mihi placet, ut sive in Romana, sive in Gallicarum, seu in
qualibet Ecclesia, aliquid invenisti, quod plus omnipotenti Deo possit placere,
solicit eligas -- Non enim pro locis res, sed pro bonis rebus loca amanda
sunt. Ex singulis ergo quibusque ecclesiis, quae pia, que religiosa, quae recta
sunt, elige, etc. Beda eccle. hist. l. 1. c. 27.

In diversis ecclesiis diversas protulit consuetudines; nec Romanus ipse ubique
voluit imponendus. Spelm. Council. p. 110.


modes of Celebrating the Eucharist in several Churches, particularly the Roman
and the French; with a design to know his sense thereof, and which he would
have him follow.

That part ascribed to Alexander by Platina and Durand, has nothing of Prayer
in it; being only a rehearsal of the words and actions, used in the institution
of this Sacrament; and so is impertinent.

That fathered upon Siricius, Communicantes etc. is not found in the Roman
order; which Bellarmine says contains the ancient Canon entirely, de miss. l.
2. c. 20. p. 828. and so is a patch added some hundreds of years after
Syricius; when Rome was so degenerated, as to prefer Mary before Christ.

That attributed to Leo, Hanc igitur oblationem servitutis nostrae, etc. is a
patch added long after, as M. Moulin of Mass, p. 295. observes. These words, of
our Servitude, for we thy Servants, show manifestly, that this Prayer was added
unto the Mass in a barbarous Age, wherein they did say, Placuit nostrae
mediocritati subtiliter intimare vestram fraternitatem; of which phrases are
stuffed the Epistles of the Bishops, and Clergymen of the seventh Age, and
others following.

Gregory, in his answer to Austin, (who was his Creature, and whom he might
have led into any conformity with a beck,) is so far from injoyning him, to
conform to what was used at Rome, that he does not so much as advise it; nay he
persuades him to a course inconsistent with any restraint; and will have him
use his liberty, in making choice of what he saw best, in any of the differing
Churches, and if he found any thing, which might be more pleasing to God, plus
omnipotenti Deo possit placere, then what was used at Rome, to prefer that.
(Which was suitable to his Maxim, in una fide, nihil efficit sanctae ecclesiae
diversa consuetudo): Where there is one Faith, there is no hurt to the Church by
diversity ( m) of usages; intimating, that he was not so fully satisfied with
the Roman mode; but that he had room to think, the way of another Church might
be more pleasing to God; which was in reason sufficient, to restrain him from
imposing it on Austin, or others. And the (...). Irenaeus to Victor, in Eusebius.
l. 5. c. (...):


free course he would have Austin take, was not only his advice, but his
practice: For when it was objected to him, that he followed, even in this
administration, the customs of some other Churches, particularly of the Greek;
his answer signifies, that he would not be so circumscribed by the customs of
Rome, but when he saw any thing Epist. 41. ad Leandrum, lib. praised. Syn.
Tolet. 4. Can. 5. Walafr. Strab. de reb. eccles. cap. 26.

Non de Constantinopolitana Ecclesia, quod dicunt; quis eam dubitat sedi
Apostolicae esse subjectam? Tamen si quid boni, vel ipsa, vel altera Ecclesia
habet, ego and minores me, quos ab illicitis prohibeo, in bono imitari paratus
sum. Stultus est enim, qui eo se primum existimat, ut bona que videret discere
contemnat. l. 67. ep. 63.


good, in any other of the inferior Churches, he was ready to imitate it.

And, as Gregory did not impose the Roman Canon, or form of Consecration on
Austin, nor would have him prescribe it to others: So Austin, though rigid and
imperious enough, did not offer to impose it on the Britains. He requires of
them, but conformity in three things only, as Beda relates that transaction,
whereof this was none Dicebat autem eis, quod in multis quidem nostrae
consuetudini, imo universalis ecclesiae contraria geritis; and tamen, si in
tribus his mihi obtemperare vultis, ut pascha suo tempore celebretis; ut
ministerium Baptizandi, quo deo renascimur, secundum morem Romanae Sanctae
Ecclesiae compleatis: ut Genti Anglorum una nobiscum praedicetis verbum Domini,
caetera quae agitas, quamvis moribus nostris contraria, aequanimiter cuncta
tolerabimus. Bed. hist. lib. 1. c.

Another thus: e Britonum and Scotorum Episcopis, in Synodo in Wigorniensi
Provincia, postulavit, ut deinceps non Asiano sed Romano more, praedicarent,
baptizarent, and pascha celebrarent. In Spel. Council. p. 107. 108. Where, by
Conformity in Baptism, probably he means (as in that about Easter) the time of
Baptizing, for which the Roman Bishops were great Zealots. Vid. Leo epist.


. But, if he had insisted on this, he had found no more compliance herein, then
in the other: For the Britains and Scots, were not only Britanni moribus
Romany inimici, non solum in missa, sed etiam in tonsura. Gildas in Ush.
Relig. of Irish. p. 34.


enemies to the Roman use in the Eucharist in Gildas time; but were adverse to,
and unacquainted with any uniformity, as in Celebrating the Lords Supper, so in
other parts of Worship; and had no prescribed Liturgies for such uniformity
long after. Which is manifest, by what Bishop Usher, the most Learned of our
Bishops, affirms of the Irish, (who with the Scots,) as he tells us, ( Epist.
Dedic.) differed little or nothing from what was maintained by their Neighbors
the Britains ut p. 98. It is sure (says he) that in the succeeding Ages, no one
general form of Divine Service, was retained; but diverse rites and manners of
Celebration, in diverse parts of this Kingdom; until the Roman use was brought
in at last, by Gillibertus, and Malachias, and Christianus, who were the Popes
Legates here, about five hundred years ago. Relig. of Irish, cap. 4. p. 31.So
that the Irish for above eleven hundred years (and the Britains and Scots, if
not so long, yet long after Austin) retained such liberty herein, as the Church
anciently enjoyed in all For the East, Vid. Socrat. hist. l. c. (...).

The West. Innocentius epist. ad Decentium. Diversa in diversis locis celebrari
videntur.

South. Augustine. lib. de Baptism. contra Donat. c.


quarters of the World. And when Gillibert, one of those Roman Legates, rails
at those various Vt diversi and Schismatici illi ordines, q^ibus Hibernia pene
tota delusa est, ubi Catholico, and Romano cedant officio. Usher ibid.


modes of administering Worship as Schismatical, and such wherewith all Ireland
had been deluded: He does no more, then those (whom a better prospect of
things, in later and clearer times, might have made wiser) who are ready still
to brand that as Schism, which agrees not with their own novel conceits or
orders, how correspondent soever it be to the general usages of the ancient
Churches. And whether of old, the Churches had any such custom, as to confine
the administration of the Lords Supper to prescribed Forms of Prayer; let
those, who are disinteressed, judge by the premises.

To proceed; The words in their delivery of the Elements were not of old
prescribed, nor used in any unvariable Form. We need not go so high, for proof
of this, as the sixth Age. Later and worse times afford evidence enough to
satisfy us. Only, in our way, the observation of truly noble Du Plessis, as to
the former Ages, is true beyond contradiction, inter dandum vero verba hujus
mysterii significativa, (...) quaeque praeferebant, ita tamen, ut certis and
statis sese non alligabant. De Miss. p. 145. And the vanity used herein, both
by Greeks and Latins Churches, is worth our notice, as he tells us, Contra
adversariorum Superstitionem, qui Sacramentorum, tum distributionem tum
Consecrationem, certis verbis adligare voluerunt; in reference to the
Superstition of the Papists, (which it were to be wished they had kept to
themselves,) who would have both the consecration and distribution of the
Sacraments, confined to a set of words. p. 155.

Yet how Superstitious soever they were, in using their Canon as a charm, so as
a word, a syllable might not be changed; more liberty was left and used, as to
the words in the distribution of the Eucharist; even after Charles the Great
had suffered himself to be abused, as the Popes Executioner, in forcing some
uniformity according to the Romish orders, on some of his Subjects.

Agobardus, Archbishop of Lions (famous, as for his opposition to Images, so
for his endeavors to reform the corrupt Service of those times) could not well
like that common Roman Form. The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. since he
was only for Scripture expressions in the public offices; Cum praeter
Scripturas admittere in sacris officiis nihil vellet. Whether he was wisely or
piously disliked for this; they, who have a due reverence for the Scripture,
are more fit to be judges, then either Baronius or his Epitomator; ob nimiam
suam scrupulositatem haud quam put avit consecutus gloriam. Sp. ad an. 831. n.
2.

The words, which Adrian the 2d. used in giving the Communion to Lotharius,
were far from any prescribed Form. Post missarum solennia, sanctam ei
Communionem porrigens, in haec verba illum allocutus est. Sp. ad an. 868. n. 4.
Si innoxium te recognoscis a prohibito and interdicto tibi a Nicolao adulterii
scelere; and hoc sixa mente statutum habes, ut nunquam diebus vitae tuae
Waldradae pellicis tuae dudum a te repudiatae miscearis nefario concubitu;
fiducialiter accede, and Sacramentum salutis aeternae tibi ad remissionem
peccatorum per futurum percipe: sin autem tua conscientia te accusat, teque
lethali vulnere sauciatum proclamat, aut iterum redire mente disponis in
maechtae volutabrum, nequaquam sumere praesumas, ne forte ad judicium and
condemnationem tibi adveniat, quod fidelibus ad remedium praeparavit divina
providentia. In Regino and Aimonius. l. 5. c. 21.

The words, with which, the same Adrian delivered the Sacrament to the rest of
the French, are neither the same with these now described, nor with those in
the Missal (the words in that being but the tale of these) and the form changed
(too as well as the matter) being expressed hypothetically. Si Domino and Regi
tuo Lothario in objecto adulterii crimine favorem non praestitisti, neque
consensum tribuisti, and Waldradae aliisve ab hac sede Apostolica
Excommunicatis non Communicasti; Corpus and Sanguis Domini nostri Jesu Christi
prosit tibi in vitam aeternam. Id. ibid.

Long after this, Leuthericus Archiepiscopus Senonensis, in the delivery of the
Sacrament, used these words; Accipe, si dignus es. Robert King of France checked
him for it, not because thereby he transgressed any established order; but
because the King, (not well enough acquainted with the Apostles discourse, 1
Cor.) supposed there were none worthy to receive; cum tamen sit nullus qui
habeatur dignus; whereas Leuthericus his mode of distribution employed, none
that were not worthy should receive. As for Spondanus his inference, that this
Bishop was no friend to Transubstantiation, because he delivered not the
Eucharist in the words of the Missal, Corpus Domini Jesu Christi sit tibi salus
animae and corporis, the Body of our Lord Jesus, etc. upon a supposition, it
seems, that the Monster they are in love with, is thereby countenanced. Whether
it is just or no, I leave those to consider, whom it concerns. Spond. ad an.
1004. n. 2.

To add no more, sure the words, wherewith Gregory the seventh took the
Sacrament himself, and would have delivered it to the Emperor, cannot be found
in any Mass Book. They are thus represented by Spond. ad ann. 1077. n. 2. out
of Lambertus, cumque Sacratissimam Eucharistiam sumpturus, manu eam teneret,
vocato Rege ac universa adstantium multitudine, contestatum esse, eam se sumere
in judicium criminum, quae Schismatici adversus ipsum promulgassent; ut si
innocens esset, absolveretur ab omni suspicione; si vero reus, subitanea
periret morte.

Or those of Paschal 2. who, cum in celebratione missae traderet Henrico
Imperatori 5. Corpus and Sanguinem Domini nostri Jesu Christi: Domine
Imperator, inquit, hoc corpus Domini naetum ex Maria Virgin, passum in cruce
pro nobis, sicut Sancta and Apostolica tradit ecclesia, damus tibi; in
confirmationem pacis, inter me and te, idque factum an. 1111. idibus Aprilis,
test Sigeberto. Cent. 12. c. 6. p. 886.

For Baptism, there is not any, the least reason to imagine, they were more
confined to set Forms, in administering it, then the Eucharist. And therefore,
where so little need to endeavor for a copious proof, we may be briefer.

The liberty the Ancients took, to use several Forms in Baptism, with great
variety, to the invariable use of which, those, that are for freedom in
Praying, are willingly confined; signifies they used as much liberty in those
Prayers.

I can find no more uniformity, in their Celebrating this Sacrament, then the
other. But enough may be easily found, to show, that they were not, they would
not be, tied up to words and syllables. Even where varying might seem
dangerous; they used variety of words, and thought an agreement in sense
sufficient. And this is observable, as to the terms, wherein Christ delivered
the Form of Baptizing, Matthew. 28. Where sure, if any where, they would have
been patient of confinement to all punctilios. This was accounted a Form
prescribed by Divine Authority, Lex namque tingendi imposita est, and forma
praescripta est. Ite, docete Nationes, tingentes eas in nomen Patris, and
Filii, and Spiritus Sancti, says Tertullian, de Baptism. cap. 13. It was not
thought, that any had so much authority to prescribe, as Christ; nor that any
prescriptions were so punctually to be observed. And yet, even in this, they
made account, some liberty was left, and might be used; and used it was
accordingly, as is manifest in their practice.

The first word, Baptizing, some used in the first person, ego Baptizo te, I
Baptize thee; some in the second person, (...), be thou Baptized; some in the
third person, (...), this Person, or this Servant of Christ is Baptized. Vid.
Theod. lect. p. 167. Also they thought it as fit, to use in the Latin Churches
tingo (a Native of the Latins) as Baptizo (an adopted word) So Cyprian, ep. 3.
l. 4. Ite ergo, and docete Gentes omnes, tingentes eas in nomine Patris, etc.
and Epist. 3. l. 2. Yet sometimes Baptizo, ep. ad Jobaian, p. So Tertullian Et
post Resurrectionem spondens, missurum se discipulis promissionem Patris, and
novissime mandans, ut tinger^nt in Patrem, and Filium, and Spiritum Sanctum,
non in unum, non nec semel, sed ter ad singula nomina in personas singulas
tingimur. Tertull. adv. Prax. cap. 26.

Neque quicquam refert inter eos, quos Johannes in Jordane, and Petrus in
Tiberi tinxit. De baptis. cap. 1. and cap. 19. Diem baptismi solenniorem Pascha
praestat, cum and passio Domini, in quo tingimur, adimpleta est.


, in the place fore quoted, de Bapt. c. 13. and ad Praxeum, cap. 26. Novissime
mandavit, ut tingerent in Patrem, etc. So Jerome and Augustine In hoc ergo
font, antequam vos toto corpore ting^remus, interrogavimus, credis in Deum.
August. hom. ad Neophyt. in Vicec. p. 608.


render the words of Christ by tingentes. Voss. So they use mergo, or mergito
for baptizo. Thus Hierom Multa, quae per traditionem, in ecclesia observantur,
autoritatem sibi scriptae legis usurpaverant, velut, in lavacro ter mergitare.
Hieronym. adv. Luciferian.


advers. Luciferian. Velut in lavacro, ter caput mergitare; where the Greeks
express by (...). Basil de Sp. Sancto, c. 27. And Tertullian, Dehinc ter
mergitamur, amplius aliquid respondentes, quam Domlnus in Evangelio
determinavit. Tertull. de cor. mil. c. 3.

Mysterium Trinitatis in Sacramento Baptismatis demonstratur, dum tertia vice
vetus homo mergitur. August. de temp. sermon. 201. Quando in salutari lavacro
tertio Christiani merguntur. Hom. 91. de temp. Mira Dei pietas, peccator
mergitur undis. Paulin. epigr. ep. 12. ad Severum.

As great a change, as if any, amongst us now, administering Baptism, instead of
I baptize thee, should say, I dip, or, I wash thee, in the name, etc.


dehinc ter mergitamur, (...) (...). Can. Apost. 50.


, Dionys. Eccles. Hier. c. 11. in Voss. They did not think, it seems, that
Christ himself (whatever others take upon them) would tie them so precisely to
his own words, but that they might have leave to change them for others, which
changed not the sense.

The like liberty was taken, in changing the next phrase, (...) into (...), as
it is in Justin Martyr, Apol. 2. p. 159, 160.

And the Latins, for in nomen (as it is in Tertull. de Baptis. c. 13.) in
nomine, as in Cyprian, supra. A difference, which some count more then
syllabical. Yet Tertullian varies more, when he leaves it (the name) quite out;
which he does more then once: Novissime mandavit, ut tingerent in Patrem,
Filium and Spiritum Sanctum, adv. Praxeum, cap. 26. Ite ad docendas and
tingendas nationes in Patrem, Filium and Spiritum Sanctum, de praescrip. c. 8.
They thought it no variation of the rule, where the sense and design of it was
observed, to change something of the expression. And would they presume to
exact a more punctual conformity to rules of their own making, then what they
thought Christ required to his? Or would they pay more to any Humane
Constitution, then they made account was due to the Divine? Their practice
obliged them, to leave others as much, or more liberty then here they took; and
neither to fetter others, nor be fettered by them, with words and syllables,
when the great Lawgiver had left them so free. Vicec. de bapt. p. 395.


Zuingl. de bapt. tom. 2. p. 201.


Piscat. in Matthew. 28.




But proceed we to what may seem yet more considerable. Some thought
themselves, not obliged to Baptize expressly in the Name of the sacred Trinity,
(...), so as to name every Person as they are mentioned, Matt. 28. 19. but in
the Name of Christ, or of the Lord Jesus, or of the Lord.

And this, supposed to be the Practice of the best times, has great Advocates;
Basil, l. de Spiritu Sancto cap. 16. defends it thus, (...), the naming of
Christ is an acknowledgment of the whole Trinity: (...), p. 257. which are
almost the words of Irenaeus before him, Adv. Haeres. 1. 3. c. 20. p. 209. In
Christi enim nomine subauditur, qui unxit, and ipse qui unctus est, and ipsa
unctio in qua unctus est, and unxit quidem Pater, unctus est vero Filius, in
Spiritu qui est unctio. For in the Name of Christ is understood, he that
anoints, and he that is anointed, and the Unction with which he is anointed.
And the Father indeed anoints, but the Son was anointed with the Spirit, who is
the Unction.

Add to these, Theophylact, who affirms, (...), in Act. 2. That he, who is
Baptized into the Name of Jesus Christ, is Baptized into the Trinity; the
Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost being not parted. To the same purpose
Ambrose also following Basil in the defense of it, Qui unum dixit, Trinitatem
signavit. Si Christum dicas, and Deum Patrem, a quo unctus est Filius, and
ipsum, qui unctus est, Filium, and Spiritum, quo unctus est, designasti. -- si
tamen id etiam cord comprehendas, etc. de Spiritu Sanct. l. 1. c. 3. If the
Person was Named, so as the rest were understood, they thought the prescribed
form sufficiently observed, though it was not verbatim repeated, but liberty
taken, to change either the Words, or their order; so these great Persons
following. And can we think they would take upon them to prescribe more
imperiously, or would more punctually observe it, if others had imposed? So
these excellent Persons judged, in reference to the form of Baptizing, which
our great Lord delivered to us: And can we think, etc. -- especially in
Prayers, where varying is more tolerable, and the Prescribers of no Authority,
in comparison of him who authorized the Form before us.

Some used it in Cyprian's time, Quomodo ergo quidam dicunt -- modo in nomine
Jesu Christi, ubicunque and quomodocunque Gentilem Baptizatum, remissionem
peccatorum consequi posse, p. 225. Ep. 73. ad Jubaianum. He allows it not
indeed, but it seems those that were not of his opinion, for Rebaptizing of the
Baptized by Heretics, some of them differed from him in this; and before, p.
224. Non est autem quod aliquis ad circumveniendam Christianam veritatem
Christi nomen opponat, ut dicat, In nomine Jesu Christi, ubicunque and
quomodocunque Baptizati, gratiam Baptismi sunt consecuti, etc. Fortasse
Stephanus Romae Episcopus.

Others, though they expressed the three Persons in administering Baptism, yet did
they not tie themselves precisely herein to the Those that will have the three
Persons to have been always named, deny not, but that their Names were used
with some variation; vid. Vicec. de Baptis. rit. l. 4. c. 5. Non negaverim
tamen, probabile videri, Christi, aut Jesu, aut Jesu Christi nomen aliquandiu
appositum fuisse, addito item Domini nostri, sed non omisso Patris and Spiritus
Sancti nomine, hac forma, Ego te baptizo in nomine Patris, and Filii ejus Jesu
Christi Domini nostri, and Spiritus Sancti.

Cyprian, though for the other, rejects not this, opening Act. 2. Jesu Christi
mentionem facit Petrus, non quasi Pater omitteretur, sed ut Patri quoque Filius
adjungeretur, etc. Epist. ad Jubaian.


words of Christ, but enlarged upon them, adding something thereto, as the
former detracted. This is evident in Justin Martyr, who thus represents the
words they used in Baptizing, Apol. 2. p. 159. (...), In the Name of the Father
of all things, and of our Lord God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ, and of the
Holy Spirit, this washing with Water is performed; and afterward, with some
variety in the latter clauses thus, p. 160. (...), (...), Iren. l. 1. c. 1. p.
34. So Basil, (...), de Spir. Sanct. c. 27. p. 274. Facilius inveniuntur
Haeretici, qui non baptizant, quam qui symboli verbis non baptizant, August.
contr. Don. l. 6. c. 25.


And in the Name of Jesus Christ, who was Crucified by Pontius Pilate, and in
the Name of the Holy Ghost, who by the Prophets foretold all things concerning
Jesus, he that is to be illuminated is Baptized. In which words are contained
the regula fidei, the sum of the Confession of Faith, as he expressed it. And
if they used the words of that rule in Baptizing, they tied not themselves to
one Form of words in that administration. For a Consession of Faith, in a
common unvariable Form they had not in that Age, nor long after. All the
Uniformity to be found herein, is a harmony in Cur enim veteres, non
apellatione professionis variare potuerint, quando professionis and regulae
ipsius sententiis, earumque ordine and verbis, tantopere discreparent? Voss. de
3. Symb. diss. 1.. 20. p. 17.

Horum locorum collatio docere nos potest, cum veteres regulam fidei aut
baptismi immutabilem dicunt, non ad certam and receptam ubique verborum
formulam eos respicere, sed ad vim atque sententiam interrogationum. Grot. in
Matthew. 28. 19. Quae, ipsa Cypriani verba ostendere mihi videntur, symbolum sive
regulam fidei, ipsius aetate, nondum adstrictam fuisse illis verbis, quibus
postea scripta invenitur; cum tamen eandem fuisse regulae sententiam, minime
sit dubitandum, Id. ibid.

In Tertullian, lib. de praescript. cap. 13. lib. 2. contra Prax. and lib. de
Veland. Virg.

Vid. Two different Forms in Irenaeo, l. 3. c. 4. p. 172. and l. 1. cap. 2. p.
34, 35. edit. Gallusq.




sense, while there is in words a great diversity. The variety of expressions,
used by the Ancients ( Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Clemens, Tertullian, Novatian,
etc. which you may see in Grotius upon Matthew. 28. 19.) in giving an account of
it is several Articles, make this manifest, they were not so strict and severe
in any thing, as in the Rule of Faith. In other matters, though Ecclesiastical,
they allowed more variableness and greater Latitude. Hac lege fidei manente,
caetera jam disciplinae and conversationis admittunt novitatem correctionis,
says Tertullian, de Virgin. veland. and yet in these, were satisfied with such
an Uniformity as consisted only in Sense, not in Words. To one Form of words in
this nicest point, and where varying was most hazardous; they neither And when
the Creeds had more stated Forms, in the IV. Century; in the same Country the
Creeds of several Cities were not uniform, v. g. in Italy, that of Rome much
differed from that at Aquileia, vid. Rusin. and Voss. de Symb. p. 29. etc. And
that of Ravenna from both. Ush. de Symb. p. 7. Petr. Chrysol. Sermon. 57. etc. de
Maximo Taurinensiq.


limited others, nor would be confined by others, no nor by themselves: We have
seen this before in Justin Martyr, (Tertullian) and Ir^naeus (with others in
Grotius) is also a very pregnant instance of it. The Creed ( regula fidei
(...)) was at first no more than the words, wherewith Baptism was to be
delivered, Matthew. 28. 19. Parker de descens. Voss. de Symb. p. 23. it was
enlarged by degrees, and till it grew too large, probably was used in the
delivery of Baptism, as we have it in Justin Martyr, no other than a
commentary, instead of the Text; afterward the use of it was, to be rehearsed
by the Competantes, before they were Baptized, so but once, or twice, or in
some places thrice a year.

Not put into set Form till the fourth Age, or near it: And those Forms varied
in several places in the same Country, vid. supra.

It had no place in the Church Service, till near the sixth Age; for as the
Lord's Prayer was used no where but in the Eucharistical Office, while the
orders for the Catechumens were observed; so the Creed was not used but in
Baptism, or in order to it, till late.

The first who brought it into the Church Service, was (not as Voss. Timoth.)
Petrus Gnapheus, a person stigmatized for more heinous crimes than one: part of
his Character see in Evagr. l. 3. c. 17. He amongst other innovations,
introduced this, (...), and which was more, (...), Theod. lect. collect. l. 2.
p. 189. This was about the latter end of the fifth Age at Antioch, obiit an.
486. Afterward Timotheus, a flagitious person and a Heretic, vid. Spond. an.
511. n. 3. brought it into the same use at Constantinople, being made Bishop
there by Anastatius, according to Baronius, 511. till 517. (...), Theod. lect.
collect. l. 2. p. 188.

The Western Churches had it from the East (this not the first time the Church
borrowed of Heretics. The unguent from the Valentinians, Iren. l.... c....
stated Fasts from Montanists) Illud symbolum, quod nos ad imitationem Graecorum
intra missas adsumimus, Walafrid. Strabo de reb. Eccles. c. 22. first in Spain,
Conc. Toled. 3. c. 2. an. 589. per omnes Ecclesias Hispaniae and Galliciae,
secundum formam orientalium ecclesiarum, Concilii Constantinopolitani symbolum
recitetur.

In France and Germany long after, Walafr. Strab. de reb. Eccles. cap. 22. Sed
apud Gallos and Germanos, post dejectionem Faelicis Haeretici sub Gloriosissimo
Carolo, Francorum Rege, idem symbolum latius and crebrius in missarum coepit
officiis iterari. And the Constantinopolitan Creed rather than the Nicene, for
a very weighty reason, quod aptius videretur modulis musicis; of which Baronius
seems ashamed, ad an. 809. n. 3. Felix condemned, an. 794. Baron.

Not at Rome till an. 1014. when Berno Augiensis, lib. de miss. relates, he
being at Rome, cum Romani Presbyteri ab eo interrogorertur, Cur post evangelium
(ut in aliis eccl^siis siebat) symbolum non canerent? they gave him a reason,
such a one as it is; and adds, Imperatorem (Henric. 1.) Benedicto Papae
persuasisse, ut ad publicam m^ss^m symbolum decantarent, in Spond. ad an. 1014.
n. 3.


He gives several accounts of the rule of Faith, de Veland. Virg. which neither
agree with what is given by others, in mode of expression, neither with one
another; there being no coincidence in any one phrase observable through the
whole. And is it probable, that they who left themselves and others so much
liberty about formulas of Creeds, would deprive others of it, or be bereaved of
it themselves, in Forms of Prayer (in Baptism, or elsewhere) where there is
much more reason for more liberty? How incredible is it, That their Prayers
were limited to a set of Words, when the regula fidei, which more required it,
had no such confinement? Sure, if they had judged any such limits requisite in
any thing of this nature, they would have given them to that rule of Faith. No
Prayers, Supplications, Lauds, Litanies, etc. could in their judgment require
such strict, and precise, and unalterable bounds, as that which they counted
and styled immobilem and irreformabilem.

The Apostles Creed may be objected, but is sufficiently removed by the
premises. Those who can believe what pleases them, may receive the story of
Ruffinus concerning it; but his faithfulness and credit is not so much with
others, as to advance it above a Fable. And it seems incredible, that there
should be such a Form among Christians, of the Apostles composing, and yet the
Ancients, for above Three hundred Years, take no notice of it, yea take the
boldness to vary from it; and, which is more, to prefer those of their own
conception before it, on the solemnest occasions.

Or, if there were such a Form of the Apostles, and the Ancients would not
confine themselves to it, as it is apparent they did not; much less would they
be confined to Forms of Prayer, composed by ordinary Persons.

In the constitutions ascribed to the Apostles, the Creed to be used in
Baptism, is exceeding (...), Athanas. contr. Sabell. orat. tom. 1. p. 513.


different from that called the Apostles, not only in Words, Phrases, Order,
but in the omission of diverse Articles, and the addition of others, vid. l. 7.
c. 42.

Moreover, Basil (...), de Spir. Sanct. c. 27. p. 274.


tells us, The Confession of Faith is conformable to the delivery of Baptism,
and the Doxology conformable to the Confession of Faith; That they are all
three much alike. That they Baptized as they had received, and believed
accordingly as they Baptized, and gave glory just as they believed; that there
was a necessary and inviolable coherence betwixt these, and that an innovation
in any of these, would destroy the whole, (...); lib. de Sp. Sanct. cap. 27. p.
274. But he does not think the change of Phrase and Words therein is such an
innovation, if it remain the same in sense, (...), for he himself used the
Doxology very variously, and would not be bound up to one Form, in the
expressing of but four or five Words. And by what liberty he took in this,
shows, what might be taken in the rest. Two days before the writing of this
Book, in Prayer with the People, (...), he used the Doxology two ways (both
differing from that which is usual) as he tells us cap. 1. (...), Glory to God
and the Father (adding) sometimes with the Son, together with the Holy Ghost;
sometimes by the Son, in the Holy Ghost; but this is but a taste of his
variety. He that will observe how it is used in this Book, and in the end of
his Homilies, may find it diversified near forty several ways, and run almost
into so many Changes, as so few words are capable of. One may think they are
put to hard shifts for proof of the prescribed Forms in question, who are glad
to make the ancient Use of the Doxology one of their Arguments. We see it would
not serve their turn, if it could be proved, that they were as much limited to
Forms of Prayer in Baptism, as they thought themselves confined to the words of
Christ, delivering the Form of Baptizing. Those that thought a (...), a
conformity in sense sufficient, where Christ gives the direction, might with
much reason judge this enough, or too much, when men only prescribe; and in
cases too, where a greater Latitude is safer. Their practice, in the severals
premised, show, they knew no such prescriptions, nor would have honored them
with any more observance, or so much.

To proceed, There was a mode of Renunciation generally used in Baptism, and a
general agreement to use the same in sense; and yet, as to Words and Syllables,
a strange variety: When as here, if any where, a common rule injoining
uniformity in Words might have been expected, and in such a Case, if in any,
would have been observed. I have taken notice of more than twenty Origenes,
Quid denunciaverit diabolo, non se usurum pompis ejus, and voluptatibus
pariturum, in ep. ad Romans Universis denique aliis Diis and Dominis, Homil. 8.
in Exodus

Constantius, de se, Renuncians Satanae Pompis and operibus ejus and universis
idolis manu factis, credere me in Deum professus sum, in Edict. ad Sylvest.

Cyril, Hierosolym. Catech. 1. Myster. (...), p. 228, 229.

Ephrem. Syrus, Abrenuncio tibi Satan, and cunctis operibus tuis, l. de poenit.
c. 5.

Basil, (...), de Spir. Sanc. cap. 27. no prescription for it.

Cyril Alexandrin. Ibi deposuerimus tenebras a mente nostra, and doemoniorum
turbis valedixerimus, omnemque ipsorum pompam, and cultum prudentissime
respuerimus, consitemur fidem in Patrem, lib. 7. contra Julian.

Salvian Massiliens. Abrenuncio, inquis, Diabolo, Pompis, spectaculis and
operibus ejus, de provid. lib. 6. p. 197. Quae est enim in baptismo salutari
Christianorum prima confessio, nisi ut renunciare se Diabolo, ac pompis ejus,
atque spectaculis, and operibus, protestentur? p. 198.

Dionysius Areop. (...), Eccles. Hierarch. The repeating of it singular.

Clemens Constit. (...), l. 7. c. 41.

Justinian. (...), c.... l. 33.. 1. de Episcop. Audient.

Tertullian, Sed and aliquanto prius in Ecclesia sub Antistitis manu,
contestamur nos renunciare Diabolo, and Pompae, and Angelis ejus, de Coron.
Milit. c. 3.

Optatus Milevit. Contra nos peccatores (ut vultis) interrogemus alterum
Gentilem, an renunciet Diabolo, and credat Deo, etc. and dicat Renuncio and
credo, Cohtr. Parmenianum, l. 5. p. 59.

Cyprian, Seculo renunciavimus cum Baptizati sumus, Epist. 5. l. 1. Stare illic
potuit Dei servus, and loqui, and renunciare Christo, qui jam Diabolo
renunciaret and seculo, Sermon. de Laps. p. 151. Cujus (mundi) pompis and
deliciis jam tunc renunciavimus, cum meliori transgressu ad Dominum venimus, de
habit Virgin. p 107. Se carnis concupiscentiis and vitiis renunciasse
profitetur, id ibid.

Augustine, Quisquis huic aedificio conjungi desiderat, renunciet Diabolo,
Pompis and Angelis ejus, de symbol. ad Catechum. l. 3. c. 1.

Omissa enim certissima cautione, qua vos abrenunciare omnibus Pompis Diaboli,
and omnibus operibus ejus, and omni fornicationi diabolicae, spospondistis,
Homil. 3. ad neophytos. Pro ipsis enim respondent, quod abrenuncient Diabolo,
Pompis and Operibus ejus, and ideo pactum, quod, cum Christo in Baptismi
Sacramento, conscribunt, custodire contendant, nec unquam aliquid de Diaboli
pompis, vel mundi istius luxuriosis oblect ationibus concupiscant, de Temp.
Sermon. 116.

Ambrose, Dicens, abrenuncio tibi, Diabole, and Angelis tuis, and operibus tuis
and imperiis tuis, Hexam. l. 1. c. 4. Quando te interrogavit Sacerdos;
abrenuncias Diabolo, and Operibus suis? quid respondisti? Abrenuncio.
Abrenuncias seculo and voluptatibus ejus? quid respondisti? Abrenuncio, de
Sacrament. l. 1. c. 2. Quid interrogatus es, recognosce, quid responderis,
renunciasti Diabolo and operibus ejus, mundo and luxuriae ejus, lib. de iis qui
Myster. initiant. c. 2.

Chrysostom, (...), Homil. 21. ad pop. Antioch. p. 609. Savil. edit. (...), in
Coloss. 2. Hom. 5. p. 122.

(...), in Joh. Hom. 1. p. 558.

Hieronym. Quidam coactius disserunt in Baptismate singulos pactum inire cum
Diabolo and dicere, Renuncio tibi, Diabole, and pompae tuae and vitiis tuis,
and mundo tuo, qui inmaligno positus est, in Matthew. 5. Tom. 6. p. 6. Confessus
es bonam confessionem in Baptismo, renunciando seculo and pompis ejus, in 1 Timothy 6. Tom. 8. p. 270. Secundo post Baptismum gradu, inisti pactum cum
adversario tuo, dicens ei, Renuncio tibi Diabole, and seculo tuo, and pompae
tuae, and operibus (al. opibus) tuis, Epist. 7. ad Demetriad. p. 63.
Abrenunciationem qua praeputiis denudamur, ante oculos collocemus -- sic namque
dicimus, abrenunciare nos mundo and pompis ejus, Epist. ad Therasiam, de vera
Circumcis. Tom. 9.

No Writings mentioned the use of any Words whatsoever, any Prayer at all on
those occasions, no^e enjoined any set Form of Prayer: But any Words were so
far from being enjoined, that there were none so much as set down or mentioned
in any Writing.


variations of this so short a sentence; and find no two of the many Ancients
who used it, to represent the usage of it to us, agreeing therein as to Words
and Syllables; nor yet have I met with two instances, where the difference is
not more than Syllabical: It may be others may meet with more; yet if more than
two, amongst so many intending to express the same thing, had used exactly the
same Words, (and where other things besides a Rule might have rendered their
expressions Uniform) it would have been no proof, that the Words had been
prescribed; it would rather be strange, if in such circumstances, they should
not casually fall into such an agreement without the conduct of any
prescription. But since they are so far from observing the punctilios of a
prescribed Uniformity, and vary herein so much, as one may wonder how so few
Words could be contrived into such variety; it proves sufficiently, that they
were not under any Orders, obliging them, to use precisely the same Words.

And thus we find not only those of the Greek and Latin Churches differing, or
such as lived at a greater distance, and in the parts of the Empire, remotest
one from another, but those of the same Country and the same Church, where, if
any where, Uniformity is to be looked for: We may observe it in Tertullian,
Cyprian, Optatus, and Augustine.

Nor do several Persons only differ herein amongst themselves, but we may see
in diverse instances, one and the same Person express this usage variously;
whenas, he that is not circumscribed by others, nor will be imposed on by the
imperious, is constant to himself, many times, and varies not in the use of as
many, or more Words, than this Form consisted of; and so it is represented by
Cyprian, Chrysostom, Jerome, Augustine, Ambrose, Origin.

Now, if in so short a sentence as this, and that universally used in some
terms or other, with a general harmony as to the sense, and wherein also there
is nothing of Prayer, and so none of that reason which there is for freedom in
Praying, they were not limited, nor did tie themselves to a Set of Words: Who
can believe they were, or would have suffered themselves to be confined to an
unvariable Form of words, in Praying at Baptism?

And that there were none limited to any Forms of Prayer, is made evident, more
directly by that of Basil, lib. de Spir. Sanc. cap. 27. where, mentioning the
several Prayers used in Baptizing, he declares there were none of them to be
found in writing, (...), p. 271. We bless the Water in Baptism, and the Oil
used in Unction, and the Party also Baptized; but out of what Writings? They
had no Prayers for these severals, in or before his times, written; none found,
none set down in writing; and how there could be prescribed Forms of Prayer,
and yet no Prayers in writing, is not intelligible. There were no writings
injoyning them, That Prayers should be used for these purposes; much less
therefore, what Prayers should be made use of, or in what Form of Words. For
where the existence of a thing is not supposed, there is no giving rules for the
mode of it, amongst those who are regulated by reason. They had then no Rules
nor Prescriptions in Scripture, or Councils, or Fathers, or any Church
Liturgies, for the use of such Prayers (much less for the Words of them) (...)
reaches all. There was nothing for them in his time, but (...), silent and
secret Tradition, in opposition to ((...)) what is Duobus modis dici posse
observationem aliquam esse scriptam: id enim scriptum cum ab aliquo vel scripta
lege suisse praescriptum (qui proprius est and usitatus horum verborum sensus)
vel tantum in scripto libro commemoratum, Dall. de pseudep. p. 334. He takes
Basil in the former sense, ibid.

Ob. But by Writings Basil may understand the Scriptures only. Ans. His words
plainly deny it of all Writings, and not of the Scripture only, vid. Dall. p.
334. He alleges many expressions of Basil in the same place, concluding, Ex
quibus vel caecus videt, qua ista accepta erant, Traditionem, Basilium non
quibusdam, sed quibusvis; non canonicis, sed omnibus omnino libris opponere,
ibid.


Written; which is utterly exclusive of, and inconsistent with any such Rules
or Prescriptions, and so quite clears the Church for all such prescribed Forms
in Baptism, in all Ages till that day. And clear of them it was long after; for,

The Impostor, Ob. Cook, p. 123. And others deny the latter part of this Book
to be Basil's. Ans. The generality of Protestant writers do not question it,
Chamier, Casaubon, Dalleus.

Mr. Cook thinks it was writ by one living after Meletius, who survived Basil,
and so after Basil's time. The later he lived, the less Ancient will prescribed
Forms appear to be by his Testimony, which in this cannot be suspected; who
will think him so impudent to affirm, what every one knew to be false?

B. Usher inclines to think, the interpolations of the six Ancient Epistles
ascribed to Ignatius, with the six latter, and also Clemens Constitutions did
ex eadem officina prodire, and yet the former not extant before the sixth Age;
and therefore the Constitutions are elder, in Dallaeus, de supposit. Ign. l. 2.
c. 2. p. 237. cum 232, 233.

After the Prayers in Baptism, in reference to the Oil and Water, and Chrism,
c. 43, 44, 45. l. 7. having said, c. 43. (...), he adds, c. 45. (...), haec
atque alia his consentanea dicat, (...), etc.

For the Catechumens, (...), some such, hujusmodi benedictione, l. 8. c. 16.
med.

For the penitents, (...), in some such manner, in hunc modum, cap. 8. fin. In
the blessing of Water and Oil, (...), c. 29. l. 8. (...), l. 7. c. 26. pro
primitiis collatis, (...), l. 8. c. 39. pro mortuis (...), l. 8. c. 41. post
sumptionem Eucharistiae, (...), l. 7. c. 27. (...), l. 7. c. 28. (...), pro
Eucharistia quidem in hunc modum, l. 7. c. 26.

And by these instances, when he calls for Prayer or Praise, with (...), or
(...), or (...), or the like; we have warrant to understand (...), or (...), or
(...), and that such liberty is allowed.


who forged these Constitutions, under the name of Clemens, many Hundred years
after the Apostles, and one Age atleast after Basil, though he set down Prayers
for the Baptismal Office, yet he ties none to those Forms (no not when he
pretends they were of the Apostles composing) nor to any other; but leaves all
at liberty to Pray as they saw good, only to the same effect he would have them
Pray. He requires not, that they should use those Prayers (of his) but such
Prayers with a (...), his words are, l. 7. c. 45. (...). For if some such
Prayer be not made by the Godly Minister at each of these, he that is to be
Baptized, goes into the Water only as the Jews, and parts with only the
Impurity of the Body, not the Impurity of the Soul.

By which we may discern, what was the freedom, as to Prayer at Baptism (and
consequently elsewhere) in those times when he writ (probably about the latter
end of the fifth, or the beginning of the sixth Age) when Forms through
necessity were growing more common. Prayers to the same effect would then serve
the turn, as they now serve the Reformed Churches. He that appeared to the
World about that time, in the vizard of Apostolical Where he presumes to say,
(...), l. 8. c. 15.


Authority, would not by virtue thereof presume to tie any, in administering
Baptism, strictly to one Form, any one Form of Words; No, not to those Words,
which he would have them believe, were formed by the Apostles themselves. The
Apostles, as he personates them, gave liberty to wave their own supposed Forms,
and think it well enough, if Prayers to the same purpose be used instead
thereof. In all probability, if this Actor had laid his Scene in places and
times, where more restraint had been tolerable, he would have represented it
otherwise.

But there needs no other evidence, for this liberty in Baptismal Prayers, to
any who are willing to see, than that in Augustine, de Bapt. contra Donat. l. 6.
c. 25. where, examining the Allegations of the several Bishops in the Council
under Cyprian, to Sedatus of Tuburbis, who pleads thus for the Rebaptizing of
those Baptized by Heretics; in quantum aqua, sacerdotis prece, in ecclesia
sanctificata abluit peccata, in tantum Haeretico sermon, velut cancere
infecta, cumulat peccata: As the Water, by the Prayer of the Priest, in the
Church is Sanctified to the washing away of sin; so by an Heretical Prayer, as
by a Cancer, it is infected, to the increasing of sin.

Augustine Answers, Si non sanctificatur aqua, cum aliqua erroris verba per
imperitiam precator effundit, multi non solum mali, set etiam boni fratres in
ecclesia non sanctificant aquam. If the Water be not Sanctified when he that
Prays, through unskilfullness, utters some erroneous words; then, not only
many evil, but good Brethren, in the Church do not sanctify the Water.
Multorum enim preces emendantur quotidie, si doctioribus fuerint recitatae, and
multa in iis reperiuntur contra Catholicam fidem. For the Prayers of many are
daily amended, if they be recited to the more Learned, and many things are
found in them contrary to the Catholic Faith; (they were vitiosae preces, and
in quibus aliquid perversum, as he afterward.) Now such prayers cannot be
supposed to have been any common Forms, commanded, or used, much less
prescribed by the Church. The course taken to redress this, was not a total
prohibition of the Prayers they had chosen; nor the tying of such Ministers to
the use of any common Form; no nor the commending of any such to their use: But
(what diverse Synods (of which before) had decreed) the Prayers, which such
indiscreet persons made choice of, being recited to the more learned, were by
them amended, and the errors being left out, they are left to use them still,
(for the amending of them cannot be otherwise interpreted, than in order to
future use:) And this course, as it is inconsistent with the imposition of any
set Forms, so it argues forcibly, the Churches then had not in the
administration of Baptism, so much as any common Form in free use; otherwise,
instead of daily trouble to others and themselves, about correcting their very
faulty Prayers; Why are not persons so intolerably indiscreet (who could not
discern when a Prayer was Heretical) so much as advised to make use of the
common Form? And finally, under what restraint can any fancy the more discreet
and learned to have been in Baptizing; when the weakest and most imprudent had
so much liberty therein? Nothing needs be more manifest, than that neither the
prudent nor indiscreet, were then confined to prescribed Forms in the
Ministration of Baptism.

And thus we have made it sufficiently evident, that in the Ancient Church, the
order for Administering the Sacraments (the Prayers especially used in their
Consecration) were not prescribed; nor the Administrators thereof under any
such restraint, as later and worse times thought fit for them. I might
endeavor to give the like satisfaction concerning other parts of Worship,
which were Administered by Prayers; and might do it now with more ease than this
already done. But it is not needful, since those, who show the greatest passion
for the Forms in question, affirm, that in the Sacraments they were and are
most necessary, and were first there used; and so must acknowledge, that when
they were not in use there, they were no where used, nor any where counted
needful: And besides, this Discourse grows long, (and so may be tedious) beyond
what I expected or designed. I will therefore only add some few testimonies,
which give evidence against such Forms in general, and will reach the
particulars, as therein involved; easing my self and others thereby of a
tedious and superfluous labor.

Begin we with Justin Martyr, one of the first Writers left us of unquestioned
credit, after the Apostles times: Who, Apol. 2. p. 139. has these words, (...)
(...). We are not Atheists since we worship the Maker of all things, affirming,
as we are taught, that he has no need of Blood, Drink Offerings, or Incense;
in all our Oblations, with Prayer and Thanksgiving, according to our ability
praising him. In his time, they Prayed and gave Thanks according to their
ability. Now certainly, the Chrysostom. in Ephesians. Hom. 6. p. 792, 793.
abilities of the Pastors, at least, of those times, reached further without
stretching, than the reading or reciting of some Prayers, composed for them by
others. They were persons ordinarily of greatest abilities amongst the
Christians. When ordinary Christians were superior to the Pastors of after
times, they wanted not the knowledge of Divine things, nor the sense of their
Spiritual condition, or their Peoples, nor a faculty to express tolerably what
they knew and felt. They were not besotted by intemperance, nor had lost the
use of their faculties for want of exercise, nor were their gifts shrivled up
by a curse, because they did not employ them: They had ability to frame their
own Prayers, as well as to make their own Sermons; and if they confined
themselves to Prayers made by others, they did not give Thanks and Pray, as the
Holy Martyr says they did, (...), according to their ability, or as they were
able. The phrase has been sufficiently vindicated before; but because it here
occurs again, let this be added for further satisfaction. It is said, that it
denotes not the exercise of abilities for Prayer, but earnestness in Praying,
neither less nor more: But this is only said, without any proof, without any
instance where it is so taken, either in Justin Martyr, or any other. The best
way to discern the import of it, will be to observe, how this and other of the
same signification are used commonly in this or other Authors. Now Five hundred
instances might be produced, wherein this expression, and others of the same
import, do clearly denote the exercise of abilities for the work, to which they
are applied. I will but give a taste hereof in a like case, preaching or
writing, pastoral works, as Prayer is. In Justin Martyr, where he says, they
did (...), etc. Apol. 2. p. 157.


exhort the Brethren (...), and when he tells Trypho he would make a collection
of all the places of Scripture which concerned the millennium, he would make a
(...), Dialog. cum Tryphon. p. 88. edit. Rob. Steph. Lutet. an. 1551.


collection (...). In Origin, when he says, the Christians instructed (...),
contra Cells. l. 8. p. 428. (...), id. ibid. p. 395. vid. p. 409, 410, 411.
edit. Cantabr. an. 1656.


many (...), and what Celsus alleged he would examine (...). So in (...),
Hist. l. 8. c. 3. vid. vit. Constable. l. 4. c. 29. infra.


Eusebius, when he tells us, the Bishops made panegyrical Orations (...), and
de vit. Constable. l. 4. c. 29. Likewise in Basil, when he speaks of Praising
Gordius (...), forgetting his own (...), Homil. in Gord. p. 204. edit. Basil.
an. 1551.


weakness, and says, he will explain (...). p. 142. (...), lib. de Sp. Sancto,
c. 17. p. 264. Preached (...), Hexaem. hom. 3. initio.


the words of the Apostle (...), and that the impiety (he is mentioning) was
elsewhere refuted (...), and that he had preached the day before (...). Also in
(...), Tom. 6. p. 756. edit. Savil. and in Philip. Hom. 6. p. 34. in 2 Timothy p.
346. and Tom. 1. in Genesis p. 165. Hom. 17. initio. fin. Hom. 17. Hom. 25. Hom.
32. Hom. 48. Hom. 49, 117, 183, 254, 306, 452, 459, etc. (...), 306. Hom. 38.


Chrysostom, when he says it was necessary he should (...), discourse of
Prayer; and frequently Add that in Cyprian, Propter hoc etiam libellum hunc de
bono patientiae quantum valuit nostra mediocritas, permittente and inspirante
Domino, conscripsimus, Epist. ad Jubaian. and often, pro nostra mediocritate.

And Augustine, De quibus in aliis opusculis, in quantum Domino adjuvante
potuimus, satis nos disseruisse meminimus, de peccat. orig. l. 2. c. 34. Et hoc
pro viribus ago, contra Cresc. l. 1. c. 9. Si autem ministri assint pro viribus
quas eis Dominus subministrat, omnibus subvenitur: alii baptizantur, alii
reconciliantur, nulli dominici corporis communione fraudantur, omnes
consolantur, aedificantur, exhortantur, ut Deum rogent qui potens est omnia
quae timentur averlere, etc. Epist. 180. Honorato, p. 928. edit. Lugduni an.
1561.

And that Constantine exhorted his Subjects, (...), to lead a pious Life, (...).

Athanasius, about to give an account of Man's degeneracy, (...), contr.
Onules. p. 3.

And reciting too some passages of Scripture, (...), de natura human. suscept.
Tom. 1. p. 465. init.

Maximus in Athanas. Tom. 2. says he had confuted Heretics, (...), p. 255.

Augustine, retract. l. 2. c. 1. in secund. libro tractantur caeterae
quaestiones, and pro nostra quantulacunque facultate solvuntur, p. 58.


elsewhere.

It is evident, that in these passages, the phrases signify, they used their
own abilities, judgment, invention, expressions; in preaching, expounding,
disputing, etc. And it would not be imagined, but that they denote the same
when applied to Prayer, in Justin Martyr and others, had not custom settled
another mode of Praying than was used in those times, when abilities to Pray
were counted a qualification as requisite for a Pastor, as ability to Preach;
and more thought necessary to accomplish a Minister for public Prayer (so
great a part of his work) than a Child is capable of.

Who ever imagined, that by writing (...), or pro viribus, they meant no more,
than the transcribing another man's Discourse; or by expounding or preaching
(...), etc. no more was to be understood, than their reading or reciting
another man's Sermon, etc. with what earnestness soever? This would be no
better, than to offer plain violence to their Words, and unpardonable injury to
the Authors. And why is it not as intolerable, when they speak of Praying
(...), to say they meant no more, than their reading or rehearsing another man's
Prayers with all earnestness; let those who are not (...), judge.

Nay, it cannot be denied, but these phrases do sometimes denote, when applied
to Prayer or Thanksgiving, the Exercise of personal abilities for Prayer; as
when Chrysostom tells us, in Genesis Hom. 26. that Noah gave Thanks (...), (sure
it was in no Form composed for him by another) and then exhorts to imitate him;
and in the application shows how, viz. taking account every day and hour, not
only of Mercies common to others, but particular and personal; yea and those
which we observe not, (...). (for all this could not be done in a stated Form)
(...) p. 202. he adds, God made us rational, (...), therefore he gave us
faculties, Souls and Tongues, (...), that he might be sensible of his favors,
and (...), p. 203. And in the next Homily 27. we should endeavor (...), having
always his benefits in our minds ((...) that our memory may be helpful to us
therein) though they be more than we can recount, (...), etc. For who can
((...);) reckon up those which we have, those which are promised, and (...),
those which we meet with every day, (so every day there is new matter of
Thanksgiving) then enumerating abundance of particulars, p. 204, 205. and
adding still (...), they can never be numbered. (...); how can any Tongue of Man
express them? (...), they transcend all human apprehension; yet will have us
notwithstanding, remember, conceive, reckon them up, and express them as we are
able, and would have us employ mind, memory, tongue, all faculties, therein, as
much as we can: for he adds again after all, we must (...), such Thanksgivings
are according to the abilities of him who offers them. (...) (which I proved
before to be the same with (...)) signifies that which is inconsistent with any
confinement to a set Form, by our selves or others.

Basil also, giving directions how (...) cap. 1. p. 554.
to Pray, premises, That there are two sorts or parts of Prayer, Thanksgiving
or Praise of God with self abasement, and petition; then he advises to begin
with the former, and therein to make choice of Scripture-expressions ((...),
which it seems was Basil's Formulary) after he has given something by way of
Example, he adds (...), when thou have Praised him (with expressions selected)
out of the Scriptures, as thou art able (or according to thy ability) the same
phrase with (...), and (...), then begin with self abasement; in which, after
thou have been large ((...), p. 555.) then proceed to Petition. There he would
have him beware of Praying for the severals he mentions, but to seek that which
is prescribed or enjoined; not in any Liturgy (for if there had been such,
these directions had been needless, and if they should, and might use no other,
ridiculous (yet some Men's fancies are so strong, as to stretch these, even to
private Devotions;) but in the Scripture, and the Words of Christ ( seek first
the Kingdom of God, etc.) (...), and will have him careful in any wise, that
his whole mind be Ut collectis and congregatis intra se sensibus, oret Deum,
non ^vagetur m^nte and cogitationibus evolet, ut ipsis Dei conspectibus, atque
ineffabili illi lumini se intelligat assistemem, ibique orationes, and
obsecrationes, postulationesque, and gratiarum actiones suas profundat, nullius
extrinsecus Phantasiae solicitatus imagine, Origin. vid. Dall. de objecto cult.
p. 396.


intent upon God, and him alone, and no where else ((...)) which will be very
hard for him, who, Praying in public or private, has his Book to mind.

By this we may also judge, what it is to Pray (...), or which is all one
(...). And to add no more, it cannot be supposed, that there was any prescribed
Form of Prayer, for the Case which Augustine mentions, viz. Vir Tribunitius
Hesperius, qui apud nos est, in territorio Tussalensi, fundum Zabedi
appellatum, ubi cum aflictione animalium and servorum suorum, domum suam
Spirituum malignorum vim noxiam perpeti comperisset, rogavit nostros, me
absente, Presbyteros, ut aliquis eorum illo pergeret, cujus orationibus
cederent. Perrexit unus, obtulit ibi sacrificium corporis Christi, orans
quantum potuit, ut cessaret illa vexatio, etc. August. de civit. Dei, l. 22. c.
8. p. 686. edit. Lugdun.


A House possessed by the Devil; for the relief of which, he tells us, one of
the Presbyters of Hippo Prayed, quantum potuit, a phrase equivalent to (...),
and therefore it may be presumed, he Prayed there according to his ability. And
why (...), in Justin Martyr, should not signify the same, as in these
forementioned instances, and be rendered according to their abilities, so as
their Prayers should be understood to be the product of them; I can discern no
reason at all, but because they who deny it, are loath it should be so.

Let us proceed; That of Tertullian, Apol. 1. c. 30. sine monitore, quia de
pectore oramus, has been pleaded by others, and not without reason. Bishop
Hall in Answering it, when he was concerned to be most reserved and cautious,
so as to yield nothing, but what the words would extort, grants, The mode of
Praying was not then under any superior injunction, and so not prescribed.
Bishop Bilson concluded from this passage (before it came into debate by the
differing parties) that extemporary Praying was used in Tertullian's time,
Christian Subject. Part 4. p. 617. rendering it without any Sine monitore, not
being urged by any superior injunction.


Prompter, as coming from the free motion of our own Hearts, and ascribing it
to the extraordinary gift of Prayer then continued. (How reasonably may be
considered elsewhere;) and this shows, it is not for want of evidence in the
expression, that this sense of it is since rejected by his followers, but from
something else. I doubt not, but if it would have been serviceable another way,
there would be no question, but this was Septimius's meaning, the Christians
did Pray without any such Prompter, as the Heathen, because their hearts were
their Prompters: or, as Bishop Bilson, because they Pray as their hearts move
them. Prayers suggested to the Heathen by their Monitors, were suggested to the
Christians by their own hearts; they had not their Petitions out of a writing,
but out of their own Breasts.

The Gentiles Monitor, as Rigaltius on the place observes, did praeire preces
de scripto. Amongst the Greeks, their Prayers were read out of a Book, as
appears by Apuleius, describing a great solemnity amongst them, where their
Monitor, whom they called Tunc ex his unus, quem cuncti Gramma^ea dicebant, pro
foribus assistens, coetu Pastophorum (quod sacrosancti collegii nomen est)
velut in concionem vocato, indidem de sublimi suggestu, de libro, de literis
fausta vota, praesatus Apuleius metamorph. l. 11. p. 204.


Grammatea, from a high Pulpit, de libro fausta vota precatus, Prayed out of a
Book.

Amongst the Persians, Pausanias representing the rites of their Pyretheia, as
they were used in Hierocaesarea and Hypaepae, brings in the (...) (...) in
Hesychius, (...), Phavorinus.


(who was a Priest, a Sacred person amongst them) thus Praying: (...), Pausan.
lib. 1. Eliacor.

Ammianus Marcellinus, Hist. l. 23. c. 8. The Magus by a set Form of Prayer --


He coming into a place in the Temple, and having laid Wood on the Altar, first
puts on his Sacred Habit, and then Prays to some God; and this Prayer he says
(...), out of a Book.

For the Romans, Livy tells us, Numa gave them in writing, all that belonged to
their Worship; eique (viz. to Marcus the Chief Priest) omnia sacra exscripta
exsignataque attribuit, Dec. 1. l. 1. p. 16. Upon special occasions, the
Decemviri transcribed their Prayers out of the Sibyls Books, (their
extraordinary Ritual) Dec. 5. l. 1. p. 15. Pacem Deorum peti precationibus,
quae editae ex fatalibus libris essent. When they were distressed by Hannibal
sending Fabius's Picture to Q. Fabius Pictor, Legatus a Delphis Romam rediit,
responsumque ex scripto recitavit; Divi quoque in eo erant, quibus, quoque modo
supplicaretur. Dec. 3. l. 3. p. 64.


Delphos, Apollo Pythius prescribed them a Liturgy in Writing; which he
returning, recited out of that Writing; in which was contained, what Gods they
should supplicate, and in what mode; and the Senate enjoined an accurate
observance of it. When Scipio Aemilianus was Qui Censor, cum lustrum auderet,
inque solito fieri sacrificio, scriba ex publicis tabulis solenne ei
precationis carmen praeiret, quo Dii immortales, ut populi Romani res meliores
amplioresque facerent, rogabantur: satis inquit bonae ac magnae sunt; itaque
precor ut eas perpetuo incolumes servent. Ac protinus in publicis tabulis, ad
hunc modum carmen emendari jussit. Valor. Max. lib. 4. c. 1. p. 191.


Censor, the Scribe (their Prompter) at a Lustration, reads the usual Prayer,
Ex publicis tabulis; Scipio misliking an expression therein, alters it, and
orders the alteration to be made in the public Writing, out of which it was to
be read; and so reforms their Common Prayer Book.

Thus were the Devotions of the Heathen regulated; but the Christians, says
Tertullian, (describing them in opposition to the Gentiles) had no such
Monitor, did need no such Prompter; their Prayers are not de Scripto, but de
Pectore. In Answer to this, thus much is granted, That the Christians in those
times prayed without Book; and so it is acknowledged, that those who read their
public Prayers out of a Book, are therein nothing like the Ancient Christians,
but more resemble the Pagans in that mode of Praying, for which Tertullian here
derides them. This cannot be denied, it seems; yet, which is the only shift
left them, de Pectore, they will have to be no more than saying their Prayers
by heart.

But this is not to Pray de Pectore, but de Memoria, not as their heart moves
and prompts them, but as their memory serves them.

And this supposes, that in those times they had written Liturgies, and were
wont to get their Prayers by heart; for which they should produce some
expression, or intimation, or show of proof, from some credible Author of that
Age, before they take it for granted. I have yet seen no proof of it, and I am
confident never shall.

Certainly, it was a hard task (and required so good a memory, as all cannot be
supposed to have had, who were employed therein) to get all the Prayers they
then used by heart. Since the Christians then continued, and principally in
Prayer, sometimes Nine hours (and this twice every Week) in their Jam horum
conventuum proprius ac praecipuus finis erat oration, atque deprecatio, unde
factum, ut stationes dicerentur, quod (...) statio Hebraeis sit oration. Dall.
de jejuniis, l. 4. cap. 5. ex J. Capell.

They began at Sunrising, Statim ab exortu solis. Rigalt. obs. ad Tertull. id.
orat. p. 43.

Their Stations were continued till 3 Afternoon, (...), Epiph. expos. fid. p.
110. others longer, arguunt nos, quod stationes plerumque in vesperam
producamus, Tertull. de jejun. c. 14.

Their Fasts till 6 Afternoon, (...), Basil. de jejun. (...). p. 133.

Diebus atque noctibus jugiter and instanter oramus, propitiantes Deum, Cypr.
insistamus per totam diem precibus, and oremus. Idem.


Stations; sometimes Twelve hours, as at their Fasts, besides what were usual
at their Vigils, Festivals, and Lords-days Assemblies, at their Baptizings,
Ordinations, reconciling Penitents, and other occasions; all requiring variety
of Prayers.

And who can believe, their Pastors were then limited to written Forms in
Praying, when the ordinary sort of Christians were not tied to any Forms at all
in Singing? There seems more reason for a restraint in Hymns, than in
supplications; and those who are earnest for liberty in the latter, are well
enough content to be confined to Scripture-Forms in the former. It Is evident by
Tertullian, that in his time, Christians had the liberty in their
Church Assemblies, to choose either such Hymns as they collected out of the
Scripture, or such as were of their own conception. So he Thornd. Serve. p. 293.
tells us, describing their Love Feasts; at which we are told, the Eucharist
was Celebrated, Post aquam manualem, and lumina, ut quisque de Scriptura, vel
de proprio ingenio potest, provocatur in medium Deo canere, Apol. cap. 39. 9.
And these, if we believe Grotius, extemporary Non solebant pro re nata
extempore hymnos quos (...) vocant, effundere Hebraei -- nec dubito quin and
hoc canendi genus vel praecipue commendat Paulus, Ephesians. 5. 9. Col. 3. 16. Mansit
diuis mos in ecclesia vetere, Tertullianus meminit, and Plinius, etc.


Hymns, and such used by others, both before, and after those times.

It is excepted, that Tertullian, in the place we have insisted on, speaks of
private Devotions: But if they will have it of private only, any that considers
the words, will see it evidently mistaken, Illuc suspicientes Christiani,
manibus expansis, quia innocuis; capite nudo, quia non erubescimus. He shows
Christians were unlike the Pagans, in their mode of Praying, for such reasons,
as would not admit them to be alike any where, either in private or public;
since they thought themselves concerned to signify, they were more innocent,
and less conscious of what was shameful, than the Heathen, as well in public
as in private.

This manner of Praying was continued in the following Age, as is evident in
Origin, who declares it both of the Greek and Latin Churches, which divided
betwixt them the Contr. Cells. l. 8. p. 402.
whole Christian World. They Prayed in his time, not only in their own
Language, but also according to their ability, (...). The Grecians in Greek,
the Romans in Latin; and so every one in his own dialect, Prays to God, and
Praises him, as he is able. Precantur Deum, and celebrant pro viribus. The B.
H. H. T.
most learned and judicious, that have appeared in this Question for prescribed
Liturgies, do yield, that if (...) in J. Martyr were duly rendered according to
his ability, and be of the same import with (...), then the Prayers there
mentioned were such as we say, viz. the issue of the Administrators abilities,
not formed for him, nor imposed on him by others. Now (...), in Origin, is
exactly correspondent to, and of the very same signification with, (...): nor
can it be better rendered than by, according to his ability, or which is all
one, as he is able; and therefore, that those Prayers mentioned in Origin were
such, may be taken for granted; and those also which we find in the same Book,
p. 386. where the expression is of the same sense, but comes nearer to the Form
and sound of the other, which they yield is for us, (...), that one God, and
his only Son both in Word and Image, we worship with Prayers, according to our
ability, and honors, offering Prayers unto the God of the Universe, by his
only Begotten. It is acknowledged, by the most zealous Friends of these
Liturgies, that in the Apostolical times, there was a (...), an ability or gift
of Prayer, inabling those who had it, to conceive their Prayers themselves; and
the exercise of this gift or ability, in the New Testament, D. H. in Jud. 20.
is (...), Jude, v. 20. and (...), Ephesians. 6. 18. But this, so expressed, they
will have to have been an extraordinary and miraculous gift, as those of
healing, prophesying, tongues, etc. Now the former (that there was a gift of
Prayer) we acknowledge with them; but the latter (that it was extraordinary and
miraculous) should not be granted without proof, being also inconsistent with
other principles equally acknowledged, and with those Scriptures too now
alleged. Not to take notice, that the gift of Prayer is not reckoned amongst
those that were miraculous, where we have a particular account of them, Mark
ult. 1 Cor. 12. 8, 9, 10. 1 Cor. 14. It is granted by them, that, as all
extraordinary D. H. 586. 385.
gifts were not conferred upon any one Person, except the Apostles; so no one
gift was conferred upon all; this is plain in the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12. 8, 9, 10,
11. particularly this gift of Prayer, is asserted to have been bestowed upon
some one of the multitude, (...). So in To. 8.
Chrysostom. (whom alone, amongst the Ancients, they have to allege for it, as
an extraordinary grace:) But all the believing Hebrews (all that are
sanctified, to whom Jude writ, ver. 1.) are required to exercise this gift:
((...)) and all the converted Gentiles at Ephesus to whom Paul writ, are
exhorted by him, to exercise it, Ephesians. 6. 18. (and all other Christians in them,
if those Epistles be of general concernment.) Now it could not be their Duty to
exercise it, if they had it not; and if they all had it, it was an ordinary
gift, and continued to the Church in all Ages. And so Origin, in reference to
this gift or ability, might well say, every one Prayed, (...), and (...),
according to his ability: However, he that was able to conceive a Prayer
himself, yet made use of Prayers formed by others, did not Pray as he was able.

Proceed we to the times Athanasius was exercised with more conflicts than
others: Theodoret calls him elegantly, (...). After many before, he meets with
a new incou^ter in Julian's time; of which that Historian gives this account,
(...), lib. 3. cap. 8. The Devils not able to endure the power of Athanasius's
Preaching and Praying; so that they could less bear his Prayer and Preaching,
than that of others, and therefore they raised him more troubles than others
met with.

Now, if his Preaching had been but the Reading of the same Homilies which
others Read, who could give a reason from thence, why Satan should not endure
it in him, as well as in others? So, if his Praying had but been the Reading of
the same Prayers that others did Read, no account can be given, why the Devils
should be more troubled at his Praying, than of the rest. The ordinary Deacons
or Readers at Alexandria, and elsewhere, could read a Prayer as well as he.
Certainly his power in Preaching, was something else, than his reading another
Man's Sermons; and was his power in Praying, no more than his reading another
Man's Prayers? One would think it could denote no less, than that he had a more
powerful (way or) faculty in Preaching and Praying.

And if it be said, that this lay only in his more devout or earnest reading,
etc. Ans. If the disinteressed can be satisfied, that his powerful faculty, in
Preaching, was but his fervency in reading other men's Sermons; I shall not
contend, but that his powerful faculty in Praying, might be no more, than his
devout reading of other men's Prayers.

Athanasius himself shows us, that Prayers were not then had from Prayer-Books,
and prescribed Forms, when he tells us, men's orationis fons est.


following: Basil in the beginning of his Tract de Spiritu Sancto, tells
Amphilochius, that he lately Praying with the People, and concluding his
Prayers Hook. pol. l. 5.. 42.
with a Doxology, used variety of expressions therein; (sometimes to the Father
with the Son, together with the Holy Ghost; sometimes by the Son, in the Holy
Ghost) and that offense was taken at one mode of his, expressing it, (...),
cap. 1. p. 248. Hence it appears, Basil was not, would not be limited to the
same words, in any the least part of public Prayers, not in one clause, so
short a clause, not in the conclusion of a Prayer, where those, who vary in
other parts, many times agree; not in a Doxology, where, those that are for
more liberty elsewhere, can be content with less. He varies in this once and
again, in several Prayers, and none of his variations fall in with the usual
mode, ( to the Father, and the Son, aend the Holy Ghost); nor did the fear of
offense restrain him from using this liberty.

Now, if in such circumstances he would not be confined, in the part of a
Prayer, to the invariable use of so short a clause, as the half of the Doxology
now used; would he be confined Qui loquendi art caeteris hominibus excellere
videntur, but not to be reckoned inter illos doctissimos, quorum men's magnarum
rerum est exercitata quaestionibus.

Discant non contemnere, quos cognoverint morum vitia, quam verborum, amplius
devitare, id. ibid. p. 329. His enim maxim utile est nosse, ita esse
praeponendas verbis sententias, ut praeponitur animus corpori, id. p. 330.

Basil, In Praying publicly, used (...), strange or unusual expressions, which
could not be the words of a Common Prayer Book, of ordinary, though free use,
much less of one prescribed and enjoined to be constantly, and unvariably used.
If there had been any such, you will not think, but Basil would have been
confined to them; but he is far from it, he would not be limited to the same
words.


himself, or confine others to the invariable use of whole Prayers? No, it is
hereby evident, his times knew no such bonds; he used expressions, as to his
Auditory seemed strange and unusual, which the words of a Common Prayer Book
could not have been.

Augustine, giving directions, how the Catechumens are to be instructed,
advises the Catechists ( Deo gratias particularly) to accomodate themselves to
their several capacities; and when they are to deal with those of some learning
and eloquence, to let them understand, that God minds not so much the
expressions, as the inward affection; ita enim non irridebunt, si aliquos
Antistites and ministros ecclesiae forte animadverterint, vel cum barbarismis
and soloecismis Deum invocare, de Catechiz. rudib. cap. 9. p. 330. Tom. 4. pars
poster. So they will not jeer, if perhaps they take notice, that some Bishops
and Ministers of the Church, do invocate God with Barbarisms and Solecisms.
Prayers, wherein there were Barbarisms and Solecisms, none will imagine them to
have been prescribed by the Church; yet such were the Prayers both of Bishops
and Ministers, in Austin's time.

Socrates, who lived in the middle of the Fifth Century, Ant^nius of Valentia,
a Dominican (in the Council of Trent) said that it was plain, by all History,
that anciently every Church had her particular Ritual of the Mass, brought in
by use, and upon occasion, rather than by deliberation and decree; and that the
small Church did follow the Metropolitan, and the greater, which were near. The
Roman rite has been, to gratify the Pope, received in many Provinces, though
the Rites of many Churches are still most different from it, etc. And that of
Rome also has had great alterations, and the true Roman rite, not that which
is now observed by the Priests in that City, etc. Hist. of the Counc. of Trent,
l. 6. p. 548, 549.

Prayers in end of Ancient Councils not premeditated, but as the Spirit did
excite some Bishops.

In Trent, not giving way to the extemporary Spirit of any, but repeating it
out of a paper, ibid. p. 813.

Fid. Augustini retractat. l. 2. c. 20. of varieties in Sacraments, ^^c tamen
commemorari omnia potuerunt.


and whose History reaches an. 439. gives us an account of the variety then
used in Prayers, altogether inconsistent with any common prescribed Liturgy, l.
5. c. 21. p. 698. (...). Generally, in any place whatsoever, and amongst all
(the sorts of) Worshippers, there cannot two be sound agreeing to use the same
Prayers. Now where there was diversity of Prayers every where, How could there
be the use of one common Liturgy? where there was no (...), no agreement or
concurrence, in using the same Prayers in any place; How could there be one
prescribed model? when there could not be found two, any where, using the same
Prayers; Where were they to be found, that used the same Service Book?

For the West, we may understand by Innocent's Epistle to Decentius formerly
alleged, how far they were in the same Age, from being confined to one Form of
Church Service; when he tells us, every one celebrated, as pleased him.

And long after this, something of the Ancient liberty is discernable, in the
several Countries, which was retained in some of them, even after the imposing
Spirit was rouzed and active. And by the remaining ruins, we may guess what it
was, when it stood entire. At the time, when the Fourth Council of Toledo was
held, an. 633. the Spanish Churches were not subject (though forwarder for such
subjection than others) to imposed orders, for one Form of Worship; no not in
the Sacraments. Even these in the said Churches, were celebrated Crab. Tom. 2.
p. 196.
in various modes, and in some of them unduely; as is expressed in the Preface
to that Synod, In sacramentis divinis, quae diverso atque illicito modo in
Hispaniarum Ecclesiis celebrantur.

In France Percipiens de omnibus civitatibus Franciae Magistros Scholae,
antiphonarios eis ad corrigendum tradere, and ab iis discere cantare: correcti
sunt ergo Antiphonarii Francorum, quos unusquisque pro arbitrio sua vitiaverat,
vel addens vel minuens, and omnes Franciae cantores didicerunt formam Ro^anam,
Chron. Engolismense in Morn. de miss. l. 1. c. 8. p. 224.
they had Books for public Service, in the Eighth Century; yet were they used
at the discretion of those that officiated, who added or left out, what they
thought fit; till Charlemaine, in the beginning of the Ninth Age, would have
them reformed after the Roman guise; unusquisque pro arbitrio suo vitiaverat,
vel addens vel minuens.

And in Germany, long after Boniface had been stickling to reduce it to the
Roman uniformity, the whole Country was so far from submitting to any one
prescribed order of Service, that in one Decret. Greg. (3. q.) tit. 31. de
offic. jud. ord. cap. 14. Quoniam in plerisque partibus intra eandem Civitatem
atque Dioecesim, permixti sunt populi diversarum linguarum, habentes sub una
fide varios ritus and mores: districte praecipimus, ut Pontifices hujusmodi
civitatum five Dioecesium provideant viros idoneos, qui secundum diversitatem
rituum and linguarum, divina illis officia ce^ebrent, and ecclesiastica
sacramenta ministrent.
Diocese there were various modes of administering, particularly in that of
Colen. And Rotger. vit. Brunonis, apud Surium. Oct. 11. obiit an. 965.
Bruno, Bishop there in the middle of the Tenth Age, was endeavoring to reform
this, as Churchmatters, in those days, were wont to be reformed; diversitatem
sacra peragendi in sua provincia corrigens, ac ut eadem ubique esset ratio
constituens.

And in Ireland, (with which the Britans and Scots symbolized) we showed
before, out of the great Usher, That till the Twelfth Century, no one general
Form of Service was retained; but diverse rites and manners of Celebration were
observed, till the Roman use was brought in, by the Popes Legates.

So that all along it is manifest, the uniformity aimed at, in the common
prescribed Liturgies, was only the issue and darling of late, dark and
degenerate times; an innovation upon the Churches usages, in better times, and
an invading of her Ancient Liberty; for which the Bishops of Rome were the
greatest Zealots, designing therein the subjection of all other Churches to
that of Rome; and gaining thereby, both an acknowledgment of the Papal
Authority, from those who submitted to this Yoke, and an advantage of diffusing
the Poison of her Superstitions, through the body of the Western Empire, where
uniformity in Liturgy and Rituals, became a chief part of the uniform Apostasy
of the latter times.

Thus we have gone through the disadvantages, of proving a Parker of Cr. l. 2.
p. 125.

Cum per rerum naturam factuna negantis probatio nulla sit. d^cret. p. 2. cause.
6. q. 5. c. 2.

Does your discretion serve you to put us to prove the Negative? you cannot
prove they had, and that is cause sufficient for us to avouch they had not,
Bills. apud. c. 4. p. 351.


Negative: Let us now see, how they acquit themselves, upon whom the proof
lies; affirming, That the Liturgies they contend for, have been ever, from the
beginning. And here, if any where, it would be an easy matter, to give the
World abundant satisfaction, that what they assert is true, if indeed it were
so: He that takes notice, what clear and full evidence may be easily had, from
the Writers of some one Country, in a part of the last Age, for prescribed
Liturgies; or what convincing and unanswerable proof may be brought for them,
from the few Writers, which were in part of the Eighth or Ninth Centuries, when
they had got place in the World; may justly expect, that, from that multitude
of writings, in those many Ages, which this question concerns; such ample and
evident testimony, for imposed Forms, would be found by those who have labored
for it, as would have no place for the least doubt, but there were such in use
all along, if they had been really, as is pretended, the usage of the Churches,
from the Apostles times. And if no such thing be produced, by those, whose
interest led them to ransack all antiquity for it; even this, if there were no
more, will be a convincing argument, that the ancient Church had no such
Custom. Let us then view, what the learned Advocates for these Liturgies, have
collected out of the Ancients, and published for the satisfaction of the World,
in this point; and impartially examine, whether it amount to such proof, as may
be reasonably looked for in those circumstances, or whether it came not short
of any just and competent proof at all.

Clemens Alexandrinus is one of the antientest Authors produced for this
purpose; and he in these words, Strom. 7. (...), thus rendered, The Congregation
addicted to their Prayers, having as it were, one mind, and one voice common to
all. Now (says my Author) a Congregation cannot have one voice in their
Prayers, without a set Form for them to join in. But this is very strange and
mysterious; I had thought, as others do, that the Congregation had one voice,
in respect of the Minister speaking in their stead, one for all, and therefore
accounted the (...), the mouth of the People in Praying, (as when he Preaches
in the name of Christ, he is (...), in Clemens's style, Strom. or (...), as
Basil calls Nazianzen, Ep. 141. Now who can imagine, why he should not be their
mouth, in uttering a conceived Prayer, as well as in reading a Prayer out of a
Book. He had told us immediately L'Estr. allianc. of Lit. cap. 1. p. 19.
before (and it is generally, by those of his persuasion acknowledged) that
while the gift of Prayer lasted, viz. in the Apostolical Age, there was no Form
settled; and therefore, if the People cannot have one voice in their Prayers,
without a set Form; an Apostle, or other primitive Minister, Praying with a
Congregation (since he used no set Form) was not their mouth; nor did any
Church Pray with one voice, all that Age.

As insufficient for this purpose, is that of Tertullian, Apol. c. 39. Oramus
pro Imperatoribus, pro Ministris eorum ac potestatibus, pro statu seculi, pro
rerum quiet, pro mora finis. And that of Cyprian, Epist. ad Demetr. Pro
arcendis hostibus, and imbribus impetrandis, and vel auferendis vel temperandis
adversis, rogamus semper and pr^ces fundimus: and pro pace ac salute vestra,
etc. And that of Basil, Epist. 141. (which, though in the Age following, we join
with these, because of the same import.) A friend of his, gone to Travel, had
written to him, that he would be mindful of him in his Prayers; to whom his
Answer is this, (...), etc. To forget thee in my Prayers is impossible, for
thou rememberest, (...), etc. that in the Church we make Prayers for all our
Brethren that travel, for all that are enrolled Soldiers, for all that confess
freely the name, for all that bring forth Spiritual fruits, etc. Anonym. Use of
daily public Prayers, p. 6. 8.

Here is, in these severals, some account for what, and for whom they Prayed;
but not a syllable to signify, that they did it in set or prescribed Forms. If
those that Pray without such Forms, were to give an account of the scope and
import of their usual Prayers, and to express for what persons and things they
ordinarily do pray; they would do it in such terms, as might be as just a
ground for our Author's inference, as any alleged. Indeed, these allegations
are so far from proving an imposed Liturgy, with set Forms of Prayer; that they
do not prove so much as a Directory: For, in that which was composed for these
Nations, we have more than the Persons for whom, and the things for which we
should Pray; yet no more is specified in, or can be collected from any, or all
the places now mentioned. I dare offer many more, of this nature, to any
judicious Eye, without fear that he will see any such thing therein, as the
producer of these three would fain have seen. Let him that is minded, look
Cyril Catech. 5. Tertull. Apol. cap. 30. Chrysostom. in 1 Timothy p. 271. and in 2
Cor. p. 557. and Hilary -- in Cant. 4. p. 414. Author de vocat. Gent. l. 1. c.
12. p. 798. Coelestin. Epist. in Prosper. p. 894. pro Prosper. and Hilario.
cap. 11.

The same Author thinks he has discovered a Church Common Prayer Book in
Origin; but without any ground at all, save his desire to discover one so
Ancient: his words are, Origin, in his Fourth Book against Celsus, quotes Three
or Four several passages of Scripture, out of their (...), or Prayers; by
Prayers meaning, that which the Grecians now call their Euchologium, or
Prayer Book. But if he had consulted a little more with Origin, he might have
discerned, that by (...) he means the Psalter, or Psalms of David, and no other
Church Service Book, besides the Scripture. For, in that Book against Celsus,
quoting any passage out of the Psalms, he says, so it is found (...), so lib.
6. p. 285. edit. Cantabr. 1658. where alleging, Ps. 130. v. 1, 2, 3. he says,
(...), it is said in the Prayer, (...), etc. Lord, my heart is not lifted up,
etc. So alleging Ps. 50. 10. (...), therefore it is said of him, Praying
understandingly, viz. the Psalmist, (...), create in me, O God, a clean heart,
lib. 7. p. 354. So lib. 4. p. 178. (...), who find in the Prayers what the
prudent ought to say, (...), that the earth is full of the mercy of the Lord;
which, being found in two Psalms, 33. 5. and 119. 64. may be the reason he
quotes it in the plural (...). And this may be the place my Author intends; for
he had not the confidence to transcribe it, nor direct particularly to it;
having, it is like, no hopes that any, whose fancy was not deeply tinctured with
his conceits of such Liturgies, looking upon the place, would mistake the
Psalms of David, for a Greek Prayer Book

Origin is again produced by him; Who, says he, gives this description of a
true Christian, (...) ( lib. 6. against Cells.) that is, as he renders it; They
that serve the God of all, through Christ, and live according to his Gospel;
who also frequently and duly, both night and day, use those Prayers that are
(prescribed, as he will have it, or, which is all the word imports) Commanded.
There needs not many words, to show the impertinency and unserviceableness of
this passage, for the purpose, for which it is alleged; when it appears, The
same Origin in Genesis Hom. 10. Sine intermissione orandum, Apostolus praecipit:
vos qui ad orationes non convenitis, quomodo impletis sine intermissione, quod
semper omittitis?
that those were not private Prayers, which were to be put up night and day, at
any hour of either. And 2. That there are no Prayers Commanded, but in set
Forms; or that, if it had been (...), any one would have understood thereby,
prescribed and set Forms of Sermons; And 3. That there are no Commands for
frequent Praying, but humane inventions or prescriptions: Then this allegation
may be thought pertinent, and further considered; but the producer of it would
not judge it worthy so much, professing his distrust of its sufficiency to
prove what he desires; Yet I profess, says he, I do not allege this passage,
as an infallible proof, because I know the word (...) may be also otherwise
Interpreted. If he had said, the word, when applied to Prayers, in Origin, or
any near his time, could never be but otherwise interpreted, he had spoke with
more ingenuity, and no less truth.

Another place in Satis constat, Origenis, quae latin tantum extant, a Russ^no
and aliis interpretibus ita fuisse interpolata, ut ex iis vix possit certo
intelligi, quid vere sit Origen^^um, Dall. de lib. suppos. Dionys. etc. l. 2.
c. 34. p. 440.


Origin is more commonly insisted on, viz. in Homil. 11. upon Jeremy; and for
imposed Forms, they argue from the mode of an expression there, which, what it
was in Origin, no man can tell; since in those Latin commentaries, we never
have his words, and can never know (as his Translators have used him) when we
have his sense, or whether we read him or them. However, these are the words
alleged, Vbi frequenter in oratione dicimus, Da omnipotens, da nobis partem
cum Prophetis, da cum Apostolis Christi tui, tribue ut inveniamur ad vestigia
unigeniti tui; When we often say in Prayer, Grant Almighty, grant us a lot with
thy Prophets, with the Apostles of thy Christ, give us that we may be found at
the steps of thy only Son. Here it is presumed, that these are Origen's words,
and not his Translators; and that the Form of his expression (on which alone
the reasoning is grounded) is exactly and faithfully transferred to us, by
those who declare they used no such exactness or faithfulness in reading him.
It is presumed also, that, this was his meaning, that they frequently used, not
only those Petitions, but in those very words, which there is no need we should
grant: Yet if all these were yielded, no more can hence be concluded, than what
is common with those who Pray Extempore, viz. That they often in Prayer,
preferred one or two Petitions, in the same words. Or, if I should grant, that
this was a Form of Prayer, when there is nothing to persuade it, more than that
the Apostles was a set Form, Ephesians. 1. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 11, 12.
16, 17, 18, etc. ((...) there being no less than frequenter here) yet what
shadow of a proof is there, that it was a prescribed Form?

Another very learned man thinks there is sufficient evidence for the Forms in
question, from one or two words ( Dominica solennia;) in Tertullian, de anima,
cap. 9. But what Tertullian means by those solennia, himself particularly
declares in the same place; Iam vero prout Scripturae leguntur, aut Psalmi
canuntur, aut petitiones delegantur, aut allocutiones proferuntur, ita inde
visionibus materiae subministrantur, The reading of the Scriptures, the singing
of Psalms, the Prayers, and the Sermons, are the Dominica solennia mentioned.
Now, if he, who alleges this, can persuade the World, that at every Assembly,
the same Chapters were still Read, the same Psalms always Sung, and the same
Sermons still Preached; he may persuade us, that the same Prayers in the same
Form and Words, were always made; because forsooth, these (as the other, and no
more, no otherwise than the other) are solennia, in Tertullian's style. Yet, if
we were so credulous, as to be persuaded into such a Paradox, his work would
not be done; for Prayers might be, (and are frequently) the same, and yet not
prescribed. In Ut quisque de scripturis, vel de proprio ingenio potest,
provocetur in medium Deo canere, Tertull.

Now, as concerning the ancient and general course of God's praises, and
reading the Scripture, it appears by Justin Martyr, and Tertullian, that the
order of reading the Scripture in the Church was arbitrary in their time, as
accommodated to the condition of the times and occasions of their Assemblies,
by the guides of several Churches. The one of them says, That the Scriptures
are read (...): The others words are these, Apol. cap. 39. Coimus ad literarum
divinarum commemorationem, si quid praesentium temporum qualitas aut praemonere
cogit aut recognoscere; We assemble to repeat the Scriptures of God, what the
condition of the present times inforceth, either to forewarn, or to recognize.
The Order, which is accommodated to the condition of the times, cannot be
certain and appointed before, H. Thornd. Serve. at publ. Assem. p. 397, 398.


Tertullian's time, neither the order of reading, nor singing, nor preaching,
was prescribed; and yet they were in his style and account, solennia; and that
Prayers must be concluded to have been in prescribed Forms, merely because he
reckons them, as the other, inter dominica solennia, will seem wonderful to an
ordinary reason.

By this we may judge, how reasonably the same word in Cyprian is made use of,
for the same purpose, Vbi vero solennibus adimpletis dare calicem Diaconus
praesentibus coepit, Sermon. de Lapsis; When the things wont to be done, before
the distribution, being performed, the Deacon began to give the Cup to those
who were present. Prayers were some of those things, which were wont to be
performed before, and so may be included in solennibus. But that solennia
should here denote prescribed Forms of Prayer, or such Forms as were generally
frequented, or indeed, any Forms whatsoever; there is not the least show of
reason (which we made evident by Cyprian's Master, even now.) Nor could it have
fallen into any imagination, but of one only, fully possessed with a conceit,
that none but such Forms were then in use. The learned Person producing those
words, tells us a little before, p. 240. the Eucharist was celebrated with
Solemn Prayers, in the Apostles times; and yet I acknowledge, that under the
Apostles, the Prayers of the Church were not prescribed, but conceived, by
those that were employed in that Office, Thornd. Right of Church, 328.

He makes it an argument for prescribed Forms, that Deacons were employed; yet
says, they were not in Prayers at the Eucharist, p. 329. but appropriates these
to Presbyters, 328. And that which Deacons did in the other was (...), bidding
of Prayer, not Praying, which Clem. Constit. distinguishes. vid. (...) the
Deacon, (...) the Bishop, lib. 8. c. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.


acknowledges, these were not set Forms, but such as were suggested by the
Spirit, and made by virtue of the extraordinary gift; which, with Chrysostom,
he calls (...): So that Solemn Prayers were not set Forms then; and who can
divine, why they must needs be so in Cyprian?

But in Answer to these testimonies, this may suffice. I will add no more,
(...), to use Chrysostom's words, in 1 Cor. 15. p. 514. Hitherto we meet with
no evidence, for so much as any arbitrary Forms of Prayer, in the first and
best Ages of the Church; much less for prescribed Forms. And yet this is the
very best evidence, that I can meet with (produced by any that have labored in
this argument) for the First Three hundred years; and indeed all, that has any
show of proof, if so be all that has been examined, may seem to have so much. I
should show too much contempt of the Reverend Authors judgment, if I should
offer with more words, to satisfy him, that the pretended Ignatius, his (...),
Epist. ad Magn. or Justin Martyr's (...), Apol. 2. or the ancient Preface, or
Tertullian's mode of renunciation, de Corona Militis, sursum corda, or the use
of a Doxology (of these two last, see what is said before) have not so much as
the face of a proof for the Liturgies in question. And I might be suspected of
some design, to render their Advocates contemptible; if I should insinuate,
that any of them rely upon that, in this cause, which yields not the shadow of
a support. I am much mistaken, if those that are judicious and disinteressed,
can count any thing proved hereby, more than this, that those who make use of
such allegations, are at a great loss for want of proofs: But I must not
overlook what I met with, when I had thus far proceeded. I was not a little
amazed, to see some Protestants willing to allege that impudent forgery,
called the Liturgy of St. James, as evidence for prescribed Liturgies; a piece
stuffed with many (...), Eusebius. Hist. l. 3. c. 32. Lat. edit. (...). Graec. The
Dialogues betwixt Peter and Appion were condemned as counterfeit, upon this
account. (...) -- (...), etc. Postea Mariae and omnium Sanctorum, ut precibus
and intercessionibus eorum misericordiam consequamur, ut oblatio sit in requiem
animarum, quae ante nos dormi^runt -- (...).

Nam in ea jubet fieri mentionem Apostolorum, Martyrum, Conf^ssorum, and alibi
meminit Anachoretarum, and Christianorum damna^orum ad metalla; cum tamen
constat Anachoretas coepisse a Paulo primo Eremita, and Christianos coepisse
damnari ad metaila post tempora Apostolorum. Ibidem jubet recitari, Gloria
Patri and ^ilio, etc. quem hymnum compositum fuisse in Concilio Nicaeno,
communis opinio est. Jubet and dici, Sanctus Deus, sanctus Fortis, sanctus and
Immortalis, miserere nobis, qui diu post tempora sancti Jacobi inventus est.
Multa sunt alia, quae redolent novitatem.

Vid. Rivet. crit. Sacr. p. 110. 271.


Superstitions and Novelties, such as were never dreamt of in the Apostles
times, nor long after; and not without some strictures of Blasphemy and
Idolatry (offering Incense to God, for remission of Sins, and invocating the
Virgin Mary.) So that Bellarmin himself (though the interest of a desperate
cause, needing such supports, might have tempted him (as well as others) to it;
many corruptions, which he is engaged to defend, being therein countenanced)
durst not say, it was his, on whom it is Fathered. De Jacobi Liturgia sic
sentio, eam aut non esse ejus, aut multa a posterioribus eidem addita. He
instances in diverse particulars, not known in the First times, and then adds,
Multa sunt alia, quae redolent novitatem, There are many other things therein,
that favor of Novelty.

All that Baronius has to The Cardinal brings Five Instances, most he
misrepresents; none serve his turn.

1st. is, Sursum corda, so in Cyril, (...), but in the Liturgy not so, but
(...): and the Answer in Cyril is (...), but in the Liturgy quite otherwise,
viz. (...).

2d. Orate pro vivis and defunctis, which words neither Priest nor Deacon
uses, either in Cyril, or the Liturgy.

3d. is, Osculemini invicem in osculo sancto; in the Liturgy, (...), but in
Cyril, (...).

4th. is, Sancta Sanctis. Resp. Unus est Spiritus, etc. So in the Liturgy, but
with the Addition of (...), which is not in Cyril.

5th. Gustate and videte, quoniam suavis est Dominus, is in other Liturgies (as
some of the former are) and so may as well prove James to be the Author of
them, as of this.


say for it, is, some passages in the Catechisms Ad. an. 63. N. 17.
called Cyril's, agreeable to somewhat in the said Missal, as he will have it;
( Quam vere ejus esse plane cognoscet, qui eam conferat cum iis, quae Cyrillus
ejusdem Ecclesiae Hierosolymorum Episcopus in suis mystagogicis orationibus
habet, quae quidem ipse non aliunde quam ex Jacobi Liturgia cognoscitur
accepisse, ad An. 63. N. 17.) which is a very serviceable argument, and may
happily prove as well, that Cyril was the Author of the Liturgy ascribed to
James, or that James was the Writer of the Catechisms attributed to Cyril. How
it is known, that Cyril could not have these passages any where else, but from
James his Liturgy, I apprehend not; we must take the Cardinal's word, nor is it
capable of better proof: But, that those particulars might be transferred out
of the Catechisms into that Liturgy, we may well understand another way.

It was some disparagement to the Church of Rome, not to have a Liturgy, which
might pretend to be Apostolical, as well as the Church of Jerusalem and
Alexandria. A Missal is formed, wherein the Prayer for Consecration, is
verbatim the same with that called, The Canon of the Roman Mass: This Missal,
for the reputation of that Canon, must pass for St. Peter's. But Gregory Bishop
of Rome, who Six hundred Years after Christ, knew no Apostolical Liturgies, and
says, in the Apostles times, there were no Forms used in the Eucharist, no not
for Consecration, but only the Orationem autem dominicam id^irco mox post
precem dicimus, quia mos Apostolorum erat, ut ad ipsam solummodo orationem,
oblationis hostiam consecrarent, and valde mihi inconveniens visum est, ut
precem quam Scholasticus composuerat, super oblationem diceremus: and ipsam
traditionem, quam Redemptor noster composuit, super ejus Corpus and Sanguinem
non diceremus, Greg. lib. 7. Ep. 63.

Omnis Ecclesiastici Officii institutio veteris fuit Gregorii. Platina.


Lord's Prayer: Tells us also unhappily, that one Scholasticus made the
Canonical Prayer used in the Roman Church, for Consecration of the Eucharist;
so that if we will believe Gregory (who knew the original of the Roman
Liturgies, as well as most Parents know their Children) their St. Peter must be
beholding, for the said Prayer, to Scholasticus (even as James was to a
Catechism for the forementioned passages) unless we can imagine, that Gregory
Admittere possumus totum canonem, exceptis verbis Domini, a Scholastico
compositum, quia nimirum and Sanctus Petrus, and caeteri Sancti Pontifices
Scholastici dici possunt, Bellarm. de Miss. l. 2. c. 19. p. 819. edit.


by Scholasticus, understood the Apostle Peter. But even this should not seem
strange; since to Bellarmin, in his Zeal for the Canon of the Mass, it is
probable; and yet Si Gregorius, per Scholasticum, intelligat certum aliquem
hominem, qui aetate ipsius vixerit, ut Adversarii contendunt, utraque
probabilis est, id. ibid.


probable too, that Gregory, by Scholasticus, understood some person who lived
in his own time. How hard is it, for the greatest persons, to manage the
defense of Apostolical Liturgies, without rendering themselves Flagrans cupido
nobilitatis avitae cogit homines interdum delirare, ait Baronius.


ridiculous?

But these, whom I deal with, seem not to own this Missal of James directly,
speaking of it only, as the opinion of some Greeks, who tell of such a Liturgy.
What Greeks these are, I know not; not finding any Greeks owning it, till Seven
hundred Years after Christ: Yea the Greeks under the Patriarch of
Constantinople, and those in the Diocese of the Orient also, did utterly
disclaim that Liturgy One thousand Two hundred Years after Christ, as Attamen
85 Canon Sanctorum and omni laud celebrium Apostolorum, and 59 Canon
Laodicenae Synodi, enumerantes veteris testamenti and novi, ipsosque
Apostolicos libros, qui in usu nobis esse debent, nullam sacrificii S. Marci,
vel S. Jacobi mentionem faciunt, neque etiam Catholica sanctissimi and
oecumenici throni Constantinopolis ecclesia, ullo modo eas Liturgias agnoscit.
Pronunciamus igitur, non esse has recipiendas, Balsam. in respons. ad quaest.
Marci. Petr. Alex. writ as Baronius observes, an. 1204.


Balsamon the Patriarch of Antioch declares.

The last particular, of (...), the Hypocrisy of Liers, I made to be
counterfeit Writings, under the names of the first and best Antiquity; St.
Peter's Liturgy, the Liturgy of St. James, Matthew, Mark, etc. Through which we
need not doubt, but the Doctrine of Demons was promoted, when we see some not
ashamed still to maintain it, by those counterfeit autorities, Mede, Apost. of
Lat. time^, p. 139.


Those that own it, or others, as Apostolical, or did so heretofore, never did,
never will, give any account thereof to the World, to clear them from imposture.

To wave the Arguments usually insisted on, (that we may not actum agere) these
Liturgies were not known (nor used) before the Seventh or Eighth Century. For
if they had been The Dialogues betwixt Peter and Appion were rejected for less
than this, (...), Eusebius. Hist. l. 3. c. 38. Yea the Epistle of James was in
danger, not because it was never mentioned (it would never have been received
by any under such silence) but because it was not so frequently mentioned,
(...), although it was received and approved (...), Eusebius. l. 2. c. 22. Graec.
(...).

The 2. Epistle of Clemens was not approved as genuine, (...), because the
Ancients were not known to use it, id. ibid.

So Augustine rejects the writings, under the name of Andrew and John, because
they were not admitted by the Church, contra advers. Leg. l. 1. c. 70. contra
Faust. l. 20. c. 79.

Nam ut Latini ipsi and Graeci Pontifices, multa deinceps in suis Liturgiis,
quas jam inde ab Apostolis acceperant, pro re nata, vel immutarunt, vel
addiderunt: ita etiam ab Alexandrinis and Aegyptiis, par est credere, pro
temporum opportunitate factitatum, Victorius Scialach. praefat. to his version
of 3 Arabic Liturgies.

Illud accedit (quod etiam apud Latinos factum esse constat) ut in sacratissima
Missa (viz. Jacobi) aliis superadditis precibus, aliis autem breviori summa
contractis, ritibusque nonnihil auctis aut immutatis, vel tamen substantia
integra permanente paulo diversior ab illa pristina habeatur, Baronius in
Spond. ad an. 63. n. 5.

Extat etiam Liturgia eidem S. Jacobo attributa, quae tamen a posterioribus ita
lecupletata est, ut non sit facile dijudicium, quae pars ejus Liturgiae S.
Jacobum habeat Authorem, Bellarm. de Script. Eccles. p. 33.

And H. T. compares the pretended primitive Liturgies, to Theseus Ship, which
had been so changed, as no man could tell what part of it remained, Serve. of C.
at relig. Assemb. p. 250. Of Theseus Ship, Plutarch. in Grot. 211.


known in the foregoing Ages,

1. Certainly there would have been some mention of them, by some Fathers,
Councils, or other Writers; by those sure, who give an account of all
Apostolical Writings, both questioned and unquestionable; or those who lived
upon the place, where these Counterfeits, assuming those great names, are said
to have been entertained, particularly for that of James, by Eusebius, Cyril,
or Jerome, who resided in P^laestine.

2. Undoubtedly they would have been generally admitted, as other Apostolical
Writings were. None would have seen reason, to have composed other Liturgies,
nor would any other have been preferred before them.

3. Finally, none would have presumed, or would have been suffered without
control, to have enlarged, curtailed, inverted them, and made all kind of
alrerations therein, as some have done, so as they are quite transformed from
what they were once; insomuch as their Favorers can show us no one part of
them, which may with any assurance be ascribed to the first Authors, whoever
they were. This is acknowledged, and said to be done in several Ages, by the
Guides of those Churches, where they had entertainment: Who by thus using them,
evidently declared, either that they did not believe them to be Apostolical,
nor would have had them so accounted; or else, that themselves were impious
wretches, in making so bold with that which should have been preserved
inviolable as the Scripture; and wretched Impostors too, who would thrust their
own patches, and others no better than their own, upon Christians, under
Apostolical names: And so, one of these ways, all the credit is lost, upon
which they are recommended to the World as Apostolical.

But, if they were not known (as is manifest by the premises they were not)
for so many Ages; then, neither were they extant, and so, owe not their
Original to the Apostles, or any near their times. For it is impossible, that,
if they had been extant, and composed by the Apostles, for the constant and
daily use of the Churches, they should not be known to the generality of
Christians, supposed to have so used them: Or, if any will say, the Churches
used them not, he must condemn them as highly impious, living in willful
disobedience to the Apostles orders, and open contempt of their Authority, from
Generation to Generation: And further, if they were not known to be
Apostolical, before the Seventh or Eighth Ages, there is no way left to know it
after. Innate Arguments there are none, in those pieces, to evidence it, but
many which show the contrary; no features or lineaments truly Apostolical, but
much of the scurf and luxuriousness of corrupt and decrepit Ages. So that there
is nothing but testimony to rely on; and he that will admit writings to be
Apostolical, upon the testimony of times, wherein delusion and degeneracy
prevailed, without the least attestation of the First Churches, and so many
intermediate Ages, is well disposed to be deluded, or delude others.

To conclude, if those Bilson, Apol. p. 4. p. 409. When the Papist reasons
after this manner, Sure the Apostles had some precise Form of Service, though we
know it not; the reply is to them: Since you know it not, why make you it your
Anchor-hold, seeing what the Apostles did observe, none would have dared, but
have observed it, after their example?


who allege them, did know any Prayers, in that of James, or the rest, which
they really believed to be Apostolical, they would use those themselves, they
would employ their Authority and Interest to have them used by others; they
would not be so arrogant, as to think their own models, or so weak, as to judge
the Forms of others better; or so perverse, as to make choice of the worse;
they would not show such contempt of the Apostles, as to prefer others before
them; or such disobedience, as never to observe what they prescribed. All the
writings of the Apostles (they being universal Officers, divinely Inspired)
oblige all; so that I see not what room there is for excuse, unless they will
say, that though the Apostles composed these Liturgies, yet they did not enjoin
the use of them, but left it arbitrary, imposing on none. Yet even thus, though
there be less disobedience, there is no less contempt. For those that will have
Prayers of others composing used, when there is also choice of them; Do they
not offer an affront to the Apostles, with the aggravations forementioned, if
they neglect theirs, and use and impose others?

And if the Apostles did not enjoin the use of their supposed Liturgies, nor
would impose them on any, Why are they not imitated herein? Why, having less
Authority, (to say nothing of Wisdom) do our Liturgists take more upon them,
than the Apostles would do, in imposing on those, whom they thought best to
leave free; and imperiously prescribing their own weak inventions, or others,
weaker and worse than their own, when the Apostles, Divinely Inspired, did not
so much as advise the use of their supposed Forms?

But if they do not know, nor really believe, (as the premises persuade me
they do not) that those Forms and Prayers, or any of them, are the Apostles; Is
it ingenuous to offer that for proof, which they do not themselves believe?

Let us then leave them to those who can believe them, which I shall wonder if
any can, but those who have a Faith at Command, (when it will serve a turn)
wide enough to swallow a Jacobus de Voragine without mincing.

If I have stayed the longer here, they will, I hope, bear with me, who tender
the honor of the Apostles, and of the Divine and Infallible Spirit, to whose
inspirations we owe all their writings; and would not have them lie under the
unsufferable reproach, of having such deformed Brats fathered on them; which
indeed were the issue of darkness and degeneracy, and the Ages wherein those
prevailed; but borrowed those great and sacred names, to hide their shame, and
gain them reputation, in a World much under the power of delusion, where alone
it was to be hoped for.

Thus we have cleared the first Three hundred Years after Christ, from all
suspicion of Worshipping God publicly, in the way under debate; having
examined all that is alleged, either for prescribed or arbitrary Forms; and
finding nothing of weight therein, to sway a disinteressed person, to believe
there was any such thing, or to procure the assent of any, but those who are
disposed to yield it without proof: And since that is not found to have been
the way of the Three First Ages of Christianity, it is not very considerable,
nor scarce worth the inquiry, in what times else this may be found, a way of
worshipping God in public Assemblies, for which there is nothing in the
Apostles writings or practice, or in the practice of the First Churches, and
those after them for Three hundred Years; and so, neither rule, nor reason, nor
example, in the best and most imitable Ages; where also, their way of
Worshipping is deserted, who served God most regularly and acceptably: If it
find any thing to excuse it, it will have nothing to commend it to any, unless
we will admit those of such Palates to be our Tasters, who like a Puddle better
than either the Spring or the Streams while they run any thing clear.

In the two next Ages, (...), things grew worse and worse, Chrysostom. in 1 Cor.
Hom. p. 277. as he tells us, who resolutely set himself against the Stream of
the then prevailing corruptions, but found it too violent for him, and warned
others by what besel him, that to strive against it, was the way to be sunk.
Those, who have no great affection for these Liturgies, will not envy them the
honor of having their rise in such degeneracy, as the best Writers of those
days saw so much cause to lament. The chief, if not the only ornament of those
times, were those great persons, who had such reason to complain thereof. And
many there were excellently accomplished, in the Fourth Age, and some till
about the middle of the Fifth. It may seem something for the credit of these
Liturgies, if they can be found in the Church, while there was any thing of
such eminency in it; let us therefore view what is produced, as a discovery
thereof.

The Eighteenth Canon of the Council of Laodicea is alleged for prescribed
Liturgies, p. 374. Titulus in Crab. de Orationibus quotidianis, (...) (...),
That the same ministration of Prayers, ought to be both at Evening, and at the
Ninth hour, viz. Three in the Afternoon.

Hence it is argued, The same Prayers are to be used, both at Nones and
Vespers; therefore Forms of Prayer are imposed. But this is a very lame
inference; for, neither is the Consequence good, neither is the Antecedent true.

The inconsequence is apparent, since the same Prayers may be used often, and
yet not the words thereof prescribed or imposed. We have instances enough, to
clear this, in our Pulpits; where many, before their Sermons, and after, use
the same Prayers Morning and Evening, whereas none prescribe the words, or
impose those Forms on them, but themselves. And so we might dismiss this Canon,
as making nothing for prescribed Forms. If this Synod would have had the same
Prayers used; yet here is not a Syllable for prescribing the words thereof, or
injoyning what Forms should be used.

But indeed here is nothing to signify, that it was the intent of the Synod, to
have the same Prayers used, at the times specified; neither the whole phrase
((...)) nor any word in it imports such a thing; and they make the Fathers
absurd, who fix such a sense on their Decree. (...) will not serve the turn;
for it does not here (as in later times) signify a Book or Model of prescribed
and stinted Forms of Prayer, and other Administrations. Indeed, as some
Papists, where they meet with this word, conclude they have found their Mass;
so others, when they find it, may fancy they have discovered a Service Book:
But both ridiculously, to those who understand the Ancient use of the word.

For, no instance has yet been produced, nor can be, wherein it is used in
this sense, by any of the Ancients, before this Council, or long after: And
therefore none will believe it is so taken here, but such, whose desire to have
it so, will serve for reason enough to believe it.

But (...), Suidas Lex.

(...), Origin contr. Cells. l. 8. p. 428.

Theodoret, Hist. l. 2. c. 24.


(...), according to the Notation and Ancient known use of the word, denotes
sometimes a public Function or Office, most commonly the Exercise and
Administration of it, (...), exercise of their Function, Synod. Epist. Nic. in
Theodoret. l. 1. c. 9. vid. Con. Antioch. can. in cod. 97. and then it is not
the Forms of Action, but the Action it self, the public use, employment,
exercise, or ministration of that, to which it is applied, Civil or Religious,
applied to Worship; it is not the Forms of Worship, but the Ministration of it;
so, (...), in Theodoret, is not a model of prescribed Hymns, but the singing of
Hymns; so (...), in (...), Anth. Collot. 2. Tit. 3. cap. 11.

(...), is in the Code, (...), id. ibid.

Prayers and Liturgy are sometimes contradistinct, as when privatae domus,
(...), sed non (...), Novel. 58. (...) and (...) distinct. Cod. lib. 1. tit. 3.
de Epist. and Cler. p. 51. Episcopum aleatorum aut spectatorum, etc. (...),
Cod. p. 87.


Justinian, is the Holy exercise of reading the Scripture, not a Rubric
prescribing what Lessons should be read; of which the Ancient Church knew
nothing: And, (which comprizes all) he will have him capitally punished, (...),
whosoever (...), Anth. Coll. 9. tit. 6. c. 31. the disturbance sure is of the
Exercises of Divine Ministrations, not of any Written Models. So (...), in
Theophylact and others, is Preaching; which Exercise will not be denied to have
been performed without any prescribed Forms, for many Hundred years.

So, applied to Prayer, (...), here is not a Model of prescribed Prayers, but
the Exercise of Praying; and therefore, unless we will perfer a sense of the
word then utterly unknown to Christians, before the proper and So part of the
Presbyters Ministration, (...), Conc. An^^r. is (...) and (...), to Offer and
Preach, Can. 1. And the Deacons employment, or (...), is (...), Can. 2. And
there is the (...) of the Deaconess her Ministration, Con. Chalced. Can. 15.
(...).


usual acception of it, (...), is not the same prescribed Forms of Prayer, or
the same of any sort; but the same Exercise of Prayer, when long, was better
performed, and may be such without such Forms.

If (...) had been put by the Synod in the place of (...) (...), Theoplylact.
in Act. 13. So Oecumenius, ibid. So Chrysostom, in Act. Hom. 27. p. 766. (...),
Eusebius. vit. Constable. l. 4. c. 45. (...), Chrysostom. in Romans Hom. 29. p. 221. ver.
16.


(a word apt to be mistaken, since it was applied to a later invention) nothing
would have been understood hereby, but a Holy Exercise, or as it is in
Hesychius, (...) a Sacred Employment; and by the whole, no other, than the same
Holy Exercise of Prayer, instead of what is now made of it, the same Prayers:
And yet these two words were of the same import Anciently. The Apostle
expresses his acting as a (...) by (...), Romans 15. 16. and Chrysostom uses
them as Synonyma's, in the place forecited, Hom. 29. in Romans p. 221. and
Balsamon in Syn. Ancyr. explains (...) by (...).

Again, for the phrase, let it be observed, that the expression is not (...):
this indeed might have signified the use of the same Prayers. But (...) is no
more here the Praying of the same Prayers, at Three and Six Afternoon, than
(...) would have been the Preaching of the same Sermon Twice in one Afternoon.
And as there might have been (...), the same exercise of Singing at Nones and
Vespers, without Singing the same Psalms at both Hours; and the same Service or
Exercise of reading the Scripture, though the same Chapters had not been read, or
any by the prescript of a Rubric; and the same Ministry or Exercise of
Preaching, though the same Sermons had not been Preached twice over within Three
hours, or without using any set Forms of Homilies: As well might there be
(...), the same exercise of Praying at the Third and Sixth hours, without using
the same Prayers, or any set Forms at all.

Besides, no rational account can be given, why the same Prayers must be used
at Six, which were used at Three Afternoon. No Decree, parallel to this (if so
taken) can be produced; nor any thing, in the practice of the Church, before or
after, agreeable to it. Where can it be showed, that the same Prayers, without
variation, were always u^ed, at several hours of the same day, the same
invariably at the Sixth hour, as at the Ninth, etc. Even after unalterable
Forms were introduced, their several hours had their different Offices; each of
them, in the Latin Church, did statui tempo^is respondere, and were suited to
the time, for which they were appointed, as Sane off^cium sextae statui
temporis respondet, sicut and officia aliarum h^rarum; in prima namque hora est
inchoatio, in tertia perfectus, in sexta consummatio, etc. Quod indicant vorba
hymnorum, quae in ipsts horis, and etiam in nona permittuntur, Durand.
ra^i^nal. l. 5. c. 7. p. 160.


Durandus tells us: And in the Greek Church, they did (...), as Leo, accomodate
the Service to the season.

Beda speaks of a Hymn sung, potius In Durand. l. 5. c. 9. p. 162.
in vespertinis, quam in aliis Officiis, Vita Chrysostom. p. 288. rather at
Vespers than in any other Office. And Bas^l, long before him, mentions one,
which he calls (...), which was used at In the Cathemerinon of Prudentius,
containing Hym^s for all parts of the day; the Fifth (in the Editions of Al^^s,
and all other, but those of Giselinus and Fabricius) is entitled ad
accensionem lucernae, and was afterward made use of as a Church Hymn,
different, both from those Four that go before it, ( ad Galli cantum, ad
M^tutim^m, ante Cibum, post Cibum) and those two that follow it, vid. Rivet.
crit. Sacr. l. 3. c. 26. p. 331.


Candlelight, (...), de Spir. Sanct. cap. 29. p. 276. And such a one we have
set down, by the Learnedest of Primates, de Symb. p. 35. called, (...): so
proper for the Evening, as it could not be congruously used at any other hour
of the day. What reason is there to doubt, but their (...), as Epiphanius calls
them, (...) or those (...), Prayers at Candlelight, in Socrat. Hist. l. 5. c.
22. were also accommodated to the time, from whence they are denominated, and
at which they were used, as well as their Hymns? To conclude, there is no need
to make the Canon thus confound the Offices, which were always distinct, and
without all reason, to run counter to all the Christian World; nor to force a
sense upon the phrase, which it is impatient of; nor to put a construction upon
(...), which those times were utterly strangers to. The design and import of it
is but this; That those in that Province, should assemble for Worship Twice
after Noon; and as they had Prayers at one of the hours, so should they have
the same holy Employment or Exercise at the other; or as it is more briefly
expressed, in the Latin Editions of that Council, Quod semper supplicationes
orationum, and ad horam nonam, and ad In Clem. Constit. l. 8. (...), and (...),
and (...), are distinct and different, cap. 35, 36, 37, 38.


vesperam oportet celebrari, Caranz. Quod id ipsum ministerium orationum, and
in nonis and vesperis fieri debeat, Cod. Justell. p. 73. Quod id ipsum officium
precum and nona and vespera semper debeat exhiberi, in Crab. t. 1. p. 377.

This Canon of the Laodicean Synod (which I have been the longer in examining,
because I see some apt to mistake it, who have not so much bias as others, to
mislead them) is all considerable, that I find alleged for prescribed Liturgy,
in Martinius and others, 1. for any public Office of Ministry, and especially
of Distribution. 2. for the public service of God, in Reading, Teaching,
Praying. 3. for stated Orders and Forms of that public Service. Bellarmin add^
a fourth, for the Sacrificing Offices only.


Liturgies, in the Fourth Age. For I would not disparage all, with the
unadvisedness of those, who produce the Twenty third Canon of Con. Carth. 3.
(and also the Twelfth of Milevis) to support that, which we have seen, they
utterly overthrow.

Only I must not forget, that some make an offer at the Liturgies, which go
under the names of Basil and Chrysostom; as though these would help their cause.
But they do this but faintly, as knowing them to be, by Protestants, generally
branded for counterfeits; and that for many reasons, such as their opposites
count very cogent, in like case: Such being the order and matter of them, such
rites there used, such persons there mentioned, many words, many things
therein, that they cannot but ridiculously be ascribed to those great Persons,
or to any, in, or near their times. Our English Prelates formerly had no more
favor for them; take a taste thereof in Bishop White's censure of them: The
Liturgies, says he, Fathered upon St. Basil and St. Chrysostom, have a known
Mother (to wit, the late Roman Church;) but there is (besides many other just
exceptions) so great dissimilitude between the supposed Fathers and the
Children, that they rather argue the dishonest dealing of their Mother, than
serve as lawful witnesses, of that which the Adversary intends to prove by
them. Against Fisher p. 377. Indeed the Romanists are the great sticklers, for
the Legitimation of these Missals, seeing them full of those sores, which they
count the beauty of their Church. They are made use of, to countenance the
worship of Images and Altars, the Intercession and Invocation of Saints, the
Sacrifice of the Mass, the Real Presence, the Immaculate Conception of the
Virgin Mary, etc. And yet none of them have the confidence to affirm, that as
we have them now, they were the issue of those, on whom they are Fathered. Only
some, very loath quite to lose the advantages they would make of them, are
willing to supppose, that though they have suffered very great changes, by
additions, interpolations, inversions, substractions, etc. yet something may
yet remain therein of Basil's and Chrysostom's. But they give no reason, why
they suppose this, when it is necessary they should do it, in this case, if
any; since there are the same grounds, for the entire rejection of these
Liturgies, which they count (and many more than they count) sufficient for the
total rejecting of some others. If such groundless surmizes may be admitted, no
Brat, though evidently spurious, but will procure a Legitimation, in part at
least, if any can expect thereby to serve a turn; a way is hereby opened, for
an equal defense of the most impudent and pernicious forgeries, that the Church
has been pestered with. Some will be apt to suppose the like of the Liturgies,
Fathered upon Peter, James, Mark, and all the Apostles, in their pretended
Constitutions. Something therein may be theirs, and they may as reasonably
suppose it; for the Gospels, which went under the names of Peter, Those
mentioned in Synopsi Scripturae, in Athanas. tom. 2. p. 134. (...), etc.


James, Thaddeus, Thomas, Andrew, though they were changed and corrupted, yet
what was found therein consentient to Primitive and Catholic Doctrine, might
be the Apostles, and the substance of them of their composing. It Is true, those
Gospels were not received by the first Churches, but that makes no difference;
since neither were those Liturgies received by them, no nor known, or
mentioned, as we showed before, (and so not extant) till many Hundred years
after the Apostles times; and upon this account, their pretense to
Apostolicalness, is more ridiculous than that of the other. And they, who
received those spurious Liturgies so late, might, upon the same terms, have
admitted the forged Gospels, viz. changing and patching them, as they listed.
But enough of this before.

As for the Liturgies before us; those who will suppose something of them to be
Basil's or Chrysostom's, do not, cannot show us, what that is; nor do they, nor
can they, give us any Rule by which we may know it; and so it is not, it cannot
be known, that any Prayer in them is theirs, to whom the whole is entitled:
And therefore it cannot be hereby proved, that ever either of them composed any
Prayers, for the public use of others; much less that they prescribed any to
be used, in the same Form and Words. And so, if this shift were honest, and
safe, and reasonable; yet is it wholly unserviceable for the proof of
prescribed Liturgies. To be brief, It is manifest, in the genuine Writings of
both those Fathers, that they judged it necessary, to conceal and keep secret
the Sacramental Rites and Prayers (which is all that is considerable in those
Liturgies) from all but the Communicants: Now, they did not take the course to
conceal, but divulge them, if they writ and published those Liturgies, though but
for the common use of the Province or Diocese, where each of them presided; and
therefore, since we cannot conceive, that they would run counter to their
declared principles, it cannot be believed, that they were the Authors and
divulgers of those, or any other such Liturgies, or of any such Prayers in
them; and consequently, it is injurious to them, to Father these Missals (if
they were not otherwise so Leprous, and every way unlike them) upon these
Worthies.

And so I leave them, stufft so full with the corruptions of later times, that
none but those who are fond of such corruptions, and would fain have them,
right or wrong, of Ancient generous extract, can believe them to be the issue
of those Fathers; only let me interpose my conjecture, how it came to pass,
that Basil, Chrysostom, and Ambrose too, were accounted the Authors of
Liturgies, though neither themselves, nor any that lived with them, or near the
time in which they flourished, mention any such thing. It is recorded of each
of these persons, signally and peculiarly, that they introduced a new mode and
order of Singing, into the respective Churches, where they presided, never
there used before. Basil's new Psalmody, brought in by him to Caesarea, was
made more remarkable, by the offense taken thereat by the Clergy of
Neocaesarea, as an innovation in the Worship of God: He defends it, and gives
an account what it was, Epist. 63. (...): If the cause be asked of this
implacable and perpetual quarrel, they say, It is the Psalms, and the mode of
singing, altering the custom, which has been retained amongst us. And
afterward, (...), There was none of this (say they) in the time of Gregory the
Great. Now Basil denies not, but he had begun another way of singing, than they
had been accustomed to; but that it might appear, how little reason there was
to quarrel with him for it, he declares what it was, (...), etc. finally,
rising from Prayer, they betake themselves to singing, and sometimes the
Company being distributed into two parts, they answer one another in singing.
The First who brought up this mode of singing, (...), Theodoret Hist. l. 2.
cap. 24. p. 78. And by this it appears, that the account, which Socrates gives
of the Original hereof, is a fable, lib. 6. c. 8. and either not known, or not
believed by Theodoret, who yet was best acquainted with the customs of Antioch.


was Flavianus and Diodorus at Antioch, using it in their Conventicles, when
the Arians had possessed themselves of the public Churches, as Theodoret relates
it l. From thence it past to other places, and was first at Caesarea, practiced
by Basil.

Ambrose, who borrowed many other things of Basil, liked his Psalmody so well,
as he introduced it into the West, first using it in his Church at Non long
coeperat Mediolanensis Ecclesia genus hoc consolationis and exhortationis
celebrare, magno studio fratrum concinentium vocibus and cordibus. -- Et ex
illo in ho^^ernum retentum multis, jam ac pene omnibus gregibus tuis, and per
caetera orbis imitantibus, August. Confess. lib. 9. cap. 7. p. 221.


Milan, and this when Augustine was there, who assures us, from his own
knowledge, that it was not long since the practice there begun; Nimirum annus
erat, aut non multo amplius, cum Justina Valentiniani Regis pueri Matter hominem
tuum Ambrosium persequeretur haeresis suae causa; it was but a Year, or little
more (before Austin was leaving those parts) when Justina the Mother of the
young Emperor Valentinian persecuted the servant of God Ambrose, for her
Heresies sake (she being an Arian.) Excubabat pia plebs in ecclesia mori parata
cum Episcopo suo. Tunc Hymni and Psalmi, ut canerentur secundum morem
orientalium partium, ne populus moeroris ^aedio contabesceret, institutum est,
The Godly multitude did watch in the Church, ready to die with their Bishop;
then, lest the People should languish through the tediousness of their grief,
was the singing of Psalms and Hymns, after the mode of the Orient, instituted.
And from Milan, where Ambrose Antiphona in Ecclesia Mediolanensi celebrari
primum coeperunt, cujus celebritatis devotio, usque ad hodieruum diem, non
solum in eadem Ecclesia, vecum per omnes pene Occidentis provincias manet,
Paulin. vit. Ambros.

Besides, some Hymns were composed by Ambrose; of which, there is ancient and
sufficient testimony, though none such for the Prayers ascribed to him.


began it, did it pass into other Churches of the West. Paulinus testifies as
much in the Life of Ambrose.

And Chrysostom was the first that brought in this order of singing amongst the
Orthodox, in the Church at Constantinople, though the Arians had a little the
start of him in practicing it in the Streets; for there, in the Nights of the
Weekly Festivals, as Socrates calls Saturday and the Lord's day, l. 6. c. 8.
and (...) (which Sozomen adds) (...), they sung by course, l. c. (...), in
Socrat. ibid. Chrysostom, lest any of his Flock should be hereby enticed from
him, puts his People upon singing in the same manner, (...) (...); and upon
such an occasion the Orthodox, first taking up this mode of singing, continued
it till now, says he; (...), Soz. Hist. lib. 8. cap. 8. Now, as these three
Fathers were the first introducers of that way of singing, in their several
Churches; so it is further observable, that singing was anciently called (...).
So Chrysostom himself calls singing of Psalms, (...), Homil. in Psalm. 41. And
Theodoret calls that very mode of singing, which they in their respective
places first used, (...). Leontius his desire, that the Meletians would sing by
course in public, is thus expressed, (...), Hist. lib. 2. c. 24. p. 78.

So in Justinian's Code, (...), is said to be (...). And thus (...) is there
(...), L. 42.. 10. de Episc. and Cler.

Now, they being found Authors of that which is called Liturgia, this might
seem a sufficient ground, to account them the formers of Liturgies; and (...)
in after Ages, being used for a model of set Forms of Prayer and other
Administrations, those that found them accounted the Authors of Liturgies,
might easily mistake them to be the Authors of such a thing, as the word then
signified.

Nor will this seem improbable, if it be observed, that a Liturgy was actually
fathered upon James (called (...)) merely because Hegesippus in Eusebius styles
him (...), Vnde quidam putant opinionem natam, quod Jacobus primus missae ritum
instituerit, quem Hegesippus apud Eusebium primum ab Apostolis constitutum
fuisse Episcopum, and Liturgum dicit, says Cassander, Cassander, Liturgic. c.
6. p. 16. Egesippus apud Eusebium, de Jacobo inquit, eum ab Apostolis primum
constitutum fuisse Episcopum and Liturgum, i. e. sacrarum and divinarum rerum
Administratorem. Unde quidam putant opinionem natam, quod Jacobus primus missae
ritum instituerit.


in Liturgic. c. 6. Hence, some think, came the opinion, that James was the
first Author of a Missal; Hegesippus in Eusebius affirming, that he was by the
Apostles first made Bishop and Liturgus. And this might encourage those, whose
inclinations led them to father their own conceptions upon great and eminent
Persons; to compose such Forms, as are the Contents of those Liturgies, and
expose them under their Names.

Add hereto, that amongst the Latins in those Ages, when the framing and
counterfeiting of Liturgies was in fashion, almost every part of them went
under the name of Cantus, not the Prayers excepted. So Componuntur missae, sive
preces, vel orationes, sive commendationes, sive manus impositiones, ex quibus
si nulla decantentur in Ecclesia, vacant omnia officia ecclesiastica, Conc.
Tolet. 4. c. 12.


Syn. Tolet. 4. can. 12. all the several Offices and Prayers by name, pass
under the notion of Singing. The Law of Charles the Great, imposing the
Gregorian Office upon the Churches in his Dominions, is in these terms, Vt
secundum ordinem and morem Ecclesiae Romanae fiat cantatus, Capit. l. 6. c.
225. So when Durandus would tell us what Liturgies they had in the primitive
Church, all is comprised under Cantare; In primitiva tamen Ecclesia diversi
diversa quisque pro suo velle cantabant, Rational. l. 5. c. 2. p. 139. In the
primitive Church, several Men sung several things, according as every one
would. And Belethus after him, in primitiva Ecclesia diversi diversa cantabant,
quisque pro suo libitu. Expl. diver. Offic. cap. 19.

Now those, who were the introducers of a particular way of singing in their
Churches, might thus come to be accounted the Authors of Liturgies for them,
when these were expressed and understood by cantus, and cantare became
equivalent with (...) in its modern signification. And it will be hard for
them, who ascribe a Liturgy to Jer^me, to give any better account to the World
than this, why they do so. It was believed, that by his means, the same mode
and order of singing was first used at Rome. That Ut Alleluiah hic diceretur,
de Hierosolymorum ecclesia, ex Beati Hieronymi traditione, tempore beatae
memoriae Damasi Papae traditur, tractum. Gregor. M. l. 7. Epist. 63.


Alleluiah, after the Eastern mode, was by his advice there sung; and the
Doxology, secundum usum Secundum Antiochiae usum, in sine omnium psalmorum,
Gloria Patri Romae cantare, eo^instante, coeptum est..... do emendante Roma
legendos canendosque in ecclesia 70 Psalmos suscepit, Marian. vita Hieronym.

Pati item charitatem tuam, ut, sicut a creatore tuo Alexandro coepiscopo
nostro didicisti in gremio Graecorum psallere: ita ad nos tua fraternitas
dirigere delectetur, Epist. Damasi, in operibus Hieronymi, tom. 9. p. 219.
edit. Marian.


Antiochiae, where, as I showed before, Singing by course was first invented;
and that Pope Damasus writ to him for his direction, how the Grecians mode of
singing might be practiced at Rome. Hence Durandus says, cantum ordinavit, and
nothing else, but an Order for reading the Scripture. So, upon these grounds,
an Ecclesiasticum Officium is ascribed to him, and he is made the Author of a
Liturgy, made up in time of a Lectionary, an Antiphonary, and a Sacramentary,
as Pamelius represents it.

These forementioned, were the most eminent Persons, both in East and West, in
those times, when the Church flourished with Persons of greatest eminency, for
Learning and Oratory. Now, when Liturgies were all in all, (the happiness of
the ancient Church, and the excellency of its Pastors in Preaching and Praying,
being turned by the lamentable degeneracy of the following Ages, into Et
postremo, omnes ordines, majores and minores, tandem transformati sunt in
lectores and cantatores: quid enim aliud quotidie agunt? Chemnit. exam. Pars 2.
p. 415.


Chanting and Reading) it behoved those, who were Zealous for their honor,
they having no worth of their own, to borrow or Restincto inde valde studiorum
omnium ac religionis apud ^os ardore, in paucis ejusmodi preculis, earumque
fere sola recitatione, nimis segniter, vulgo amant acquiescere and immori,
Hoornb. sum. controv. l. 11. de Graec. p. 886.


steal some for them, from great names; and to have them thought of noble
descent, that the meanness of their true and lawful Parents might not discredit
them. In these circumstances, a smaller matter, than I have insisted on, would
serve to prove their title and pretense to an extract so honorable. This might
well encourage some to entitle their Liturgies to those Worthies, and call them
their Fathers, and might persuade others, who were willing enough to have it so
(for the credit of their Churches that used them) to believe it was so indeed.
But this, as I said, is but my conjecture; but whether it were so or otherwise,
let others judge, as they see reason. It suffices me, that these Liturgies are
spurious, and so generally accounted, in a manner by all, but those, who are
engaged in a cause that needs such a defense; and to uphold their trade, must
deal in false Wares, and so see cause to plead for them, against very much of
that reason, a little of which they themselves count a sufficient evidence of
forgery, in cases, where such an interest is not concerned.

The next Authority I meet with, is the Fifteenth Canon of the Vinetick Synod,
in which Six Bishops, toward the conclusion of the Fifth Age, made this
Decree, Rectum quoque duximus, ut vel intra Provinciam nostram, sacrorum ordo
and psallendi una sit consuetudo; We have also thought it right, that, as to
the order of Sacred Administrations and Singing, there be August. Ep. ad
Januar. 118. c. 6. Apostolus de hoc sacramento loquens, statim subiexuit:
Caetera cum venero ordinabo; unde intelligi datur (quia multum erat ut in
Epistola totum illum agendi ordinem insinuaret, quam universa per orbem servat
ecclesia) ab ipso ordinatum esse, quod nulla morum variatur diversitate. vid.
Three positions about Public Prayers.


one custom through our Province. What is intended here by ordo sacrorum, may
be best understood by the Council of Agatha, being a Synod of the same Country,
held not long after this of Vannes, that in the beginning of the Sixth Age, an.
506. this in the latter end of the Fifth. There Can. 21. Et quia convenit,
ordinem ecclesiae ab omnibus aequaliter custodiri, statuendum est (sicut ubique
fit) ut post Antiphonas, collationes, ab Episcopis vel Presbyteris, dicantur.
Et Hymni matutini vel vespertini decantentur diebus omnibus, and in conclusione
matutinarum vel vespertinarum, and missarum, post Hymnos, capitula de Psalmis
dicantur, and plebs collecta oratione ad vesperam ab Episcopo cum benedictione
dimittatur, Council. Agath. Can. 21.


Ordo ecclesiae ab omnibus aqualiter custodiendus, is the disposing of the
Responsals, Prayers, Hymns, and Psalms, each in the place thought most fit
(according to Augustin's definition of Ordo, est parium dispariumque rerum,
suae cuique loca tribuens, dispositio, Civ. Dei. l. 19. c. 13.) and so, applied
to Sacred Administrations, Ordo, established by a Synod, if it reached all
particulars, will amount to no more, than a Rubric or Directory. One and the
same might be observed by all the Churches in a Province, in all Offices, yea
and in Prayers too; though the same expressions were not used, nor those that
officiated, at all tied up to Words and Syllables: For example; If, in the
common Office (at which all might be present) they began with Psalms, and then
read some part of the Law, or Prophets, and next some part of an Epistle, or of
the Gospels, and afterward proceeded to the Sermon; the same order was
observed, Hic ordo psallendi, is not qui Psalmi, but quot; requires not the
same, but so many Psalms to be used, Syn. Turon. 2. c^n. 19. in Crab. 14. in
Caranza. A Council in the same Country with the former, an. 570.

Cyril Catech. Mystag. 5. p. 259. Vidistis Diaconum (...).

(...).

Postea clamat Sacerdos, (...), p. 240.
Vos deinde respondetis, (...).
Dicit deinde Sacerdos, (...).
Vos dicitis, (...).
(...), quae in Spiritu Sancto canebat Esaias, circumstantia Thronum Dei --
atque dicentia, Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus Dominus Deus Sabbath -- sic per
ejusmodi Hymnos nos ipsos sanctificames, Deum benignissimum oramus, (...).


though the same Psalms were not always sung, nor the same Lesson twice in a
Year, and the same Sermon never twice Preached: So for the Prayers, if
according to the order specified, Con. Laodic. Can. 18. first Prayers were made
for the Catechumens, then for the Penitents, after that for the Faithful. And,
if in that office peculiar to the Faithful, the Prayers be ordered, as Augustine
thought the Apostles method was, Epist. 59. so as first Prayer be made for all
sorts; then the Deinde, postquam confectum est illud Spirituale Sacrificium,
and ille cultus incruentus super ipsa propitiationis hostia, (...). Then
follows what Rivet says, is interpolated, (...), primum Patriarcharum, (...),
Apost^lorum Martyrum; (...), deinde pro defunctis, etc. p. 241.

(...), Lord's Prayer which he expounds, 242, 243. Expleta oratione dicit (...).

Sacerdos postea dicit, (...) vos respondetis, (...), deinde audistis
psallentem, ac ad communionem adhortantem, (...). Accedens ad communionem,
ostendit quomodo, etc. (...).

Postremo exaltata oratione (...), qui te tantis mysteriis divinum reddidit.


Elements be Consecrated; after that the People Blessed; and the Elements being
distributed, all be concluded with Thanksgiving: The same order of Prayer is
observed, though the same Prayers be no more used, than the same Psalms or
Lessons always, or the same Sermon more than once. And the same is to be
understood of the 27. Can. Con. Epam. an. 517. in Bl.

But, if I minded not the discovery of the truth, more than upholding of my
opinion, or disproving of yours; I would grant, that by Ordo is understood a
Liturgy with prescribed Prayers; and it would be a great disadvantage to your
cause, to grant it; for here is a plain signification, they had no such Liturgy
before, and the Original hereof from Six Bishops, in one Province of France,
where Fifteen or Seventeen, and this not till the latter end of the Fifth Age,
when all (...).

And this is all, which I can find alleged in behalf of these Liturgies for
Five hundred Years after Christ, that is considerable, unless the Hymns
Benedicite and Te Deum may be counted worthy of consideration: And so perhaps
they may be accounted, if not otherwise, yet in respect of the Persons, that so
make use of them.

But the inference is not good, from Forms of Hymns to Forms of Prayer; much
less from arbitrary Forms of Hymns, to prescribed Forms of Prayer, or
Liturgies. Hymns are more elaborate, require more Art and Ornament than
Prayers: and therefore, those who are not for set Forms of Prayer, if they
admit Hymns of humane and ordinary composition, see reason to have them in
Forms, and not without premeditation. And their Opposites will not deny them
here more needful.

Nor will the Inference hold, from prescribed Hymns to prescribed Liturgies,
from a small part (for which there is a different reason) to the whole Ex. Gr.
If Nicephorus his report were true, lib. 14. cap. 46. that Theodosius Junior,
with his Sister Pulcheria, enjoined the (...) (a Hymn of six or eight Words) to
be sung throughout the World (which yet he makes questionable, by adding such a
Legend of its miraculous original) could it be inser'd from thence, that they
enjoined the whole World the same Liturgy? Besides, Hymns there were prescribed
and so used ( viz. the Psalms of David, and others of Divine Inspiration) in
the Apostles times, when all our Liturgists in a manner, acknowledge there were
no prescribed Liturgies.

As for those two Hymns alleged, there is no evidence, that they were imposed,
or so much as used, in any time, which will serve to prove the Antiquity of
those Liturgies, which is pretended, or any which is for their reputation. That
which begins with Te Deum, is found by the great Epist. ante diatribam de
Symbolo, p. 2.


Usher, in some Ancient Manuscripts ascribed to Nicetius (who, if it be he of
Triers, lived till after an. 565.) He concurs herein with Menardus, that it is
not mentioned in any Author antienter than the Rules which Benet writ for the
Monks of his Order, which was about the middle of the Sixth Age, as may be
collected from Baronius; and those Rules had their first public approbation,
an. 595. How long after this, that Hymn came to be used in the Church, and when
it was thought fit to be imposed, is not worth the inquiring.

The other, called the Song of the Three Children, I have no where discovered,
before the Fourth Council of Toledo. It is mentioned, Can. 13. as used before,
but then first imposed, an. 633. Such like Hymns were so far from being
generally prescribed in the former Ages, that the use of them is forbidden in
Public, by Synods, both in the Greek and Latin Church. Conc. Laod. Can. ult.
(...): that private (or uncanonical) Psalms ought not to be used in the Church,
neither Books that are not Canonical, but only the Canonical (Books) of the Old
and New Testament. Where (...) seems by the clause following, to be opposed to
(...), as writings (...) are, by the Apostle, 2 Pet. 1. 20, 21. opposed to
those of Divine Inspiration. So that the Fathers of Laodicea, as they prohibit
any Books but those that were Canonical; so do they forbid any Psalms or Hymns,
save such as were of Divine Inspiration, to be used in the Churches; and the
Canons of this Synod were received by the Church, amongst her universal Rules.
Add hereto, Conc. Boncar. 1. an. 565. can. 30. Extra Psalmos ve^eris Testamenti
nihil poetice compositum in Ecclesia psallatur, Besides the Psalms of the Old
Testament, let nothing Poetically composed be sung in the Church.

Thus I have given an account of the Testimonies produced for the Antiquity of
the Liturgies in question, and of all that I have met with, after endeavors to
meet with all, having waved none, wherein there might be conceived to be any
strength, or wherein I could perceive any show of it. What opinion others may
have hereof, I will not conjecture: For my own part, after a careful observance
of whatever might seem to have any force or evidence, for that purpose; I may
profess, that (as this was it, which First swayed my Judgment to that part of
the question, wherein it now rests; so still) I am very well satisfied, even by
these Testimonies, (...), Isidor. l. 5. Ep. 501.


that there was no such thing, as that for which they are alleged. To me there
needs no more Arguments, nor (if I much mistake not) will more be very needful
to any other, whose minds are not prepossessed with something too hard for
their reason. For if there had been such Liturgies used constantly in all
Churches through the World, for Five hundred or Six hundred Years next after
Christ, it is not imaginable, but there would have been such remarkable traces,
yea such clear evidence in some, yea in many of the Ancients (especially the
Writers being so numerous, their Writings left us so full and Voluminous, and
the occasions of mentioning them so very frequent) that there might have been
had as full and clear proof thereof, and with as much ease, as of any one
thing, whose antiquity has been questioned. Now, when many have curiously
searched antiquity for this, and being pricked on by opposition, have pursued
the search with great industry, under a quick sense too how much they are
concerned herein, and being withal, Persons of as great ability for the
discovery, as any we can expect will attempt it, diverse of them seeming as well
acquainted with what is obvious in antiquity (which is all that is needful in
this case) as with their own Lodgings, and some of them no strangers to her in
her Retirements and less traced Recesses; after they have, (as they tell us,
and we might have believed it, if they had not said so) made the fairest proof
thereof they can, yet produce nothing, which any that are impartial can
account, or which I am apt to think they themselves can believe to be
sufficient proof, (if their belief were beholding to nothing but their reason:)
May it not be hence reasonably concluded, that what, in these circumstances, is
not now discovered, was not then extant? Such Liturgies used every where, for
so many Hundred years, are a matter of that nature, which would have been
obvious at a superficial view, and of easy proof to such as have no intimate
acquaintance with antiquity. If then, we can have no intelligence thereof from
those who may think themselves wronged, if they be not counted her Secretaries;
if no discovery thereof be made by that diligence which has ransacked all the
corners, penetrated the inwards, and dived to the bottom of antiquity for it:
What ground is there to expect any discovery thereof hereafter? What reason is
there left us to believe any other, but that such search has been for a thing
that was not, and that the supposed Liturgies of those Ages had no being, but
in the imagination of later times?

And now, I may from the premises conclude, That for Five hundred Years after
Christ (if not more) the ordinary way of worshipping God in public Assemblies,
was not by prescribed Liturgies.

Instead of a more particular discovery of their introduction, this may
suffice, and is enough for my purpose, that they were not the common usage,
while the state of the Church was any thing tolerable, nor till it was sunk
deep into degeneracy, and was much worse than when Chrysostom complained,
(...), Hom. 29. in Act. p. 776, 777. The Church is in an exceeding bad posture;
and compares it to one laid out for dead, (...), etc. in 2 Cor. Hom. 7. p. 692.
And again to a House quite burnt down, having taken Fire at the Pillars, which
should have supported it, in Ephesians. Hom. 10. p. 816. where he says, it was many
a day since the Church through the World was overturned, and laid flat on the
Ground, all being equally involved in evil, but those that were its Rulers more
guilty than others; (...) (...), p. 817. And elsewhere represents it to us, by
a Woman (...), Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. Hom. (...). p. 487. And this, as Isidore adds,
(...), and l. 5. Ep. 21. (...).


robbed of her Jewels and Treasure, having nothing left, but (...), some poor
empty significations of what precious things once she had, in 1 Cor. Hom. 36.
p. 487, 488. In which he is followed by (...), etc. Isid. l. 3. Ep. 408. vid.
lib. 2. Ep. 5.


Isidore of Peleusium, lib. 3. Epist. 408. Zenoni.

Particularly the degeneracy of the Church was lamentable, as on many other
accounts, so (to wave those that are less pertinent to the business in hand) in
respect of Worship, and the Persons who ordered and administered it.

The Worship of God was First fearfully corrupted; the native plainness and
simplicity of it ((...)) most amiable to God, and all that are like him (...),
Orig. (...), etc. Origin* contr. Cells. l. 7. p. 367.


contr. Cells. l. 8. p. 418. was vitiated and defaced with the Paint and Patches
of bold and wanton Fancies.

The Law of God, the only Rule and Standard of Divine Worship, was overlooked
in the regulating of it; and that offered to God at a venture, whether it
pleased him or no, which was pleasing to Men; without consulting his word, by
which alone is known, what is (...), Chrysostom. in Matthew. Hom.... p. 323.


acceptable to him.

There were more compliances with the Heathens, than with the Scripture; and so
the Church too far from being, as, Origin says, what God, in sending Christ and
the Gospel, designed them to be, (...), Congregations opposite to the
Assemblies of the superstitious, Contr. Cells. l. 3. p. 123.

The Christian Worship was made more Ceremonious than that of the Jews, and
clogged oneribus servilibus, with more badges of Thraldom; whereby the state of
Christians was rendered far more intolerable, than theirs under the Law: Their
impositions being from the Pleasure of God, but these from the Will of
presumptuous Men, inthralling that Religion, which God in mercy would have had
free. As Sed hoc nimis doleo, quia multa quae in divinis libris saluberrima
praescripta sunt, minus curantur; and tam multis praesumptionibus sic plena
sunt omnia, ut gravius corripiatur, qui per octavas suas terrdm nudo pede
tetigerit, quam qui mentem vinolentia sepelierit -- quamvis enim neque hoc
inveniri possit, quo modo contra sidem sint, ipsam tamen religionem quam
paucissimis and manifestissimis celebrationum sacramentis, MISERICORDIA DEI
LIBERAM ESSE VOLUIT, SERVILIBUS ONERIBUS premunt, ut tolerabilior sit conditio
Judaeorum, qui etiamsi tempus libertatis non agnoverint, legalibus tamen
sarcinis, non humanis praesumptionibus subjiciuntur, August. Epist. 119.
Januario, c. 19.


Augustine, complaining thereof, expresses it; For one Institution of God's,
there were Ten of Man's, and their presumptuous Devices more rigorously
pressed, than the Divine prescripts: So that, if the whole had been
denominated, from what was predominant therein, it was in danger to lose the
name of Divine Worship.

Nay, some of the most horrid Vid. Theodoret. de curand. Graec. affect. l. 9.

(...), Theodor. Lect. Collect. l. 2. p. 189. (...), Cedren. Comp. Histor. p.
299. Nolite consectari turbas imperitorum, qui vel in ipsa vera religione
superstitiosi sunt -- novi multos esse sepulchrorum and picturarum adoratores,
Augustine l. 1. de moribus Eccles. Cathol. cap. 34.


abuses were invading it; Invocation of Saints, Adoring of Pictures, and giving
Divine Honors to the Creatures. After such company, those Forms found
entertainment. So was the Worship of God adulterated, and the corruptions still
increasing and growing worse, before these became the high way of Worshipping.
And by it, the rest became general and incurable errors and abuses, before but
private and voluntary; being hereby Authorized and Enforced.

This was, after all the great Lights of the Church were extinct. Such
Liturgies were not (...), but (...), as Basil in another case, de jejun. Hom.
1. a later invention; after those, whom we honor under the notion of Fathers,
were dead and gone, (...) ( Clem. Alex. strom. 1.) Their Successors (who may
glory therein) were nothing like them, but too commonly under the Character of
Boniface, Lignei Sacerdotes; Multa denique de cultu divino usurpata sunt, quae
honoribus deferuntur humanis: sive humilitate nimia, sive adulatione pestifera:
ita tamen, ut quibus ea deferuntur, homines haberentur qui dicuntur colendi and
venerandi: si autem iis multum additur, and adorandi, Id. de civit. Dei. l. 10.
cap. 4.

Isidore ascribes the lamentable condition of the Church to the degeneracy of
Pastors, (...), Isid. lib. 5. ep. 21. Id. l. 3. ep. 223. Horrid corruption of
the Clergy, lib. 5. ep. 131.

(...), Chrysostom. Hom. 37. Tom. 6. p. 442.

(...), Isid. l. 5. ep. 272.

Adding, (...) -- either so indulgent (...).

(...) Orat. 28.


and though so much of another temper than those that went before them, yet
served the better for this turn, being imperious, or slothful, or insufficient.

Prelacy was declining into tyranny long before; and Bishops in many places,
grew insolent and intolerable, forgetting that they were ordained Naz. Orat. 1.
p. 3.
(...), not to exercise dominion over the Flock, but to take charge of Souls.
The stirrings of this domineering humor were complained of in part of the
Fourth, and beginning of the Fifth Ages; and shooting up daily and speedily, we
may guess to what height it might come by an Hundred years growth. Nazianzen
complains in his time of Prelates, who, when they had overrun all things else
with violence, in fine tyrannized over piety it self, (...), Orat. 21. in Laud.
Arbanas.
and wishes, that there were no Pr^lacy in the Church, not only under the
notion of local pre-eminence, (...), but of tyrannical prerogative, Orat. 28.
(...).

Their tyranny was one thing, if Erasmus mistake not, which drove Jerome out of
the World into a Cell. To be sure Chrysostom, so rigorously persecuted for
endeavoring to reform the then prevailing corruptions, professed that he
feared none so much as Bishops, (...), vid. Ep. 2. p. 64.
Epist. 13. p. 95. And Arcadius puts one of them in mind, viz. Theophilus of
Alexandria, that the audaciousness and tyranny of the Bishops before him had
ruined the Nation, and dispersed the people through the World, (...), in Georg.
Alexand. vit. Chrysostom. c. 39. p. 212.

So in Isidore Pelusiota After instances of great degeneracy, he adds, (...),
Isid. l. 5. ep. 21.

He says he accuses not all, there were some (...), but very few, ( ep. 89.)
and those guilty, because such was the multitude of the (...), that they were
afraid, and durst not speak against them.

Though things seemed desperate, yet there might be some hopes of better, if the
(...), the Chief in the Church (...), l. 5. ep. 126. Bishops tyranny hindered
Reformation, which was otherwise fesible, though to some it seemed impossible.

Those who observed the Apostles rule were (...), l. 5. ep. 89.

(...), l. 3. ep. 223. vid. Having showed in many particulars (...), ibid.

Some except against Socrates, as a Novatian. But who can except against
Isidore, who represents it worse, and complains of it as general, supra, lib.
5. ep. 21. and l. 3. ep. 223. Though they affected the grandeur of Princes, yet
were upbraided by their Piety, l. 5. ep. 89. ep. 286. (...), l. 5. c. 2. ep.
234. l. 4. ep. 229. p. 255.


Episcopacy, as diverse exercised it, is (...), a ty rannical licentiousness,
because they turned it into domination, or rather to speak freely, into
tyranny; (...), Epist. (ad Theodos.) 125. lib. 2.

The chiefest of them made bold to leap over the just bounds of their Place and
Office, (...), to secular domination, as Socrates tells us, Hist. lib. 7. c. 7.
etc. 11. And as there is his Testimony for those of Rome and Alexandria, so
have we the Fear of the Fathers at Ephesus for others, (...), lest under the
pretense of a sacred Function, the pride (haughtiness) of secular power should
creep in, Can. in Cod. 178. Also the observation of the Council of Chalcedon,
(...), Can. 12. that some, against the Ecclesiastical Rules, did affect
domination.

Ad Spiritualem (monarchiam) captum est aspirari palam and aperte, a nonullis
Paparum, circa an. 400. Casaub. exercit. 16. number. 209. p. 541. vid. exerc. 15.
p. 302.

Circa An. Dom. 420. primo Zosimus, deinde Bonifacius, duo Praecoces
Hildebranduli, Reges agere incipiunt, and (...) dominium exercere adversus
electos in spiritualibus, etc. id. ibid.

Vid. Hom. 2. in Tit. 1. 5. p. 386.

(...), Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. Hom. 6. p. 277, 278. and in Ephesians. Hom. 6. p. 792. That
of Chrysostom was forgot, (...), Hom. 18. p. 647. in 2 Cor.


The Bishops of Rome affected it with a witness, asserting and contending for a
Supremacy over all other Churches; and were so impotently zealous for it, as
they attempted to get it acknowledged by a gross forgery used by Zosimus,
Boniface and Celestine, to a Tom. 2. Conc.
Council in Africa; by Leo also in his Letters to Theodosius the Emperor; and
by his Legate to the Council of Chalcedon, Act. 16. Tom. 2. Conc.

Nor did the Bishops of Rome domineer alone in the West; other Prelates acted,
in lower capacities, answerably, as appears by Prosper, complaining of the
Bishops in his time, as if they made account, that for this alone they had
their power, that they might exercise a De vit. contempl. l. 1. c. 21.
tyrannical dominion over those who were under them, Ad hoc potentes tantum
facti, ut nobis in subjectos tyrannicam dominationem vendicemus. Such and worse
was the tyranny and imperiousness of Bishops, before they conspired to take
order, that none should use a word in public Prayers, at the most solemn
administrations, but what, and as they thrust it into their Mouths.

Nor was this, before those who ordered and administered the public Worship,
were grown negligent, and slothful, easing themselves of the chief duties of
Pastors, viz. Those which were laborious and required any intense exercise of
their faculties. Particularly, it was, after diligent and frequent peaching
(which was the happiness, even of the Fourth, and part of the Fifth Age, and
their security too, (some stop being hereby put to that degeneracy into which
all was sliding down) and the excellency also of those Bishops, who were the
lights and ornaments of those times,) was growing out of fashion. When that of
Maximus was too true, Qui reipsa doceant aut doceantur admodum pauci. When
those, who had the charge of Souls, declined the work, but were eager after the
power, profits and dignity of the place; and so retaining the name of Pastors,
were really no such thing: Which Prosper thus bewails, But we (modestly
including himself, that they who were guilty might take less exception)
delighted with things present, while we hunt after the advantages and honors
of this life, make all have to be Prelates, not Sed nos praesentibus delectati,
dum in hac vita commoda nostra and honores inquirimus, non ut meliores, sed ut
ditiores; non ut sanctiores, sed ut honoratiores simus, praeesse festinamus.
Nec gregem Domini, qui nobis pascendus tuendusque commissus est; sed nostras
voluptates, dominationem, divitias, and caetera blandimenta carnaliter
cogitamus. Pastores dici v^lumus, nec tamen esse contendimus. Officii nostri
vitamus laborem; appetimus utilitatem and dignitatem. And after, Greges Domini
pascendos, Pastores facti, suscipimus: and nosmet ipsos pascimus, quando non
Gregum utilitati prospicimus, sed quod foveat and augeat nostras voluntates
attendimus. Lac and lanas ovium Christi, oblationibus quotidianis, aut decimis
fidelium gaudentes, accipimus: and curam pascendorum gregum ac resiciendorum a
quibus perverso ordine volumus pasci, deponimus, de vit. contempl. l. 1. c. 2.


that we may be Better, but Richer; nor that we may be more Holy, but more
Honored. Neither do we regard the Lord's Flock, which is committed to us, to
be fed and preserved; but we carnally (mind) our pleasures, domination, riches,
and other allurements. We will be called Pastors, but we strive not to be such.
We decline the labor of our office, affecting (only) the profit and dignity,
etc. This way of Worship was well suited to the humors of such Pastors; and
they were more thoroughly and generally of this temper, in Prosper's time,
before it could have free entertainment.

The lamentable insufficiency of those, who took up this Ministration, we may
judge of, by the noted Ambros. de Sacerd. dignit. cap. 5. Qui mentis torpore
hebetati Sacerdotalem diffamant dignitatem.


defectiveness of those times, part whereof were in this respect, incomparably
better. The unworthiness of those who were preferred, is noted by Ambrose,
Nazianzen, Nazianz. Orat. Funeb. Athanas. (...), etc. vid.

and Orat. in laud. Basilii, where he says the holy Order was in danger to be
rendered most ridiculous -- and the Bishops Chair, not for the most Worthy, but
most Potent.


and almost every one, who was not obnoxious. Not only the Pride, but the
Ignorance of the Western Bishops, and some of the chief of them, is censured by
Basil, Damasus is included in that censure of Basil. Siricius passes for a dull
and sluggish Person; a Simpleton in Jerome, simplicitati illuderet Episcopi,
Epist. 16. and sluggish even in Baronius, causam fidei segnius tractans, in
Spond. ad an. 397. n. 6. And Innocentius, if we may believe Erasmus (passing
that judgment on him for a piece, wherein he might be presumed to have shown
his best) had nothing in him worthy of his place. Yet we can scarce find two of
the Bishops of Rome in Three hundred years, better accomplished than these.
What were the lesser Lights commonly, when the greater were so dim?


(...) Epist. p. 285.
(...); What belief can be expected from the superciliousness of the West,
where they neither know the truth, nor will learn? The condition of the East
was not much better, for a little after we hear from Sozomen and others, that
Asia and the parts about it were sick of their unworthy Bishops, (...), and
languished under the want of such as were really Pastors.

In the Diocese of the Orient, Chrysostom What better could be expected, when
the Dignity was put to sale, and he carried it too commonly, not who had the
richest Soul, but fullest Purse? So in the West. Ambrose complains in the East,
(...), Chrysostom. in Ephesians. Hom. 6. p. 793. 9. vid. Isid. l. 5. ep. 276. 470.

Vt vides in Ecclesia pessimos, quos non merita, sed pecuniae ad episcopatus
ordinem pervexerunt. Ambr. de dign. Sac. cap. 5.


complains that the unworthy were preferred, and those fitly qualified cast
out; (...), a double misery equally grievous; (...), de Sacerdot. Orat. 3. p.
24, 25. Tom. 6. vid. Isidor. l. 5. p. 276. (...); not because there are none
such, (...), Isid. lib. 5. ep. 276. l. 3. ep. 245. If they endeavor to reduce
but a mean person, they are hissed at, as those who are guilty of greater evils
themselves. (...), ibid. ep. 27. etc. Ancient Discipline neglected, the
Virtuous oppressed, the Wicked indulged, ep. 426. l. 3. ep. 259. (...), because
he must either be evil, or hated and endangered if good, by those who observed
pernicious custom as a Divine Law, and expelled those that lived well, ep. 481.
l. 5. How Episcopacy degenerately abused, l. 2. ep. 50. Those Rulers generally
worst, ep. 71.

In Egypt, (...), Soz. lib. 8. c. 7. p. (...) Georg. Alex. vit. Chrysostom.
cap.... p. 202. 632.

(...), Chrysostom. Epist. 2.

(...), id. ibid. cap. 20. p. 185. Georg. Alex.


it was the custom of Theophilus of Alexandria (without whom no Bishop was to
be ordained in those parts) to consecrate not knowing Men, (...), unless he
missed of his aim; choosing rather to have the ordering of them, as of Fools,
than to be liable to the control of any that were prudent: A thing which would
scarce have past as credible upon the word of George of Alexandria, had not
Palladius said as much before him.

And, as he in Egypt would have none, so they in Africa could scarce get any
that were sit to be Pastors: For so Aurelius Bishop of Carthage, in a Council
there Assembled, An. 401. complains, That so great was their want of Ministers,
as many Churches were found to have not so much as one Euscbius of Peleusium
did as bad or worse, ordaining not only (...), ep. 81. lib. 3. himself being
(...), epist. 3. but (...), l. 5. ep. 52, 53, 54. (...), ep. 140. (...), ep.
147.


illiterate Deacon; and leaves them to consider, at what a loss they must needs
be, for persons qualified to be superior Officers, when they could not find
such as were fit to be Communi periculo providendum, maxim^, quia tanta
indigentia Clericorum est, multaeque Ecclesiae ita desertae sunt, ut ne unum
quidem Diaconum, vel inliteratum (Graec. (...)) habere reperiantur. Nam de
caeteris superioribus gradibus tacendum arbitror, quia, ut dixi, si ministerium
Diaconi facile non invenitur, multo magis superiorum honorum inveniri non
posse, certissimum est, and quotidie nos planctus diversarum pene emortuarum
plebium jam non sustinemus: quibus nisi fuerit aliquando subventum, gravis
nobis, and inexcusabilis innumerabilium animarum pereuntium causa apud Deum
mansura est, in Cod. Afr. can. 56. in Justell. p. 164. in Crab. Council. tom. 1.
p. 502, 503.


Deacons.

And Augustine tells us, there were many good Pastors, who could not discern,
per ignorantiae simplicitatem, through their ignorance and simpleness, when
there was Heresy in a Prayer; but made use of such as were Heretical,
accounting them to be good, de Bapt. contr. Donat. l. 6. c. 25.

Yea many Bishops there were, (and many more consequently of lower rank,) who
knew Helius Episcopus Hadrianopolitanus definiens subscripsi per Romanum
Episcopum Myronum, eo quod nesciam literas. Caiumus Episcopus Phoenicensis
definiens subscripsi per Coepiscopum meum Dionysium, propterea quod literas
ignorem, Council. Ephesians. 2. in Act. 1. Chalced. Conc. in Crab. Tom. 1. p. 830.
So amongst others, Conc. Ephesians. 1. Patricius Presbyter de vico Paradioxilo,
manu utens Maximi compresbyteri, ob hoc, quod literas ignorarem. Zenon
Chorepiscopus -- manum accommodavi pro eo ego Flavius Palladius, ob hoc quod
praesens dixerit literas se ignorare, in Act. 1. Con. Chalced. in Crab. p. 816.
Theodorus Gadorensis per alterius manum, i. e. Aetherii Diaconi, in Gr. can.
Aetherius the Deacon subscribed, (...), which is likely the cause, though not
expressed, why those that were present, subscribed by others; of which see
instances, Con. Ephesians. 2. in Cr. p. 831. Con. Constantinop. sub Flaviano, contra
Eutych. in Cr. p. 781. and Conc. Ephesians. 1. in Conc. Chalc. Act. 1. Crab. p. 819,
820.

^antinus Zenensis literas nescit, collect. Carth. d. 1. n. 133.


no Letters, and could not so much as write their own Names, but were glad to
get others to subscribe for them, even in Councils, where, we may think, such
insufficiency would have been ashamed to show it self, if it had not been too
common.

Not to be tedious, Leo the Emperor, about An. 460. is commended, as having
well provided, that the Church should have able Bishops, because he would have
none Ordained, but those who had learnt their Psalter; (...). Theodor. lect.
collect. lib. 1.
Such was the state of the Church, as to the sufficiency of her prime Guides
before the Sixth Age, and much worse afterward, when they steered this course
in their Worship; all sorts of Learning, together with Holiness, declining
apace. And Barbarism, Ignorance and Vitiousness more and more prevailing. Under
such Planets were those Liturgies born, and by their influence nourished.

To conclude, They were not entertained, till nothing was admitted into the
Church, de novo, but Corruptions, or the issues thereof; no change made in the
Ancient Usages, but for the worse; no motions from its Primitive Posture, but
downwards into degeneracy! Till such orders took place, as respected not what
was most agreeable to the rule and primitive Practice, or what was best to
uphold the life and power of Religion in its solemn exercises, or what might
secure it from that dead heartless formality, into which Christianity was
sinking, and which is at this day the sediment of Popery: But what might show
the Power, and continue occasion for exercise of Authority to the imperious and
tyrannical; or what might comport with the ease of the lazy and slothful; or
what might favor the weakness and insufficiency, and not detect the lameness
and nakedness of those, who had the Place Sentio, negligente me, crescit
sentina vitiorum, and tempestate fortiter obviante, jam jamque putridae
naufragium tabulae ^onant. Gregor. 1.

(...), Chrysostom. ep. 1. p. 51.

(...), epist. (...). p. 115.

(...), Epist. ^on. p. 186.


and Name, but not the real accomplishments of Pastors and Teachers. In a word,
nor till the state of the Church was rather to be pitied than imitated; and
what was discernable therein, different from preceding times, were Wrecks and
Ruins, rather than Patterns.

FINIS.
An ADVERTISEMENT. Lately PUBLISHED of the same Author's,
PRimitive Episcopacy, evincing from Scripture and Ancient Records, that a
Bishop in the Apostles Times, and for the space of the first three Centuries of
the Gospel Church, was no more than a Pastor to one single Church or
Congregation. With the Contents of each Chapter at the End of the Book. Printed
for N. P. and are to be sold by Jonathan Robinson at the Golden-Lion in S.
Paul' s Churchyard. 1689.


