A CLEAR PROOF OF THE CERTAINTY and USEFULNESS OF THE Protestant Rule of Faith,
SCRIPTURE, After the Help of Ministerial Guides, Finally Interpreted by Each
Man's Private Sense.

Published with Allowance.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
for His Household and Chapel; And are to be sold at his Printing House on the
Ditch-side in Blackfriars. 1688.

A Clear Proof of the Certainty and Usefulness of the Protestant Rule of Faith,
Scripture, after the Help of Ministerial Guides, finally Interpreted by each
Man's private Sense.
THis proof is drawn from the Answer to the Address presented to the Ministers
of the Church of England. The Author thereof had required that clear and plain
Texts of Scripture be offered, which interpreted in the Protestant-way, by
those who receive it thus expounded for their whole Rule of Faith, should so
prove the two principal Articles of Christian Belief, the Trinity and the
Incarnation of Christ; as also the Obligation of keeping holy the Sunday, and
not Saturday, as one of the Commandments seems to require; and that so
convincingly, that a Christian might ground on them his Faith. Interpreted, I
say, in the Protestant-way, without any deciding Church Authority when doubts
arise about the sense of the Letter.

The Addresser holds, (if he be a Catholic) That Scripture, rightly understood,
is a Rule of Faith: That the Gospel revealed by Christ, preached by the
Apostles, and preserved by the Catholic Church, is so much our whole Rule of
Faith, that we own with Tertullian, De Presc.
we need not be curiously searching since Christ, nor further inquisitive since
the Gospel was preached. No new Revelations, no new Articles, being received as
of Catholic Faith; but those Truths only retained, which the Church proposes as
delivered to her by the Apostles, her whole Authority being ever employed, as
Pope Celestine delivers it to the Council of Ephesus, Ep. 7.
in providing that what was delivered, and preserved in a continual Succession
from the Apostles, be retained: So that nothing is of Faith, but what God
revealed by the Prophets and the Apostles, or what evidently follows from it;
the Catholic Church ever handing it to us, and declaring it to be so.

Scripture thus interpreted is a Catholic Rule of Faith: The Addresser
therefore meant nothing less than to diminish its Divine Authority; his design
was to preserve it, and that each man's private sense might not sacrilegiously
pretend to be that Word of God, which, as St. Peter minds us, is not of private
Interpretation: It Is not against the Authority or Use of Scripture he writ, but
against the Protestants unjust and insignificant method of using it. I will
here make good the Charge, (hoping that, when he thinks fit, he will much more
fully perform it) by the very Answers given to his Questions, which I shall set
down in that Order and Sense in which the Answerer construed them.

Qu. 1. Whether all things necessary to Salvation are contained in Scripture?

Ans. Scripture must contain these necessaries.

All Catholics ever owned what St. Augustine teaches, De Doctr. Chapter l. 2. c. 9.
That all things which concern Faith and Manners of Life are found in those
things which are plainly contained in Scripture; So that, as St. Gregory
expresses it, God needs speak to us no more by any new Revelation. For, as the
same St. Augustine observes in the Question betwixt Him and the Donatists, about
true Baptism, which he held absolutely necessary to Salvation, Though we have no
proof in this case from holy Scripture, yet we follow the truth of holy
Scripture even in this case, when we do what the Universal present Church
approves of, which Church is commended by the Authority of the very Scripture.
But the case in this first Question, as it appears stated by the Addresser, is,
Whether all things necessary to Salvation are immediately and expressly contained
in Scripture, or drawn thence by an evident Consequence? Our Answerer proves
they are so by the three following Texts; his Proofs I will set in a due form,
that their force may lie open to all.

The first Text is taken out of John 20.31. where the Evangelist having
premised, (v. 30.) Many other signs also did Jesus in the sight of his
Disciples, which are not written in this Book; says, v. 31. These (which he had
set down) are written that you may believe that Jesus is Christ the Son of God,
and that believing you may have Life in his name. Now what Conclusion can be
drawn from this Text to our present purpose, but one, in one of these two
forms? First thus: The signs set down by St. John, chapter 20. are sufficient to
make us believe that Jesus is Christ the Son of God; but precisely to believe
that Jesus is Christ the Son of God, is all that is necessary to have Life in
his name, or to Salvation; therefore the 20th. Chapter of St. John contains all
things necessary to Salvation. Or else thus, in the Answerer's words: All that
is as sufficient in its kind to beget Faith in us, as Faith is to save us,
contains all things necessary to Salvation: But the 20th. Chapter of St. John
's Gospel, as it appears by ver. 31. is as sufficient to beget Faith in us;
therefore that 20th. Chapter contains all things necessary to Salvation. A
special piece of Logic! However his Conclusion eases the Members of his
Congregation from the obligation of reading any part of Scripture besides the
20th. Chapter of St. John's Gospel.

The second Text of Scripture is, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16. where the Apostle having
thus warned Timothy immediately before, v. 14. Continue in those things which
thou have learnt, and are committed to thee, knowing of whom thou have learnt;
by which words he renews the commands he had given him, 1 Timothy 6.20. 2 Timothy
1.13.
O Timothy! keep the depositum; have a form of sound words, which thou have
heard of me, in Faith: The said Apostle minds him that in his Infancy he had
read the Old Testament, which bears sufficiently witness that Christ was the
Messiah, v. 15, 16. Because from thine inf^ncy thou have known the holy
Scriptures, which can instruct thee (the Protestant Version has, make thee
wise) to Salvation by the Faith that is in Christ Jesus. All Scripture inspired
of God is profitable to teach, to argue, to correct, to instruct in Justice,
that the man of God may be perfect, instructed to every good work. Hence the
Minister argues thus: The same Apostle that says all Scripture, ( i. e. each
part of Scripture) is given by Inspiration of God, says that the Scriptures are
able to make us wise to Salvation: But men cannot be wise to Salvation, without
knowing what is necessary to Salvation. Here he leaves us, but I will make up
the Syllogism: Therefore the Old Testament alone, nay every part of Scripture,
contains all things necessary to Salvation. Thus you see the Minister rests
satisfied with the first Chapter of Genesis for his whole Rule of Faith. The
truth is, that St. Paul only teaches there that the Testament, or any part of
Scripture, is of good use, is profitable to instruct any one in the concerns of
his Salvation. What Is this to the containing of all necessaries to Salvation?
Bread is of very good use to preserve Life, and enables a man to perform all
the duties of it; is therefore nothing else necessary? What pitiful shifts are
these!

His third Proof is this: Christ sent the young man who put that Question to
him, Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal Life? Luc. 10.25. Luc. 16.29.
to the Commandments, Thou know the Commandments; and again declared that
Moses and the Prophets were sufficient to dispose a sinner to repent. Behold
another Logical Inference of great credit to the University this Answerer was
brought up in! By reading Moses and the Prophets I am moved to repent from my
sins; and if I will know what I must do to inherit eternal Life, I must know
the Commandments; therefore all things necessary to Salvation are contained in
Scripture. I may with Justice return to this man more than what he ungroundedly
says to the Addresser, p. 1. That he takes up with such a sort of Arguments,
which, though not useful to make any of his Religion, may very well make others
of none. If such use only could be made of Scripture, it would be of no use at
all to our Salvation; no senseless Heresy has appeared these 1600 years,
which was not backed by more seeming Proofs from Scripture than these.

Q. 2. Whether all things necessary to Salvation are clearly contained in
Scripture?

Ans. From Scripture, not a word.

However he condescends to deliver His sense and that of his Church on this
Question: It is, That all persons cannot immediately learn all the necessaries
to Salvation by mere reading of Scripture; that many other helps are necessary,
to wit, attention, consideration, to be cleared from prejudices and
prepossessions, from pride, love of the world, interest, obstinacy, partiality,
sloth; and besides all this, the assistance of teaching Guides, and a
dependency from God for the Wisdom he has promised, (such promises I find made
to the Church, but not any to particulars that shall refuse to be absolutely
guided by the Church:) So that Scripture is plain in this sense only, that by
these means it may be apprehended. Now by Guides he means not false ones, such
as Christ bid us beware of, Mat. 7.15.
and consequently till a Protestant has a reasonable conviction that his
Church-Teachers, though divided from the Catholic Church, and condemned by
General Councils, though Abettors of a Religion of not 150 years settlement, though
not in Communion with one Bishop in the whole World out of His Majesty's
Dominions, yet still are true Guides; and till he be morally sure that he wants
not himself any one of the ten other dispositions required, is to persuade
himself that he may very well be one of those who wrest the Scripture to their
perdition, and consequently has no good ground for any one Act of Faith. This
will create but small comfort to any Protestant. Less yet will he find in St.
Cyrill's Sentence, In Jo. l. 1. c. 4.
The things that are easy are yet to Heretics hard to understand; especially
if all those be Heretics, according to St. Augustine, L. 4. de Bapt. cont. D^n.
c. 16.
who when the Doctrine of Catholic Faith is declared to them, choose to oppose
it, and rather embrace what is their own sense; if the Catholic Faith be, L. 2.
co^^. G^^d.
according to the same Dr. a Communion with the whole world, so that, according
as his Scholar St. Prosper defines it, In ^im H.
a Christian when in Communion with this General Church, is a Catholic; when
separated from her an Heretic. I wonder how this man was so confident as to
name that word Heretic, which his Brethren are usually as much afraid to
mention, as a Murderer to come up to the murdered Corpse, lest by its bleeding
he be betrayed.

Q. 3. What are the necessaries to Salvation?

Here plain and full Scripture will be of great use, we may expect shoals of
Texts: What answer from Scripture is given to this Question think you? Even the
same as honest Bays returns to a hard one in the Rehearsal, Y Gad I will not tell
you. No, he gives not one word of answer to it, though it be so material. Any one
may guess at the reason without casting a figure.

Q. 4. It Is in its whole extent this: By what Text of Scripture are we plainly
taught that God is One in Substance, Three in Person? For as, John 10.50.
Christ says, I and my Father are One; so 17.21. he prays, That all Believers
may be One, as He and his Father are One: This second place may seem to expound
the first, and then Christ and his Father will be One only morally, as all the
Believer's be One. Or else, what Text declares the Three Persons to be One by
identity of substance?

Ans. Not one Text of Scripture, to give us the dubious sense of the two in
question! And yet these men pretend to clear Scripture for each Fundamental
Point! The Answerer supplies this want of Scripture with two Reasons. The first
is this: Of the Three that bear record in Heaven, it is said they are One; but
of the Three that bear witness on Earth, they agree in one. (I will admit this
English Translation, though Apocryphal.) But what then? But if in both were meant
only a Moral Union, it would have been as well said of the Three that bear
record in Heaven, they agree in One; therefore they have more than a Moral
Union. Is not this special Logic? Would not this way of arguing prove equally
that the Believers are one with more than a Moral Union, because otherwise it
might as well have been said, Jo. 17. May they agree in one. The Question is,
Whether this second clear Text concerning the Three that bear witness on Earth,
and which we know to be only Morally One, does not expound what that Unity is
that is found in the Three which bear record in Heaven? We ask a proof out of
Scripture to decide this doubt; but our Answerer has none to give us, or is
grown churlish, and will not allow us any. Has he any to expound the other
Text? No, not any; but he offers at some insinuation from Scripture, and it is
this: When Christ said, I and my Father are One, the Jews took up stones to
stone him for blasphemy, because that thou being a Man (said they) make thy
self God: The Jews then under stood him to have spoken of a Natural Union,
therefore he did so. Well, I will let my good Nature work upon me once, and for
quiets sake I will let this Discourse pass as allowable: But in return of
courtesy I hope each sober Protestant will own this following Argument to be of
at least as good Alloy: When Christ said, Jo. 6. Unless you eat the Flesh of
the Son of Man, you have no life in you; the Jews, who said how can this man
give us his Flesh to eat? and his Disciples, who walked no more with him,
understood that he spoke of his natural Body which they should corporally eat;
therefore Christ did really mean they should corporally feed on his natural
Flesh. This Popish Conclusion is in the same Form.

Q. 5. Is the Mystery of the Incarnation of Christ clearly expressed in
Scripture? Or can it be clearly made out by Scripture, that those words, John
1. The Word was made Flesh, owned by all Christians to be true, are to be
understood in such sense that Both Natures were in One Person, so that what is
said of the Man Christ Jesus be truly said of the Son of God; for example, that
the B. Virgin was Mother of God; and not as the Nestorians understood them, to
wit, that Christ was indeed a true man, made of the Seed of David; and that the
Eternal Word, true God, was indeed in him, but not by a strict Personal Union?

Ans. Not one word from Scripture. What indeed all the Nestorians supposed, he
proves; but as to the Unity of One Person uniting these two Natures, not one
word. This man (any one may see) is of those who take the Nestorians to be a
part of the Catholic Church; and no one will grudge their Congregation the
Title of such a part of the Cath. Church, that is a Member severed from the One
Body of Christ.

Q. 6. The first branch of this Question is, What Scripture has absolved us
from obeying one of the Commandments, which imposes the keeping of Saturday
holy? The second, What Text of Scripture exacts of us the keeping holy (as the
Lord's day) the Sunday?

Ans. To the first part, not one word of Scripture; and for excuse he tells us,
That here was no need of an express abrogation, because Sunday being set apart
for the public and solemn Worship of God, the Sabboth-day, as well as the
Holydays and New Mons of the Jews being a shadow, must surrender to the
Sunday. Here is as little Reason as Scripture; for the Sabbath did appertain to
the Law of Nature, and was not a shadow only of a thing to come, but a memory
of the past and never-to-be-forgotten benefit of the Creation, Genesis 2.3.
from the work whereof God rested on that day, and blessed the seventh day.
Here it is pity at what a loss the Answerer is to find the Chapter and Verse
wherein the abrogation of Circumcision is clearly expressed: It Is a charitable
condescendency to instruct him; let him look then in Gal. 5.2. where behold
Paul tells you, that if you be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing.

For the second part, he produces a Text, Rev. 1.10. I was in spirit on the
Lord's day; then he flourishes to teach us ignorant people, that it is usual in
Scripture, after that Times, Places, Things and Persons were set apart for the
service of God by Divine Institution, to have his Name as a mark of propriety
given to them. But in the name of sense and reason what means all this? There
is a Lord's day, no doubt; St. John was in spirit that day, it is certain: But
the question is, What day of the week was it? or was it only some peculiar day
of the year, as Easter Day, or Good Friday? Has he Scripture for this? Not one
word. I find forty Texts that call the day of general Judgment, or that of each
man's death, the Lord's day, but not one that mentions Sunday under that name.
I find, Act. 2.46. how they that believed were daily continuing with one accord
in the Temple, or breaking Bread from house to house, but not a word of a day
appointed for stated Assemblies.

Scripture failing our Adversary, he seeks supplies from Reason; but the
misfortune is, that the first and chiefest he offers at stands against him: The
Moral Sabbath (says he) in the Patriarchal Church, and the Ceremonial in the
Jewish Church, were on the days following the Creation and Deliverance from the
Slavery of Egypt. True, but what follows? Therefore it is not to be kept by
Christians on the day in which Christ rested afte^ he had accomplished our
Redemption on the Cross by a solemn Consummatum est, and his precious Death?
Not on Saturday? Raillery aside, what can be (I will not say more dull, but)
spoken more directly in spite of sense and reason?

Q. 7. Am I bound to believe (the sense given to a doubtful Text) because my
Guides tell me I must do so?

Ans. No, plainly No: And he has two Texts for it; the first, 2 Cor. 1.24. Not
for that we have dominion over your Faith, but are helpers, says St. Paul; and
Mat. 23.8. Call no man Master on earth, for one is your Master. Here not only
the Walls of the City of God are broken down, but the very Foundations (of
Prophets and Apostles) are dug up; is it all St. Paul could do, all you
allow him, to give some light, some helps, when his Proselytes had any doubt
about the sense of Scripture? Were they not obliged to believe the Sense and
Interpretation He gave to the Text? Then that Faith is vain which was founded
on the Apostles Preaching, and all Christianity stands on a wrong bottom.

Now our Answerer takes his turn to ask Questions. He tells us that for the
first he has a pinching one: It Is this: If I must know the Church by some Marks
or Notes, then I must find those Marks first; and where must I seek them? This
is pinching indeed! Suppose in a Gazette I should find some marks of a man that
is sought for, were it not a severe objection against the man who gave them,
and a pinching Question, I must find these Marks before I find the man, and
where shall I find them? I conceive such pinching would force a smile, and this
Answer, Why Friend the Marks and the Man are found at once, for they are to be
seen in his face. At the same time as one takes a view of the Catholic Church,
he sees therein a continual Succession of Bishops and Teachers from the
Apostles; he discovers her in all parts of the World, and finds her thus
Catholic; he sees in her an undivided Faith, Union under one Pastor in the use
of the same Sacraments, and finds her One; he observes her Rule is, Let nothing
be altered of what was received from the Apostles by a constant Universal
Tradition in the Churches which they founded, and is convinced she is
Apostolical: he finds God favors her with the Gift of Miracles, promised Matt.
10. and Joh. 14. that she has fulfilled the Prophesies concerning the
Conversion of Nations, converted to Christianity by her Children only; and he
concludes this is she.

It Is also observable at what a distance these men are from the true Church,
who conceive it so hard to find her out. All holy Fathers ever judged it a most
easy thing to each person, insomuch that the holy Doctor St. Augustine thus
delivers his sense of it: CC. 2. in Psalm. 30.
I tell you with truth, Brethren, the Prophets have spoken more obscurely of
Christ, than of the Church: I believe because they saw in spirit that men would
make Sects against the Church, but would not be so much divided about Christ.
But it is natural for a Criminal to question the Power of his Judge; and these
men know it has ever been the sense of all Christians, which St. Augustine
expressed in the following words: There is no Salvation out of the Church, who
doubts of it? De Unit. Eccl. l. 4. c. 18.
therefore whatever you have from the Church (Scripture, Creed, Sacraments,
etc.) help you not to Salvation out of the Church, whether you believe contrary
to the Truth, or being divided from the Unity, gather not with Christ; whence
St. Paul says to Heretics, Those who do such things, shall not possess the
Kingdom of Heaven. Gal. 5.


His other Quaere's have no difficulty, and withal so little of sense, that I
shall not offer to force my Readers attention on them.

All well-meaning Protestants finding that Scripture interpreted the
Protestant-way is so far from being an easy and clear Rule of Faith, that a
Protestant in the Answer to an Address made to the Ministers of the Church of
England, approved by a Chaplain to the highest Ecclesiastical Authority under
the King, cannot as much as teach by it the first Principles of Christian
Religion; will seek a better method of using that Divine Rule, and not be
hereafter so easily imposed upon by those Guides who give them but their own
private fancies under the Veil and Name of the Word of God. I was (I confess)
surpised to find Guil. Needham, etc. approving this Answer; but God and Truth
are of our side: Et inimici nostri sunt Judices; the weakness of our Opposers
Arguments bear a proof to it.

Ad Majorem Dei Gloriam.
FINIS.

