blazon of the City of London, consisting of a shield bearing the cross of St.
George (patron saint of England) with a sword (emblem of the martyrdom of St.
Paul, patron saint of London) in the first quarter of the shield
By the Mayor.
WHereas it appears by several Examinations taken before Me and others his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace, that there have been several Endeavors and
wicked Contrivances influencing some Apprentices and others, to enter into a
detestable Combination for wicked Purposes against the Peace and good
Government of this City; several of the Accomplices being now in Custody to
answer the Law.

And foreseeing the Dangerous and sad Consequences (both as to our Religion and
Peace) in the Circumstances we are now in, that Riotous and Seditious
Assemblies may run into, by the Managery and Artifices of designing Papists and
other Persons disaffected to the Government: And the great Numbers of
unaccomptable Persons that fill the Suburbs of this City, many of whom are of
Desperate Fortunes, and of worse Principles, who may take Advantages to improve
Riots and unlawful Assemblies, to worse Purposes than Apprentices might intend
them.

For Avoiding and Preventing any such wicked Designs and Evils that might
thereupon ensue, and for preventing the Mischiefs that Apprentices and others
might unwarily run into, and for the preservation of the Peace, Honor, and
good Government of this City.

These are (by the Advice of my Brethren the Aldermen) in his Majesty's Name,
straightly to Command and require all Masters of Families, that they take great
heed and care to keep their Apprentices and Servants strictly under their
Commands; And that they Warn and Admonish them against all such Combinations
and Riotous Assemblies and Proceedings, Especially on the Lords day and
Festivals; that by their due care in keeping them to their respective Duties,
all undue and unlawful Assemblies may be prevented, which in all times have
been of Mischeivous Consequences, and greatly to the dishonor of God, the
Scandal of the Protestant Religion, and the good government of this City.

These are also to Charge and Command all Constables and Beadles to take care
that the Civil Watches be duly kept, and in full Proportions according to the
Law in that case, and upon any defect to Represent it to Me, that effectual
care may be taken for the Redressing any neglect or abuses therein; And I do
further Recommend it to the Care of the Alderman, Deputy, and Common
Council-men of each Ward, that they sometimes, with some other Citizens of the
Neighborhood, when they shall think fit, do walk the Rounds, and see that the
Watches be duly kept, and do their respective Duties. And it is also
recommended to their Care, that this may be speedily Communicated to all
Inhabitants within their respective Wards.

Given at Guild Hall London, the 30 th. day of March, Anno Dom. 1680. And in
the xxxij. year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, by the
Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, King, Defender of the
Faith, etc.
Printed by Samuel Roycroft, Printer to the Honorable City of LONDON.


