An HISTORICAL DEFENSE OF THE Reformation: In Answer to a Book Entitled, JUST
PREJUDICES AGAINST THE CALVINISTS.

Written in French by the Reverend and Learned Monsieur CLAVDE, Minister of the
Reformed Church at Charenton: AND NOW Faithfully Translated into English, By T.
B. M. A.

LONDON: Printed by G. L. for John Hancock, at the Three Bibles over against
the Royal Exchange in Cornhil; and Benj. Alsop, at the Angel and Bible in the
Poultrey. 1683.

THE PREFACE.
HOwsoever Men fall into the Misery of being deluded by Errors, nothing appears
Amiable under that Name; and whatsoever carries the name of Reformation, is
therefore thought Honorable and Glorious, because it professes to cast out
those. The Romanists themselves applaud a Reformation, and will therefore own
Ours to be no other then Pretended; and plead that their Religion is Actually a
Reformation, that they may more confidently urge the Unnecessariness of
another. But we cannot be ignorant how the Name has been abused, and Experience
has showed us what Reformation They have made in the Gospel of our Savior;
what Truths they have expunged, how they have perverted and depraved, and
indeed made it quite another Gospel then what was at first delivered: They have
Reformed it, only to make it serve their Interests, and elevate their God, both
which it so much opposes and condemns. As this raised a Generous Indignation
and an Heroic Zeal in those whom God had prepared to discover and overthrow
their Abuses, so it made them see the high Necessity of another Reformation,
and to endeavor it with that Success which the Protestant World justly admires
and blesses God for at this day. Our Fathers have to their Honor and Praise
taken care to instill the Principles and the Love of a true Reformation into
their Posterity, and it has been so strong as to increase with fresh vigor and
more largely to diffuse it self in our times. But how many are there even among
our selves, who owe their Religion to little else then their Education, and cry
up still loudly for the Reformation, without being able to give solid Reasons
and Grounds of their Profession? They have sucked it in with their Milk, and as
they took it up without their own foresight, so they have thought it needless
to take a view of the Justice and the Reasons of it, if they did but profess
themselves Protestants. The most have a Zeal, but not according to Knowledge,
which were highly commendable if it were joined with it. Indeed, if we take a
view of all who unite under the Name of Protestants, and the diverse Parties who
have little else common between them, we must sadly acknowleged our selves like
the Ephesians, who when they had made an Insurrection in the City, and for two
hours space cried up their Diana, yet it is hard to define which excelled, their
Zeal or their Ignorance, when a far greater part of them knew not so much as
why they were come together. Therefore it is high time for us to be instructed
in what we so much talk of* that we may be sensible Reformation is somewhat
more than a Pretense, and that our Adversaries are not to be vanquished as some
Armies have been, by the great Noise and Clamor before the Engagement: No,
there must be solid Argument, and well tempered Truths, to assert our Religion;
and our Reason, as well as our Faith, must be able to remove those Mountains
which the Deluge of Errors in the Church of Rome will be sure to raise in our
way; as some impute the Origin of Natural Hills to the Universal Flood, which
caused even the Ararat on which the Ark rested. There are Alps to be past,
before we can enter Italy by way of Conquest; and if we would pass them, we
have no other way to do it, but by cutting through them. Considerations like
these, made me first Read, and consequently admire this Author, whose cause was
the same with ours, and he maintained it, not without success, and I expected
something extraordinary of Courage and Conduct, from a man, who had so well
defended himself even in the Enemies Country, where he had no advantage but his
Cause; the only Conquest he could pretend to, was, not to be overcome; and he
could expect no assistance from men, but what our Savior himself found, when
he was assaulted with Swords and Staves, his Disciples forsook him and fled.
Yet notwithstanding all these seeming Inconveniences and Discouragements, they
gave him only greater occasions of setting forth his Makers Glory, and
purchasing his own; for though he came to them fairly in the Name of the Living
God, and they Armed with Helmets of Brass, and Spears like Weavers Beams; his
smooth Stones taken out of that Current of Living Water, strikes down the
haughty Gathites, and sinks into their Foreheads, the certain Fate of all
those, who defy the Armies of the Living God. And we may guess at the
compleatness of his Victory, by the Grandeur of his Triumph, for he put them to
their last Reserve, their Censure; they condemned what they could not Confute,
and when their School Divinity failed, the Flames (as I have heard) were called
in to their assistance. This is the Infallible and Catholic Argument, and
whatsoever opposes the Popes Supremacy, must expect to feel that of the
Faggot. And to show that this way is ancient enough, the Persians by the same,
proved the greatness and Universality of their Deities, because it consumed all
the Images of the other Gods, till Canopus his Water Retorted the vain
Sophistry upon them, and with a more powerful Pitcher, quenched their
pretensions and their Numen together. But Books have Souls as well as men,
which survive their Martyrdom, and are not burnt but crowned by the Flames that
encircle them. They quickly found that there was nothing Combustible in it, but
the Paper; The Truth flew upward, like the Angel from Manoahs Sacrifice,
untoucht by the fire, and unsullied by the Smoke, and found a safe Refuge at
the Footstool of the God of Truth. And sure whatsoever Received so severe a
Doom from our Adversaries, may challenge from us a kind Reception; They have
taught us to value, what they thought not below their Malice, and it will be
the greatest Commendation amongst Protestants, that the Papists knew it worth
the Burning. This likewise may supply the place of a Panegyric upon the
Author, then whom none has done or suffered more in so glorious a Cause, and
seeing we give so great a welcome to numbers of French Protestants that daily
arrive amongst us, let us receive Mr. Claude as one of them, and use him no
better, nor any worse then he deserves. It is the Prerogative of a Translator,
to make him an Englishman, to give him all the Immunities our own Authors
enjoy, and to make him equal in Liberty and Property with the best of our
Native Writers. And indeed no man can wonder why he has now crossed the Seas,
and appears in this dress, with half the reason I do, that he appeared in it no
sooner; I have heard it has been the wish of some Great Divines, but their own
Employments hindered them from Effecting it; and it might have been expected
that it should have moved somebody to have attempted it upon that very account,
because they desired it. For since the Gift of Tongues is ceased, and those
Inspired Linguists have been long ago silenced, Translation is none of the
worst ways of supplying that absent Grace; neither can it be accounted beneath
any man by his Industry to retrieve a departed Miracle. I could wish he had
come forth in all the Ornaments of our Language, as he did at first in those of
his own: Those Ceremonies of Speech, though in themselves not absolutely
necessary, and add not much to the Substance, yet they contribute not a little
to the Decency and pleasing part of an Author; for there is a Delightful
Prospect arising from the Agreeable Mixture of the Colors of Language, without
which a Book is never the less solid, but with which it is much more
persuading. However, he appears the more in his own Dimensions, the thinner his
Garments are, and the closer they sit about him. I shall make no Apology for
the Author, because I know nothing in him that needs it, unless some should
mistake some of his expressions about Episcopacy. Where if he has let fall any
thing that may offend, he has these two things at least for his excuse: First,
that he lived under an external constitution of a Church that did not exercise
that way of Government: Secondly, he himself tells us, those that he mentions
were only such who were of the Popish Communion, and only as such he uses them.
I shall not detain the Reader any longer from the Book it self, only I am to
desire him, that, whatsoever faults he finds in the Preface, may not be imputed
any further to the Book it self: For the more mistakes there are in it, the
more proper it is for that Perfect Piece it is set before; as the Errors of the
Church of Rome had no small share in the occasion of our Religion, and may in
some sense be styled, The Preface to the Reformation.

The Epistle Dedicatory of the Author, To the Right Honorable The MARQUESS of
RUVIGNY, Lieutenant General of His Majesty's Armies, AND General Deputy of the
Protestants in FRANCE.
MY LORD,
MY first thoughts after I had read the Books of the Prejudices, were, not to
write any Answer to it: For besides that I saw in that Book nothing else but
the same Accusations from which our Fathers and we have already been frequently
justified; and that moreover they were wrote there in so extremely passionate
and invenomed a style, for my own particular I did not think my self bound to
follow every where those persons who seem to make it their design to load me
with the number of their Volumes, affecting to take me for a Party in all the
Works that they daily publish, and even in those that are most remote from the
chief Subject of our Controversy. Yet when I perceived the loud Outcries that
these Gentlemen and their followers made about their Prejudices, to draw the
applause of the World to themselves, as if they had silenced us, and our
Reformation remained over thrown under the weight of their Victory, I judged it
necessary to enter upon this new labor, and the deference that I had for those
who exhorted me to undertake it, has brought forth this Treatise that I now
give to the public. Those who shall take the pains to read it, will find that
I have not merely tied my self to the Book that I confute, but that to save my
self the labor of doing it at twice, I have considered the matter in its first
Principles, and examined it in its just extent, that I might be the better able
to judge of it. I acknowledge the Subject Treated on required more Learning,
readiness, and leisure then I was master of, but it may be also they will find
in the plain and natural way wherein I have handled it, something more easy,
then if I had employed more Art and Meditation in it. It is this makes me hope,
that when I shall not fully have answered the expectations of those who have
engaged me in this work, yet they will not read this Defense without some
satisfaction, However it be, My Lord, I take the boldness to present it to you,
and to entreat the favor of you to receive it as a token of the acknowledgment
that I have for so much goodness as you have testified toward me. I am
persuaded that those of our Communion in this Kingdom will very heartily
consent, that my weak pen should also express the sentiments that they all have
of your person, and of the cares that you take to uphold their common
interests. I will also affirm, that your Merit is so generally acknowledged,
that when nothing shall be disputed, but the just praises that are due to your
prudence, to the wisdom that appears throughout your whole Conduct, to the
inviolable Principles of Honor and Justice that are the perpetual Rules of
your Actions, and in a word to the great and solid Virtues that you practice
with such exactness, they can assure themselves that there will be no
difference about that, between those of the one and the other Communion. But
all those Qualities that they take notice of in You, how Rich and Resplendent
soever they are, even in the eyes of those who are destitute of them, would be
nothing else but false dazzling light, if they were not accompanied with real
Piety, which only gives a value to all the Moral Virtues. You are not ignorant,
My Lord, you, in whom we saw it but a few Months ago, how your Soul ready to
take its flight, trembled and remained confounded in the view of all that
humane. Righteousness, and that you could find no rest in your Spirit, any
where else, then in the bosom of Religion and Piety. This alone was that which
gave you the Tranquillity of Soul, which taught all those who had the honor to
come near your Bed, after what manner a good man who could rest assured of Gods
Mercy, and the Grace of Jesus Christ, might look Death in the Face. It is this
that has yet prolonged your days, or to speak better, that has restored Life to
you by an extraordinary blessing of heaven, little different from that which
Hezechias heretofore received as the fruit of his humiliation and prayer.

Continue, MY LORD, to lay out that life which has been given you again, in the
service of God, and in the employments to which your calling engages you, and
of which you have so great an account to render. Those employments are
certainly difficult, and if I may take the boldness to say it, they are
oppressing, through their quality, through their numbers, and through the
accidents that either accompany or follow them. But he who has called you to
them, will give you ability to discharge them, and will shed abroad his
blessing upon your cares, as far as shall be necessary for his own glory and
the good of the people, in whose favor you labor, and he himself will one day
give you a reward for all those toilsome Labors.

Although you do not need to be excited to do good, yet I take the confidence
to hope, that you will be some way encouraged in the Duties of your place, by
the reading of this Work, which will more and more discover to you the Justice
of it. You will see therein the Conduct of our Fathers justified, in regard of
their Reformation and Separation from the Church of Rome; and by consequence
you will therein see not only the Right that we have, but the Obligation and
indispensable Necessity also wherein we are, to live apart and divided from
that Church, and united among our selves, in a Religious and Christian Society,
till it shall please God to make the Causes of that Division cease, and join
again that which men, I would say what the Court of Rome and her Council of
Trent, have put asunder. That Reunion is a Happiness that we will always beg
of God with the most ardent Prayers, and which we will receive as one of his
highest Favors, if his hand should bestow it. But it is also a thing which it
is impossible for us to promise our selves: while we shall not see the same
desire of a good and holy Reformation (which was almost general in our West in
the days of our Fathers) to be again revived in the Church of Rome; which yet
they knew how to stifle with incredible skill. An Author of those Times, who
himself contributed as much as any other to clude the good effects of that
desire, has not failed to own it, and which is more, to own it to be just. I do
not deny, says he, Cassander Consult. art. de Eccles.
that many at the beginning were not urged by a motion of Piety, earnestly to
cry out against some manifest Abuses, and I confess, that we must attribute the
chief cause of that Division that at present rends the Church, to those who
being puffed up with a vain pride, under a pretense of Ecclesiastical power,
contemned and haughtily and disdainfully rejected those who admonished them
with reason and modesty. And imediately after that same Author reasoning about
the means to re-establish a holy peace between the two parties; I do not
believe, adds he, that we ought ever to hope for a firm peace in the Church, if
those who have been the cause of that disunion do not begin by themselves;
that is to say, unless those who have the Ecclesiastical Government in their
hands, relaxe a little of that great rigor, and contribute something to the
peace of the Church, and unless in harkening to the ardent prayers and
exhortations of the greatest part of good men, they apply themselves to reform
those manifest abuses, by the Rule of the holy Scriptures and of the Ancient
Church, from which they have wandered. After this manner a man engaged in the
Communion and Interests of the Church of Rome, spoke, even in the Time of the
Council of Trent. He would indeed after that, have us also, whom he accuses to
have gone too far in the other extreme, yield something on our side, and that
we should return, as he speaks, to our selves; but it ought not to be thought
strange that he being such a one as he was, would lenify by that corrective the
confession that he made before, and it is enough for us that he has owned the
force of the evil, and taken notice of the true and only remedy. God who holds
the hearts of all in his hand, kindle in them the love of the true Religion,
and give us all the grace to look to the Blood that has ransomed the Church,
and that first Spirit who consecrated it to one only Jesus Christ her Lord and
Husband. For it is he only who can reunite us; without me sates he, ye can do
nothing; and he that gathers not with me, scatters abroad. I pray that the
same God who has given you the knowledge of his Gospel, would make you
persevere in it to the end; that he would confirm his love and fear in the
souls of my Lords your children, who already so well answer the honor of their
birth, and the cares you have taken for their Education; and lastly, that he
would more and more shed abroad his blessings over your person, and over all
your house. This is that which I desire from the bottom of my heart, and that
you would do me the favor to believe that

I am, My LORD, Your Lordships Most Humble and Most Obedient Servant CLAVDE.

The ATTESTATION.
WE whose names are underwritten, certify that we have read the Answer of
Monsieur Claude our most honored Colleague, to a Book Entitled, The
Prejudices, etc. in which we have found nothing contrary to the Sentiments of
the Religion which we profess. Signed at Paris the nine and twentieth of
November, 1672.

DAILLE' MESNARD.


The Reader is desired to take notice, That the word Historical, in the
Running-Title, was inserted without the Translators knowledge or Consent.

An HISTORICAL DEFENSE OF THE Reformation; Against a Book Entitled, Just
Prejudices against the CALVINISTS.
THE FIRST PART: Wherein it is shown, that our Ancestors were obliged to
Examine by themselves, the state of Religion, and of the Church in their Days.
CHAP. I.
General Considerations upon this Controversy. The Division of this Treatise.

IT is not difficult to understand, why those who were possessed of the
Government of the Western Church in the days of our Fathers, and those who have
since succeeded them in the Church of Rome, have thought themselves so much
concerned to oppose the Reformation. It would oblige them, to strip themselves
of that Sovereign and and absolute Authority which they had Usurped, and by
which they had disposed the Consciences of men to their wills: And it would
force them to give an Account of that Public management which they held in
their hands, and no person is ignorant that, that is a thing of all others in
the World most intolerable to those persons who have made a Secular Empire of
the Government of the Church. As those Interests have made them lay hold of all
they could to defend themselves, so they have raised a new Controversy,
touching the Right that our Fathers had to reform themselves. They demand of us
who our Reformers were? from whence they came? and what Call they had for so
Great a Work? They accuse them to have been Rebels and Schismatics, who lifted
themselves up against the Authority of their Mother the Church, and broke the
sacred bond of the Christian Communion. They have defamed their persons as much
as ever they could, and have laid to their charge the most wicked manners, to
the end they might render them odious. In fine, they have put forward, all that
they could believe capable, of retaining the people in a blind submission, and
hindering them from entering upon any Examination of the Matters of Religion.

But, blessed be God, that notwithstanding all the endeavors they have hither
to made on a subject that has exhausted all the subtilties of the Schools, the
Justice of our Cause, which is the same with that of our Fathers, has not
received the least prejudice; and we can even assure our selves, that there has
been nothing said, the weakness and impertinency of which, may not easily be
displayed, to the bare light of common sense.

For, either those things which our Fathers rejected, and which we reject with
them, are in deed Errors, Superstitions, and Inventions of men, as we believe
them to be, or they are not. If they are not, we will be the first that shall
Condemn the Reformation, and when they shall let us see that on the contrary
they are the Truths, and right worship that belong to the Christian Religion,
we shall be very ready to receive them. But if in deed they are Errors and
Corruptions, as we are persuaded they are, with what Reason can any man demand
by what right we rejected them, since it is all one as to demand what right we
have to be good men, and to take care of our own Salvation? We may see then
from thence, that all those Evasions, are nothing else but vain wranglings, and
that we ought always to examine those Tenets that are Controverted, for the
Justice or Injustice of the Reformation entirely depends on their Truth or
Falsehood. If we have right at the Foundation, they ought not to raise a
contention about the Form; for to be willing, to believe in God according to
the purity of his word, and to be ready to serve him sincerely, are the things
to which we are all obliged, and which cannot be condemned, in whomsoever they
are found, as on the contrary side, to harden one's self in Errors, to practice
a false Worship, and to expose one's self to the danger of Damnation under
pretense of observing some Formalities, is such a guidance of one's course, as
can never be Justified.

It will here be to no purpose, that they say, that in this Controversy
concerning the Justice of the Reformation, they do not suppose that we have any
reason in the Foundation of it; but that on the contrary, they have a mind to
let us see that we have no right at all in the Foundation, since we have none
at all in the Form; and that they would only say, that those things, which we
call Errors, and a false Worship, are not so indeed as we imagine them to be;
since they are the Institutions of a Church that cannot Err, and to whose
Authority we ought absolutely to submit our selves. This is, in my judgment,
the course that not long since an Author has took, in a Book Entitled, Just
Prejudices against the Calvinists. For he pretends to conclude that our
Religion is faulty in the very Foundation, because there are Errors in the
manner of our Reformation, and that those things which we reject as Errors, are
the Truths that we ought to believe, because we ought to acquiesce in the
Authority of the Church of Rome.

But that can never hinder us from coming to a discussion of the Foundation it
self, separated from all Forms, and from all prejudices: for when these
Gentlemen have reasoned against us after this manner, You are faulty in the
very Foundation, because you have not had right in the Form; we oppose to that,
this other Reasoning, whose consequence is not less Valid, as to the subject
about which it is concerned, We have not done wrong in the manner, because we
have right in the Foundation. And when they tell us, That which you call our
Errors, Transubstantiation, Adoration of the Host, Purgatory, etc. they are not
Errors, since we cannot Err, we Answer them, You can Err, because the
Transubstantiation; the Adoration of the Host, the Pargatory, etc. that you
teach, are Errors. And when they reply, You ought to believe that which we
teach you, because you ought to acquiesce and rest in our Authority; we rejoyn
again, We ought not to acquiesce in your Authority, because you teach us those
things which we ought not to believe.

In these two ways of Reasoning, it is certain that ours is the more equal, the
more just, and more natural. For it is by far the more just and natural, that
the Judgment of those Formalities should depend on the highest Interest that
can be in the World, which is that of the glory of God, and ourown Salvation;
then on the contrary, to make the glory of God, and our own Salvation, to
depend upon some Formalities. It is far more reasonable to judge of the
Infallibility that the Church of Rome pretends to by the things that she
teaches, then to judge of the chings that she Teaches by a pretense of her
Infallibility.

But although these two ways were equally Natural, and equally Reasonable, they
can not deny, that that which at first drew nearer to the Examen of the
Foundation were not more sure, and that all good men who ought to neglect
nothing conducing to their Salvation, were not bound to enter into it, in Order
to the avoiding of Errors. They Propose on one side for a Principle, the
Authority of the Church of Rome, against which there are a thousand things to
be said; on the other side we Propose, the Authority of God himself speaking in
those Scriptures, which all Christians receive, and which the very Enemies of
Christianity respect; who will dare to deny that in this Opposition, it were
not more sure to side with that part, which rules all by the Authority of God?
You may deceive your selves, say they, in taking that for the word of God,
which is not so. And are not you, answer we, more liable to deceive your
selves, in taking that for the Church of God, which is not so, and in taking
those for Infallible, who are no ways so? There is far greater Reason to hope
that God will then assist you with the illumination of his Spirit, when with
humility you search out the sense of the Scriptures, which you are so often
commanded to do, then when you search them through humane prejudices, to submit
your Consciences to a certain Orde of Men, whom God has never told you that
they ought to be the Masters of your Faith.

After all, if they will make use of the Authority of the Church of Rome, and
the pretended faults of our Reformation, as an Argument sufficient to let us
see that those things which we call Errors are not really so, they can demand
nothing more of us, then to set down this proof in its order with the rest, and
maturely to consider it in its turn, before we determine our selves. But to
pretend that that ought to hinder us from considering also the proofs on the
contrary side, by which we may see that those things that we call Errors are
really so, this were an injust pretense and bordering on [the greatest]
rashness. For the Authority of the Church of Rome, and the pretended faults of
the Reformation, whatsoever they be, are not Principles so demonstrative and so
evident among Christians, that after them, they ought to hear nothing more. We
ought then to yield to this proof, its place in our discussion, but without any
prejudice as to those that may be drawn for or against the very Tenets that are
contested, which ought to be first examined, as the more natural and most
decisive. That being so, I hold, that that which they have set before us will
be to no purpose at all. For if from the Examination that we shall make of
those matters in themselves, it results, that those things are not Errors which
we have rejected as such, but Christian Truths, we have no further need either
of the Authority of the Church of Rome, or of the prejudices against the
Reformation, The Reformation is sufficiently overthrown. And if on the
contrary, it results, that those are Errors, all the Authority of the Church of
Rome, and all the prejudices in the World, shall not be able to persuade men of
good understandings that they are Truths, and by consequence that the
Reformation is not just, for it is always just to extirpate Errors.

It seems to me, to appear already, that that debate which they have raised
against us about the Justice of our Reformation, and our separation from the
Church of Rome, is rather a field wherein they would busy themselves in
subtilties and declamations, to amuse the People, then a just Controversy
whence one might justly expect any profit. Yet, as those subtilties and
declamations, how vain and false soever they are, fail not of finding applause
in the World, and always making some impressions on the minds of men, we
acknowledge the too great effect that they have produced, which is that the
greatest part of those of the Church of Rome look upon us as Schismatics, and
think that we have disturbed the peace of the Family of God, and violated the
right of that Religious Society which had united us with them. The Idea which
they form of our Religion appears not half so odious to them. After what manner
they have disguised us, the most equitable among them discern, and fail not
sometimes freely to confess the same, that we have all Doctrines that are
necessary to men's Salvation, that our Worship, as plain as it is, has nothing
which does not tend to nourish in their hearts a true Piety and a solid Virtue,
and that as to the Form of our Government it has nothing so remote, either from
prudence, or from equity or from the Charity that Jesus Christ has recommended
to us. But it is a far different Idea which they Form within themselves of our
Separation, for it becomes insupportable to them, when they compare it with the
Specious name of a Church, that ought to command the Veneration of all Holy
men. So that this is most ordinarily the matter of their reproaches, which they
the more exaggerate as a thing about which they imagine we have not the least
show wherewith to defend our selves; I dare affirm that as to the far greater
part, that is the chiefest and almost the only matter, that makes them appear
so much Exasperated against us.

It is necessary then that we justify our selves, and that we clear to their
minds that honor which we have, not only to live among them in the same civil
Society, but also to depend on their lawful Authority in respect of those
humane affairs wherein we are engaged. Our own Innocence commands it of us; not
to say that the inheritance which we have received from our Fathers is of a
value sufficiently great, to merit a defense, after what manner soever they
attack it. We ought then to endeavor to let them see, that that which they are
made to believe concerning us, is nothing but a false imputation, that we have
an infinitely greater respect for the Church, then any of those who oppose
themselves to hinder its Reformation; that their Maxims tend to the Ruin of the
Church, where ours tend only to preserve it; that our Separation from Rome is
nothing else but an effect of that Love and Jealousy that we have for the
Church, and that it will be most unjust if they shall hate us upon an account,
that ought on the contrary to draw from them all their esteem and Love toward
us.

It is then about this, that we entreat that they would calmly hear us, and
judge us without passion, and without interest, in the fear of that God, whom
we all acknowledge for our Sovereign Judge. Those who always act against us
with a pride that hurries them away, and who have resolved to condemn us, and
to the uttermost of their power to destroy us what ever we say, will not
possibly take our request to be just, and in that Case we shall content our
selves as to them, with the Testimony of our Consciences, which persuades us
not only that God will not condemn us for having been Reformed, but also that
he certainly will, if we do not in that follow the sense of our hearts. But
there are yet enough persons in the Church of Rome of too much equity to follow
the Examples of such a sort of People; these equitable persons are those of
whom we demand that hearing, and that same equity, and moderation, of which
they make such profession, and which the importance of the subject treated on,
challenges them to yield us. We shall tell them nothing which shall not be
founded, either on matters of fact known to all, or upon the inviolable
principles of Religion, or upon the light of Common sense.

To set down this matter in some order, I propose to my self to make evident
these four Propositions.

1. That our Fathers, had both right and obligation to examine the State of
Religion, and the Latin Church, such as it was in their days.

2. That the Reformation which they made was just and lawful.

3. That in Reforming themselves they had right, and were bound to separate
themselves from the Church of Rome.

4. That in Reforming and Separating themselves they had right, and obligation
to maintain among themselves a Christian Society by public Assemblies, and the
exercise of the Ministry. I do not pretend that in Treating of these four
Propositions I have exhausted all my subject, but yet I hope that there will be
few Questions that have some Relation to it, which I do not sufficiently touch
upon, and few Objections which I do not* answer. I will particularly answer to
all those that are contained in that Book of Prejudices, as the order of the
matters that I Treat of, shall present them to me; none of which will begin to
oppose themselves till the seventh Chapter, because that Author having passed
by in silence a great many things that belong to the Foundation of this
Controversy, it will be necessary to touch upon them before we go any farther.

CHAP. II.
That the State of the Government of the Latin Church some Ages ago, gave to
our Fathers Prejudices, of its Corruption in Doctrine and Worship, sufficient
to drive them more nearly to Examine their Religion.

AS our Fathers did not Reform themselves, but by following the Examination
which they made of Religion, such as it was in their days, and as they did not
enter upon that Examination but by the Prejudices which they received that its
state was extremely corrupted, it is necessary to our judging of their Conduct,
to consider in the first place, of what nature and force those Prejudices were,
whether they were just, or unjust, rash or reasonable, and whether they justly
led our Fathers to make a more particular Reflection upon that which they
taught them. It shall be then by this Fundamental Question that we will begin,
and first propose the Prejudices that the corrupted estate of the
Ecclesiastical Government gave them some Ages before; and afterward we shall
consider those that the same External State of Religion furnished them with.

But because this matter will engage us to declare those Truths, which it may
be will not be agreeable to all the World, they ought to remember that we are
within the bounds of a just and natural defense, having been publicly provoked
to it, by a Famous Book, which is alleged on all occasions with great
boasting; and that that Book in assaulting us with Prejudices has furnished us
with the very same Example, to defend our Ancestors likewise by Prejudices,
and that it will be a strange injustice, if while on the one side they charge
us with such foul accusations, they will not allow us on the other side to
declare those things that are essential to our justification. We will declare
them then, but no otherwise then Historically, and upon the proper Testimony of
those Authors which the Church of Rome approves, with a design rather [nakedly]
to show them, then [subtilly] to represent or exaggerate them.

In the first place, Our Fathers beheld, that instead of having kept that
Evangelical simplicity which Jesus Christ and his Apostles had so much
recommended by their Sermons, and their Examples, they had on the contrary
framed the Government of the Church, according to the Platform and Model of
Secular Empires: They saw an almost innumerable Company of Dignities, elevated
by Pompous Titles, Canons, Honors, Preeminencies and Privileges, upheld by
the vast Riches and the Splendour of the World, and all of them together
depending on a Sovereign High Priest who had lifted himself up above the whole
Church, as its rightful Monarch, yea as a Divine Monarch, whose words must be
Laws, and whose Laws Oracles, who pretended to reign not only over the external
Actions of men, but to Lord it also over their Souls, and their Consciences,
and who left nothing so reserved in the deepest and most inward motions of the
Soul, of which he did not demand its Subjection. It had been very hard, if our
Fathers had not found in the midst of the Grandeur of this Body so ordered,
something very much alien to the natural Aspect of the Church of Jesus Christ,
which is much rather a Ministry, then an Empire, in respect of its External
Government. Indeed, if Jesus Christ had had a design to have established such a
Dominion as our Fathers beheld established, he had never told his Disciples
that which he said to them, The Kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship over
them; and they that exercise Authority upon them Luke 22. 25, 26.
are called Benefactours. But it shall not be so with you: but he that is great
among you let him be as the less, and he that is chief, as he that does serve.
St. Peter would never have said to the Pastors of the Church that which he told
them, Feed the stock of Jesus 1 Pet. 5.
Christ which is committed to you, not as being Lords over God's Heritage. It
had then already from thence, in that very Dominion, a great sign of its
Corruption. It was an evil, but an evil that discovered diverse others. For it
had this appearance with it, that the Spirit of the World had got possession of
the Ministers of the Church, till it made them forget what they were in their
first Institution, beyond which it had made them often commit many outrages.

2. They had not contented themselves to establish a Spiritual Dominion upon
the plat-from of Secular ones, unless they joined the very Temporal one it self
to it. The greater part of the Bishops were become Lords properly so called,
and even some of them had got to be Sovereign Princes, with the Titles and
Preregatives of other Princes and Lords, without any difference: had not the
Popes themselves done far better, if they had put themselves in possession of
that which they now call the State of the Church under the quality of Temporal
Lords and Monarchs? I will not mention by piecemeal the Disorders the
Complaints, the Contentions, the Wars that this Spirit of Temporal Dominion has
raised: This is not my design. It is sufficient for me to remark, that one can
scarce give a more certain Character of the Corruption of a Church, then that.
For where that Spirit reigns, it is by that, that men will easily bring in
Errors and Superstitions, at least those that can bring them any advantage, and
those that have a tendency to adjust the Crown with the Miter, and the worldly
Grandeur with the Dignities of the Church. It is not very easy in such a state
to be studiously watchful over the Flock, and much less to repel the Doctrines,
the Customs, and the Maxims that can any ways advance or favor that
Elevation.

3. Covetousness is almost always inseparable from Ambition. They are those two
things that nourish and mutually sustain one another. So, our Fathers saw them
reigning together through a long tract of time among the Churchmen. I will not
here speak of the complaints which they made many Ages ago of the Avarice of
the Court of Rome, because I shall mention something about them hereafter in
this Discourse.

I will only say, that those Complaints were universally extended to all the
Clergy, whom they reproacht with an insatiable greediness of heaping up of
Riches. The vast stocks they had gained, the great Cares they took to hinder an
Alienation, and procure an increase, would not possibly be the worst proofs.
But as that evil spread it self very far, so it was lamented for a long time
after, They feed on the sins of my people, said St. Bernard, who lived Bernard
in Cant. Sermon. 77. Item, Sermon. 33. Nicol. Cusan. lib. 3. de Concord. Cath. c.
29.
in the twelfth Century, that is to say, they require money for their sins,
without making any other account of the Sinuers, Who of the Clergy may you not
observe far more careful to empty the Purses of those set under them, then to
destroy their Vices? A disorderly Appetite of those Lands that are annexed to
the Churches, said Cardinal Cusanus, dwells at this day in the hearts of the
aspiring Bishops, so that we see them do that openly after their promotion,
which they secretly coveted before. All their Care is for the Temporal, and
nothing for the Spiritual. But this was never the mind of the Emperors. They
did not then think that the Spiritual affairs would be ingulpht

in the Temporal, when they gave those goods to the Churches. So, our Fathers
were but too well acquainted with that Spirit of Avarice with animated the
Governors of the Church in their Days, and every one knows that one of the
matters that very much Scandalized them, and made them deliberately examine the
state of Religion, was the Traffic of Indulgences. In effect what likelihood
was there, that a Vice that corrupts all things, and which St. Paul calls the
root of all evil, and elsewhere a kind 1 Timothy 6. 10, 3. Col. 5.
of Idolatry being as it was for many Ages so universally spread over the
Clergy, over the Head, and the Members, even to the Monks themselves, what
likelihood I say was there, that this Vice, which was found to be so much
increased by their Superstitions, should have left Religion in its natural
purity?

4. Our Fathers discerned a prodigious neglect of the Functions of the Ministry
joined with that Covetousness. For a Preaching Bishop was for a long time so
rare, that it was altogether unusual. The Care of the poor, the visiting of the
sick, the comforting the Afflicted, the correcting the Ignorant, the studying
of the Scriptures, and all the other offices belonging to the Pastoral Crosier,
were, if not quite quite abandoned, yet at least extremly neglected, All was
may almost reduced to saying of the service as one speak, and to reading of the
Administration of the Sacraments, and the Formularies of a Liturgy, which a
very few of the People understood, and neither he himself sometimes who read it
before them. It was this that made Nicholas de Clemangis Archdeacon of Bayeux,
who flourished in the beginning of the fifteenth Centuary, to say, that the
study of the Holy Scriptures, and those who taught them were derided by all,
and that which is yet more amazing, is that it is chiefly Nicolaus de Clemangis
de corrupto Statit. Ecclesiae.
the Bishops that scoff at them, preferring their own Traditions to the
Ordinances of God. Now a days, the charge of Preaching which is an Office so
admirable and so glorious, and which heretofore belonged to the Pastors only,
is now thought so vile by them, that there is nothing which they judge more
unworthy of their Grandeur, and to bring more reproach to their Dignity. He
adjoyns, that they made no difficulty openly to profess, that it belonged only
to the begging Friars to Preach, and not to them. But this Negligence did not
spring up in that Age of the Reformation, nor in that, that immediately preceded
it, for since the ninth Century the Pastors of the Church have been extreme
slack in dressing the Vineyard of our Lord. Which could not but have made way
for false Doctrines and Superstitions, and have caused a very great alteration
in Religion.

5. Ignorance was one inevitable Consequence of that carelessness of the
Ministers of the Church, that is to say, that which of all things in the world
was the most improper to engage any to have relied on their Conduct, and to
have rested assured of the sincerity of their instructions. This Ignorance was
very great and very general, in the time of our Fathers, and the most
prejudiced of our Adversaries will not deny it. But it had began a great while
before their days, as it appears, from the Barbarism of the Schools, and from
the matter and style of the greatest part of the Books that the preceding Age
had produced, and from the express Testimony of diverse Authors. The Church of
God, says St. Bernard, every day in diverse manners finds by sad experience,
Bernard de verbis Evangel Dixit Simon, etc. page 1000. Marsil. de Pad. Defens.
pacis. Part 2. cap. 20.
in what great danger she is, when the Shepherd knows not where the Pastures
are, nor the Guide, where the right way is, and when, that very man who should
speak for God, and on his side, is ignorant what is the will of his Master. In
these days, said Marsilius of Padoua in the fourteenth Century, in these days
wherein the Government of the Church is corrupted, the greatest part of the
Priests and Bishops are but meanly instructed in the Holy Scriptures, and I
dare say they are incapable of deciding the doubts of their Faith. For
Ambition, Covetousness, and Canvassings obtain the Temporal Benefices, and they
purchase in effect by their services, or by their prayers, by their Gold or by
their Favor, all the Dignities of the Age. God is my witness, and a great
number of his faithful also, that I remember I have seen many Priests, many
Abbots, and many Prelates so void of knowledge, that they have not known how to
speak even according to the Rules of Grammar. Is it not very natural to
conclude that a number of Errors and Superstitions would infallibly accrue from
the favoring of this Ignorance, and thereby be established in the Church, and
that that, would produce Novelties, and that those which formerly were but
private opinions, or which consisted but in some first dispositions and
[tendencies] to Errors, would become general, and be changed into habits?

6. But, might not our Fathers very well conclude the same thing from that
dreadful depravation of manners, which they and their Fathers had seen reign
for so long a time among the Churchmen? Those who have any knowledge of
History are not ignorant of the Lamentations that all honest men made then, and
the mournful descriptions that they have left of those times in their writings.
One may read for the twelfth Century, only St. Bernard; for the thirteenth,
Cardinal Hugo; for the fourteenth, William Bishop of Mende; for the fifteenth,
Werner Rollewink a Carthusian Monk of Cologne; for they say but too much for
the justifying of these Articles; and for the sixteenth, which was the Age of
the Reformation, who does not know that it was extremely corrupted? One of the
matters of which the Ambassador of the Duke of Bavaria so vehemently
complained before the Council of Trent, on the behalf of his Master, and upon
which he so much insisted, was, the wicked lives of the Clergy, where he said,
that he could not describe their horrible wickednesses without offending
History of the Council of Trent, Book 6.
the chaste ears of the Audience; He subjoyns, That the Prince his Master
remonstrated to the Council, That the Correction of points in Doctrine, would
be vain, and unprofitable, if they did not first correct their manners. That
the Clergy was defamed by reason of their Luxury. That the Civil Magistrate did
not suffer any Layman to have a Concubine, that notwithstanding amongst the
Clergy it was so common a thing to have them, that amidst a hundred Priests one
could not find above three or four who either kept not Whores, or were not
Married, the one secretly, and the others publicly. It is In the Instructions
and Missives of the most Christian King, for the Council of Trent.
with shame that I speak of it, said the Cardinal of Lorrain, in an Oration
that he made to the same Council, but it is also with a sensible displeasure
that I mention the lives that we have led. We are the causes that have swelled
this storm so high, let us cast our selves into the Sea, and since you have our
Confession, punish us after what manner you please. A little before that, he
had said, That the Troubles wherewith France was found to be agitated, were the
effect of a just Judgment of God, and that they had drawn that judgment upon
themselves by that Corruption of manners which was to be found among all Orders
of men, and by the subversion of all Ecclesiastical Discipline. Charles the
ninth also, in those Memoirs that he gave to that Cardinal for the Council, had
expressly set down this Article, That his Majesty with the most extreme regret
was constrained In the same Instructions and Missives.
to complain of the unclean lives of the Ecclesiastics, who brought so much
Scandal and Corruption amongst the Common people, beyond the scandal they took
at their Ministers, that to him it seemed necessary that it should be very
speedily provided against. Tell me I beseech you, what could any justly
conclude from the so licentious lives of Persons who for so long a time since
had made themselves Masters of that Religion, but that there was very little
appearance that that Religion was preserved in its Ancient Purity. I
acknowledge, the ill life of the Pastor is not of its self a sufficient reason
to separate from him; but I affirm, that when that wicked life is found to be
so general in the Clergy, and remains there for some Ages without amendment, it
gives a prejudice exceeding reasonable of some great corruption in that very
Religion it self: For Men of such impure manners can be but very ill Guardians
of Faith and Piety.

7. The Corruption of the Church of Rome in particular, that is to say, of that
Church which calls her self the Mother and Mistress of all others, and which
had in possession the Government of them according to her own will, confirmed
our Fathers in this prejudice. For by this means they saw the Evil did not
confine it self only to the borders, but that it was got into the very heart it
self, that is, into that Church which as the Chief, shed its influence on the
others. Further, I think I need not prove that Corruption, where every one will
yield it as a thing that cannot be contested. Those who have read the Histories
of Luitprand, of Glaber, of Matthew Paris, of Platina, of Baronius, and
Onuphrius, and of many others, cannot deny that since the ninth Century, the Sea of Rome has been most frequently filled with Popes, whose Lives and
Government have not very much edified the World. Every one knows the Complaints
that all the Earth had made, and which it made yet in the days of our Fathers,
not only against the Popes, but against all that they call the Court of Rome,
the Corruption whereof, was looked on as the Cause of that in all the other
Churches. I shall not urge this matter further, but it seems to me that our
Fathers did not deserve the least blame, if they could not believe that such a
sort of men, could have a great zeal for the glory of God, and the Salvation of
men, or that they were so fit and likely to preserve Christianity entire
amongst them, nor in fine, that whereas it was for so many Ages accused to be
the very Center of all Vices, it could be the Center of all the Doctrines of
Faith and Holiness.

8. But although our Fathers should not have reflected on the persons of such
men, yet it is very certain that they found enough Characters of Irregularity
in the Maxims, in the pretensions, and the Government of the Popes, to make
them justly conclude, That they could not but be very ill Conservators of the
purity of Religion. What else could they gather from that excessive Pride so
intolerable to all Christians, that consisted in making their Feet to be Kissed
with a submission far beyond what was yielded to Kings, in making themselves to
be born on the shoulders of men, and to be served by the greatest Princes, or
by their Ambassadors, to wear three Crowns, and to be Adored upon the Altar
after their Election, etc?

9. What could they say, to those proud Titles which they with the greatest
scandal affected to have given them, as that of God in the Canon Law, whereof
see the words, It evidently appears Distinct. 96. Canon. 7.
that the Pope who was called God by Constantine, can be neither bound to any
thing, nor loosed by any Secular Power. For it is manifest that a God cannot be
judged by men. To the same purpose Augustine Steuchus says, That Constantine
called the Pope God, and that he acknowledged him to be so, and he assures us
that from thence it was Aug. Steuchus De falls. Donat. Constantini.
that he made that Excellent Edict in his Favor, he would say, that false
Donation. He adored him, says he, as God, as the successor of Christ, and of
Peter, and rendered him all the ways that he could, Divine Honors, Worshipping
him as the living Image of Jesus Christ. So Clement the seventh, Anti -Pope,
with his Cardinals at Avignon in a Letter which they wrote to Charles the
sixth, which is set down by Froissard, they make no scruple of Froissard. Tom.
3. Fol. 147.
calling him a God upon Earth, seeing as there is, say they, but one only God
in the Heavens, there cannot, and ought not of right to be more then one God on
Earth. After the same manner Angelus Politianus Angel. Politian. Orat. pro Sen.
ad Alexand. Sextum.
in an Oration that he made for those that were sent as Deputies from the City
Sienna to Alexander the sixth, ascribes Divinity to him. We rejoice among our
selves, says he, to behold you raised above all humane things, and elevated
even to Divinity it self, seeing nothing next unto God which is not set under
you. He was not the only person that treated that Pope as God, for Raynaldus
relates that amidst the Pomps of his Coronation one might Raynald ad Ann. 1492.
ss. 27.
see in diverse places of the streets of Rome the Arms of the Pope with Verses
and Epigrams underneath, among which this Distich might be Read:

Caesare magna fuit, nunc Roma est maxima, sextus Regnat Alexander: ille vir,
iste DEVS.

10. What could our Fathers say to that Divine power that the Flatterers of the
Popes attributed to them? As the Glossary of Decretal. Greg. lib. 1. tit. 7.
Can. Quanto, in Glossa.
the Decretals, which remarks, That every one said of the Pope that he had all
Divine power, caeleste arbitrium. That by reason of that he could change the
nature of things, applying the essential properties of one thing to another.
That he could make something of nothing, that a Proposition which was nothing,
he could make to be something; That in all things that he should please to do,
his will might serve for a Reason. That there is none that could say to him,
why do thou do that? That he could dispense with whatsoever was right, and
make injustice to become Justice, by changing and altering of that which was
right. And in fine, that he had a Plenitude, a fullness of Power.

11. What could they say to those Titles which the Popes attributed to
themselves, of being the spouses, Husbands of the Church, and the Vicars of
Jesus Christ? The Church my Spouse, said Innocent the Third, were not married
to me, if she did not bring Itinerar. Ital. Part, 2. de coron. Romans Pontif.
me something, she has given me a Dowry of an inestimable price, the fullness of
all spiritual things, the greatness and spaciousness of Temporals, the Grandeur
and Abundance both of the one and the other. She has bestowed on me the Miter
in token of things Spiritual, The Crown for a sign of the Temporal, the Mitre
for the Priesthood, the Crown, for the Kingdom, substituting me in his place
who had it wrote on his Vestment, and his Thigh, The King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords. After the same style Martin the fifth, entitled himself in this manner,
in the Instructions which he gave to a Nuntio Raynald. ad Ann. 1162.
that he sent to Constantinople, as Raynaldus relates, The most Holy, and most
Happy, who has Heavenly power, who is the Lord of the Earth, the successor of
Peter, The Christ or Anointed of the Lord, the Lord of the Universe, the
Father of Kings, the Light of the World, the Sovereign High Priest, Pope Martin.

12. What could they say to that Scandalous applying to the Popes those
passages of the Scripture, which only and immediately regard God himself, and
his Son Jesus Christ? Baronius relates, that Alexander the Third making his
Entry into the Town of Montpellier, a Sarasin Prince prostrated himself before
him, and adored him as the Holy and venerable God of the Christians, and that
Baron. ad Ann. 1162.
those that were of the Popes train, ravished with Admiration, said one to
another those words of the Prophet, All the Kings of the Earth shall worship
him, and all Nations shall do him service. So, in the Council of Later an one
complemented Leo the Tenth with Council. Lateran. Sess. 7. and 9. in Orat.
these Applications of Scripture, God has given you all power both in Heaven
and in Earth, Weep not Daughter of Sion. Behold the Lion of the Tribe of Judah,
of the stock of David. And those of Palermo, by the Relation of Paulus Jovius,
prostrate at the feet of Martin Paulus Jovius in Philippo 3.
the Fourth, made their addresses to him in the same words that they say to
Jesus Christ before their Altars, Thou that take away the Sins of the World,
have mercy upon us, Thou that take away the the sins of the World, have mercy
upon us, Thou that take away the sins of the World, grant us thy peace.

13. What could our Fathers say to those strange Declarations of some Popes?
that maintained, that all Laws resided in them, that all the Rules of Justice
were enclosed within their Breasts, that it was necessary to the Salvation of
every Creature that he should be subject to the Pope of Rome, that they had in
their hands the Temporal and Spiritual Sword, and other expressions of the like
nature? So Paul the second answered Platina, who requested him that he would
Renvoy, signifies properly a simple dismission granted to one, that being
appealed or called before a superior Judge, requires to be dismissed to the
prosecuting of his suit already begun before the inferior (his Ordinary) Judge.
dismiss him to the prosecuting of his suit about a very important affair,
before the Auditors of the Rota, because the Sentence that the Pope had given
was unjust, Is it so then, says he, that you would have us be brought to be
tried before the Judges? Do not you know that we have all the Laws shut up
within our own Breast? In the close of that business Platina having taken the
boldness to say he would demand Justice of a Council, the Pope put him into a
strait Prison. So also Boniface the Eighth begins one of his Decretals in these
words, Licet Romanus Pontifex qui jura omnia in scrinio pectoris sui censetur
habere. It was the same person who desin'd the necessity of subjecting ones
self to the Pope after this manner. Subesse Romana Pontifici, omni humanae
Creaturae, dicimus, declaramus, definimus, and pronuntiamus, esse de
necessitate Salutis, Platina in vit.
and who said, that although the Papal Authority was given to a man, and that
though it was exercised by a Man, it was never the less Divine, Sexto Decret.
tit. 2. cap. 1. Sext. Decret. Extravag. lib. 1. De major. and obed. cap. 1.
that though the Papal power came to be depraved, yet it could not be judged by
any man, but by God alone, because the Apostle has said, that the Spiritual man
judges all things and is himself judged of no man. That there are two Swords
that are in the power of the Church, the Spiritual and the Temporal, the one of
the which had its use for the Church, and the other the Church her self
exercised, the one is in the hand of the Pope, and the other in those of Kings
and Soldiers, but whose management depends on the good pleasure, and the
sufferance of the Pope.

14. What could our Fathers say to those prodigious pretensions that the Popes
made over Emperors and Kings, even to make their Crowns depend on their
pleasure, to dethrone them, to give away their Kingdoms to others, and to
absolve their Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance. Every one knows what the
decisions were that Gregory the Seventh made in a Council held at Rome in the
year, 1076. against the Emperor Henry the Fourth whom he had deposed, and whose
Subjects he had absolved of their Oaths of Allegiance. One may call those
decisions the Dictatorship of the Pope, do but see some of their Articles as
they are set down by Baronius. That the Bishop of Rome only could wear the
Imperial Ornaments. That all Princes were wont to kiss the feet of the Pope
alone. That only his name ought to be mentioned in the Baron. ad Ann. 1076.
Churches, That there was but one chief name in the World, which was that of
the Pope. That he had right to depose Emperors, That his Decrees could be made
void by none whosoever he were, but that he alone could make void all others.
That he could loose the Subjects of wicked Princes from their Oaths of
Allegiance. The Decretals are full of the like attempt of Boniface the Eighth,
upon Philip the Fair, one of our Kings. He went so far as to excommunicate him,
and to absolve his subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance, and in fine to give
away his Crown to the Emperor Albert. I confess that he was punished as he
deserved, and that the French on this occasion served their Prince with great
zeal. The same Platina mentioned before, could not forbear making this
reflection on the Platin. in vit. Bonif. 8.
Death of this Pope, Thus died this Boniface, who thought of nothing less then
of terrifying Emperors, Kings, and Princes, and all men, that he might the more
inspire into them a Religious respect, and who pretended to give and take away
by force, whole Kingdoms, to overturn and re-establish all men by the mere
motion of his Will. But howsoever it was, the bad success of Boniface could not
hinder our Fathers from judging as they ought of these insolent pretensions of
the Popes, and taking notice, that those who made their very Religion to serve
their Ambition, seeing their Ambition had no bounds, had a peculiar interest to
feed the people with their Superstitions, for they were such as enslaved their
Souls, where true Piety would have ennobled, and freed Men from that yoke which
they would have imposed on us. Further, if any would more particularly see how
far the Claims of the Roman See went, they need but to read what Augustine
Steuchus Library Keeper to the Pope, has wrote, for he ascribes to the Popes
the very same Temporal rights, in the same Latitude, wherein the Old Roman
Empire possessed them, and he proves from the Register of Gregory the Seventh,
that Spain, Hungary, England, Denmark, Russia, Croatia, Dalmatia, Arragon,
Portugal, Bohemia, Swedland, Norway, Dacia, did all heretofore belong to the
Popes, and that all that Pepin, Charlemain, Henry, and other Emperors gave to
the Church, brought him not any new rights, but only set him in the possession
of that which the violence of the Barbarians had wrested from him.

15. What could our Fathers say to those unjust Usurpations of the Popes over
the whole Body of the Church, over which they pretended Soveraignly to reign,
to have Authority to decide matters of Faith, to make new Laws, to dispense
with the Ancient Constitutions, to call Councils, to transfer them from one
place to another, to Authorize, or to condemn them, to Judge all the World,
without being liable to be judged of any, in a word of making all things to
depend on their power, and binding all Churches to submit themselves to its
decisions about matters of Faith and Rules of Discipline, not only with a bare
external obedience, but with a real acquiescence of their Consciences? By
Reason of which they were accustomed, as they practice it even at this present
in their Bulls, to place in the Front the fullness of their Power, and to adjoyn
this Clause, That no man should dare to be so rash as to infringe or go
contrary to their Decrees, under penalty of incurring the indignation of God,
and the blessed Apostles, Peter and Paul. I know there were some that sometimes
did very strongly oppose these pretensions of the Court of Rome, that some
Councils did labor to repress them, and that the Church of France has appeared
often enough jealous of its Liberty. But besides that those oppositions never
had that success which might justly have been hoped for, on the part of the
Popes, who almost always eluded them, besides that, I say, they did but serve
to confirm the prejudices of our Fathers, by daily discovering to them more and
more of the Corruption of the Sea of Rome.

16. What could they Judge of those Dispensations that the Popes gave in the
business of Marriages within prohibited degrees, against the express words of
the Law of God, and in the Case of Vows which they themselves held to be
lawful, and in diverse other matters, even against that which they call the
general State of the Church? What do we think we ought to say at present, said
Gerson, of the easiness whereby Dispensations are given by the Pope Joan.
Gerson. de Eccles. potest. Consid. 10.
and by the Prelates, to lawful Oaths, to reasonnable Vows, to a vast Plurality
of Benefices, against all the minds, or as he speaks even to a universal
gainsaying of Councils, in privileges and exemptions that destroy common
Equity? Who can reckon up all the ways whereof they serve themselves to loosen
the force of Ecclesiastical Discipline, and to oppose and destroy that of the
Gospel? Who can read without some Commotion, that which Innocent the Third has
wrote? That by the fullness of his Power, he had a lawful power to dispense with
Decretal. Gregor. lib. 3. tit. 8. cap. 4.
that that was beyond all Equity. And that, that the Glossary has subjoyned,
That the Pope can dispense against an Apostle, against the Canons of the
Apostles, and against the Old Testament in the Case of Tithes. It is added that
he cannot dispense against the general State of the Church, and yet elsewhere
the Gloss on the Decret. part. 2. Cause. 25. Quest. 1. Canon. 6. ad Gloss.
Decree of Gratian assures us, that the Pope may sometimes dispense against the
General State of the Church, and for that alleges the Example of Innocent the
Third in the Council of Lateran.

17. What could our Fathers Judge of those vast abuses that were committed in
dispencing with the Ecclesiastical Functions, given most frequently to persons
altogether unworthy and incapable, and sometimes to Children, to the great
scandal of Christianity, which complained of it highly a long time ago? They
prefer, said St. Bernard, little Schoolboys, and young Children Bernard.
Epist. 42.
to Church Dignities, because of the Nobility of their Birth. So that you may
see those that are just got from under the Ferula, go to command Priests, who
were yet more fit to escape the Rod, then to be employed in Government, for
they are far more sensible of the pleasure of being freed from their Masters,
then of that of becoming Masters themselves. Those are their first thoughts,
but afterward growing more bold, they very soon learn the Art of appropriating
the Altars to themselves, and of emptying the purses of those that are under
them, without going to any other School, then that of their Ambition and their
Covetousness. How few may one find now a days of those who are raised to the
Episcopal Grandeur, said Nicholas de Clemangis, who have either read, or know
how to read the Holy Scripture, otherwise then by Nicol. Cleman. de Corr. Stat.
Eccles.
first beginning to read? They have never touched any other part of the Holy
Bible then the Cover, although in their Installment they swear that they know
it all.

18. What could our Fathers say to that Simony which was every where openly
exercised in the Church of Rome in all things? The Court of Rome, says Aeneas
Sylvius, gives nothing without money. It sells the very Imposition of hands,
and the gifts of the Holy Ghost, Aeneas Sylv. Epist. lib. 1. Ep. 66.
and will give pardon of Sins to none but such who will part with their Money.
The Church that Jesus Christ has chosen for his Spouse without spot and
blemish, says Nicholas de Clemangis, is in these days Nicol. Cleman. de praesul.
a Warehouse of Ambition and Business, of Theft and Rapine. The Sacraments and
all Orders, even to that of the Priests, are exposed to Sale. For Money they
bestow Favors, Dispensations, Licenses, Offices, Benefices, They sell pardons
of sins, Masses, and the very Administration of our Lords Body. If any one have
a mind to a Bishopric, he needs but to get himself furnished with Money, yet
not a little Sum, but a great one must purchase such a great Title. He needs
but to empty his Purse to obtain the Dignity that he seeks, but he may soon
after fill it again with advantage by more ways then one. If any one desire to
be made a Prebendary, or a Priest of any Church, or to have any other charge,
it matters not whether his merits, or his Life, or his Manners be known, but it
is very requisite it should be known how much Money he has. For according as he
has that, he must have his hopes succeed. Such were the Complaints that honest
men made in those days, and one might make a large Volum of them, if these
Ancient Disorders were not so publicly known. One has published not long since
a Book of the Rates of the Chancellerie
Apostolic Chamber, and the Taxes enjoined for Penances, which alone declares
more then it will be necessary for us to stay upon for our Edification. There
not only every dispatch of business, but every sin also, every crime has its
set Price, and as there is nothing to be done without Money, so there is
nothing which Money cannot do.

19. I could add to all that I have said, a multitude of other things, that
could not but have been very proper to have raised those prejudices in the
minds of our Fathers, whereof we have spoken. For those unjust ways which Rome
has made use of to draw all affairs to it self, with all the Riches of the
West, all the underhand Canvassings, and strange Practices it has used in the
Elections of Popes, the Scandalous Schisms that have sprung from the Divisions
of Parties, and Differences of Elections, The Bloody Wars that the Popes are
accused to have diverse times kindled among Christian Princes, the Intrigues,
the dishonest ways whereby they are said to have served themselves, to engage
the Kings and Grandees of the World in their Interests, the endeavors they
have always used to elude the demands of a Reformation; all these things
sufficiently discover more of the Spirit of the World, then of the Spirit of
Jesus Christ, and will easily persuade all those who are not wholly deprived of
their Reason, that there must needs have been latent at the bottom an extreme
Coruption.

But we ought to make an end of this Chapter, and to leave a matter so
ungrateful, into which we had not at all entered, if we had not been obliged by
the necessity of a just defense, as I have before declared. It only remains
that we shut up in the Close of all those things which we have represented, by
concluding that they cannot, at least without renouncing all equity, any more
condemn our Fathers, either of rashness or presumption, if they durst persuade
themselves, that the Church and Religion were fallen into the very worst hands,
and if they judged from thence that they ought to enter upon a more particular
scrutiny of those Doctrines that they taught, and of those Laws whereby they
would bind their Consciences. That Consequence which they drew from thence, was
but the just effect of a Reason animated by the fear of God, and a desire which
they had of their own Salvation: for what color or pretense could there be,
that a Disorder in the Government of the Church, so great, so ancient, so
general, should not be accompanied with a multitude of other Errors contrary to
the word of God, and prejudicial to the Salvation of men?

CHAP. III.
That the External State of that Religion it self had in the times of our
Fathers, signs of its Corruption sufficient to afford them just motives to
Examine it.

ALthough these Reflections that I have already set down, drawn from the
Government of the Church, were very weighty, and by themselves capable of
making the most just impressions on the Minds and Consciences of those who
would set themselves to work out their own Salvation, according to the
Exhortation of the Apostle with fear and trembling, yet we ought not to imagine
that our Fathers were determined by those considerations alone. They yet made
others which they had, that we may yet be more sensibly touched by them, since
they had for their object not the outward Form or State of the Ministry, nor
the persons who possessed the Offices and Dignities of the Church, but their
Religion it self, in that State in which it was in their days. For it is most
true, that it was scarce possible for those who did the least in the World fix
their Eyes on that Religion, to consider its Draught and its External Form,
without discovering, or at least without discerning infinite Characters of its
Corruption. And this is that which I design to treat of in this Chapter.

1. One of the chief Objects that presented it self to our Fathers, was that of
the great Number of Ceremonies, with which they beheld that Religion either
shrouded or overwhelmed: It matters little which of the two we affirm, for
which way soever we take it, it was always a true Pourtrait of the old Economy
of Moses, which seemed to be revived in the World. They took special notice of
their external sacrifices, their solemn Feasts, distinction of Meats, of their
Altars, of their Tapers, of their sacred Vessels, of their Censings, of their
set Fasts throughout the Year, of their mystical Figures, and a multitude of
particular things altogether resembling those that were enjoined under the Law,
and in general, a great Conformity to that Antient-Worship consisting in such a
Love and Excessive usage of Ceremonies. This was without doubt a Character very
opposite to that of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, where the Spirit Rules, and not
the Letter, and which is made free from all that great cumbrance of External
Observations. St. Paul calls these Observances, weak and beggarly Elements, a
Yoke of bondage, the Galat. 4. Colos. 2. Act. 15. John 4. 23.
rudiments of the World, the shadow of things to come, whereof the body is
Jesus Christ. and St. Peter, a Yoke which neither the Jews in his days nor
their Fathers were able to bear. Jesus Christ himself told the woman of
Samaria, That the time was come, when the true worshippers of his Father,
should worship him in Spirit and in truth. What likelihood was there that they
would have spoke after that manner if the Church of Christ her self should be
burdened with as many or more Ceremonies then the Synagogue; And, if as
Tertulian speaks, God had not removed the difficulties of the Law, to
substitute in their places the easy Rules of the Gospel? They would have
Preached to us the Spirit and Liberty, only to have us subjected again to the
Letter, and to have placed us under a servitude far more insupportable then the
Former.

2. Moreover, as our Fathers saw one part of those Ceremonies taken from the
Jews, so they preceiv'd a multitude of others that were drawn from, or
imitated, the Heathens, by their approving of the same which they either
Authorized, or practiced. For we might put into this rank the use of holy
water, or water Consecrated for sprinkling, in the entrance into Churches as
well as private Houses, and the Funerals of the dead, the blessings and the
sprinklings, the using of Spittle in the Baptism of little Children, the
Invocation of Saints, their Canonization, their Patronages, and ordering of
their Charges and Employments; Their Images and Pictures, their Agnus Dei's,
their Feasts for all the Saints, for the deaths of St. John, and many others,
their usage of Processions, of Rogations, their visiting the Shrines or
Relics of Saints, of setting up the sign of the Cross where four ways met, of
Anniversaries for the dead, of swearing by their Relics, and I know not how
many others, that were evidently either the Remnants, or Imitations of Ancient
Paganism. Who would think it strange that an Idea of a Religion that plainly
appeared to be so little advantageous to it, or to say better, which was so
contrary to the Spirit and the true design of Christianity, should have touched
our Fathers, and inspired into them a desire of knowing those things a little
more particularly then they had as yet done?

3. They were yet further carried out with that desire, when they considered
the ill Effects that those Ceremonies borrowed from the Pagans had produced,
and some others that were annexed to them, as Rosaries, Chaplets, holy Salt,
their Pilgrimages, and and Monastic Vows, and such like things. For they
manifestly filled the minds of men with superstition, they caused a thousand
abuses among the people, they ordinarily made way for lying Forgeries, and,
which rendered them yet far more odious, they fomented a too natural negligence
which every one has, for works of true and solid Piety, whether, by busying the
minds of Christians too much, or persuading them, that they had very well
acquitted themselves of their duty by doing these External things, or lastly,
whether it was by infusing into them a false Idea of Divinity, as if all its
worship did consist in such Trumpery. Who is it that sees not what a great
prejudice this was against a Religion that taught such things, and so solemnly
enjoined them to be practiced?

4. It had been yet very hard, if our Fathers had not been offended by that
worldly Pomp, wherewith they saw Religion so excessively clothed. For they
very well knew, that true Christianity was contented to gain the Hearts and
Souls of men by the Majesty of its Doctrines and Holiness of its Precepts. And
that for the rest, it professed to retain its simplicity, notwithstanding which
they observed a clean contrary Character in the Magnificence of their Tenples,
in the Gold of their Tabernacles, in the Pride of their Sacrifices, in the
Riches of their Ornaments, and in general in all that external splendor, which
seemed destined only to strike extraordinarily the senses, and by this means to
raise an ill grounded Admiration, that which is proper to only corrupt
Religions, which as Tertullian takes notice, labor to gain their Authority,
and to obtain the belief of the People, by their Tertul. de Baptismo.
Pomp, and their profuseness.

5. The Natural Effect of the Doctrines of Christianity, when they are received
with Faith, and when its worship is practiced with Devotion, is to comfort the
Conscience, and to give it a certain satisfaction and calm, which is better
felt, then it can be expressed. But our Fathers were so far from receiving that
Effect from the Doctrines and worship wherein they made in their days almost
the Fundamentals of Religion to consist, as in the Invocation of Saints, the
absolute Obedience to the Pope or to his Councils, the conceit of Men's
satisfactions, the Adoration of Relics, the Pilgrimages and other things of
the like nature; they were I say, so far from receiving it from these
Doctrines, that on the contrary they could not but feel secret remorses after
having practiced them. For the Consciences of Christians are naturally carried
out to none but God alone, and cannot endure that that which is due to him,
should be divided between him and the Creatures. They have naturally a
reluctance, to call upon any other Being then the first Cause of all, to pay a
Religious service to lifeless Images, to subject themselves to any other
Oracle, then that of God, to attribute any part of their Redemption to any
others besides Jesus Christ, who has acquired for them a fullness of Salvation;
And in a word, to lay hold on any Creature as the object of their Confidence or
Piety; so our Fathers knowing from their own Experience, that these Tenets and
Devotions were, not only barren of all that quiet, but at the same time
contrary to the peace of their Souls, they could not but receive a great
prejudice against those Tenets, and against those Devotions themselves, and
against that Religion that proposed them.

6. But that was not all, they saw yet many things in that Religion most
formally opposite to many plain and express passages of Scripture; As the point
of Images, to the second Commandment, Thou shall not make to thy self any
graven Image, etc. That of Communion only in one kind, to that Command of Jesus
Christ, Drink ye all of this, That of Praying in an unknown Tongue, to the
Prohibition of St. Paul in the fourteenth of the first Epistle to the
Corinthians: Else, if thou shall bless with the Spirit, how shall he that
occupies the Room of the unlearned, say Amen at thy giving of thanks, seeing
he uuderstandeth not what thou say? For thou verily give thanks well, but
the other is not Edified. And the business of blind Subjection to the Ministers
of the Church, to that strict Declaration of the Apostle, We have not Dominion
over your Faith. That of the Papal Monarchy, to these words of our Savior, The
Kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship, etc. but it shall not be so with you,
That of humane satisfactions, to the words of St. John, The blood of Jesus
Christ cleanses us from all Sin. And that of the Sacrifice of the Mass, to
that Doctrine of St. Paul to the Hebrews, That Jesus Christ has once offered up
himself for us. I do not at all enquire, whether the force of these passages
may be eluded, and distorted to a sense that may agree with those points which
I have mentioned, I do not enter upon that. It is enough if any see that
opposition of which I speak to appear at 1 sight, that it likewise strikes the
Soul, and seems at least strong enough to Create great scruples, and to form a
prejudice that carried our Fathers on to examine those things a little more
narrowly.

7. To which they were yet further urged by the Consideration that they made of
some Maxims and Distinctions which they ordinarily made use of to uphold the
worshipping of Creatures, for they discovered in them something that was
extremly Scandalous. For Example, where they maintained the Worshipping of
Angels, and that of the Saints, by saying, that they did not adore them, but by
a lower sort of Adoration, proportioned to the excellency they acknowledged to
be in them, not, that they gave them that supreme Adoration which is due to
none but God alone. I do not here put it in Question, whether this distinction
be good or bad, it is sufficient that it had the ill luck to fall in with that
which the Ancient Heathens made use of for the defense of those Adorations
which they paid to their Genius's, to their Heroes, to their Demi, and
inferior Gods, etc. For the Pagans said the same, that men did them great
wrong in laying it to their charge, that they worshipped their Genius's and
inferior Gods with that Sovereign Worship, which they gave to none but the
chief and greatest of the Gods. And that that worship about which the Question
was, was only an inferior and lower kind of Worship. So they defended their
worshipping of Images by that Distinction of Absolute and Relative Worship; but
that was the very same distinction which the Pagans served themselves of, to
excuse the Worship they rendered to the Statues of their Gods, alleging, that
any one very much wronged them, in imagining that they served Stocks of Wood,
or Stones, but their Devotion was carried out only to those objects that those
Statues represented. They defended the Invocation of Saints by that
distinction, That they did not pray to them, as the Authors of those graces
which they desired, but only as they were mere Intercessours before God. But
yet the very Heathens said the same as to those Prayers which they offered up
to their Inferior Gods, whom they acknowledged to be but as the Friends and
Favorites of the great God, whom they made use of toward him to obtain
blessings for themselves. They defended a Company of Opinions and Customs in
their Religion, by saying, that they were the Traditions which they had
received from the hands of their Fathers; but that defense had yet this
unhappiness; that it favored the Jews against those censures of Jesus Christ,
and that which Jesus Christ had wholly beaten down by those words, in vain do
they worship me, teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of men. Mar. 15. 9.


8. We might here very well join to what has been said, the scandal our Fathers
must needs have taken at that School Divinity, which for a long time had filled
the World with Questions not only vain and frivolous, but pernicious also, and
leading men to wickedness; we could make a long Catalogue of those Questions,
if the common interest of Christianity did not oblige us to conceal them from
the Public, but because we fear the ignorant or the malicious will lay it to
our charge that we would impose on the World under a pretense of an affected
modesty, we will send our Readers to that Collection which Cardinal Perron
himself has made in his Treatise of the Eucharist. Page 920. where I assure my
self they will find on one only Article, which is that of the Incarnation of
the Word, more then enough to justify that which I have said. What can any one
think of such a manner of treating of the Mysteries of Religion, and of that
Art they had joined with it, to defend all things by, and that even the most
remote from sense, and by distinctions crude and senceless, if it were not,
that all that was very likely to raise an abundance of Errors, and excellently
contrived for the maintaining of all such, as Ignorance, Passion, Engagements
or Interests would yet have produced? I know that the wiser sort among our
Adversaries, are themselves ashamed of it, but they cannot deny that it was
almost the only way of Teaching the Divinity of Rome for a long time before the
Reformation, and that it was but a very just prejudice against the State of
Religion, that depended so absolutely on that of the Schools.

9. One of the Effects of that disorder of the Schools, was the depraving of
Christian Morality, by the introduction of diverse destructive Maxims, which
tended only to corrupt men's minds and hearts, as well in respect of Piety
toward God, as of Justice and common Charity toward men, and of that
Temperance that every man ought to maintain in his Actions. It would be too
long to relate in this place all the proofs that make good this Charge, I shall
content my self to allege only some Pieces that have made too much noise in
the World to be unknown, They are on one side the Provincial Letters ascribed
to Mr. Paschal, and some other Treatises which we have seen Published against
the Moral Divinity of the Jesuits; And on the other side, The Apology for the
Casuists, and the Book of Amedeus Guimenius. Those former pieces accuse the
Jesuits of Teaching and establishing Maxims, Rash, Erroneous, Scandalous, and
altogether contrary to good manners, and the others let us see, that the
Doctrine of the Jesuits in that respect, is wholly like to that of the Ancient
Schoolmen, and that one cannot condemn the Jesuits without condemning at the
same time the whole Ancient School of the Roman Church. For Example, The one
sort accuses the Jesuits of Teaching, That it is lawful for one man to rejoice
within himself at the death of another, and to desire it, not only when it is
an evil to him who suffers it, but also when it is advantageous to him who
desires it. But Guimenius shows us, that, that is exactly the Doctrine of
Thomas Aquinas, of Cajetan and diverse others, who all maintain the same. The
one accuses the Jesuits for Teaching, That it is but a Venial sin, to be
disobedient to Divine Inspirations. But Guimenius shows, that that is also the
Doctrine of Aquinas and Cajetan. They accuse the Jesuits of Teaching, That it
is lawful to advise and at the same time to draw in a man to commit a lesser
Sin, to avoid a greater Evil; As to persuade a Lascivious man to mere
Fornication, that he may avoid committing Adultery. But Guimenius proves this
to be the Doctrine of Cajetan, Sotus, and Sylvester Prierias. They accuse the
Jesuits of maintaining, that a man may, not only not remove an occasion or
ground of sin from another whom they know will abuse it to that end, but that
they may at the same time present it to him, and by that means lay a snare for
him to make him fall into Sin, provided, they do it with a good intention,
either to correct his Viciousness, or to make him shun some other
inconvenience; so that a Husband who is jealous of his Wives committing
Adultery, may present her with an opportunity or occasion to commit it, and a
Father may lay an occasion in his Childrens way to steal from him. But
Guimenius lets us see that this is the very opinion of Aquinas, Sotus, Navarr,
and of Cajetan. I omit an abundance of other beastly cases, which no one can
propose without wounding his modesty. They will say to this, it may be, that
the Sorbonne has censured that Book of Guimenius: but this Answer signifies
nothing, for we are not concerned to know what the Sorbonne holds in these
days, nor what it approves or condemns, but to know, whether those Authors that
Guimenius has alleged, are well or ill quoted, whether it were not true, That
those Scandalous and Pernicious Maxims were taught in the School in the days of
our Fathers, and whether our Fathers ought not to have looked on them as
evident and certain proofs of a great corruption?

10. I know not whether we might not here make a particular Reflection on the
procedure of the Council of Constance, which notwithstanding the safe conduct
granted by the Emperor Sigismund to John Huss, and Jerome of Prague, made no
scruple to condemn them to be burnt alive, and to Cause that Sentence of their
Condemnation to be executed. For so that Council violated the public Faith, by
a most Solemn and resplendent Action. Council. Constant. Sess. 19.
But it was not contented with that, unless it did at the same time add a
Decree that it expressly made on that Subject, bearing this with it, that all
Letters of safe Conduct granted to Heretics by any Emperors, Kings or Princes,
ought not to hinder the Judges [to whom it should appertain to take Cognizance
of their Crimes, whether they were Laymen or Churchmen,] from proceeding
against them, and punishing them with the greatest severity. Aeneas Sylvius
relates that that sentence, through the force of which they were exposed to the
Fire, was given in Full Council, Lata est, says he, in concessu Patrum adversus
contumaces sententia, CREMANDOS esse qui Doctrinam Ecclesiae respuerent, Aeneas
Sylv. Hist. Bohem. cap. 36.
prior igitur Joannes combustus est, Hieronimus diu postea in vinculis habitus,
cum resipiscere nollet, pari supplicio affectus. He adds, that those two men
suffered that Torment, with and admirable Fortitude, singing of Hymns in the
midst of the Flames. This was in that time very astonishing, to see a Council
gathered in a Body, wholly intent upon the causing the death of two Christians;
since it is certain amongst Christians, that the Church has no power over the
Temporal Lives of men. But that Scandal was yet made greater by the way they
carried it on, for to come to that, they made no difficulty of violating all
that was the most sacred and inviolable in humane Society, I would say, the
public Faith given by the Authentic Authority of the Sovereign Magistrate,
and given, with all the appearances of their own consents, as one may collect
from the Words of Aeneas Sylvius. For he says as that Council was laboring in
the affairs of Bohemia, Placuit tandem, Sigismundo Imperatore suadente, Joannem
and Hieronymuus ad Synodum vocari. They thought good through the Entreaties of
the Emperor Sigismond, that John and Jerome should be called to the Council.
They then made no scruple of violating that Faith, to which they had consented,
and not only to break it by that Action, and in that Practice, but framed at
the same time a Decree to authorize that breach of Faith, and made it a lawful
Rule for Posterity to go by. Who can deny that our Fathers had not here a just
cause to be shaken at that management of affairs which had violently born down
all that wise and moderate men since have conceived, and that they had not
reason to join that to all those other things I have mentioned, as a most
powerful prejudice against a Religion that maintained it self, by such strange
proceedings?

11. They might have added also to the rest, methinks, the establishment of
Inquisitions, and usage of Croisado's against those who were pretended to be
Heretics. For it is most true that such a way of maintaining Religion by
Torments and Armies raised by the Clergy, as the Popes had used some ages since
against the Waldenses, the Albigenses, the Wicklifists, and the Hussites, was
not at all proper to make it be beloved, or to instill into men's minds an
extreme good opinion of it. There where they would introduce the Faith by
force, they shut up peoples hearts instead of gaining them. That course is good
no farther then for Temporal Monarchies, or Mundane Religions, where men are
not much concerned whether they reign over the Spirits of men, provided they
reign over their Bodies. But that is not at all the way that Jesus Christ uses,
who sets up his throne in their Consciences, and who knows no other conquests
but those, which the sword that comes from his mouth, gains.

12. But besides those cruel ways which they made use of for the upholding
their Religion, they employed yet others, as well as those, which though they
were not so severe, did not fail of being as odious, and of raising as strong
suspicions against that Religion it self. I might rank in this place, those
false Miracles which they invented every day to gain credit to some Doctrines
and Devotions, which of themselves had no foundation at all in the word of God.
For every own knows how much these sort of Fables were in use in the days of
our Fathers, and some Ages before, with what care they spread them among the
people, in Preaching them up with Zeal, and defending them with heat, and in
stuffing their Legends with them, and other Books of that nature. But every own
knows likewise that the greatest part of them were so grossly invented, that a
very mean understanding could easily detect their falsness. We might join with
those false Miracles, those stories of Visions, or Apparitions of the Blessed
Virgin, or some other Saint, to the Religious men or women, which were so
frequent that one can find nothing else in the Books of the Monks of those
Ages. We might Place here also those so often devised Tales of the returns of
Souls out of Purgatory, of their Apparitions, their Complaints, and pitiful
Groans, of their requests to be eased of their pains by their Masses, and
Foundations, and of the outcries and terrible din that they* made upon Men's
least neglect to perform what they begged of them. I do not now examine whether
those Doctrines which gave ground to those pretended Miracles, to those
Visions, and Apparitions, were Evangelical or not; it is enough for me to note
that, that falseness that appeared in the greatest part of those gross,
Inventions, which were so often publicly detected, rendered that Religion
justly suspected, not only in respect of those Opinions and Devotions which
they pretended to authorize by those frauds, but also in general, as to all
that which came under the name of Traditions.

13. Might we not say the same thing of so many forged and supposititious
Books, the making and use of which had been so frequent in the Ages that
preceeded the Reformation; not to meddle with what is reported of the Monks,
that they did not scruple to serve themselves by forged Deeds, to enrich their
Convents, and gain Privileges to them. Without touching upon that, there are
few Persons that are ignorant of what Character the Decretal Epistles of the
Ancient Popes are, collected under the name of one Isidore Mercator, whereof
the Court of Rome has made so advantageous a use for the establishing of its
Authority, and of the pretended donation of Constantine, by which that Emperor
is said to have given away the Roman Empire, and all its rights to the Pope.
Every own knows also how they had forged whole Books and Treatises under the
most Ancient and Venerable names, as the Epistle of the Blessed Virgin to Saint
Ignatius, the Works of Dionysius the Areopagite, the Epistles of Saint Martial,
the Acts of the Passion of Saint Andrew, by the Priests of Achaia, the
Liturgies of Saint James, Saint Peter, and of Saint Mark, and diverse others of
the same nature: None are ignorant how they had mingled some false pieces into
the true Works of the Fathers, as in those of Justin Martyr, of Origin, of
Saint Cyprian, of Saint Athanasius, of Saint Hilary, of Saint Ambrose, of Saint
Chrysostom, of Saint Jerome, of Saint Augustine, and almost generally of all
the Fathers, whose names they have made use of to authorize their forgeries.
None are ignorant what alterations they had made in the true writings of the
Fathers, whether by changing their words, or adding to them, or sometimes in
cutting off considerable clauses and whole passages entire. Who sees not that
these ill practices, which of themselves are so odious in all sorts of matters,
and especially in those of Religion, could not but increase the just suspicions
that our Fathers had of all that which they named Tradition?

14. We might make the same judgment of that visible abuse about Relics which
was brought into the Church. For on the one side, the devotion of the people
was so hot as to that point, that it could not keep it self within any measure,
and on the other, the Cheats about them were so multiplied, that even those of
the weakest understandings could not behold them without being ashamed of them.
That prodigious quantity of the wood of the true Cross which is scattered over
the World, witnesses this; as likewise the Slippers and Hose of Saint Joseph,
the Shift of the Blessed Virgin, her Coifs, her Fillets, her Girdles, her two
Combs, her Clothes, her Wedding-Ring, the Sword wherewith Saint Michael fought
with the Devil, the twelve Combs of the Apostles, some of the Stones wherewith
Saint Steven was stoned, the Skin of Saint Bartholomew, the Coals that broiled
Saint Laurence, Aarons Rod, the Bones of Abraham, of Isaac and Jacob; And
beyond all that, the multiplication of one and the same Relic, which is to be
found in diverse places; for there is nothing more ordinary then for one to see
two, three, or four Bodies of the same Saint, as of Saint Gervase, Saint
Protais, Saint Sebastian, of Saint Pretonilla, Saint Anthony, and some others.
All which being very much recommended to the People as the true objects of
their Devotion, not only without any certain grounds, but very often with all
the appearances of falsness, could not but create a vast prejudice of
corruption in that Church and Religion.

15. Moreover, when our Fathers cast their eyes upon the four chief means that
God has established in his Church for the preserving of true Faith and Piety in
it, which are, the Scriptures, the public Worship, Preaching, and the
Sacraments, and when they considered after what manner they were altered, and
the use of all those means almost brought to nothing, it was not possible they
could do otherwise than conclude that corruption whereof we dispute. For as to
the Scripture, instead of making that the only Rule of Faith, they had joined
Traditions with them, that is to say, the most uncertain thing in the World,
the most subject to Impostures, and the most mixed with humane inventions and
weaknesses. Instead of recommending the reading of that Divine word, to the
Faithful, for their Instruction and their Comfort, it could scarce be found
even in the hands of some Churchmen. And as for the Schools, they knew far
better how to quote Aristotle, the Master of the Sentences, Albertus Magnus,
Saint Thomas, and Saint Bonaventure, then the Prophets and Apostles. As for the
public Service, they performed it some Ages ago in a strange Tongue unknown to
the people, who by this means were deprived of that benefit which they might
justly expect. So that the Assemblies were become in that respect, Springs
stopped up for any public edification, and their little Prayers themselves, the
Lords Prayer and the Creed, were then read almost only in Latin, and the Women,
and Children, and People, seemed to know God only by the Idea that was given
them of that Tongue, in which notwithstanding they understood nothing. As for
Preaching, besides that the Pulpit in the greatest part of that time was
abandoned, we have yet some Books of the Sermons which they made in those days,
as of Jacobus de Voragine, of a Menot, a Maillard, a Barelette, a Discipulus de
Tempore, which did no very great honor to their Age. They treat there far
oftener of the Legends of the Saints, then the truths of Religion; and that
which was yet more deplorable, instead of the Word of God, they Preached,
almost nothing else but scandalously extravagant Opinions, raw Parallels of a
Saint with Jesus Christ, ridiculous stories, pleasant buffooneries, and such
like things, which to speak moderatly, were exceedingly remote from the natural
design of the Pulpit, and rendered it not only despised, but after a sort odious.

For that which respects the Sacraments, [not to touch on those multitudes of
unprofitable ceremonies wherewith they had loaded them,] we must confess, that
that opinion of the necessity of the intention of the Priest which was so
generally taught in the School, and which Eugenius the Fourth had defined in
his Instruction to the Armenians in the Council of Florence, it destroyed
almost all the benefit of those sacred Mysteries, and cast men's Consciences
into perpetual scruples and uncertainties. For unless they could establish a
revelation for every particular Christian, what assurance could we have, that
he who administers the Sacrament to us, had an intention to do that which the
Church enjoins him to do, or that he had not an intention contrary to that of
the Church? What assurance could be given, that in all that long Train of
Priests, Bishops, and Popes, that is to say the Bishops of Rome, who had been
from the beginning of Christianity down to this present time, there had not
been any in whom that intention, which they make so necessary to the operation
of the Sacrament, had been defective? Yet if one only Priest that shall happen
to Baptize a Pope, had not had an intention to Baptize him, or if he himself
was not truly a Priest, by the default of the intention of him who gave him
Orders, or him who Baptized him; If one only Bishop who confers Orders on a
Pope then when he is made Priest, had not an intention to do what the Church
pretends to do, all that which would come in consequence of that default would
be spoiled, the Bishops that that Pope afterward should promote, would not be
lawful Bishops, the Priests on whom those Bishops had conferred Orders, would
be no lawful Priests, and the Sacraments that those Priests should administer,
would not be lawfully administered. What could our Fathers think of such a
dreadful confusion, which they knew not how to undo, unless by supposing a
perpetual Miracle? Which is, that God should have so overruled the intention
of all those men, that howsoever Wicked, Athestical, Hypocritical or Profane
they should have been, yet that not one of them nevertheless should fail in
having an intention to do that which the Church enjoins. But what assurance
have we of such a Miracle, or what promise can we find of it in the Scripture?
Not to insist here, that it very ill agrees with the Doctrine of those among
them, who make the will of man so much Lord of all his Actions, that whatsoever
Grace God shall manifest toward it, it remains always indifferent and free to
follow that Grace, or to reject it. It is then very certain that hitherto our
Fathers could not be very much edified in the point of the Sacraments in
general; but they were yet far less in the matter of the Sacrament of the
Eucharist in particular. For if we look only on one side, they were plunged
into that perplexity about the intention, where they taught one another that
the Transubstantiation of the Bread into the Body of Jesus Christ was the
effect of that Consecration, and that they were bound to Worship the Host after
the words of Consecration, as being Jesus Christ himself; What assurance could
they have of so important a change? Since it also depended upon so impenetrable
a secret, as that of the intention of the Priest, which could only be known by
God alone, what assurance could they have that they were not deceived? What
ground had they to give a supreme Worship to an Object of which none could have
any certainty of Faith, what likelihood they should believe it to be, that
which it was pretended to be, and that it ought to be reckoned an adorable
Object* What likelihood that God would have given to his Church so doubtful an
object to be the object of perpetual adoration? Which on one side, is so
visible and so determinate that one may always say, Behold it, but of which
notwithstanding no one can be assured that it is that indeed? Is it any ways
agreeable to his goodness and his wisdom, to leave the Church to be perpetually
held in suspense in that inexplicable doubt, and exposed to the danger of
taking the Bread for the true Son of God, and the Wine for his real Blood, and
reduced to the necessity of putting that adoration daily to a hazard upon the
credit of one man?

CHAP. IV.
That such a Corruption of the Latin Church as our Fathers had conceived, was
no ways an impossible thing.

THese things, were well nigh, the chief Objects that stroke the minds of our
Fathers, and cain'd them to a more strict examination of the matters of that
Religion. Whether those motives were weak or strong, just or unjust, I leave to
the judgment of every rational man to determine.

But, some may say, what, did your Fathers never call to mind that so ordinary
Maxim, and so generally received in their days, That the Church could not err,
at least in matters relating to Faith, and the general Rules of manners? and if
they had so called it to mind, could they not by that very thing easily have
repelled all those importunate prejudices of corruption which you have set
before us?

It cannot be doubted but our Fathers did often think of it, but it cannot
likewise be imagined, that they would not have endeavored to search a little
more narrowly upon what that Maxim was founded, what construction they ought to
make of it, if in a word that Corruption, whereof they saw such great signs had
been a thing absolutely impossible.

1. I say then, in the first place, that one of the thoughts that most
naturally fell into their minds, upon this matter* was this, That the same
thing which has happened almost in all human affairs, might very well befall
the Christian Religion in the space of about five hundred Years, wherein it had
been in the hands of the Latins.
Romans. Every one might observe it to be changed by the succeeding Age, to be
rendered so as it could not be known, and to become quite another thing, than it
was at first, according as they degenerated from their Original. That
inclination that men had to alter the first institutions of things, to add to
them, or diminish from them, to give to them new Forms and new Customs, Reigned
at least as much in our Western Parts, as among other Nations. It Reigned also
so universally, that there was nothing reserved from its Dominion, either in
their Languages, or their Discipline, or their Professions, or in the
Governments of the People, or in their Laws, or in the Distribution of Justice,
or in one word in any of those things that depend in any manner whatsoever, on
the management of men. It had been then a kind of Miracle, if Religion had been
spared, and its Truth, its Worship and Customs regarded and kept with so great
care, that nothing should be altered in that, either by additions or
diminutions. And we cannot say that Religion being so Heavenly and Divine a
thing, is also above all those accidents. For it is most true that it is Divine
in it self, and consequently inviolable de jure, and of right; but there is
none that sees it not in effect too often violated through the rashness of men;
and our Fathers were not ignorant, that as perfectly holy as it was, yet it was
found to be as much or more exposed to the passions and disorders of the Soul
of man, in all other things.

2. But besides that general Inclination which never fails to change things
from their natural state, our Fathers could not but know also, that all men did
very much lean toward superstitions and errors in the matters of Religion;
They saw the proofs of this in those Chimaera's wherewith the false Religions
had filled the World. Chimaera's that were yet so much the more strange, as
those people who believed and authorized them, as the Greeks and Romans did
appear, as to every thing else to have minds exceedingly enlightened [and
refin'd] which made our Fathers clearly see that blind love that men always
had for errors in the matters of Religion. And without doubt that very thing
carried them out to suspect that that pretention to Infallibility was null and
vain, and that there might very well be Corruptions in the State of the Church
of those times; for what likelihood was there, that that ill inclination should
have had no place among those of the Latin Church, that it was wholly
extinguish't beyond a possibility of returning, or that the Enemy of our
Salvation would not make use of it for our destruction, or that having made use
of it, it should remain so long without any effect during the course of so many
Ages?

3. The example of the Church of Israel, whereof the Bible teaches us the
History, confirmed our Fathers in those thoughts. That was the very Church of
God, as well as that of the Christians; That Church was purchased by the Blood
of Jesus Christ, as well as ours, although that Blood had not yet been shed. God
not only kept his Chosen and his truly Faithful under that Ministration, but he
had not any other Church, nor any other Ministry in all the World, for the
Salvation of his Children. Whence it follows not only that God had the same
concern in the preservation of the purity of that Church, as of that of the
Latin Church, but that he had yet a far greater. For above this, that Church
had external help for the Conversation of its purity, far greater than the
Latin Church ever had. For it was shut up in one only people, and in one
Country only. It had one Language only, one only Tabernacle, one only Temple,
but one civil Government, but one only Political Law, and but one King; where
the Western Church had all those apart in many places. And yet notwithstanding
all that, it could not be kept from Corruptions, not only at one, but diverse
times: not only in matters of small Consequence, but after a strange manner, by
a heap of depraved Traditions, by false glosses on the Law, by open Idolatries,
and by a multitude of other things, wherewith their Prophets reproached them.
Had they not then very great reason to think that the Latin Church, which had
no peculiar promises that it should be kept from Corruption, in being
distinguished from that of Israel, was not more happy then that in the
Conservation of its Purity?

4. To this example of the Church of Israel, our Fathers adjoined that of the
Greek and other Eastern Churches, which God had at first honored with
Christianity, as well as the Latin; and that the times had nevertheless so
dissigur'd them, that they did not any farther appear to be what they were
heretofore. Indeed into what errors and superstitions did not those Churches
fall? And in how many points does not the Church of Rome find it self to differ
at this day from them? Some of them observe Circumcision with Baptism, others
keep up the sacrificing of living creatures, after the manner of the Jews; some
solemnly every Year Baptize their Rivers, and their Horses; others believe that
the smoke of Incense takes away their sins; others hold, that the Prayers of
the Faithful deliver from the pains of Damnation those Souls that are then in
Hell; others give Pass-ports in due Form to the dying, to carry them to
Paradise; and a thousand other suchlike impertinencies that are found to be
established among those People: Why might it not be possible that the Latin
Church should have degenerated as well as those Churches? Is it, that their
Christianity was from the beginning, different from that of the Latin's? or is
it because the Latin Church had some peculiar privileges beyond all others?
No, certainly, their Vocation was equal on one part, and on the other; and the
nature of things being so, if those Nations had corrupted themselves, those of
Rome might corrupt themselves as well as they.

5. Our Fathers who were not ignorant of those Examples, could not but
represent all to themselves also in my judgment, the times past, wherein
errors and corruption had visibly prevailed over the Truth, even then when
those very Churches of the East and West were joined together in one Body. They
knew that that had past in the Council of Antioch, in favor of the
Macedonians; in the Councils of Sirmium, of Milan, of Ariminum, at Selucia, and
at Constantinople in favor of the Arrians; and in a Council at Ephesus, in
favor of the Eutychians; without thinking of that which they said of those two
Councils held at Constantinople in favor of the Iconoclastes [or abolishers of
Images] the one under the Emperor Leo Isaurious, the other under Constantine
Copronimus. That very thing was an evident token to them, that the Latin Church
might be very likely in their times fallen into other corruptions, and that
error had triumphed over truth. For it was not at all impossible, that that
which had happened frequently in respect of some errors, might not yet with
greater success and longer duration happen in respect of other errors.

6. Moreover, They observed that Councils of a great name among the Latins, as
those of Constance and Basil, had been rejected and opposed by other Councils,
and that in the most weighty points of Religion, to wit, in the Case of the
Supreme Authority that ought to govern the Church upon Earth. For some raised
the Authority of the Councils above that of the Pope, and others would have it,
that the Popes should have an absolute and an independent, and perfectly
Monarchical Rule over the Church; what could our Fathers conclude from so
manifest a contest, if not, that it had a vast confusion in it, and that it was
exceeding necessary to the quiet settling of their Minds and Consciences, to
enter on an examination of that which those men taught in the business of
Religion?

7. Our Fathers were confirmed in that design, when they set before their eyes,
those obscure Ages through which the Latin Church had past. For who knows not
what the ninth, tenth, and eleventh Centuries were, not to speak of those that
followed them? As for the ninth, Baronius is forced to conclude the History of
it with saying; That it was an Age of affliction to the Church in general, and
chiefly to the Church of Rome; as well by reason of the complaints it had
against the Princes of the West and East, and Baron, ad Ann. 899.
the Schism of Photius, as by reason of intestine and implacable Wars, which
had began then to be formed within the very Bosom of that Church. That this Age
was the most deplorable, and dismal, above all the rest, because those who
ought to have been watchful in the Government of the Church, not only slept
profoundly, but the very same Persons labored all they could entirely to drown
the Apostolick-Ship. For the Tenth, as there are very few Persons but will
acknowledge that it was buried in darkness more gross then that of Egypt, so
it will be needless here to produce the proofs. The eleventh was scarce
happier, and Baronius begins the History of it with a remark of so universal a
Corruption of manners, chiefly among the Churchmen, that it had made way, says
he, for the common belief of the near approach of Antichrist, and of the end
Baron. ad. Ann. 1001.
of the world. How could it be possible, that during such gloomy times,
Religion, Faith and Worship, should be preserved without any alteration? Saint
Paul has joined together Faith and a good Conscience as two things that
mutually sustain one another, 1 Timothy 1.
and has taken notice that those who cast off a good Conscience; make Shipwreck
of the Faith. In effect, says Saint Chrysostom; then when men lead corrupted
Lives, it is impossible they should keep Chrisost, in 1 Timothy 1. hom. 5.
themselves from falling into perverse Doctrines.

8. To these considerations, we might join that of the two sorts of
Philosophies which successively had reigned in the Church, to wit, that of
Plato, and the other of Aristotle, to whose principles they had strove to
accomodate the Christian Religion. For it is scarce to be conceived but that
mixture of Platonic and Peripatetic Opinions with the Doctrines of Jesus
Christ, should have defaced the Faith, and quite altered his true Worship. It
was for this Reason that Saint Paul had cautioned the Faithful, to Coloss. 2.
take heed that no one seduced them through Philosophy, and vain deceitful
reasonings, after the Traditions of men, after the rudiments of the Wisdom of
the World, and not after Jesus Christ.

9. They will say, without doubt, that all these considerations; how strong
soever they appear, do yet make no more then conjectures and likelihoods, which
ought to have been immediately stifled by the only name of the Church, which
improves so profound a respect for it self in the Souls of all true Beleivers.
But that very thing served but to increase the just suspicions of our Fathers;
They understood what respect they owed to the Church; but they were not also
ignorant how easy it was to be deceived by so specious a Name. That visible
society of men who profess Christianity, which we call the Church, is not
wholly composed of true Believers, it takes into its Bosom a great number of
false Christians, of wicked, Worldly and Hypocritical men, who are mingled with
the good, as chaff amongst the Wheat, or as the mud of the Stream is, with the
Water of the Fountain. And as on the one side, the false Christians are not all
so, after the same manner, for some are full of light and knowledge, others of
ignorance, some are profane, others superstitious, one sort are full of
contrivances and intrigues in the affairs of Religion, others take little care
of its interests; some are ambitious, others covetous, others fierce and
inflexible, others full of impostures and deceits, according as we see those
different humors ordinarily reign among the men of the world; so on the other
side, the true Beleivers who are in the same visible Society, have not all of
them the same Degree either of knowledge, or sanctification, that they have
more or less of natural light, more or less of supernatural grace, more or less
of zeal, of courage, or of vigor, according to the measure of the Spirit that
is communicated to them; it is now almost scarce conceivable, that that Medley
should not corrupt Religion in a long Train of Ages, and that it should not
cause to enter in, Maxims, Doctrines, Services and Customs far more conformable
to the Spirit of the World, then to that of Jesus Christ. There needs but a
little leven, says Saint Paul, to 1 Cor. 5.
corrupt the whole Mass. From thence, that two Parties, whereof the one is
good, the other is evil, are joined together, experience always instructs us,
that the ill does far more easily deprave the good, then the good better the
bad. And we cannot say, that God is bound to hinder that Corruption, and that
otherwise his Church would Perish from the Earth: For besides, that it no way
belongs to us to order so boldly what God is bound to do, or not to do, for the
execution of his designs; it is certain that he has not hindered it, as we have
but just before seen in the Church of the Jews, nor in the Eastern Christian
Churches, nor in the the whole Body of the Church in the time of the Arians. He
has other ways to preserve his Elect, and his sincerely Faithful ones, who only
are, to speak properly, his Church; he can preserve them in the midst of a
corrupted Ministry, and when that is become impossible, he knows how to
separate them from the wicked, and to draw them away from their Communion. But
we will speak to that more largely at the end of this Treatise.

10. To go on with our Remarks, That which I have said supplies us with
another, which is not less considerable than the rest. It is in consequence of
that mixture of the good and the wicked in the same visible Church, that it
might fall out, and it has very frequently hapened, that the far greatest
Number, the external Splendor, Force, and Authority, is found among the Party
of the wicked, and that they are chiefly those who fill up the highest places
in the Church. For as those highest places yield them honor, and the goods of
the World in a very great measure, so it is very natural, that they should be
more hunted after and obtained by the men of the World, then by the truly
Faithful, who ordinarily are not so violently carried out to those things.
After that manner, one may very often see the Government of the visible Church
to fall into exceedingly wicked hands, and then there needs but a capricious
Humor, but a Passion, but an Interest, but a Whimsey, but some neglect or some
other thing of the like nature, which it is not hard to conceive to be in such
Persons as we suppose, to bring into the Church false Doctrines, and false
Worship, to which those of the best minds shall no sooner oppose themselves,
but they shall be immediately quelled, which often forces them to keep silence,
and to give way for a season, till it shall please God to deliver them from
that oppression.

11. Could it not in the least happen, that those errors and superstitions
that were but little taken notice of at first, sprung up in the Schools, or
among some other sort of men, should be by little and little, and insensibly
spread over the Body of the Church, by the means of ignorance and negligence of
the Pastors? And might not the same thing fall out according to the pleasure
and interest that the Pastors might take to see them established? that in the
end being found to be rooted in men's minds, and as I may so say, incorporated
into Religion, they might be looked upon as Traditions, or as Customs that for
the future ought to be observed as Laws. No one can deny that a multitude of
things had crept after that manner into the Latin Church; as the keeping back
the Cup, which the Council of Constance had taken Council. Constan. Sess. 13.
up in express terms, as a Custom that had been, says it, rationally
introduced, and which ought to be kept as a Law. It was after the same manner
that the Celibacy of Priests, the Worshipping of Images, the Distinction of
Meats, and many other things, which how particular [and private] soever they
were at first, came after to be made public, and in the end, to be changed
into Articles of Religion.

12. All these Reflections might serve to let our Fathers understand, that it
was no ways impossible for the state of the Latin Church to be corrupted; but
besides that Reason, those examples, and that experience, which convinced them
of it, they yet farther saw the plain proofs of it in the Declarations of the
Holy Scripture. For after whatsoever manner they expounded that Mystery of
Iniquity, of which Saint Paul speaks to the Thessalonians, which in his days
had began to work, and that Captivity of God's People, 2 These. 2. Apocal. 18.
whom God commanded to go out of Babylon, lest in partaking of its sins, it
partook also of its plagues, no one could avoid acknowledging from those two
places, but that a great Corruption must needs fall out in the visible Church.
The Mystery of Iniquity which had began to work, or to form it self, could not
be conceived of but under the Idea of a secret Plot, whose lowest Foundations
were laid in the very days of the Apostles, and which must at length after a
long Train of Ages have come to its utmost pitch, and be manifested. And as to
that other Passage, it supposes in the first place a Captivity of the People of
God; Go out, says it, of Babylon. Secondly, a Captivity of that People, who did
not yet fail to be the People of God, Go out of her, says it, my People. And in
the third place, a Captivity, in which, while they abode, they were in danger
of partaking of the sins of their Oppressors, Least, it adds, in partaking of
its sins, Ye partake also of its plagues. All that formed an Idea of a Church
that groaned under the weight of a great Corruption, which easily gave way to
that thought, that it might possibly be the Latin Church as soon as any other,
and that it might as well fall out in the times of our Fathers, as in any other
season.

CHAP. V.
More Particular Reflections upon that Privilege of Infallibility which they
ascribe to the Church, and of its Authority.

ANy one may now see methinks, from what I have laid down, what Judgment ought
to be made of that pretended Infallibility that the Latin Church ascribed to it
self, and by what means they would shut our eyes, and reduce us to a slavish
Obedience. We shall yet nevertheless make here some reflections upon it, and see
whether it has any solid Foundation, and any Justice in that claim.

1. But before we proceed farther, it will be necessary to know what they
understand by that Infallible Church, and examine all the Senses that may be
given to this Proposition, that the Church cannot err. For our Adversaries
themselves very differently understand it. In the first place then, if they
would plainly say, That that which has been believed, and universally practiced
by all those who have composed the Body of the visible Church, throughout the
extent of all Ages, is Infallibly true: I say that it is a very useless
Principle, since, to speak according to men, it is impossible to know that
which has been so believed, and universally practiced. So that one need say no
more against it, but to send back those men to an Infallibility of that nature.
Who could make a search so just, so clear, and so general as he ought, to
assure himself of the unanimous consent of all the particular Members, unless
he could raise all that were dead, and understand them one after another? I
acknowledge that we have the Books of the Ancients; but all have not wrote, and
who can warrant us that those who have not wrote had the same Sentiments with
those that have? Who can warrant that the many Books that are lost were not in
very many points contrary to those that are extant? Who can teach us nicely to
distingush what those Authors have wrote in Copying out of, or in imitating one
another, from their true and natural Sentiments; and that which they have wrote
on their own heads, from that which they have wrote as Witnesses of the general
Belief of their Ages? Who can assure us that they were not sometimes deceived
in taking for the general Belief or Practice of the Church, those things which
were not so? For the same Case happens in these very days, that as to those
things that seem so exceeding clear, there are yet a sort of men who would
persuade us, that we do not very well and perfectly know, what the General
belief of the Church of Rome is, and that we may very easily deceive our
selves, and deceive others; how much more then heretofore, when those things
were by nothing near so clearly decided, and so manifest as they are now at
this day? Who can exactly enough tell us what those Articles were wherein all
the Ancients were universally agreed, and those wherein they did not agree,
since it has very often fell out that one and the same Author has wrote things
very contrary upon one and the same Subject? Who can assure us that what three
or four Ancient Authors had wrote after an agreeable manner, was not one of
those particular deviations from the Truth, which one may often discover in
them, which does not at all hinder, but that the contrary Opinion may be more
received, and more general? In fine, there is nothing so vain and so
fallacious, as that pretended Infallibility of the Church, if they restrain it
to those Doctrines which shall be found established by the unanimous consent of
all Persons and of all Ages.

Moreover, Such a kind of Infallibility, would not only have been no hindrance
to our Fathers from entering on an examination of the matters of Religion; but
it would also have obliged them to it. For they must always have known whether
that which was taught and practiced in the Church in their days, concerning
Faith and Worship, had been confirmed by the consent of all the foregoing Ages,
which they could never have known but by such an examination. So that those who
in these days dispute with us about the right of the Reformation, will never
find any reason on their side. The Church of Rome must needs be very Infallible
with them, but it can be so but in one respect; I would say, in those matters
wherein She agrees with the Church throughout all Ages, and with all those
Persons who Compose it, which could not in the least have taken away her
possibility of erring in those matters wherein she should withdraw her self
from the Ancient Church, and by consequence she must submit her self, her
decisions, her Doctrines, and her Customs, to a Rule and an Authority that was
superior, according to which they ought to be examined.

2. If they understand by it, That the Church in every Age cannot err, that is
to say, for Example, That that which was believed and generally practiced, and
beyond all controversy, in the Church in the days of our Fathers could not be
otherwise then true and good, I say that they make this a Principle which
cannot be to any purpose, and from which they cannot draw any advantage. For
how could they assure themselves that all those who made up the Body of the
Visible Church a little before the Reformation, did well approve of the
Doctrines that they then taught, and the Worship that was then practiced, and
how could they distinctly and precisely affirm, that any such thing had been
generally received? For it cannot be imagined, under a pretense that some
certain Opinions had been ordinarily taught in the Schools, or that certain
Devotions had been commonly used, that they should be brought into the public
Service, and spread over their Books under that same pretense; It cannot I say
be imagined, that there had not been many in the World who disapproved them,
and looked on them as errors and abuses, although they did not forbear as yet to
abide with the rest in the same Communion. And it was certainly from thence,
that as soon as our first Reformers had began to speak openly against such kind
of things, their voice was heard, and their words received with the applauses
of, and being followed by a great part of Europe. For that was from no other
reason, but because they found all matters ordered so readily, and that for a
long time they had vehemently breathed after Reformation. There is then nothing
more ridiculous, then when they would send us back to an Infallibility which
could never be found there, and of which they can give us no marks or sure
characters that may be had there. Besides which, if the Church is not
Infallible, but only in those things that are generally believed and approved
of without all disputes, and if it may err in other matters, none can blame our
Fathers for having entered on an examination of them, since it had formal
oppositions to one part of the Church in a great many points, as in the
opposition of the Berengarians, the Waldenses, the Albigenses, the Wicklefists,
and the Hussites. They will say that these were such Heretics as the Church
had condemned. But this answer will be but a mere Fallacy; For if then when the
Church was divided into two Parties, and that which was the weaker should have
been condemned by the stronger Part; they would treat all those as Heretics
who should have been condemned, to elude, under that pretense the weight of
their opposition, and that they might still attribute Infallibility to the
stronger Party, in respect of those very things that are contested, this is but
to deceive our selves, to say at the same time, That the Church is not
Infallible, but only in regard of those things that all generally hold without
Controversy. They ought to change their Principle and to say the same of it
that they affirm in the case of that Contestation, That their Infallibility
follows the stronger side, and that those who oppress the other by their
Intrigues, by their Authority, by the force of their Arms, or otherwise, are
the truly Infallible, since the opposition of the others ought not to be looked
on but as the Insurrection of Heretics, and not as just opposition. It will
always depend on the most powerful to make themselves Infallible, by beating
down all that oppose themselves; for there will need no more for that purpose
than to condemn them, and they are presently Heretics, excluded from all right
in their oppositions; either this is that which I call a Fallacy, or there
never was any such thing in the world.

3. But if they will indeed change their Principle, and say, that that
Infallibility is to be placed in the greater number, in the Ruling party, any
one may convince them of the contrary, by the example of the Arrians, who had
made themselves Masters of the Church, under the Successors of Constantine. The
greater part in the Council, were for them, the Pulpits were for them, the
people followed them as they were lead either by their own humors, or by
Constraint and Force, they Persecuted the Orthodox, which evidently shows the
falsness of this Proposition, That the greater number, or that side that finds
it self the stronger, can never err. Jesus Christ had never had any Defenders,
if in the days of his flesh, all had been persuaded of the Truth of this Maxim.

4. This Experience of the Arrians makes it appear more evidently that
Infallibility could not be attributed to that which they call the Church
representative, that is to say, to the whole Body of Pastors, or as they speak,
to all the Clergy: For it is but too true, that the whole Body of Pastors
assembled in a very great number at the Council of Ariminum, gave way to the
Arrian Infidelity, by rejecting the word of Consubstantial, which signified
that the Son of God was of the same Essence with his Father, and declared only,
That he was like to the Father, and that he was not a creature, as other
creatures were, which supposed that he was a creature, although different from
others. They will say that it was not of their own motion that these Bishops
made that Arrian Confession, but that they were forced to it by the Emperors
Ministers: That moreover, they were deceived by the Arrians, not taking notice
that that clause that the Son was not a Creature as other Creatures, made him
always a Creature, and in fine that they rejected the word (...) because they
did not thoroughly understand it. But all that is not of any advantage to their
Cause, for if the whole Body of Pastors, assembled in Council to decide matters
of Faith, did determine of Heresy, either out of weakness, or through surprise
or ignorance, since they determine of it in effect, what does it signify in
what manner, or in what respect they determined it? Could they call those men
Infallible who were capable of making a Wicked and Infidel Confession, in an
Article so Fundamental as that of the Eternity of the Person of the Son of God
is, in such a manner, and by such Principles as that came to pass? We can never
commit any faults, but that they must have some cause, but what cause soever
they have, our faults are always faults, and certain Arguments that we are not
Infallible.

5. There are some of them that say, that Councils are not Infallible but when
they are approved by the Popes. But that neither has any solid ground, for how
can an approbation which ordinarily passes after the separation of a Council,
possibly confer any Infallibility on it? has that any Retroactive virtue, and
can that change the state of a thing already past? They will say, that the Pope
does not confer any Infallibility on it, but only acknowledges it, and makes it
to be acknowledged by others, and that his approbation is as the Seal and
Impression that denotes that such a Council ought to be held Infallible. But if
the Pope himself is not Infallible, as the sounder part of the Gallican Church
holds that he is not, what certainty can his approbation give us? May he not
err in approving those things which he ought not to approve, and in taking for
Infallible a Council, which was really deceived? And let not any one say that I
produce the opinion of the Gallican Church to the prejudice of all the others,
for after what manner soever it be, it seems to me that one may very well
affirm, without offending any person, that it is not an Article of the Faith of
the Church of Rome to believe that the Pope must needs be Infallible, for
otherwise the Gallican Church would be guilty of Heresy. And from that only it
follows, that one could have no such assurance as one ought to have to settle
the Mind and Conscience in quiet, if it were possible for him to err in
approving a Council, and by Consequence, his approbation could not be a certain
character of the Infallibility of that Council.

But why do we use Arguments in a matter, in which experience has sufficiently
instructed us? The Fifth Council assembled at Constantinople, on occasion of
three Books published, the one of Ibas Vide Baronium in Justiniano and Vigilio,
Tom. 7, and sirmundum praefat. in saecund.
Bishop of Edessa, the other of Theodorus of Mopsuesta, and the other of
Theodoret Bishop of Cyrus, was it not held in spite of all the oppositions of
Pope Vigilius, did not that Council condemn those Writings as Heretical,
against the express prohibitions that Vigilius had made, by a public Decree to
Condemn them, and yet notwithstanding was not that very Council in the end
approved by the Successors of Vigilius, and in fine received throughout all
the Church for a True and Holy Ecumenical Council? Those Approbations
therefore are only a juggle, which wholly depend on the capricious humors of
the Popes, on their different Interests, on their good or ill humors. One Pope
disapproves of a Council, and makes it void, to advance all that he does; by
that the Council is remote enough from Infallibility, and ought not to be held
for Infallible: another Pope comes, and receives and approves of it, and behold
on a sudden that Council changes its condition and becomes Infallible.

Besides that, did not Pope Liberius approve an Arian Council held at Sirmium,
in subscribing an Heretical Confession that had been drawn up, and which Saint
Hilary calls the Arian perfidiousness, the Heresy sprung from Sirmium, for
which he pronounced an Anathema against Liberius. For what else was that
Subscription Hilar. In fragment.
in Consequence of which Liberius embraced the Communion of the Arians, but a
Ratification and real Approbation of the Act of an Erroneous Council? and it
signifies nothing to say, That Liberius was in Exile when he committed that
Error, for without alleging here what he himself declared to the Eastern Arian
Bishops, That he was in Peace and Unanimity with them, and all their Provinces,
in good earnest, and that he had received that Catholic Faith with all his
heart, that he had never in the Apud Hilar. ibid.
least contradicted it, that he had readily given his consent, that he followed
and held it; his Exile and Concern to get away from them, does not hinder but
that it should be true, That he did approve an Infidel Confession, nor by
Consequence, letting us see, that it might very well happen, That the Popes did
Authorize the Acts of wicked Councils, and that it ought not to be pretended
that their Approbation makes Councils Infallible, nor that it has any certain
ground for declaring them to be such.

6. That Example of Liberius encounters also all those who ascribe that
Infallibility to the Popes; for behold one in whom by the Testimony of St.
Hilary, and St. Jerome, that Privilege had no effect. But as that Opinion is
not generally received in this Hilar. ubi supra.
Kingdom, and we need not to fear objections from any here, so it is needless
to refute them. I shall only say, that that Dispute that Hieron. in Chron.
is in the Church of Rome about those to whom this Infallibility belongs,
whether to the Pope only, or a Council only, or to a Council approved by the
Pope, or to the Pope as the Head of the Council, lets us see that that pretense
in general has no ground; for if in truth the Latin Church had that
Privilege, it would never be so uncertain as they have made it, but it would
have been known a little more clearly where it resided.

However it be, it plainly appears that the Latin Church does not pretend to
it, as a Law of Nature, for she is composed of no different blood from the rest
of men, nor as a right joined to the profession of Christianity, nor as a mere
quality of a Church, for in that case the Greek and other Churches would have
the same advantage, but that she pretends to it as a peculiar privilege,
whereby they were distinguished from other Churches, as the Greek and Armenian,
etc. It appears that they would not set this Prerogative before us, as a first
Principle, which is evident of it self, without needing any proof: for in fine,
it is not so clear that the Latin Church should be Infallible, as it is that
one and one make two, and that the whole is greater than any of its parts. It
is then, certainly, but very reasonable to demand that they would give us the
proofs and grounds of so important a right. I mean other proofs than those that
are commonly taken from the same Authority of that Church. For it will not be
enough to confirm that Infallibility, for her only to say, I am so; every
Church may say the same, and yet not be believed. They ought to produce proofs,
and proofs that come from Heaven, since there is none besides God that can
confer so great a Right, and they ought to show them to us, to the end we may
judge of them and weigh their Cogency and Truth. That being so, I affirm that
our Fathers were bound to use all sorts of Rational methods to examine that
Question, whether the Church of Rome was Infallible or no? And to look to both
sides to settle themselves in a good Judgment. This is that, which, in my
opinion, none will contest. But from thence these things will clearly follow.
1. That our Fathers had right to examine one of the Tenets of the Latin Church,
which is that of her Infallibility. 2. That they had right to judge of it
according to the Nature of those proofs which presented themselves for, or
against it. 3. That they might lawfully reject it as false, if in their
examination of it* it appeared to be false. 4. That it is neither absurd nor
rash to maintain, that every one has right to examine a Tenet of the Church and
to judge of it. 5. That all those General Objections which they have hitherto
made against that Truth are false and frivolous, such as these, that if one
give All, that Liberty of examining, every one may make a Religion of his own.
That there is no other way to keep men in the Unity of the Faith. That he who
examines, makes himself a Judge above the Church. That it is the ready way to
bring in a private Spirit, and other such like things, all which are refuted by
that one Example in the Point of Infallibility. 6. That if it is no ways absurd
that every one should have right to examine a Tenet of the Church that cannot
be proved otherwise than by the Scriptures, it is not also absurd to say, that
that right of searching out the true sense of Scripture belongs to every
Christian. 7. That it is not absurd to say, that a Believer is Master of his
own Faith, by depending only upon God, and independent on men. 8. That if every
Christian has right to examine one of the chief Articles of Religion, it is no
ways inconvenient to say that he has right to examine all, for there is not
less danger, nor less consequence, for all than for one. 9. In fine, it will
also follow from thence, that our Fathers were bound upon that pretense of the
Latin Church to examine all the Points of that Religion. For firmly to assure
themselves of the Truth of that Privilege, it was not enough to consider it in
its Grounds and its Causes which are those Proofs that they call a Priori, they
ought further to look on it in its effects, that is to say, to see it in the
Doctrines of that Church, in its Maxims, in its Voice, and diligently to take
notice whether they may see all the Characters of Infallibility resplendent in
it, or whether they may not discover some Error. It was after this manner that
the Disciples of Jesus Christ acknowledged and cleaved to him. I have given
unto them, says he, the words which thou gave me, and they have received John
17.
them, and have known surely that I came out from thee. To whom should we go?
Said they to him, Thou have the words of Eternal Life: Our Fathers had so much
the more reason, to use John 6.
theirs also, when all the prejudices of Corruption which we have taken notice
of in the foregoing Chapters, presented themselves to their sight. They
observed there all the Characters of humane Weakness, of Ambition,
Covetousness, Interest, Negligence, of plotting Contrivances, and of the Spirit
of the World, and all the other marks of Fallible men, who can then blame them
for holding so circumspect a course to come to the full and clear knowledge of
the Truth? So that that pretense of Infallibility was so far from driving our
Fathers from the examining of those Doctrines which were taught in their days,
that the very same thing necessarily engaged and led them to it.

CHAP. VI.
An Examination of the proofs which they produce to establish the Infalliblity
of the Church of Rome.

LEt us see nevertheless upon what Foundations that pretended Prerogative of
the Latin Church is built. They produce on this Subject some passages of
Scripture, and some Arguments. But as to the Passages of Scripture, it is
evident that there is not any one which respects more peculiarly the Latin
Church then the Greek, the Egyptian, the Ethiopian, and others, every one of
which has as much reason to apply them to themselves as the Latin. Yet we do
not here dispute about a favor common to all Christian Societies, but about a
peculiar prerogative pretended to by the Latins. For they are all agreed that
all other Societies have erred, notwithstanding all those passages. They ought
then necessarily to allege something which belongs to the Latins peculiarly,
exclusively from all others; or they ought to come to an acknowledgment that
those passages do not at all establish the Infallibility of a visible Church,
since if they did so establish it, being so general as they are, they would
have the same cogency in favor of the Greeks, the Armenians, and the
Jacobites, as well as the Latins.

1. In effect, one sort of those passages respect the true Church of Jesus
Christ, that is to say, not that multitude of men who make profession of
Christianity, or who live in the same external Society of Religion, but the
truly faithful, those holy men whom God has inwardly regenerated by his Spirit,
and whom he leads to life everlasting. It is of that Church that it is said,
That she Ephesians. 1. Ephesians. 4. Ephesians. 5. Hos. 2. Mat. 16. Mat. 28.
is the body of Jesus Christ. That there is one Body, and one Spirit, That
Jesus Christ is her head, That she is his spouse. It is only of the truly
Faithful and no otherwise that these promises are verified, Upon this Rock will
I build my Church, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it; I will
be with you always unto the end of the World; I will pray the Father, and he
shall give you another Comforter, who shall abide with you for ever. The Spirit
of Truth shall lead you into John 14. John 16. Mat. 28.
all Truth; where two or three are gathered together in my Name, I will be
there in the midst of them. These passages denote nothing less then an
Infallibility, either in the whole Body of the Visible Church, or in the side
that is strongest, or in Councils, or in the Decisions of Popes, or in
Traditions and Ancient Customs; but they only signify that God will have always
some truly Faithful upon the Earth even unto the end of the World, and that he
will accompany them with such a measure of the light and grace of his Spirit,
as shall in the end bring them to the Glory of his Kingdom.

2. There are others, which they yet make use of, far less to the purpose,
because they signify only the Duty of Pastors, and what they are appointed to
do, and not that, that in effect they shall do. Such as these: Go, Teach all
Nations, Baptising them, in the Name of the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost.
Son of man, I Mat. 28. Ezekiel. 33. Malach. 2.
have set thee for a Watchman over the House of Israel. The Priests lips shall
keep knowledge, and they shall seek the Law at his Mouth. I have set watchmen
upon thy walls, O Jerusalem, which shall never Isa. 62.
hold their peace day nor night. And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets,
and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers; Ephesians. 4.
For the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the
edifying of the Body of Christ: These and some other like passages show to what
the Offices of the Ministry are naturally appointed, and the Obligation of
those that are called to it, but they are very far from giving from thence a
Prerogative of Infallibility.

3. They allege also some passages that recommend to the Faithful the having a
respect for and an Obedience to their Pastors. Such are these, He that hears
you, hears me; and he that rejects Luke. 10.
you, rejects me: Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your
selves: for they watch for your Souls. The Scribes and the Heb. 13.
Pharisees sit in Moses seat, All therefore whatsoever they bid you observe,
that observe and do, but do not ye after their works. But I Mat. 23.
cannot see what this last passage should let us see, but that all those
Exhortations that God makes to the Faithful to have a submission to the word of
their Pastors, denote very truly the Duty of the people in that matter, but
they do not in the least settle any Infallibility in their Pastors. For is
this that that Jesus Christ would say, That the Scribes and Pharisees as long
as they sat in the Chair of Moses were Infallible: he that on the contrary
accused them of having made void the Commandments of God by their Traditions,
and who elsewhere gave his Disciples such a Charge to take heed of the leaven
of the Pharisees, that is to say, of their pernicious Doctrines? How many times
is that Obedience, that Respect and that Submission recommended to Children to
give to their Fathers, in the Scriptures? Is it that the Scripture in that
ascribes to their Fathers an Infallibility? It is without doubt the Kings
pleasure that we should submit our selves to his Officers, and that we should
obey them, but he does not mean to advance them to be Infallible, nor to ordain
us to obey them, if they shall happen to command us these things that are
directly contrary to his service, and to that Fidelity which we owe to our
Sovereign. It is then True that all those Exhortations to hear our Pastors and
to obey their words, are always to be restrained by this clause understood, as
far as their words shall be conformable to that of God; that they can never go
beyond that, and that they cannot from thence draw any Privilege of
Infallibility.

4. As these Gentlemen let slip nothing that may serve for their Interests, so
they ordinarily make use of that passage in the 18th. Chapter of St. Matthew,
where Jesus Christ ordains that if any one receive an injury from another, he
is to reprove him between himself and him alone; and if that first complaint
signifies nothing, then he must take witnesses with him; and if he neglect to
hear those witnesses, he is to tell it to the Church; and if he neglect to hear
the Church, he is to be unto us as a Heathen and a Publican. All that that
follows in the close of that discourse of Jesus Christ shows, that he speaks
there neither of Faith nor Worship, but of some private quarrels that we might
have against our Brethren to be taken away, and of the use of that Discipline.
For the mind of our Lord is, that before we break off absolutely with our
Brethren, we should observe all the Rules of Charity, and that we should there
make use of the Church, but if he would refuse to hear the Church, that in that
case it was allowed us to treat him no longer as a Brother, but as a real
stranger. Who sees not that if they would draw any thing of consequence from
that passage, they ought to pretend that the Church is Infallible not in
matters of Faith, for they are not meddled with there, but in matters of Fact,
and in the Censures that it gives upon private Quarrels, in which nevertheless
all the World agrees that she may be deceived. And therefore it is that these
Gentlemen are wont to allege these last words, Tell it to the Church, and if
he will not hear the Church, let him be unto thee as the Heathens, and
Publicans; and they allege them also as separated from the sequel of that
Discourse, because otherwise they could not but observe that they would signify
nothing to them.

5. In fine, they produce those words of St. Paul to Timothy, These things
write I unto thee, hoping to come unto thee shortly: But 1 Timothy 3. 4, 5.
if I tarry long, that thou may know how to behave thy self in the House of
God, which is the Church of the living God, the pillar and ground of the Truth.
How can, say they, the Church be the pillar and ground of Truth, if it is not
Infallible in the Doctrines it proposes as of Faith, and in the Worship which
it Practices? But what likelihood is there that he would have established an
opinion so important, as that of the Infallibility of the Latin Church, on such
Metaphorical terms, which St. Paul did not make use of upon the sight of any
Infallibility, which should respect no other but the Latin Church in
particular, and which should much rather have respected the Church of Ephesus,
or the other Churches of Asia, where Timothy was then, when the Apostle wrote
to him, which yet did not fail of falling into Error; in Terms which may be
explained in diverse senses, and which have been applied to diverse particular
Bishops, without yet pretending to raise them up to be Infallible, what color
I say, is there that they can prove the Infallibility of the Church of Rome? It
appears in the end of that discourse of St. Paul, that he never thought of
making the Church Infallible, for in all that Chapter, he aims at nothing else
then to set down the duties of Bishops and Deacons; and after having marked out
in particular some qualities with which they ought to be endowed, and from what
Vices they ought to be more especially exempt, after what manner they ought to
govern themselves, he adds in the close of all, That he wrote all that to his
disciple, to the end he might know how to behave himself in the House of God,
which is the Church of the Living God, the pillar and ground of Truth. Who sees
not that that Infallibility, comes not in at all to the purpose in that close
of the Discourse? Let the Bishops, says he, and the Deacons take heed they be
wise, sober, etc. That they hold the Mystery of the Faith in a pure Conscience,
that their Wives should be honest and faithful in all things, that their
Children should be well educated, etc. And that which I say in general, I apply
also to thee Timothy, to the end thou may live unblameably in the House of
God, in the Church of the living God: Add, according to the Interpretation of
these Gentlemen; Which Church is Infallible and cannot err; and there is
nothing of any natural Connection in it. On the contrary that conceit of the
Infallibility of the Church, according to the Principle that our Adversaries
makes use of in the Doctrine of the Perseverance of the Saints, would harden
them in security, for let them do as they will, all would go well, and after
whatsoever manner the Pastors govern, the Church could never be corrupted, nor
its Truth be lost. Which would seem far more proper to inspire negligence into
the Bishops, then to animate them to do their duty. In effect if they cannot
tell how to exhort men by motives of that nature, They ought then to confess
the Truth, to wit, that these words, The Pillar and Ground of Truth, note the
end, and natural design of the Church, that for which she is made, and to which
she is called, which is to sustain and bear the Truth, and to make it subsist
in the World, and so the discourse of the Apostle appears very just, and well
connected: Behold, says he, after what manner the Bishops ought to frame their
course, and after what sort thou ought to live in the Church of God, in
behaving thy self in it so, as remembering that God has appointed it to be the
pillar and ground of his Truth; Live therefore in that manner that may answer
that end, or that natural appointment of the Church. Just as if the King,
exhorting one of the Officers of his Parliament to do his duty, should tell
him, That he lived in a body that was the Pillar and Ground of Justice, and the
Rights of the Crown; that is to say, which is naturally ordained for the
maintaining Justice in the State, and to defend the Rights of the Crown. But as
that speech of the Prince would not establish any privilege of Infallibility
in the Parliament, so neither can that of the Apostle do it for the Church: for
Societies do not always follow their natural appointments, we see that they
often enough depart from them. I confess that the Church does not always wander
from its end, nor in all things; yet it cannot also be imagined that she never
departs: For the wicked are mingled with the good in the same Society, the
Dignities of the Church are sometimes to be found more possessed by the men of
the World, then by the truly Faithful; the very best men themselves are subject
to weaknesses, and they sometimes commit faults of that importance, that may
consequently be dilated by continuance, and all that cannot but produce Errors
and Corruptions, which it will be most necessary to reform.

Behold all those passages of Scripture upon which, they seem to me, to found
that pretension of the Infallibility of the Latin Church! To them they join
some Arguments.

1. If, say they, it be possible for the Church to err, why do we call it holy,
as we do in the Creed; I believe the Holy Catholic M. le Card. de Richelieu.
live. 1. chapter 13.
Church? Such an Assembly that is united in the profession of an error, is so
far unfit to be called Holy, That on the contrary it is Impious, since it
agrees in a Doctrine that is contrary to the Holy Truths revealed by God. I
answer: That if this Argument were good, it would follow, not only that the
Church should be Infallible as to matters of Faith, but also that she should be
impeccable in respect of manners, for she is called Holy as well from that
Holiness that regards good works, as from that which regards the Faith. The
Church is Holy, but yet after an imperfect manner, while she is here upon
Earth, and she will never be perfectly so, but in Heaven. Furthermore they
ought to remember that the Title of Holy, and generally all other Titles of
Honor and Glory that are given to the Church, belong to it in truth only, in
respect of the true Believers, and not in respect of the Hypocrites and wicked
which are mingled with the good in the same visible Society; and that it is but
only on the same account of the Good, that all that visible Body is called the
Church. For they are none but those whom God has called to his Salvation, who
only can be the true mystical Body of Jesus Christ. When then it shall come to
pass that the number of the wicked prevails in that Visible Society, they will
fill up the Pulpits, they will be Masters of Councils and of Decisions of
Faith, of the Government and Ministry of the Church, and will not fail to
introduce Errors and a false Worship; but when those persons should introduce
and authorize them, the Church would not cease to be Holy, not in respect of
those wicked men who waste it, and corrupt it as much as it lies in their power
to do, but in regard of the Faithful whom God will keep pure by the
illuminations of his Holy Spirit, and the methods of his Providence. The Church
of Israel in the midst of its greatest Idolatries did not cease to keep the
Titles of a Holy Nation, and a Kingdom of Priests, which Moses had given her,
but she kept them, not in respect of her Corruptors, and those Exodus 19.
wretched men that would have seduc't her, but in respect of those that were
Holy. For it is certain that God has always done that which he did in the days
of Elias, where he reserved seven thousand men who had not bowed the Knee unto
Baal, and it is in those that the Church is preserved, and always kept Holy.

2. But yet further, say they, If the Church may err, and particularly Bellarm.
de Eccles. milit. lib. 3. cap. 14.
the Church Representative, that is to say, the Body of Pastors, why do the
Councils pronounce Anathema's against all those who shall not consent to their
Decrees? Would it not be very unjust to bind men under so great a penalty to
consent to things that are uncertain, and which may be false? I answer, that
the force of the Anathema's of those Councils depends altogether on their
Justice. If those Councils have lawfully decided controversies according to the
word of God, and if with the Truth they have kept Love and Charity, according
to the Precept of the Apostle, their Anathema is very efficacious, and all that
they bind on Earth shall be bound in Heaven. But if they have decided any thing
against the Truth, or against Charity, if they have abused their Places, their
Anathema's are vain and rash, and will fall upon none but their Heads who
pronounce them. For God has never submitted his Righteousness to the
Unrighteousness of any Prelates. All the force of those Thunderbolts depends on
those very things which have been decided. We can do nothing, says the Apostle,
against the Truth: We ought not then to imagine that those Anathema's must
needs be Infallible, we ought not also to believe that they could not be
rightly used if they had not that Infallibility. Saint Hilary did not pretend
to be Infallible, and yet nevertheless he pronounced an Anathema Hilar. in
Fragm.
against Liberius, who was a Deceiver. Saint Paul did not pretend to make us
Infallible, and yet notwithstanding he commands us to Anathematise even an
Angel from Heaven, and himself, if he should Preach any other Gospel then that
which he has preached Galat. 1.
unto us. Cyril of Alexandria did not aspire after Infallibility, and yet he
thunders out his Anathema's against all the Errors of Nestorius. The second
Council of Tours never thought of being Infallible, and yet nevertheless, it
Anathematis'd all those who after the third admonition refused to restore the
goods of the Church. In fine, every private Person pronounces an Anathema
against all Heresies. The Anathema's of the Councils are not the Sentences of
the Magistrate, the force of which depends on the Authority of him who
pronounces them, they are only the Denuntiations, that men make on Gods side,
as his Interpreters and his Ministers, of the severity of his Judgments against
the Unbeleivers, the Wicked, and the Heretics. And provided that those
Denuntiations should be founded on the word of God, as far as the light of the
Pastors of the Church and their good Consciences could persuade them, we ought
not to doubt but that they would be just, although they would not be Infallible.
For howsoever it be, that good and lawful Councils assembled in the Name of
Jesus Christ, would never pretend that their Anathema's should bind any person,
any farther then their Decisions and their Canons were just, and conformable to
the Scripture.

3. They add yet, if it were possible for the Church to err, it were possible
for it totally to fall away after that manner, that Monsieur le Card. de
Richelieu. live. 1. chapter 13. and live. 1. chapter 4. Hos. 2.
there should not be any longer a Church upon the Earth, and yet
notwithstanding how many promises have we in the Scripture that denote the
Perpetuity of the Church? God says in Hosea, That he would betroth her unto him
for ever. Saint Paul calls her the Body of Jesus Christ. But the Body of Jesus
Christ is Eternal. Jesus Christ promises to be with his even unto the end of
the World, and says, that the Comforter shall abide with them for ever, and
that the Gates of Hell shall never prevail against his Church. But it is no
need of heaping up these Proofs of a thing which was never contested. God will
always keep a Church upon Earth; that is to say, he will always have a number
of true Believers, whom he will guide by his Word and by his Spirit, and they
are those that are betrothed to him for ever, and the Mystical Body of his Son,
to whom he will grant his gracious presence for ever, and an assured Victory
against the Gates of Hell. There is nothing disputed in that point. Our
business is only to enquire, whether all that Body composed of the good, and
the wicked, that Assembly in which the worldly men and Hypocrites are mixed with
the truly Faithful, and that which they call the Visible Church, can never fall
into error, after what manner soever it be. Whether it is not possible, for
that party of the men of the World which may be sometimes the stronger, to
corrupt the public Ministry, and for the same in respect of some errors and
superstitions less Fundamental, to infect the Good, and to draw them, though not
so far from the Truth as to make them wholly lose the true Form of Piety, and
Communion with God (for if that might happen, the Church would be brought to
nothing) yet after such a manner as that their Faith and their Religion could
not be said to be altogether pure. But this experience justifies. For in the
Corruptions of the Church of Isral, and in those times wherein they had
introduc't the Worship of false Gods into the public Ministry, God had
reserved seven thousand men who had not bowed their knees to Baal, and that
which is most considerable, is, that that very Religion of those seven thousand
was not pure; for they lived in that Schism that Jeroboam made, and no more
went to render that Worship to God which they were bound to pay at Jerusalem,
but to Bethel. It will signify nothing to them to say, that the Church then
subsisted in the Tribe of Judah; for besides that, that would not hinder any
from seeing clearly by that example of those seven thousand, that God can when
he pleases preserve his own in a corrupted Communion, and that yet the far
greater number might fall into error, and that the public Ministry might be
contaminated, it will not follow notwithsanding that that Church was wholly
extinct, which is only that which we say: Besides that, I say, it is yet
manifest, that those two Churches; that of Israel, and that of Judah, were
often found to depart both together sometimes from the true Worship of God, as
it appears from that which Jeremiah says; That Jer. 3.
God having given a Bill of Divorce to that of Israel for her Idolatries, Judah
her Sister feared not, but that she also had turned aside from his true
Worship. It appears also by that which Ezekiel said, that Samaria had not
committed half the sins of Judah, who had justified her Sister in multiplying
her Abominations. Ezek' 16.
The same History of the Kings of Israel and Judah teaches us concerning Joram
the Son of Ahab King of Israel, that he clave to the sins of Jeroboam, by which
he had made Israel to sin, and that at the same time Joram the Son of
Jehoshaphat, and his 2 Kings 3. 8.
Son Ahaziah Reigned in Judah, and walked after the ways of the Kings of
Israel, in doing that which displeased the Lord. But, without going so far, is
it not true that when Jesus Christ came into the World, he did not find a pure
Church upon Earth? The Schismatical Samaritans had so confused a Religion, that
Jesus Christ did not scruple to say, that Salvation was of the Jews. The Jews
on their side had defaced their Religion by a thousand superstitions, and by
the false Doctrine of the Pharisees, and in fine, they had crucified the Lord
of Life, the only Messoas they expected. Notwithstanding which, we ought not to
believe that the Church was perished from the Earth, and that God did not
preserve his Children in the midst of those Confusions. The same thing happened
then, when the Arrians had made themselves Masters of the Ministry of the
Church; and when under the Emperor Theodosius the younger, the Eutichians
prevailed in the second Council of Ephesus. For it would be a very absurd thing
to imagine that during the time of the Triumph of those Heretics, there were
no more, any true Believers in those Churches, all whose Pulpits they had
filled, and none in all that Communion but those who obeyed the erroneous
Councils of Milan, of Ariminum and of Ephesus. At this very day the most
zealous among those of the Church of Rome acknowledge, that God saves many
persons who live under the Schismatical Ministry of the Greeks, and the
Muscovites, although besides that Schism, they accuse them of holding a
multitude of errors and superstitions. For so Possevin sets it down in one of
his Relations of Muscovy. We Possevin in Muscov.
ought not then to make the subsistence of the Church to depend absolutely on
that Infallibility, whereof we dispute. We ought yet far less to abuse the
promises of God, by pretending under that pretext, that they can never do that
that is ill. The true use of the promises, is to encourage us to our Duty, and
in stead of making us presumptious, they ought on the contrary to humble us,
and to show us the horror of our sins when it is contrary to that promise. For
so the Scripture makes use of it in the second Book of the Kings, upon the
subject of the Idolatries of Manasseh King of Judah; for after having reckoned
them over 2 Kings 21.
particularly, it adds, that he set up a graven Image of the Grove that he had
made in the House of which the Lord had said to David, and to Solomon his Son,
In this House, and in Jerusalem which I have chosen out of all the Tribes of
Israel, will I put my Name for ever. See there the promise employed to its
right use, not to defend Manasseh in what he had done under a pretense, that
God had promised that his Name should never depart from the Temple, which is
the Language they speak in these days; but to condemn Manasseh of that, that as
much as it lay in his power he had nullified that promise of God. And so also
it is that good men ought to speak to the Corrupters of Religion. God has
promised us, that he would betroth his Church to himself for ever; and you have
labored to break off that happy Marriage. Jesus Christ has promised us, that
he will be always with us even unto the end of the world, and you have
endeavored to deprive us of his presence. He has promised us that his Holy
Spirit shall be always with us, and you have greived and drove him away.

4. If the Church might err, say they yet farther, God would then be unjust, in
commanding us to keep our selves under the Guidance and the Ministry of the
Church, for that would not be an assured means of obtaining salvation. All men
know says, Monsieur the Cardinal of Richelieu, that God could not with any
justice Chap. 13. de la Metbode.
bind his creatures to incline to an end without giving them means to come to
that end. The Church cannot err, since if she did err we should not have any
means to come to everlasting salvation, where God would have us come under the
conduct of the Church. But the Answer is not difficult; God would that we
should be saved under the Conduct of the Church, that is to say, of the Pastors
of it, not by giving a blind obedience to all that they tell us, but by a wise
discerning of that which is good, from that which is bad: and that we may make
that discernment, he has given us his word, to which he will have usbring all
that the Pastors teach, to examine their Doctrine according to that Rule. This
is the assured means that he has left us for that. If that means is not so
agreeable to the men of the world, who have other business to mind, and wont
break their brains with the Reading of the Word of God, God will tell them one
day, that their greatest business was to serve him, and to save themselves, and
that if they have not searched out the true means, they ought only to accuse
their own neglect, and their too great grasping of the things of this world.

If they yet urge, that that means is neither easy nor proper for the meaner
sort; we need but compare it with that of the pretended Infallibility of the
Church, and we shall quickly see that this last is infinitely more difficult,
and far less proper for the simple, than the other. For without taking notice
of the impossibility that there is for them to be assured of this Principle
that the Latin Church is Infallible, supposing at the same time that it was,
where should any Woman or Tradesman go to seek that Infallibility, to be
persuaded that that which they believe, and that which they practice, is the
true Belief, and the true Worship of the Church? Will they go to seek it in the
Practices and Customs of the People? But they all agree that the people may
fall into those abuses and Superstitions, that the Church does not at all
approve of. Will they look for it then from the voice of their Curate, or from
that of their Bishop? But their Curate and their Bishop may be mistaken, shall
it be then from the Words of the Pope pronounced ex Cathedra? But that poor
Tradesman, and that Woman can neither know where to find the Pope, nor what
they mean by ex Cathedra; shall it be then from the Universal consent of the
Church and her common customs? But who shall tell them what that Universal
Consent is? Must those poor people know what they generally hold and prectise
in France, in Germany, in Spain, in Italy, or that which they generally teach
in the Schools? It is then necessary for them to learn Greek and Latin. But
when they shall have learnt that, how can they understand the true sense of the
Councils, since that without going any further the greatest part of the Canons
of that of Trent are conceived in general and Ambiguous Terms, which may be
explained in diverse senses, and which very thing some say was done with design
for the carrying on the different Opinions of the Schools. Moreover, those
general and ambiguous terms, sometimes leave the mind undetermined, and the
Conscience in suspense, in matters of practice, where they make it necessary to
do a thing without showing them after what manner they should do it. For
Example, the Council of Trent decides, That one ought to give to Images that
Worship that is due to Conc. Trid*Sess. 25.
them; this is the Infallible Voice of the Church, which binds a man to give
some Worship to Images, which if he does not, he fails in doing his Duty. But
what that Worship is, the Council says nothing to. Is it a Negative or a
Positive Worship? Is it that the same that they give to those they represent,
should be communicated to the Image as well as the Original? or is it meant
only of such Relative Worship that the Image should have no part of it, or if
has any part, what is it? Is it simply a customary Worship, which consists in
making use of those representations to excite their Piety, by the remembrance
of things past? To tell that, the Council says nothing. It says indeed, that
the Worship which they give to Images, relates to those they represent; but
this is not to define of what nature that Worship is, for of what kind soever
it is, one may always say it has reference to the Original. It says indeed yet
further, that when any Kiss their Images, when they Bow to them, and Kneel
before them, they adore Jesus Christ and the Saints; but those terms denote
only an external Worship, without determining any thing of a more internal one,
and when it should determine of an internal, that Council says not a word
whether the Image has any part, or what part it has. Notwithstanding which they
ought necessarily to determine it to some internal Worship, for of that they
treat. How shall any man know whether that side which he takes in this matter
be good or bad, since the voice of the Church has abandoned him, and after it
has as it were set him in the midst of four ways, and commanded him to march
on, never shows the way that he ought to follow, but leaves him in the
necessity of placing his Devotion at all adventure? They will say, that this is
to urge things too far as to what relates to Women and Tradesmen: For those
persons know not what use to make of the Infallibility of the Church, but only
for certain General Articles, which they cannot doubt of that the Church
Teaches. But, not to insist here, that those General Articles are themselves
subject to form different meanings in the minds of the more simple, and that
they ought to make their choice with some certainty. I say, that the Worshipping
of Images, and other such like things is more used by such sort of persons than
others, and that many of those Devotions are proper to them, about which they
cannot have any certainty, nor by Consequence practice them with any Faith. I
place in this Rank the Feast of the Immaculate Conception of the Blessed
Virgin, which they solenmly celebrate, for who can give them any certainty in
that point? Yet nevertheless it is a piece of Worship, it is a matter of
Practice or Duty, whereof they cannot acquit themselves of a good Conscience,
without being assured of that which they do.

5. In sine, they make use of the Visibility of the Church, to Monfeiur le
Card. de Richel livr. 1. chapter 6.
prove its Infallibility. The True Church of Jesus Christ, says one, ought
always to be Visible, always plainly to be discerned, whence it follows that
she cannot err; for if it were possible for her to do so, she could be no
longer acknowledged as a True Church, and there would be no more means proposed
to all men for their Salvation. None can be saved out of the Communion of the
True Church, since it is impossible for any to be saved without Faith, and that
according to the Apostle none can have Faith without that Preaching which ought
to be made by the Ministers of the Church. The True Church ought then to be
always Visible, to the end that all men should set themselves under its
Ministry to obtain Salvation, or that at least they should be inexcusable if
they did not so place themselves, and by Consequence it is necessary that she
should be Infallible. To this Reason, which alone makes a long Controversy,
and about which they make very long Chapters, they add some passages of
Scripture, from whence they conclude that the Church is always Visible, and
some others that contain in their Opinion, not only the promises of a perpetual
Visibility, but of a Visibility shining with such a brightness and such
splendor, that the True Church may be known to Strangers and Infidels to be so.

To Answer this Argument of theirs, in the first place I say, That the True
Church may be so far from being always discernable by all men, as they pretend
it to be, as that one cannot say so much as that all men have always been able
to know that there has been a Society of Christians in the World; for not to
allege that the Christian Church, in its Original, then when the Apostles were
as yet in Jerusalem, or thereabouts, was very little known to the rest of the
world; not to say, that the knowledge of that new Society did not so soon
spread it self over the Roman Empire, nor in the bordering Countries, that the
most of the people were ignorant for some time, of what it was to be
Christians; it cannot be denied that many Ages had slipped away, before that the
most considerable part of the Earth, as all America, could have any knowledge
that there were any Christians in the World. How then, can any one say the True
Church is always Visible, and always discernable to all men? Is it because
those Americans before these last Ages were not men, or is it because they were
not bound to work out their own Salvation? They ought then in good earnest to
acknowledge that God is most free in the dispensing of the means of Salvation,
which he proposes to whom he will, and refuses to whom he will. Till the
external Communion with the True Church shall be the only means of, and
absolutely necessary to Salvation, none can conclude that she ought to be
perpetually visible, and discernable by all men. For it frequently happens,
that God for most just reasons, but which we ought not to search out with too
great Curiosity, may withdraw from men the external means of their Salvation,
and yet notwithstanding he does not fail to convince by other ways, which
render them inexcusable and worthy of Condemnation. Men are bound to place
themselves in the true Church, then when it is discernable to them to be so,
but when it is not so, as it is not at this day to the Southern Nations, we
ought not to believe that God will damn them for not having put themselves into
it, they have other crimes enough to be punished for, without making God to
violate his Justice in that respect.

See here what I say for the defending of Gods Justice, and to let you see the
rashness of those Arguments, which suppose that God is bound to make those
Gentlemen Infallible, to the end that he may condemn men with some reason. But
further, I do not deny, that one cannot in some sense say, that God has always
preserved some True Church Visible upon Earth; but that one ought not to play
with those ambiguous Terms, it is necessary to make a distinction, and to show
clearly in what sense it may, and in what sense it may not be found to be True.
For beside that that I have said in the first place, That the True Church is
not Visible, nor to be generally known by all, we ought not to imagine that the
True Church must be always Visible in one certain place, that is to say, that
one only People, one Society, one body which has been for time a True Church,
may not in the end lose that quality, after whatsoever manner that comes to
pass, whether it be by an entire forsaking of Christianity, or whether it be by
an extreme and general Corruption of that Religion. God has sometimees taken
away his Candlestick from the midst of a people, according to that threatening
which he made to the Church of Ephesus. I will come quickly unto thee, and take
away thy Candlestick out of its Revel. 2.
place except thou repent. The greatest part of the African Churches which
heretofore were so flourishing, are now no longer so; and there is not any
place upon the Earth, neither Paris nor Constantinople, nor Jerusalem, nor
Antioch, nor Rome, nor Avignon, neither the Latin Church, nor the Greek, nor
the Armenian, nor the Ethiopian, neither the Chair of Saint Peter, nor that of
Saint James, nor that of Saint John, nor that of Saint Denis, that can promise
it self that it shall never perish. There are no such promises in the
Scripture, and it is a speech very criminal in the Mouth of any Church
whatsoever it be, if she says, I sit a Queen, Revel. 18.
and am no widow, and shall see no sorrow. When therefore they shall say, that
God keeps up always a True Church in the World, let them remember, that it is
in a way Independent on any Places, and Sees; or if that restriction will not
please them, let them produce those clear and solid and peculiar privileges to
us, which may set the Latin Church above all its Fellows. For as to that that
some set before us that saying of Jesus Christ to S. Peter, I have prayed for
thee that thy Faith fail not; it is clear from a plain Luke 22.
view of that passage, that it only regards the person of Saint Peter, with
relation to that violent Temptation wherewith he was hurried in the House of
the High Priest, and under which there wanted but a little of his Faith having
wholly perished, and that it does not in the least concern his pretended
Successors, whereof there is not so much as one word in all the Scripture. I
say the same, to that Commandment that Jesus Christ gave him to Feed his sheep,
John 21.
which respects only his re-establishment in the Office of an Apostle after his
fall, nor is there any promise adjoined for his Successors, nor for their See,
whereof there is not a word mentioned either there, or any where else. And as
to that passage, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church,
etc. Whether they understand Matthew. 16.
it of that Confession which Saint Peter had made, or whether they refer it to
his person, I say that no one can understand it of his Successors since there
is not any mention made of them either directly or indirectly. For when the Sea
of Rome was not, when it had never yet been; The Church did not fail of being
built upon that Confession of Saint Peter, comprehended Jesus Christ, upon whom
the Church is every way built; but also because that Confession of Saint Peter,
or Saint Peter Confessing, was as one of the Chief Stones in that mystical
Building, which is not left alone, for Jesus Christ, who is not only the
Foundation, but the Sovereign Architect, has added many others in all Ages, and
will always join others to them till the Building be entirely finished, that is
to say till God fulfilled the Decree of his Election.

But to go on with our Discourse of the Visibility of the True Church. I affirm
in the third place, that we ought to know very well what a True Church Visible
is. For we ought not to imagine that all those persons who compose that Visible
Society, should be that True Church. None but those True Believers; I would
say, those who join to their external Profession of Christianty, a true and
sincere Piety, are really the Church of Jesus Christ, and as for the others,
that is to say, the worldly, Profane and Hypocritical, they are but the Church
in appearance only, and not indeed. For having no inward Calling, which
consists in Faith and Love, they do not belong to the Mystical Body of our
Savior, nor are they of his Communion. Notwithstanding, they do not fail to be
mixed with the Faithful by reason of that external profession, as if they really
were in the same Religious Society with them. What then is the Visibility of
the True Church as to us? It is not that we can distinctly, and with any
certainty affirm. Behold these be the Truly faithful of Jesus Christ. None but
but God alone can know them after that distinct manner, and and without a
possibility of being deceived. But this we may say of that Visible Society,
that Under that Ministry, and in that Communion, God preserves and raises the
truly Faithful. Whence we may from this Judgment with Solidity and Truth, and I
may say also without a possibility of being deceived, that there is a True
Visible Church. In that sense, I declare, that there has always been some way
or other a True Church Visible upon Earth, not but that God can make it wholly
disappear to the Eyes of men whenever it shall please him to do so without
doing men any wrong, or any breach of his promises, since he has without doubt,
extraordinary ways to beget Faith in the hearts of his Children, and to keep
them on in that course and to lead them in the end unto Salvation, without
making use either of the public Assemblies, or Ministry, but only because we
ought not to believe that there ever happened since the first rise of
Christianity an Eclipse so full and entire, that one could not some way say,
There is a Society in which God does keep the truly Faithful.

I say, after some way, For as that Judgment depends on two things, the one to
be able to know a Society and a Ministry, and the other to know that under that
Ministry and in that Society a Man may work out his own Salvation, in respect
of the first it is necessary to distinguish between two seasons, the one of
Liberty and Prosperity, where the Church has its Assemblies and exercises its
Ministry openly in the face of all the World. For then she is much more visible
then she would be otherwise, that is to say, it is far more easy to be known
what Society and what Ministry that is. Such was the State of the Church under
Constantine and other Christian Emperors; and it is in such times as those
that the promises of Its outward splendor, if there are any such in Scripture,
are accomplished. The other season is that of its Afflictions and Persecution,
such was that of the first Century of the Church under the Pagan Emperors, and
the Enemies of Christianity. For none can deny that then, the Church was less
discernable by its Assemblies, not only because they were more private and less
exposed to the public view, but also yet further because, the name of
Christian had been defamed by a thousand calumnies, and charged with a thousand
false imputations, which made the knowledge of the Church to be far more
difficult. And it will be to no purpose to say, That then the Church was
visible, and illustrious by the blood of its Martyrs. For the blood of its
Martyrs, did not in the least hinder the accusing of the Christians of most
odious crimes, that which hindered its being liable to be easily known. Those
Accusations were as a Cloud before the eyes of the Common people, which was
necessarily to be discipated, before they could come to know what Christianity
was. So that the True Church is more or less Visible according to the
difference of its Seasons.

As to the second thing, which is to know that one may be saved in that Society
and under that Ministry, it is necessary that we distinguish of the two States
or Conditions wherein that Society may be found. The one is a more pure State,
then when the word of God is preached without mixtures of the Doctrines of men
when the public Worship is performed without superstitions, and the Sacraments
plainly administered according to their Primitive Institution, and when
generally Religion is established, taught, and observed, after the same manner
wherein Jesus Christ and his Apostles left it to the World. In that Condition,
it is certain that the True Church in very visible, and very discernable; for
it is easy to behold all the Characters of its Truth, which only consist in its
Conformity to that lively, primitive, and natural Image of Christianity, which
God has left us in his Holy Scriptures. But it is not less certain that a
Church may fall into a quite contrary Condition, that is to say, into a State
of Corruption, then when it adds to divine Truths, strange and adulterate
Doctrines, when it mingles superstitions with the true Worship of God, and when
in stead of a just Government, it exercises an insolent and absolute Dominion
over Men's Consciences, in one word, then when all things appear so confused and
in that disorder, that one can scarce any more see any traces of that beautiful
and glorious Image of Christianity which I have before spoke of, to shine
forth. In that Condition I affirm that True Church is very hard to be known,
for howsoever it were most Visible in quality of a Church, because its
Assemblies might be much frequented, it would be nevertheless least of all so,
in the quality of a True Church, in that its natural beauty is so darkened and
its Visage so disfigured, that in judging according to its Appearances, one can
but very difficultly say that God does yet preserve some Faithful ones in that
Communion and under that Ministry. But they will say, may not a Church fall
into that Condition, and yet for all that be a true Church? I answer, that a
Visible Society, as I have shown, is not called a true Church, but only with
respect to those true Believers who are in it, and not with respect to the
others. When then it comes to pass, that the party of the Men of the World
prevails, and fills that Society with its Corruptions, all that Society taken
in the general does not fail as yet to be called a True Church, while their is
some appearance, how small soever it may be, that God does yet keep and hold in
it those good men who do not defile their Souls with that Corruption of the
wicked. But how can, say they yet further, those good men preserve themselves
in the midst of such a Society? I answer, That they may preserve themselves
there, after that manner, that one may preserve himself in a contagious Air,
where he draws in the Air, because it is necessary to his Life, but yet he may
keep himself as well as he can from that Contagion, by the help of Antidotes.
There are two things in a Corrupted Church, the good, and the evil: if a Man
can separate that good from the evil, that is to say, if he can take the one
and keep himself from the other without falling into Hypocrisy, and being bound
to do as those who equally take the good and the evil (which he knows not how
to do without dividing between God and his Conscience,) he may be saved in a
corrupted Communion, and there may not be another more pure. This evidently
appears from the Examples of Zachary and Elizabeth, of Simeon, of Joseph, and
the Holy Virgin, and diverse other persons who lived in the Jewish Church, when
our Savior came into the World, and who preserved their Piety though that
Church was fallen into the highest Corruption under the Ministry of the Scribes
and Pharisees. Jesus Christ himself who reproved the abuses of those wicked
men, and exhorted his disciples to take heed of their false Doctrines, did not
fail to live in that Common Society, and to be found in the Temple with them,
and after that he had been Crucified by them, his disciples did not wholly
withdraw themselves from their Communion, during some time, and till they had
indispensable reasons for it. I will show in the Progress of this Treatise,
that it does not from thence follow, that we may at this day abide in the Roman
Communion, and that it much less follows, that we may return thither by
forsaking the Communion of the Protestants, under a pretense that we may
separate the good from the bad, the pure from what is impure, since we can no
more do that, then not become wicked, Impostures, Hypocritical and Detestable
before God and Men. But as this is a point that belongs to another Place, it
shall suffice me to have clearly shown in this Chapter, in what manner, and
with what distinctions it may be said, that there is always a true Visible
Church, and to have made it appear that it no ways follows from thence, that
she must needs be Infallible, as the Church of Rome pretends that she is.

After all this it is not difficult to find out the just and true sense of some
passages of Scripture, which they abuse in this matter of Visibility. For as to
that of the Gospel whereof we have spoken; Tell it to the Church, and if he
will not hear the Church let him be Mat. 18.
unto thee as the Heathens and the Publicans. It is clear, that particular
Churches are treated of there, and that the personal differences which we may
have one with another, and the meaning of it is, that the Faithful are bound,
when they receive any wrong from their brethren to carry their complaints to
the Church, and to refer themselves to its Judgment. Or, if it is not to be
understood in those Times, and in those places where there shall be Churches
established, to the Judgment of their Guides and Pastors, who may end those
private Quarrels. And if they will infer from thence, that then there must be
always a Visible Church, that may be in a Condition to attend to those
Reconciliations, this is that that has no color of Reason. For that Command of
Jesus Christ obliging the Faithful no further then as it lies in their power,
it would be but a very bad arguing, to say that he has so engaged for that,
that he will so order it, that there shall be perpetually a visible Assembly,
to hear Complaints and give Judgments. It is within a little, as if one should
say, that he was engaged that we should always have wherewithal to Lend, and
wherewithal to give Alms, because he has bid us, to Lend without hoping for any
thing again, and to make our selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness
Or, that our Kings were bound never to leave vacant the Office of a Constable,
or that of the Mayor of the Palace, under a pretense that heretofore they
ordered their subjects to acknowledge those Dignities, and to have recourse to
them in certain Affairs. Tell it to the Church, then does not in the least
suppose that the True Church ought to be always in such a State, wherein she
should have Authority to pass her Judgments for the determining private
Quarrels. And besides what I have said, Experience contradicts it; for it is
most true, that during the hottest Persecutions of the Heathen Emperors, where
all was laid in desolation, that it had in many places nothing like a Visible
Tribunal, to which men could easily address themseves.

There are some other Passages that denote the duty of the Pastors, and in
particular of the Apostles, as those where they are called, The Salt of the
Earth, the light of the World, a City Mat. 5^
set upon a Hill, a Candle not lighted to be set under a Bushel, and the
Gentlemen of the Roman Church do not fail to set them down, to give some color
to their Pretensions. But this is evidently to abuse the Scriptures, to make
them establish the perpetual Visibility of the Church, after that meaning
wherein they understand those passages which exhort the Apostles, and after
them the Ministers of the Gospel to acquit themselves faithfully of their
charge, without negligence and weariness from the Consideration of their
Calling, and the end to which God had appointed them. For besides that their
Office does not bind them to that of a Martyr, which does not suppose a very
splendid State of the Church; Besides, that the same does not oblige them to be
Martyrs, if they were not specially called to it. Jesus Christ having told
them, That when they should be persecuted in one place, they should fly unto
another* besides that I say, there is so great a difference between the duty of
the Pastors of these last Ages, which are so far behind that of the Apostles,
and that which those Pastors have actually done, that one caunot know how to
draw any consequence from the one to the other.

One cannot also conclude any thing from some Expressions of the Ancient
Prophets, which seem to promise a great Temporal Prosperity to the Church; no
one is ignorant that the Style of the Prophets may be full of figures and
darkened with Vails, that they ought not to be taken Literally unless men would
be deceived and imitate the Error of the Jews, who take them in that manner.
For the Prophets are wont to represent Spiritual blessings under the borrowed
Images of Temporal things, and so also the Spirit of Christianity obliges us to
explain that which they said of the Messiah and of his Church, and not to
delineate its prosperities, and worldly Grandeur which have no relation at all
to the nature of the Gospel. Not that one cannot say, that some of those
Prophecies have been accomplished according to the Letter of them, in the Times
of Christian Emperors for then Kings were its nursing-Fathers, and Queens its
nursing-Mothers. But that one ought not to draw a necessary consequence, from
thence either for all Times, or for all Places, and as men are always prone to
abuse Temporal blessings; such a worldly Prosperity of the Church would tend
but in the end to corrupt it.

CHAP. VII.
That the Authority of the Prelates of the Latin Church had not any right to
bind our Fathers to yield a blind obedience to them, or to hinder them from
examining their Doctrines.

HItherto we have not opposed in our course the Book of Prejudices; not but
that the end which he proposes to himself, has a great connection with the
things of which I have treated; but because that Author has not believed it
necessary (to make us renounce the Reformation) to justify the Latin Church
from those strange disorders which moved the minds of our Fathers, nor to speak
of that privilege which she pretends that God has given her by making of her
Infallible. We do not pretend, says he, to prove directly the Authority and
Infallibity of the Catholic Chureh. For although it would be most profitable
to do it, and though those among the Catholics who have taken that method have
used a most just and lawful way. Yet as the prepossessions, wherewith the
Calvinists are full, keep most of them from entering upon these Principles,
howsoever solid and true they are; Charity obliges us to try other ways also,
and that which follows here seems one of the most natural. It supposes for a
Principle nothing but a Maxim of Common Sense; to wit, That a man who finds
himself joined to the Catholic Church by himself or by his Ancestors, ought
not to break off from her to join himself to any other Communion, if he
discover in that new Communion any signs of error, which may make him judge
with reason that he ought not to follow it, and that he cannot reasonably hope
that God has established it, to lead men into the truth. So it is that he has
thought himself bound to employ himself wholly in that way, to rid himself of a
great deal of trouble, and that he may in this progress load us with a
multitude of injuries.

Yet he must excuse me, if I am not of his mind. The way which he takes is
neither just nor natural. It is not just, because it takes for granted, and
indisputable, those things, which not only are, but are almost only to the
matters of our Difference. For it supposes that that Party which would not have
a Reformation, and from which our Fathers broke of, was the Catholic Church;
but that is that very thing which is questioned, and our Dispute can never be
decided, but by deciding the whole controversy. If he will take that advantage
of us, that we to accommodate our selves to the custom of the World, sometimes
give those of the Church of Rome the Name of Roman Catholics; he cannot be
ignorant that those sorts of Condescentions, which only respect words cannot
infer any consequence as to things, nor that they can give any ground to make
those suppositions in this Dispute, which may be regulated by more solid
Principles. Further, that way which he would follow, supposes, that our Fathers
in reforming themselves, made a new Communion, and that is yet that very thing
that is in Question, and we maintain that it cannot be reasonably called so, as
it will appear in the Progress of this Treatise. I say also, that that course
is not natural. For before we should come to consider whether there were not
signs of error in our Reformation, the nature of things would first let us see
whether our Fathers had not just reasons taken from the state of the Latin
Church, to Reform themselves, and whether it was not possible for that Church
to corrupt it self. But that could not be well known, but by examining what
that State was in the days of our Fathers with that pretense of Infallibility;
as we have done.

But though the Author of those Prejudices has believed, that he might spare
himself the trouble of proving to us the Infallibility and Authority of those
whom he calls the Catholick-Church, yet he fails not to require us to submit
our selves to those by rendering them an absolute obedience. He would have it
that we being all so apt to deceive our selves in our Judgments, and that the
search of true Religion being so difficult, that the surest way is for us to
see with their Eyes, says he, to tread in their steps, and wholly to strip our
selves of our own guidance to give it unto them. So also the chief Priests and
the Scribes spoke among the Jews; This John 7.
People who know not the Law, are cursed. But Jesus Christ said of these also.
Let them alone, they be blind leaders of the blind, and both Mat. 13.
shall fall into the Ditch. If the Maxim of that Author be good he must affirm
that our Fathers were very unhappy, for having had their eyes to see those
disorders which reigned among the Churchmen in their days, and that God had
highly favored them; had he made them to have been born stupid and blind; for
he conceivs it would be so far from causing them to fall and be deceived,
according to the threatening which Jesus Christ gives to those who leave
themselves to be so blindly guided, that it would be on the contrary the only
means to go on with any certainty. Howsoever it be, we are not bound to be so
blind; that before we lose the use of our Eyes, we must not examine this
Question, whether we ought to lose them or not. Nature and Grace have given
them to us, they would have us to surrender them, but let them give us leave to
use them at the least this one time, to search whether it be just that we
should deprive our selves of them. Jesus Christ himself has forbid us to do it,
the Author of those Prejudices has commanded it. We ought at least to examine
which of the two has reason on his side. That then shall be the business of
this Chapter, wherein I propose to my self to show, That the Authority of those
Prelates who governed the Latin Church in the time of the Reformation, could not
be high enough to oblige our Fathers blindly to believe all that they told
them, nor to hinder them from examining the Doctrines of those Prelates.

But as we find it frequently fall out, that they disguise our Sentiments, and
that they may render them odious they urge them beyond their due bounds, it
will be meet before we go farther, precisely to determine what is Treated of in
that Right, to the end that all equitable persons may the more easily judge of
it. We do not here treat of the use of the Ministry in General. We acknowledge
that God has appointed it in his Church, and that it would be a rashness very
criminal to go about to abolish it. The Confession of our Faith, our practice,
our Books, and the very writings of our Adversaries sufficiently justify us,
to make us believe that they will not lay any thing to our charge in that
point. We do not here also meddle with that order that ought to be observed in
the Election and Ordination of Pastors, we all agree, that when the state of
the Church is regulated, it ought not to be permitted to any that will, to
thrust themselves into the Ministry, nor to encroach upon their Function
without being lawfully called, and if there is any difference in this matter,
it only regards other questions, and not that which we handle at present. Nor
do we further Treat of that respect, or that obedience which every one ows to
good and lawful Pastors. Jesus Christ has said, He that hears you, hears
me; and he that rejects you, rejects me: and St. Paul exhorts the Faithful
to submit themselves with all teachableness to their conduct. Obey them that
are set over you, and submit your selves; for they watch for your souls, The
word then of good Pastors ought to be received with humility, their Functions
to be considered with veneration, and their persons to be loved and honored,
not only in respect of their charge, but because they acquit themselves
faithfully in it. We do not yet further concern our selves to know, whether one
ought not to give that obedience to these Ministers of the Church who preach to
us the Word of God, although their lives are impure and scandalous, and no ways
correspond with their Doctrine. We confess, that it is not allowable for
personal crimes to separate our selves from them, nor from those who adhere to
them, whether they own those crimes, or whether they deny them. We ought to
endeavor to reduce them to their duty, and if they are incorrigible, or if
they have committed Actions which render them unworthy of their Function, there
are ordinary ways that one ought to take to deprive them; if they amend, the
scandal is repaired, and if they do not either because they will elude by
Artifices the Ecclesiastical Discipline, or because that depravation may become
so general that there shall be no more punishment of vice; then we may pray God
that he would send more faithful Laborers into his Harvest, nay we ought to do
it, but we ought always to own those for Pastors, who are in that Charge, and
to receive the Word of God from their Mouths, while they Preach it purely. I go
yet further, and I say that we ought always in General, to think well of those
Pastors, and not lightly to entertain suspicions of their goodness and
faithfulness, especially when we speak of the whole Body, and the disorder that
appears to be great and very visible therein, that we are not absolutely to
form a just prejudice against their Ministry. This is what we acknowledge and
our fathers acknowledged as well as we.

But if they will not be contented with that, if they will have it yet farther,
that the faithful are bound blindly to receive the Doctrines of their Pastors,
without having any right to examine their Nature or their Quality, and that it
would be a crime but to set upon that examination; if they would, that the
Authority of the Pastors, after whatsoever manner we consider it, whether
separatly or conjunctly, or altogether, or in the greater number, should be
without any bounds or measures, as to matters of Faith, or Worship and the
general Rules of Manners, and that, though they cease to believe the Divine
Faith, and to practice all that which they say, without informing our selves
any farther: This is a Maxim we deny, and which we maintain is contrary to the
Word of God, to right reason, and the true interest of Christianity.

1. To begin with the Word of God, we may say, That there never was any Maxim
in the World, against which it does more expressly declare it self. For, first
it absolutely forbids Lordship in Pastors. The Kings of the Gentiles, said
Jesus Christ in that passage before alleged, exercise Lordship over them, and
those that Luke 22.
exercise authority upon them are called benefactors. But it shall not be so
with you, but he that is great among you, let him be as the less, and he that
is chief as he that does serve. In the same sense Saint Peter bids them, Feed
the flock of Jesus Christ, taking the oversight 1 Pet. 5.
thereof, not by constraint, but willingly, not for filthy lucre, but of a
ready mind, neither as being Lords over Gods heritage, but being examples to
the Flock, St. Paul Preached the same Doctrine with St. Peter, We have not,
says he to the Corinthians, Dominion over 2 Cor. 1.
your Faith, but are helpers of your joy. We may observe, that on purpose to
hinder the introducing that Dominion into the Church under the name of
Instruction, as they have done in these last Ages, Jesus Christ goes so far as
to forbid his Disciples the name of Masters. Be not ye, says he, called Rabbi,
for one is your Master Matthew. 23.
even Christ, but he that is greatest among you shall be your servant. And
therefore it is, that the Scripture gives the Title of chief Shepherd to none
but Jesus Christ alone. When the chief shepherd 1 Pet. 5.
shall appear says St. Peter, ye shall receive a Crown of Glory that fades not
away. God has brought again from the dead, the Heb. 13.
great shepherd of the sheep, says St. Paul. But as to other Pastors, the
Scripture is so far from giving them any Character of Dominion, that on the
contrary they are often called Ministers or Servants, 1 Cor. 3. and 4. 2 Cor.
5. Malach. 2. 2 Cor. 4. Job 33. Col. 1.
Stewards of the Mysteries of God, Ambassadors, Messengers, Interpreters, to
teach us, that they ought not to pretend to reign over men's souls, but to make
Jesus Christ reign, who is the only Monarch of the Church. We Preach not our
selves, says St. Paul, but Jesus Christ the Lord, and our selves your servants
for Jesus sake; and elsewhere he says, that he was made a Minister of the
Church of God. All these passages by themselves are very concluding, but taken
together, make up a Demonstration that will persuade all men who are not
prepossest with prejudice. For what likelihood is there that God would have
filled his Scriptures with so many things contrary to this Dominion, if he had
had a design to invest the Pastors of his Church with an Authority so absolute
over men's Consciences, and of making them Sovereign Lords of their Faith? Is
not that Authority, after the way they pretend to it, a real Empire, and a much
more powerful Empire than the Temporal ones, which they set up over the Hearts
and Souls of men, where the others do but establish theirs over their bodies?
Bellarmine and Du Perron busy themselves very Bell. de Romans Pont. lib. 1. c. 9.
much in eluding the force of that passage where Jesus Christ forbids his
Disciples that Dominion. They say, that he forbids not Dominion, but the manner
of that Dominion, that is to say, that Du Perron. Repl. Live. 1. chapter 56.
he would not have them affect that Dominion, nor that they should Rule
Tyrannically or with violence, but that nevertheless he would have them Rule.
Who sees not the absurdity of this answer? For when Jesus Christ said, The
Kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship, but it shall not be so with you, it is
clear that the distinction that he makes between Kings and Pastors, falls upon
that Dominion, and not upon the manner of that Dominion. I confess, that he
forbids the affectation of that Dominion, but, I affirm, that he forbids also
that Dominion it self, as it appears from his words, for he says not, the Kings
of the Gentiles affect Dominion, but he says, they do exercise that Dominion,
and that it shall not be so with them, which shows he would distinctly say,
that they should not exercise Lordship. Else it was necessary that in those
words Jesus Christ should have set down some difference between the Government
of the Gentile Nations, and that of his Church. But that difference cannot
consist in this, that they ought not to affect the manner of Dominion in his
Church, for that would make him say, that they ought, or might lawfully affect
it in the Civil Government, which yet is not true. And as to what they say of a
Tyrannical and violent Domination, they evidently deceive themselves. For the
contest of his Disciples was no ways about that violent Dominion, nor about the
gentleness of that Dominion, but about the Dominion it self, they strove among
themselves which of them should be greatest. Whence it follows that Jesus
Christ, who answers to their thoughts, speaks of a Dominion whatsoever it be,
and not simply of a Tyrannical one. To which I add, that those other Passages
to which they know not how to apply those evasions, learly determine the sense
of that saying of Jesus Christ.

2. But the Scripture is not contented only to forbid that Sovereign and
Absolute Authority to the Ministers of the Church, it farther gives the
Faithful a right to examine that which they teach, and at the same time obliges
them to do it, to separate the Good from the Bad. Hence it is that Jesus
Christ, who would have his Disciples do all that, that the Scribes and
Pharisees who sat in the Matthew. 23.
Chair of Moses, commanded them to do, yet would have them discern also their
false Doctrines, and to take heed of them. Take Matthew. 16.
heed to your selves, says he, of the leaven of the Pharisees and the Saducees,
which in the close he explains of the leaven of their Doctrine. In the sight of
that, Saint John gives this Lesson to the Faithful, Not to believe every
spirit, but to try the spirits whether 1 John 4. (...)
they be of God; and Saint Paul, To prove all things, and to hold fast that
which is good. The same Apostle elsewhere, prays. That they may have an
abundant measure of all judgment and knowledge. That they might try things that
differ, that they might be sincere and without offense until the day of Jesus
Christ. And there where he 1 Cor. 3.
lets us understand that the Pastors in building upon the Foundation, might
heap up Wood, Hay, Stubble, as well as Gold, Silver, and Precious Stones, it is
evident from that Advertisement, that he engages them to make a just discerning
of those things: It is not less clear, that he supposes in the Faithful an
Examination, and a judgment in respect of those things which their Pastors
should teach them, when he has recourse to their Testimony for the
Justification of his Doctrine. We have not, says he, handled the word of God
deceitfully, but have commended our selves to every 2 Cor. 4.
man's Conscience in the sight of God by the manifestation of the Truth. Ye are
witnesses, and God also, says he to the Thessalonians, how 1 Thessalonians. 2.
holily, and justly, and unblameably we behaved our selves among you that
believe. But what more can be added to the force of his words which we find in
his Epistle to the Galatians; If we our selves, or an Angel from Heaven preach
to you another Gospel than Galat, 1.
we have preached to you, let him be accursed. Who can deny that he forbids by
those words that blind obedience which they would have us give at this day to
the Pastors of the Church, and that he does not on the contrary command us to
examine their Preaching by the Rule of the Primitive and Original Gospel? Who
sees not that that exaggeration which he uses, serves but to let us see the
importance, the necessity, the force of that obligation which he would lay upon
us, and how inviolable and indispensable it is? He commands us not only to make
a sincere discernment, he does not only speak of a simple rejecting of that
that shall be Foreign and Alien to it, and shall not agree with the Gospel; He
enjoins an Anathema, an Execration; He would not only have us pronounce it
against men indefinitely, or against those whom the Councils and the Popes
shall declare Heretics, he declares that it ought to be pronounced against an
Apostle, against himself the most famous among the Apostles, against him who
had had Visions and Revelations, who had been caught up into the third Heaven,
and who had labored with such an abundant expense of his blood, and of his
Life for Jesus Christ. This is not all yet, he enjoins the same against an
Angel from Heaven, if he undertook to Preach another Gospel than that which he
has Preached unto us. What can be said, more weighty? What is there in the
Church beyond an Anathema? What is there upon Earth among men greater than
Saint Paul! What is there in Heaven above an Angel? And shall the ordinary
Pastors, the Prelates, Patriarchs, Popes and Councils be exempted from that
Rule, when the Apostles and Angels themselves are not?

3. But we must go yet higher, and follow the Scripture yet farther. It teaches
us that God has put his Sacred Writings immediately into the hands of all the
Faithful, as well as into those of the Pastors, with an obligation to read them
exactly, and to build their Faith and their Hope upon them, whence it follows
that they have right to refer the Doctrines of their Pastors, and to examine
them by that Rule, and that they are not bound To see with the Eyes of the
Prelates, nor to divest themselves of their own guidance to rest themselves
upon that of their Prelates. The Proof of this Truth may appear from a thousand
places of Scripture. When God would give his Law to the Israelites, he said to
Moses, Gather me the people together, that I may make them hear my words, that
Deuteronomy. 4.
they may learn to fear me all the days that they shall live upon the earth,
and that they may teach their children. Moses just before his death assembled
all of Israel together, and said to them, O Israel hearken unto the Statutes,
and unto the Judgments which I teach Ibid.
you, for to do them that ye may live -- Ye shall not add unto the word which I
command you, neither shall ye diminish ought from it -- Keep the Statues and
Judgments of God, and do them: for this is your wisdom and your understanding
in the sight of the Nations, which shall hear these Statutes -- And another
time having assembled the same people, he speaks to them these words, Hear, O
Israel the statutes and judgments which I pronounce this day, that Deuteronomy. 5.
Dent. 6.
hearing them ye may learn them, and keep and do them. The words which I
command thee this day, shall be in thine heart. Thou shall teach them diligenty
unto thy children, and shall talk of them when thou sit in thine house, and
when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest
up. Thou shall bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they shall be as
frontlets between thine eyes. Thou shall write them upon the post of thy house,
and upon thy gates. It was in following that Primitive Institution, that the
Faithful among the Jews Read the Scripture so carefully. Blessed is the man,
says David, whose delight is in the Law of the Psalm 1. Psalm 119.
Lord, and meditates in that Law day and night, and elsewhere he would have the
young men order their ways according to the word of God: Saint Paul by the same
Spirit, commends Timothy 2 Timothy 3.
in that from a child he had known the holy Scriptures. See then the Old Law,
the Ancient Scriptures given immediately into the hands of all the Faithful,
with a command to Read them, and meditate upon them, and consequently, to build
immediately upon them their Faith, their Piety, and their Comfort. But because
we should not imagine that that Order has been changed under the New Testament,
we need but to run through the first Verses of the greater part of the Epistles
of Saint Paul, and those of Saint Peter, of Saint James, of Saint Jude, and
they will see that they are addressed to the Faithful of the Churches, as well as
to the Pastors. To all that be in Rome, called to be Saints. To the Saints and
Faithful in Jesus Christ which are at Ephesus. To all the Saints in Christ
Jesus which are at Philippi; where he distinguishes them from the Pastors, for
he adds, with the Bishops and Deacons. All that lets us see clearly that there
was nothing changed in that regard. They will say it may be that it does not
follow from thence that the more simple among the Faithful should take to
themselves that liberty of searching out by themselves the true meaning of the
Scriptures, and that they ought not to refer themselves to their Pastors who
are the Interpreters of them. But if that were so, why should he have addressed
them immediately to them, why should he have put them in their hands, with
commands to Read them, to Learn them, and to Mediate of them in their Houses,
in their Journeys, in their rising Up, and lying Down? why should he have said
that it was all their Wisdom, and all their Understanding, if he had not
supposed that they could of themselves comprehend the meaning of them, at least
of so much as might be sufficient for their particular Comfort, and for their
Salvation? Moreover, that is clearly refuted by the Use that Jesus Christ and
his Apostles would have us make of the Scripture, that we might know him to be
the true Messiah, notwithstanding the contradictions of the ordinary Pastors of
that Church, who gave to that Scripture a quite contrary meaning. Search the
Scriptures, said our Lord to them, for in them ye think ye have eternal life,
John 1.
and they are they which testify of me. To what purpose should he have said
that, if he would not have them by themselves search out the true sense of the
Scripture, and that they should correct the false Interpretations which their
ordinary Pastors gave of it. It is from this Principle that Saint Peter and
Saint Paul proved Jesus Christ to be the Messiah, not of the Scriptures, and
Converted the people, as it may appear by their Sermons. And it is also upon
this Foundation, that the Inhabitants of Berea are praised for having made use
of that Right, and for having by themselves had recourse to the Scripture, to
know whether that which Saint Paul and Silas told them, was true: These were,
says St. Luke, more noble than those Jews in Thessalonica, in that they
received Acts 17.
the word with all readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures daily,
whether those things were so. After that, how can any one affirm, that the
Faithful ought blindly to believe their Pastors, and to strip themselves of
their own conduct, to rest themselves upon that of the Prelates? Is not this to
condemn that which the Scripture praises? If you look on those of Berea as
being yet Jews, had they not their ordinary Pastors who had before condemned
Jesus Christ, and all his Doctrine? Wherefore then had they recourse to the
Scriptures? Could they better comprehend the sense of them, than all the
Church, to which they had submitted themselves, a Church, I say, which was
upheld by all the Authority of Moses, by the Sacred Names of Abraham, of Isaac,
and of Jacob, by the glory of a thousand Miracles, by the sending of the
Prophets, by the Holiness of a Temple where God had placed his Name for ever,
and by the Majesty of a Succession that had been preserved for near twenty
Ages? And if you look upon them as new made Christians, were not Paul and Silas
their True Pastors, whom their Zeal, their Constancy, their Travels, their
Preaching, their Knowledge, and their Miracles had made famous every where? Why
did not they trust them, why did they yet farther compare their words with the
Scripture?

CHAP. VIII.
A Further Examination of that Authority of the Prelates, and that absolute
Obedience which they pretend ought to be given them.

IT is an amazing thing to behold a prejudice and a present Interest, so far to
blind those, who set before us this absolute Obedience to the Governors of the
Church, and who would have the Faithful strip themselves entirely of the care
of their Souls, to place it in their Pastors hands, that they should not have
considered, that it is the most pernicious Maxim in the World, the most
contrary to the Glory of God, to the Interests of his Justice, and his service,
to the subsistence of his true Church. They will themselves I hope be persuaded
of it, if they will but make with me these following Reflections.

1. The first is, That by that Principle they justify the people of the Jews,
when they adhered to that false worship brought into their Church by the
Authority of their Ordinary Pastors, or practiced with their consent and
approbation, which fell out 1. Kings 14.
very often, as we have before noted, and as it appears from the History of the
Old Testament. The people in that Story, were not in the least culpable either
for sacrificing upon the high places, or in the Groves, as they had began to do
under the Reign of Rehoboam, nor for having of Images, or as the Scripture
speaks carved Idols, nor in offering up incense to the Brazen Serpent, as they
did even down to the reign of Hezekiah, since in doing all those things they
did but follow their Priests, and could say that they referred themselves to
them to see for them, according to what they were bound. They were not to be
blamed then, when under 2. Kings 16.
the reign of Ahaz they offered their oblations on a strange Altar, made after
the manner of that of the Syrians, since it was Vriah the Priest that ordered
it, and set it up in the place of the Altar of God, to the end that the people
should there offer up their Devotions. They were not in the least to be blamed
in those days wherein their Prophets charged their Priests and ordinary Pastors
with having sinned against God and prophesied by Baal, Jerem. 2.
and saying to a stock, Thou art my Father, and to a stone, Thou art my Mother,
and by that means to have corrupted the people of God. For what could those
people do more then follow their Pastors, if it were true, that we ought to see
with their eyes, and to tread always in their steps.

2. But if by establishing that Principle, they justify a People in their
Idolatry and Violation of the Law of their God, if they acquit them of all
fault in that respect, it is not less certain, that at the same time they
condemn God for Injustice, in having sent his chastisements upon an innocent
people, who had done nothing but what they were bound to do, in following their
guides, in that he was not satisfied with punishing only the Authors of those
Crimes, I mean, those Guides who only were culpable. For why should he punish
those who submitted themselves to their guides, whom they could do no
otherwise, then obey? They condemn all the Complaints of the Prophets, which
they addressed immediately to the People, and all the Threatenings, and stinging
Censures with which their writings are full. For to what purpose should they
complain, censure and threaten with so much Exaggeration and vehemence, if the
people ought not by themselves to examine the points of Religion, and that they
ought on the contrary to commit themselves only into their Pastors hands? They
condemn all those holy men, who did not adhere to their Errors, and
Profanations; and they must see themselves reduced to the necessity of
condemning them of rashness and presumption, for having been willing to make
use of their own Eyes, and not to refer themselves wholly to the conduct of
their Church. They condemn all those in that Church who have first spoke of a
Reformation, and all those who have followed them in it. For those who would
not see but by the Eyes of the Church, would never have a Tongue to speak any
thing against its present State, nor ears to hear any thing that could be said
upon that subject. So those good Kings, as Hezekiah and Josiah, who set up the
true worship of God, and did pull down Idolatry, would have been no other but
rash persons, who had Executed that which they should not have so much as
undertaken.

What can they answer to that? Will they say that all those Reformers wrought
miracles, to Authorize their Calls? But that is not true. For neither Hezekiah
nor Josiah, nor those other Kings who abolished those Superstitions, and
Errors, did any Miracle; for that, they had recourse to nothing but the Law of
God. Will they say, that they were the Ecclesiasties themselves who labored in
those Reformations? I confess it. But that alone lets us see, that they had
done ill in referring themselves merely to their Authority, since they
themselves had comdemned what they had before approved of, and by their change
and their Repentance, they acknowledged they had done ill, whence it may
follow, that the people had done ill also in reposing their trust in in them.
Will they say, that the True Worship of God having been of primitive
Institution, and by consequence the first Church having been pure, the people
would have done ill, if when a change should have happened, they had not abode
with, and stuck to their first Pastors; and that by that means of rendering to
the Church that submission which they owed to it, they would have hindered its
Corruption. But to assert that, is but to affirm well nigh what we would have.
When the Latin Church began to corrupt it self, the people ought to have set
themselves in Opposition to it, in sticking close inviolably to their first
guides, and if they had done so, they had not needed ever to have spoke of a
Reformation. Notwithstanding, the have not done so, and the Jews likewise had
not done so, they have not failed of walking after that inclination which all
men have to do ill. The Faithful Isaiah 1.
City became an Harlot, its silver was turned into dross, and its Wine was mixed
with Water, as one Prophet reproaches them. What ought they to have done in
that Misery, must they have remained in that State, under pretense of no more
seeing, then by the eyes of the Church of walking only in its Steps, and of
devesting themselves of their own conduct to rest upon that of the Church? No
certainly, whatsoever the Author of those Prejudices says. They ought on the
contrary to have re-ascended up to the Primitive Church, to the first
Institution of their Religion, to have ruled themselves by that, and to have
labored to save the present Church from that ruin where into its Corrupters
would have precipitated her. That had been the duty of all good men, and a
contrary sentiment would have been criminal. But all that lets us distinctly
see how false and pernicious that Maxim of the Author of the Prejudices is.

Will they say, to defend themselves, that their is a very great difference
between the Jewish Visible Church, and the Christian, that this has its Rights,
Privileges and Promises which the other had not. For she has a Sovereign
Authority over the Faith of her Children, a privilege, that she can never err,
and promises of a perpetual visibility? But to come to that, they ought first
to renounce all those general proofs upon which they found that Absolute
Obedience to the Latin Church. They need say no more as the Author of the
Prejudices has done, that, the darkness of our minds, our personal Prejudices,
the uncertainty wherein we are of being deceived in our Judgments, the being
overwhelmed with a thousand cares, and a thousand Temporal necessities which
almost In the Preface.
wholly take us up, and which will not allow us to give more then a very little
Time to the Examining the Truths of Religion, the want of necessary helps, the
ignorance, narrow and limited understandings of the greatest part of mankind,
constrain us, to refer our selves to the Church. All that would be to no
purpose, if they restrain it to a privilege of the Christian Church. For these
very same general reasons had place in the time of the Jewish Church, men saw
not then more clearly then they do in these days, they were not more assured in
their Judgments, they were not less cumbred with worldly affairs, they were not
less unprovided of necessary helps for the Examination of the Truths of
Religion, they were not then less ignorant, and their minds less narrow, then
men are now in these days, and yet notwithstanding, all that did not make it
their duty blindly to follow their Pastors, or Ordinary Guides. These are then
nothing but shadows, and frivolous pretenses, which having been of no force
then, cannot have any weight now. We need not further say, as the Author of
Prejudices has done, In the Preface.
That it is certain that God can save men, and even the most ignorant and
simple. That yet he does not offer them any other way to Salvation, then that
of the True Religion. That it is therefore necessary that that should be not
only possible, but easy to be known; that yet notwithstanding it is clear, that
there is no way more difficult, more dangerous, and less fitted to all
capacities then that of examining all its Tenets. One may equally apply all
those propositions to the Times of the Old Testament, as well as to those of
the New. God could save men there. He made no other way to Salvation then that
of the True Religion. That ought then to have been easily known, and that way
of Examination was not less dangerous, nor more fitted to all sorts of
capacities, then it is now. Notwithstanding all that had not any force to
hinder the Faithful from Examining it. They cannot then in these days draw any
consequence from what they so propose. I affirm the same thing of all those
other inconveniences which they invent to take away from every one that right
of Examining the State of Religion by the Scripture, and not wholly to believe
their Pastors, as, that it would be to introduce a Principle of Schism and
Division, that every one might make himself a Judge of the Church, that every
one might make a Religion according to his Fancy, that it is a great rashness
for private Persons to imagine that they have more Understanding and more
Wisdom than the whole Church, and other such like things. They may see that all
those arguings are brought in vainly and to no purpose; for if they were good
and solid, being so general as they are, they would serve for all Times and all
Places, and would have their Force in favor of the Jewish Church, as well as
they would have them conclude in Favor of the Latin.

In the second place, those Rights, Privileges, and Promises which they would
ascribe to the Christian Visible Church, in exclusion of the Jewish are
evidently null, if they would make them depend precisely on Christianity. For
as I have before noted, the Greek Church, the Armenian, the Nestorian, and
Ethiopian might pretend to them as justly as the Latin, and yet, the Latin
applies them to her self in particular, to the prejudice of all the others.
They ought then either to show us what reason she has to appropriate those
Rights, Privileges, and general Promises, and to make that, that regards the
Body of the Universal Church become particular to her; or it is necessary they
show us that indeed they are not those Rights, Privileges, and Promises that
are common to all Christian Societies, and that they are peculiar to the Latin
Church. But they know not how to do either the one or the other. For neither
Nature nor Grace have given any of those Privileges or Rights to the Latins,
in exclusion from all other Christians. They are neither more Lords of our
Consciences, nor more Infallible than others. Christianity is Uniform
throughout. The Scripture also does not contain any one particular promise for
them. On the contrary, Saint Paul says, That in Jesus Christ there is neither
Jew nor Greek, nor Barbarian, nor Scythian, nor Bond nor Free, but Christ is
all and in all. So that the Latin Church has no reason to draw that to her self
which is a common Right, nor to pretend any peculiar Privileges.

But, in the sum of all, we have made it appear in the foregoing Chapters that
those pretended Privileges of Infallibility which they ascribe to the
Christian Church Visible, and those promises of perpetual Visibility, in that
Sense of Visibility wherein they understand it, are Chimaeras which have not
any Foundation either in Scripture or Reason. And as to that right of
Soveraign-Authority, it cannot here be alleged but to very ill purpose. For it
is that which is yet in Dispute, and whereof we have shown the falsity from the
example of the Jewish Church. But they may draw from that example a consequence
against the Latin one, because that if that pretense would have been heretofore
pernicious and destructive to Religion and the true Church, as they may see it
would have been, it follows that it will be so yet in these days. If then they
cannot set before us any other difference between those two Terms, and those
two Churches, which hinders my Conclusion, the Argument will hold entire; for
it will not be enough to overthrow it, merely to say, that the Christian Church
has that Authority, and that the Jewish had it not, but they ought to give us a
reason for it.

3. But to proceed with our Reflections, If that Maxim whereof we treat, were
true, that is to say, if men were bound to give to their ordinary Pastors a
blind obedience in the matters of Religion, to see with their Eyes, to tread in
their Steps, and to divest themselves of their own conduct to rest upon theirs,
the Jews who rejected Jesus Christ and his Doctrine, during the time of his
Preaching, those who demanded of Pilate his Death by crying against him, away
with him, away with him, Crucify him, and those in fine who rejected the word
of his Apostles, and who instead of being converted by them, persecuted them,
would be sufficiently justified in their bold unbeleif, and that detestable
Parricide which they committed on the Person of the Son of God. For what were
all those things but just consequences of that Principle? They would not
hearken to the Censures that Jesus Christ made of the Traditions and Doctrine
of the Scribes and Pharisees; their Church admitted those Traditions. They
would not believe that Jesus was the true Messiah; their Church had determined
that whosoever did believe it should be cast out of their Synagogues. They
rejected the Proofs that he gave them from the Scripture; it was not for them
to judge of the true meaning of the Scripture, and the Church understood it
otherwise. They demanded that he might be Crucified; the Church had condemned
him for a Seducer, as an Enemy to Moses and the Law; it was not for them to
inform themselves any farther. They rejected his Miracles; the Church did so
too, and said, that he cast out Devils by the power of Beelzebub. They would
not hearken to his Apostles, the Authority of the Church forbad them. Hitherto
their conduct is within due Rules, supposing that the Principle of the Author
of prejudices, might be just and lawful, and those miserable People are very
much obliged to him for furnishing them with arms wherewith to defend
themselves.

4. That Maxim of the Author of those Prejudices, draws yet far greater
absurdities after it. It ministers accusations against Jesus Christ himself,
against his Apostles and all those who were converted by their Words. If the
Faithful, by those Laws of their submission to the Church, ought not to have
any other Eyes than hers, why did Jesus Christ present himself immediately to
the People, when he should first of all have made known his call from Heaven
the Glory of his Person, and the Dignity of his Office to the Church, to have
made them own it by proving it to them before he Preached to the People? He was
they will say her Lord, and the Church her self would have had no Authority but
by him; that is true; But if the People owed the Church an absolute obedience,
they would have owed it all that time that the Lord would have remained
unknown. He ought then to have began to make himself known to her, and to have
opened her Eyes, that he might at the same time have opened those of all the
People. If Jesus Christ had been known to have been indeed what he was there is
no doubt to be made, but that he would alone have been heard without any
dependence on the Church, of which he is the Sovereign Lord; but as yet he was
not, and till that knowledge had obtained, the People would have been always
bound, according to the Principle of the Author of Prejudices, not to have seen
but by the Eyes of the Church to which God had subjected them. To speak then
home to this Question, whether Jesus Christ was the Son of God, the promised
Messiah, or whether he was not, the Faithful being bound to believe nothing but
what the Church should tell them, he could not but have addressed himself to her,
and not to the Faithful People immediately. Nevertheless, it is most true that
he addressed himself neither to the Priests, nor to the Scribes, nor to the
Pharisees, nor to the Doctors, he Preached his Gospel to the simple People, out
of them he took his Disciples, and it was among them that he did almost all his
Miracles, in fine he himself gives thanks to his Father for that he had hid his
Mysteries from the Wise and Prudent, and had revealed them unto Mat. 11.
Babes. Whence could such a conduct proceed so contrary to that Sovereign
Authority, wherewith at this day they would invest the Church, that is the
Pastors, in respect of the Laymen? It is not difficult to understand, that it
was because Jesus Christ did no ways act from that Principle, nor owned it for
a good one; for if he had owned it, he had never suffered the People to have
violated it, he had made use of another way to make himself known to them, and
he would have employed the Ministry of the Church for that end.

5. One may see the same thing of the Apostles, if the People ought entirely to
refer themselves to the Church, in matters of Faith and Religion. Why did the
Apostles solicit the Jews to embrace their Doctrine, when they could not so
much as hear them without being criminal? They will say they had a commandment
from their Master to Preach this Gospel; I confess it, but the Jews lived under
a Church that had openly declared it self against their Preaching, and they
might tell them according to the Maxim of those Gentlemen, It is vain that you
Preach to us, that you work Miracles, that you allege the Scriptures; We see
by the Eyes of the Church, we hear by her Ears, we march after her Steps, and
we divest our selves of our own guidance to rest our selves upon hers; This is
our Duty, and the Law that is imposed on us, why do you go about to tempt us to
violate it? Suppose we that a Jew after having heard one of those Divine and
admirable Sermons of Saint Paul should have addressed himself to him, and have
demanded of him what Authority he pretended to give to that new Christian
Church which he took such care to establish, whether he did not mean that its
Children should render a blind Obedience to it, and that they should refer
themselves wholly to their Pastors for deciding matters of Faith, without
intermedling themselves to search out the true sense of the Scripture? Suppose
yet, that that great Apostle should have answered him according to In the
Preface of that prejudices.
that Maxim of the Author of Prejudices; That it was true that the darkness of
our understandings, and our prejudices, might be able to hinder us from seeing
in the Scriptures those Truths that are clearly contained in them, that a man
could not assure himself that he was not of the number of those who deceived
themselves. That that doubt is terrible, but that which yet infinitely
heightens that dread which it must needs cause, is, that men are necessarily
bound to choose their Party, and to make so weighty a choice (to wit of that
Religion that they ought to follow) amidst the cumbrances of a thousand cares,
and a thousand worldly necessities that almost wholly take them up, and that
will allow them but a very little time to examine the Truths of that Religion.
That the greatest part of Mankind wanted necessary helps, that the half of
Christians could not tell how to read, that others did not understand any
Language but their own, that others had so narrow and limited a Capacity, that
they could but very difficultly conceive the most easy things. In fine, that
there was no way more dangerous, more difficult, and less fitted to all sorts
of Capacities then that of a particular examination of its Tenets. That the
cutting off of that way, led of it self to that of the Authority of the Church,
since every man is bound to know the truth of something, and he that could not
learn by himself, must necessarily learn it of another. They will then have no
reason to doubt whether they shall take the Catholic Church for their Guide,
and borrow its Eyes to discern the Truths of the Faith, and they will believe
themselves a thousand times more assured in following that, than if they were
left to the weak ef-forts of their own Reason. Tell me I pray, whether that
discourse would have been very proper for the Conversion of that Jew? and
whether he might not justly have answered, That he was also uncertain whether
he should not deceive himself, and take the wrong side, from the very same
Reasons that he had alleged; from whence he might as well conclude that he was
bound to yield himself to the Authority of the Jewish Church, which had been
the most eminent one that was ever in the World; because that although it had
Sects among it who disputed the Truth of its Tenets, yet it had nothing that
could make that high Authority which arose from external signs, to be opposed
with any colorable pretense. To speak in the same Language that the Author of
Prejudices uses, That he sought then to take her for his Guide, and to believe
himself a thousand times more assured in following her, than if he had been
left to the weak ef-forts of his own Reason. Furthermore, he might think it
very strange that the Apostles of Jesus Christ should go about to violate, in
respect of the Jewish Church, a Principle, which in the end they had a design
to establish for the preservation of their own, that they should then plead for
that Maxim, that every one ought to examine the Tenets of the Faith, and search
out the true Religion by himself, without absolutely trusting to his ordinary
Pastors, since that they would have them to hear them, notwithstanding the
condemnation that their Church had pronounced against them. But that afterward
they should quickly change that Maxim toward those whom they should have
converted, and have bound them to have depended blindly on their Guides. That
Inequality would not have appeared fair. Tell me I pray yet once more, whether
the Jew had not had some Reason of his side? and whether that Maxim of the
Author of Prejudices is not far more destructive of the Interests of
Christianity than can be easily conceived? It opens a Gate to the Jews to
defend their Unbelief, to justify all their bold attempts, and to calumniate
Jesus Christ himself and his blessed Apostles.

6. What might not those unbelievers have said against those who were
Converted? They might have treated them as rash, presumptuous, as Rebels and
Schismatics, as disturbers of Order, as a sort of men of a private spirit, who
would make themselves Judges of the Church, and despoil it of its lawful
Authority, to invest themselves in it. But that which is most scandalous, is,
that as that Principle which we oppose opens the mouths of the Enemies of the
Gospel, so it shuts up those of the new Christians, and deprives them of the
means of justifying themselves. For what could they have said, to which those
others might not immediately have replied by the mere application of that
Principle? Could they have said that they had known out of the Scripture, out
of Moses and the Prophets, that Jesus was the true Messiah? But they might have
answered them, that it belonged to the Church and not to them to judge of the
true meaning of the Scripture. Could they have said that Jesus Christ and his
Apostles had an extraordinary Call? But they might have told them also, That it
was not for private men to judge whether those who said they were
extraordinarily sent, were so indeed, that that would be to give way to
impostors, that the Church ought to make that discernment, and that she had
loudly declared that they were no other then such. Could they have alleged
the Miracles of Jesus and his Apostles? But they might have given them the very
same for an answer, that seeing there were true and false miracles, it was not
for the common people who owed an absolute obedience to their Guides, to
undertake to discern between them, but for the Church, which had then explained
them, when she said that Jesus cast out Devils by the Prince of Devils. Could
they have complained of the Disorders and Mark 3.
Corruptions that then reigned in the Jewish Church? But they might have told
them, That they were ungrateful and unnatural Children, who lifted themselves
up against their Mother, and thought of nothing else but dishonouring her, and
that whatsoever they might say, they ought to borrow her eyes, for the
discerning the Truths of the Faith, and to rest assured in following of her. In
fine, that Principle seems to do nothing else but to give a complete Victory to
Judaism over Christianity.

7. But there is more in it yet; for the Heathens might so have prevailed
against the first Preachers of the Gospel, and have stopped its Progress. I
confess that the Heathens did not call their Religious Society by the name of
the Church. But what does the Name signify? Were they not all united in one
Religious Society? Had they not all their Guides, their Priests, those that
offered up their Sacrifices, and their high Priests? Put into their hands then
that Maxim of the Author of Prejudices, with the grounds upon which it is
established, the obscurity of men's understandings, that doubt of being
deceived, the cumbrance of worldly affairs, the want of necessary helps, and
all those other pretenses which they propose to us to make us blindly follow
their conduct, and it will work the same effect as it did in the hands of the
Jews. The Heathens would not have failed to have made use of it, for the
hindering their harkening to those Preachers, to justify that obstinacy with
which they resisted the Gospel, to elude those Miracles, to condemn the
Apostles themselves and those who had been converted by hearing them, as a sort
of men who had broken that Order, which they themselves acknowledged so
necessary to be kept. They might very well have told them, You have not the
True Religion, you are not that Church to which we ought to give an absolute
submission, we have a Heavenly and an extraordinary Call, and we prove it by
Miracles. The Heathens might have answered them, out of the Instructions of the
Author of these Prejudices, All those things are in question between our Guides
and yours, we cannot of our selves decide them, the darkness of our
understandings, the little assurance we can have that we are not deceived, the
just fear that that doubt must infer, the cumbrance of a thousand cares will
not allow us to give more then a very little time for the examining the Truths
of Religion; all that hinders us from harkening to you, and makes us to cleave
inviolably to the highest Authority that can be in the World, and that we
discover without any difficulty in our Society, because that though there are
Sects among us who dispute the Truth of its Tenets, yet there is nothing in it
that can make that Height of Authority which has so many external marks to be
opposed with any colorable pretense. In effect setting aside their Opinions,
their Worship, and their Religion it self in the Foundation of it, they cannot
dispute with that Heathen Society from those external marks upon which they
would found that Authority. And the Christians would not have been in a
condition to have equaled themselves with them in that regard. Would you have
the consent of many people? They had all the World of their side. Would you
seek for Antiquity? They had been almost throughout all Ages. Do you require
Temporal Prosperity? It was, say they, their Religion that gave them their
Empire. Would you have Magnificence? Where was there any thing more Magnificent
then their Temples, and more splendid then their Solemnities? Would you have
Unity? In the Plurality of their Gods, and Varieties of their Ceremonies, they
kept peace among themselves, and adopted the Gods of one an other. Do you
demand Miracles? They boasted that they had them, and the most Illustrious
ones, as those Oracles which foretold things to come, those Apparitions of
their Gods, their Recoveries and Resurrections from the dead. There was nothing
then that could justify the Apostles, but the falseness of the Pagan's
Religion, and the Truth of the Christian. But for that they must of necessity
enter upon that way of Examination, and make those people to set about it whom
they desired to convert. But this is plainly that which that principle of the
Author of those Prejudices would have hindered as we have shown. Whence it
follows that it is a pernicious Principle, contrary of Jesus Christ, to his
Apostles, and to the true Interests of the Gospel.

But can they answer nothing to these last Reflections that I have made? It
seems to me that they can possibly say but two things; the one, That those who
were converted by the word of the Apostles and the other Preachers of the
Gospel, were constrained to hear them, against that Order, by a secret
inspiration which dictated to them to make use of it also. The other thing is,
That Jesus Christ and his Apostles proved their Call to be Extraordinary, from
Heaven, and more eminent then that of their ordinary Pastors by Miracles, and
that in that Case, the Faithful are bound to go beyond that Rule, and to hear
those that shall be so sent to them against that very Authority of the Church.

As to the first, I do not believe that wise persons ought to admit of it: For
if they take those secret inspirations, to be inward motions that form within a
man frequent and strong desires to do a thing, without suggesting any Reason;
the Spirit of God does not work so in the Conversion of men. It works,
according to the Testimony of St. Paul, as a light, that inlightens the
understanding, to the end we may know what is the hope of our calling. Then
when those desires and inward motions are contrary to that duty to which we are
all naturally engaged, they ought rather to pass for Temptations, then for
Inspirations, and a man would be very much bound to repress them under that
Quality, instead of following and obeying them. Those pretended Inspirations
then which tended to make the first Preachers of the Gospel be heard, would
have been so far from having had that effect, that on the contrary, they would
have gone farther against their Consciences, because they would have been found
to have been contrary to a Duty, supposing that entire obedience to the Church
in matters of Faith a Duty. They would have been troubled to know whether they
ought to examine Religion or not: That Rule, might they say, would have me not
do it; a blind Inspiration which is not supported by any Reason, and which
cannot have any certain mark of Divinity, can never be strong enough to
Authorize the breaking of that Rule. But it cannot be yet alleged to serve
for an excuse toward that Religious Communion to which they had submitted
themselves, for if that Communion had a right of Sovereignty over them, she
would not be bound to strip her self of it when an inspiration should speak to
them, and we can, but very ill defend the cause of the first Christians, by
that way. If they would understand it so as those inward motions should be
supported by some Reason, that they should not be entirely blind, it is
necessary that they produce that Reason, and not speak any more of Inspiration.

That Reason then, in my Judgment, can be no other, then those Miracles that
Jesus Christ and his Apostles wrought, and by which they proved their Call to
be divine and extraordinary. I confess, that if we suppose that all men have a
right to make clear the Truth of things by themselves, there is nothing more
true then to say, that Jesus Christ and his Apostles made themselves to be
heard by their Miracles, and that their Miracles were made use of to prove
their Heavenly Call. For their Miracles were plainly applied to the minds of
men, to make them consider that which they taught, and in the end joining their
Miracles to their Doctrine, they saw that they both mutually upheld one
another, that neither of them were false, and that both the one and the other
had the Characters of Divinity, they did then conclude from thence that their
Call was Divine and Extraordinary. But if we suppose that Principle of the
Author of Prejudices, there is nothing more false, then to say that their
Miracles bound men to hear them, and proved their Call to be Extraordinary. For
that Principle being, as it is, founded upon the darkness of our understanding,
upon the uncertainty of our Judgments, and the easiness wherewith we are liable
to deceive our selves, it is manifest that it ought to be extended even unto
Miracles, because that there are true and false Miracles, good and bad, and
those that false Prophets work as well as they that are sent from God. We ought
then to make a distinction, and a distinction that is not easy to be made, the
Angels of darkness so disguising themselves into Angels of Light. But that
Reason of the darkness of the Understanding, the uncertainty of our Judgments,
and that readiness we have to deceive our selves, has (if you please) more
place in that Distinction, then in that of that Doctrine. We may be easily
surprised, and by consequence we ought to give over that Discerning to the
Church, and yet follow in that its light and its decisions. And if you would
give to the simpler sort, to those Babes for Example whereof Jesus Christ
speaks, that his Mysteries have been revealed unto them, if you give them I say
that right and liberty to judge of that important and fundamental Question, to
wit, Whether the Call of a man be Extraordinary and Divine, or whether it be
not so, whether his Miracles are those of a true Minister of God, or of a false
Prophet, whether it be a true Angel of Light, or a disguised Angel of darkness,
and to judge of all those things after the Church and against the Church, I see
no Reason why they should refuse them the right and liberty of judging also of
its Doctrine and the points of Religion, whereof the true knowledge is by
nothing near so difficult.

God had forewarned his People that they should not give themselves over to be
deceived by the first appearances of Miracles, and he had appointed that they
should judge of them by the Doctrine they accompanied. Whence it follows, that
the discerning of Miracles, and judging of that Doctrine, are two inseparable
things, and that their right belongs to the same persons. If there arise, says
God, among you a Prophet, or a dreamer of dreams; and gives thee a sign or a
wonder, And the sign or the wonder come to pass whereof he spoke unto thee,
saying, Let us go after other Gods, (which thou have not known) and let us
serve them: Thou shall not hearken unto the words of that Prophet, or that
dreamer of dreams: For the Lord your God proves you to know whether you love
the Lord your God with all your heart. It appears from thence, that the way for
men to judge well of Miracles, is to examine the Doctrine of him that works
them. So that if they will a gree to give the people a right to discern
Miracles, they cannot take away from them that of discerning that Doctrine they
uphold. Jesus Christ supposes the same thing when he says, that there shall
arise false Christ's and false Prophets, and that they shall work great signs
and wonders, to seduce if it were possible the very Elect. For how could they
otherwise discern those Miracles of the false Prophets, but by examining their
words?

So a famous man of the Roman Communion has not scrupled to write, that we are
bound to reject Miracles, and those men who make use of them, then when they
are joined with a Doctrine which the Church has condemned, his words are
considerable, and very well deserve to be transcribed. The Application, says
he, Le P. Annae dans un Ecrit center le pretendu miracle du Port. Royal.
and direction of a miracle to prove the Truth of a Doctrine, is an enterprise
so rash, and so scandalous, that it deserves to be punished. There is not any
Catholic in the World, who knows his Creed and understands it, that can be
capable of such a persuasion. What if the appearance of a Miracle is contrary
to the definitions of the Church, can any one hesitate or doubt, whether it
would be better to adhere to the Church supported by the truth of a Miracle, or
to deny the truth of a Miracle founded upon the Authority of the Church? Saint
Peter has taught us a great while since what we are to do on that occasion. He
had been an eye Witness of the Transfiguration of our Savior, and of that
glory that lay hid under the Vail of a Suffering and Mortal state, and yet
nevertheless he trusts more in the obscurity of Prophets, than to the clear and
manifest experience of his Eyes; we have a more sure word of Prophecy. The
Authority of the Church which is in nothing less than that of the Prophets,
breaks in pieces all those reasons that oppose it, and we ought to take to our
selves in regard of the Church that which Saint Peter says with respect to the
Prophets, To which we do well that we take heed, gathering together all our
attention to know the true sense of the Church, and turning aside from all the
Miracles, and all those Reasons the men propound to us to make us call into
question that which we know the Church to have determined. We may see clearly,
by that passage, how far one may carry that Principle of the Authority of the
Church, in the thoughts of those that admit of it, that is to say, even to make
Miracles themselves submit to it. He says, that we ought to Collect all our
attention to know the true Sentiments of the Church, and to turn aside from all
those Miracles which would make us call into question that which the Church has
determined. He says, that to go about to make use of Miracles for the proving
of a Doctrine that is condemned by the Church, is a rash and scandalous
enterprise, and such as deserves to be punished. In effect, if they suppose
that Maxim that we ought to give to the Church an absolute obedience, to see
with her Eyes, and to rest upon her Conduct, those Miracles could not make them
be heard, whom the Church should have condemned, and by which they should have
been looked on as false Miracles: the Consequence is good and just. But because
that very thing applied to the times of the first rise of Christianity,
justifies the Unbeleivers, condemns the proceedings of Jesus Christ and his
Appostles, accuses those of rashness who have believed on their preaching,
destroys the Gospel, and overthrows the Christian Church, it is a manifest
proof that that Maxim it self is false and rash, since those Consequences that
arise from it are so detestable, that they leave neither to Jesus Christ nor to
the Apostles any way to make their Gospel to be heard by men, with a good
Conscience, and the care of their Salvation.

8. They must give me leave to speak a little earnestly for the interest of our
Lord Jesus Christ. The more I consider these inevitable Consequences of that
Maxim, the more I am astonished. If those first Christians, who had been Jews,
could not hear the Doctrine of the Son of God, nor receive his Miracles,
without violating of their Duty toward the Church that had condemned them, what
scruples might not all that cast into all the Christians that are at this day
in the World? For in fine we are the Successors of that people, our Fathers
were not Converted but by their Ministry. If then we cannot see clearly that
they themselves had a right to be Converted; if they laid down on the contrary
a Principle, which of right ought to have hindered their Conversion, where then
are all we, as many as we are? The Reasons that the Author of those Prejudices
produces to make us divest our selves of our own guidance in favor of the
Church, that we should see with her Eyes and tread in her steps, had as much
place with the Jews as they have with us, they could not doubt but that their
Church was the Church of God, none can dispute with them that eminent Authority
which had so many external marks. To her belonged the Adoption, the Glory, and
the Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and the
Promises; of whom were the Fathers, and who had the Oracles of God committed
unto them, and in whose bosom Christ according to the flesh was born. If that
Maxim of the Author of Prejudices were good, it must necessarily have been good
for that Church which had condemned Jesus Christ, his Person, his Call, his
Miracles, his Doctrine, and what right then had his Disciples to hear and
follow him? We have seen them from Reason, and from the Testimony of a very
considerable person of our Age, and to whom one of the greatest Kings has given
the honor of committing the concerns of his Conscience to him, that if that
Maxim had place, that we ought entirely to refer our selves to the Authority of
the Church, we could not any more regard those Miracles when they were opposite
to that Authority. Let them tell us then what right the Disciples had to follow
Jesus Christ, by what right did the first Converts, and those who were
afterward Converted by others, embrace the Gospel? And if they did it without
any right, and against their duty, into what Labyrinths we cast you? What would
become of the Christian Church, what would become of you your selves? You form
prejudices against us, drawn from the faults that have, say you, appeared in
the persons of our first Reformers. You tell us of a pretended precipitancy, by
which the Magistrates of Zurich Reformed themselves; you conclude from thence
without entering upon the points in dispute, that we ought to renounce the
Reformation of our Fathers. Answer then your selves to the Prejudices, that
according to your Maxim, the Jews may form against the first Disciples of Jesus
Christ, and to the Consequence that they may draw from thence, that without
entering any further into a Discussing of the Points of that Religion, without
examining either the Miracles or the Ancient Prophecies, or the success of the
Preaching of the Gospel, or all the other things that we could allege in our
favor, we ought to renounce our Christianity. You your selves Authorize their
Principle, by one that is altogether like it, which you lay down, and which you
know not how to make use of against them, without overthrowing your selves; in
a word, you draw the same Consequence from it with them, show us then by what
secret Art both you and we may get out of that Abyss whereinto you have plunged
us. If your Fathers, say you, have Reformed themselves with an ill design, you
ought without farther examination to renounce their Reformation. If the chief
Authors of your Religion, a Jew will say, have adhered to Jesus with an ill
design, against the obligation which they had to cleave to the Church, you
ought to renounce their Christianity. Answer if you can to those Arguments, and
set our Consciences in quiet. As for us indeed, we are not in pain: for we know
that that Principle which you urge to those unbelievers is false. There is not
any person who has not right to examine the points of that Religion, and to
discern by himself the true from the false, the good from the bad, that which
is from God, from that which which from men. The Authority of the Church never
goes so far as to hinder us with any justice from it, and so there is nothing
to reproach the first Christians.

9. But we ought not to give over these reflections, without making one upon
the state of the Church in the times of the Councils of Sirmium, of Milan, and
of Ariminum, whereof I have spoken before. There is no person who knows not
that the Arrians were then Masters of the Ecclesiastical Ministry, which they
called the Catholic Church, treating the Orthodox as Heretics and Disturbers
of its Peace, deposing them and sending them into banishment. The Poison of the
Arrians, says Vincentius Lirinensis, had not only infected one part, but almost
all the world, and almost all Vincent Lirinens. Com. 1. cap. 6.
the Latin Bishops, some by force, others by simplicity giving themselves over
to be deceived, found themselves engaged in the darkness of Error. We are in
that condition, said Phaebadius, that if we would be called Catholics, it is
necessary that we embrace Heresy; and yet Phaebad. contra Arrianos Statim ab
enitio.
nevertheless if we do not reject Heresy, we cannot be truly Catholics. God
did yet keep to himself notwithstanding some Bishops, few in number, but great
in Courage, and that small remnant in the end served for a spark to rekindle
the Fire of the Faith in the Church. Apply then to them that Maxim which we
have before opposed, and weigh those Consequences that may be drawn from it,
against those, and against the Faithful who Heard them and Read their Writings.
The least is, that they were Schismatics, and Corruptors of the people, who
after having themselves broken off that obedience which they owed to the
Church, solicited others to do the like. They might have very well urged, that
they had the Scriptures on their side, that they had the Council of Nice for
them; but they would have answered them, That it was no longer time to dispute,
that they ought to submit themselves to, and acquiesce in the definitions of
the Church. Since it was the duty of the Faithful to strip themselves of their
own Conduct, to rest upon that of the Church. Nevertheless, they did not fail
generously to maintain the Truth, to dispute and write for it, to address
themselves not only to the Bishops, but to the people, and to defend it against
that specious name of a Church, which they set before them, and the words of
Saint Hilary upon this subject are worthy of a particular consideration. The
Church, says Hilar. adv. Arrianos.
he, terrified men by Banishments, and by Prisons, and constrained them to
believe what she tells them, she that her self had never been believed, but by
the Exile and Prisons which she suffered. She which had been only Consecrated
by the Persecution of men, Been and a dignatione Communicantium. She drives
away the Priests, forgetting that by the Banishment of her Priests she
increased. She boasts that she is beloved by the world, but she could not
belong to Jesus Christ unless the world hated her. Haec de comparatione
traditae nobis olim Ecclesiae, nunc quam de perditae res ipsa que in oculis
omnium est at que ore clamavit. Can any one be rash enough to maintain, that he
was bound then to refer himself to the Authority of that Church, to see with
its Eyes, to tread in its Steps, and to rest himself upon its Conduct? Will any
say that that handful of good men who have since re-established Christianity,
was nothing else but a company of Rebels, and of presumptuous minds? Will they
charge their Writing and their Letters to the people with Forgeries and
Subornations? Will they justify their being Deposed, their Banishments, the
Persecutions which they so constantly suffered? Will they say that the Faithful
that heard them were rash and Sacrilegious, and that those on the contrary who
submitted themselves to the decisions of the Church, were those good men, who
did nothing but their duty; and that we our selves at this day, who have
received our Christianity from the hands of that small number, are but the
followers of Rebels and Schismatics? Yet all that they must say, if they lay
down that Principle of absolute Obedience. It appears then that that Principle
is false and unjust, and invented for the ruin of Religion.

10. In effect, an absolute obedience, and an entire resigning of ones self to
the Conduct of another, as to those matters that regard the Faith and the
Conscience, is a duty that we can render lawfully to none but God, who is the
first Truth, the first Principle of all Justice. A man cannot submit his
understanding and his heart to the word of any one, so as to believe blindly
that which he says, without giving him a kind of Adoration, for there can be no
homage greater than that of an inward blind submission. It is an infinite act,
according as a creature may be said to act infinitely, that is to say without
bounds, without reserve, without measure. It is then an act that can belong to
none but God immediately, that we ought not to transfer to the Church, if we
would not adore the Church; and to which by Consequence a Church can never
pretend without usurping the just rights of God.

11. God himself has so far forborne his right, that he does not very often
absolutely make use of it, but leaves it to our minds to judge of the Truths
that he propounds to us. For there are often in those things that he teaches
us, Characters that equally note their Truth and their Divinity, so that at all
times we may draw these two conclusions from them, This Doctrine is true, this
Doctrine is of God, without their depending one upon the other. We may say the
same of his Commandments, they bear most frequently Characters of their Natural
Justice, as well as those of their Divinity; and they give us leave to receive
them not only by an Act of Obedience, but by an Act of Judgment also. As it is
from him that we hold that admirable faculty of distinguishing the true from
the false, the good from the bad, by Characters impressed in those things
themselves, so he would not take a way the use of it in matters of Religion. On
the contrary, it is ordinarily by the using of that, that he draws us, that he
convinces us first of all of the Truth of some Doctrines, that he makes us
afterward acknowledge the necessary connection that they have with others which
he has revealed to us, the Truth whereof appears not so clearly, abstractly
considered at first, and by that connection he makes us receive them. He shows
us the equity of his Precepts, the horror of those Vices that are contrary to
them, and in that manner he gains our Hearts, by making use of our own Reason.
Not that we may lawfully reject any of those things which he teaches us; we
have no right for that without doubt, because where our Understandings are
wanting to discover those Characters of Truth or of Equity in those things
which he teaches us, there he has ordained that his Authority shall help us. It
is God that says it, it is God that commands it: but it is not the same with
respect to the Church; the Church is not God, she is but an Interpreter and
Servant of God: she ought then to show us in all that she teaches us as matter
of Faith, or that she commands the Conscience to submit to, those Characters of
Truth and Equity in the things themselves, or else those of their Divinity;
when she fails in that, she cannot supply that defect by her Authority; for in
that case her Authority is purely no other than Humane, and an Humane Authority
is not sufficient either for the Faith, or for the Conscience: so that every
man has right to examine that which she teaches, and to reject that that is
beyond the word of God.

12. In fine, Let those Gentlemen tell us if they please, whether in this same
Question concerning the Sovereign Authority of the Latin Church, and the
Obligation that lies upon every one to hold himself to its decisions, they
mean, that every one should refer himself to the Latin Church, and believe also
merely because that she says so, without any other examination; or whether they
would grant that every one may have right to examine of what nature, of what
extent, and of what force that Authority is, and how far that Obedience goes
which he ought to render to it. There is no likelihood they will say the
former; for that Authority cannot establish it self; when it shall be
established, a man may refer himself to it for other things, but while her own
establishment is disputed, it is requisite it should come from somewhat else,
and that there should be for that proofs capable of persuading us. To what
purpose do they tell us of its external marks which makes us, says the Author
of the Prejudices, discover without any difficulty that height of Authority
which is in the Catholic Church, if they would not leave the Faithful a right
to see those external marks, and to examine them not any farther by the Eyes of
the Church, but by their own? That being so, they may see that they ought
always to give men a right of making a Judgment by their own light, and to give
them in that Question the most important matter of all, to wit, that of
choosing a Rule and a settled Principle for their Guidance and their Faith, an
Authority upon which their Minds and Consciences may rest, and lie down in
perfect Peace. They must give them that in that Question which it is no ways
easy for them to decide; For besides that they ought to see those external
marks of the Latin Church, which say they, gain her so great an Authority, they
ought also to see whether there are not others which they take away more
reasonably from her then those that they give her; they ought to see whether
those marks are not common to other Religious Societies, that may by that means
dispute with the Latin Church that Authority; they ought to see whether those
marks when they shall become peculiar to the Latin Church, may be capable of
giving her so Sovereign an Authority over men's Faith and Consciences. which
seems naturally to belong to none but God. And because in that Question, we
treat not of the whole Body of the Church, but only of the Prelates, and those
who take up the Ecclesiastical Function, they ought to know whether those
external marks can hinder them from believing that those Prelates have abused
their charges, and brought in, or suffered to be brought in diverse Corruptions
into the Church. All that is not so easy as the Author of the Prejudices
tells us it is. There is some difficulty to get thither; and yet that belonging
of right to the examination of all men, the darkness of the understanding, the
easiness wherewith men may deceive themselves, the want of necessary helps, the
ignorance and simplicity of the greatest part of men, would not hinder it.
Those are then no other than frivolous Reasons, which cannot take away from men
that right that God and Nature have given them. They ought therefore to enjoy
it, at least in some respect, to wit, for the deciding of the question, whether
they ought to lose it or no.

13. But it is certain they can never so enjoy it in that regard, nor decide
that Question without entering upon an examination of all their Doctrines, which
lets us see yet more and more the absurdity of our Adversaries Principle. For
there is not any Principle more absurd, than that which destroys it self, which
cannot be established but by making use of a contrary Principle, and which
precisely can have no place, but there where it cannot be of any use. But all
that may be said of that Principle of those Gentlemen, since it is most true
that to establish it, one must necessarily proceed to examine their Doctrines,
and that they can never know whether they ought to refer themselves to the
Latin Church, or examine that Doctrine by themselves, till they have made that
examination, that is to say, till there shall be no farther occasion to refer
themselves to that Authority of the Latin Church, which makes pleasant sport
enough. This is that which is evidently manifest, if one consider it, that
before one can acknowledge the Authority of the Latin Church, it must be
supposed, that one is assured that among all the Religious Societies that are
in the World, the Christian is the only one in which one ought to place
himself; and that can never be known but by one way only, which is that of
examining its Doctrine and its Worship. In effect there is not any one of those
external marks that can make that difference. The Jews had their Miracles,
Antiquity, Succession, an uninterrupted Duration, the Holiness of their
Patriarchs, the Light of their Prophecies, the Majesty of their Ceremonies; we
do not dispute these marks with them, and as to Temporal Prosperity, they had
it heretofore, and we are not assured that we have always had that, whereof we
make such boasting, which nevertheless is not very great. The Mahometans glory
that they have the same things, with the consent of the People, and the
admirable success of their Arms; and as for Antiquity, which they fail in, they
say, that as Jesus Christ did but succeed Moses, so Mahomet also has succeeded
Jesus Christ. As for the Heathens they had, as I have said, their Miracles,
their Saints, their Prophets, their Ceremonies, their Succession, their
uninterrupted Duration, their Temporal Prosperities; and if we strive with them
about Antiquity, and Multitude, the advantage will not lie on our side. There
is then nothing more deceitful than those external appearances, separated from
their Doctrines, they are as proper to make a Jew remain a Jew, a Heathen a
Heathen, and a Mohammedan to remain a Mohammedan, as to make a Christian to
remain a Christian; whence it follows, that to form well that difference, and
to be assured that the Christian Communion is the only good one, one ought to
examine its Worship and its Doctrines.

Moreover, before they could acknowledge the Authority of the Latin Church,
they must suppose, that a man is sure that among all the Christian Sects, the
Latin only is the true Church, and that cannot be known but by the examination
of its Doctrines. Those external marks can be no ways proper for it. The
Greeks, the Abyssines, the Nestorians ascribe to themselves Antiquity,
Succession, Miracles, an uninterrupted Duration, as well as the Latins. They
have their Saints, their Prophets, their Ceremonies, and their Multitude, which
is not less considerable; and as to worldly Prosperity, the Abyssines may boast
of it, and the Muscovites also, who make a part of the Greek Church, and who
knows whether that of the Latin Church shall never change? It is then manifest,
that they can conclude nothing from those marks separated from their Doctrine,
they are so ambiguous, and uncertain, that they cannot fix any settled Judgment
upon them, concerning the truth of the Latin Church.

But, supposing that they could by those external marks, or by any other ways
which they would take, be assured that the Latin Church was the true Church, I
say, it must necessarily be understood in this Sense, to wit, that in that
visible Communion God brings up and preserves his truly Faithful ones; For it
is in those only that that name of the visible Church is verified, and not in
the profane, the wicked, and the worldly, who are mingled with them, and who
are none of that Body that is the Spouse of Jesus Christ. They must then be
assured, before they can know whether they ought to refer themselves absolutely
to that Body of Pastors that governs the Latin Church, that the profane and
the worldly do not prevail in that Body, and that they never have prevailed;
for if they do prevail, or if they ever have prevailed, they may introduce
errors into the public Ministry, and false Worship, or suffer them to come in
through their negligence or otherwise, or scatter abroad the ill Doctrines of
the Schools amongst the People, favor ill customs, and in a word, corrupt that
Communion, as it appears that that did come to pass in the Jewish Church, and
sometimes in the Christian. But how can any be fully assured that it may not be
so at present, otherwise then by the examining of her Doctrine? They ought then
to give up that point of external marks; our Fathers have gained their cause
without going any farther, by the Prejudices of Corruption which I have set
down in the second and third Chapters. But if you take them only as mere
conjectures, and if you will reckon them to be nothing, it is certain, that to
be assured that there is nothing corrupted in a Communion where God brings up
and preserves his true Faithful people, that the public Ministry is pure in
all its Doctrines and in its Worship, one must of necessity take that way of
examination, and that examination must be very exact. So that before we can
enter only upon that Question, whether we ought to give to the Latin Church a
Sovereign Authority over our Faith and Consciences, the discussing of which
they know not how to avoid, all must be examined: from whence it follows that
that Principle which I have opposed is absurd, because it destroys it self,
and none can ever practice it, till it cannot be any more of any use; and more
absurd yet, in that when it would hinder us from examining, it constrains us
to make an examination as exact as can be thought of.

CHAP. IX.
An Examen of those Reasons they allege to Establish that Sovereign Authority
of the Prelates in the Latin Church.

TO defend in some manner a Principle that Scripture, Reason, the Interest of
the Ancient Jewish Church, and the Christians, do so loudly condemn, they
propound some Inconveniences which arise, they pretend, from that of the
Contrary Principle: But it is certain, that if it were enough to allege those
Inconveniences to overthrow those Rights which are found to be so solidly
established, there is nothing in the world sure, since there is nothing so
just, so reasonable, or so necessary, which the weakness or the malice of men
may not abuse. It is necessary to yield to men the right of eating and
drinking, of Clothing and Marrying themselves, of selling and buying, of
holding Commerce between themselves, of building Houses and Towns, and to
distinguish themselves by their several Arts and Professions. And yet how many
Inconveniences are there that arise from all those things? It is the same in
the usage of the most holy and inviolable things, as of Religion it self, of
which a Libertine, says in General, because of the Abuses that were made of it,

Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum. If all must be abolisht that is subject
to Inconveniences, one must abolish every thing. Gold and Iron, Night and Day,
Fire and Water would be criminal, and the very Air it self which makes us live,
causes sometimes our death. They cannot then take a worse way then that of
those Inconveniences to cry down a Right, founded upon Nature, and upon Grace,
and Authorized by Jesus Christ, by the Prophets and Apostles. Let us see
nevertheless of what nature those Inconveniences are.

One of the most Considerable is, That if they allow those who are subject to
the Church, to Examine the matters of Religion, there will be no more any way
to keep men in the Unity of the Faith, that every one will have a Religion by
himself, and that by this means they should open a way for Extravagancies and
Heresies, and by consequence for the entire ruin of the Church, since the minds
of men are so different and confused that that which pleases one, will not
please another.

To Answer to that Objection, I would demand of those Gentlemen whether they
propose to themselves to find out any humane and efficacious way, which shall
go so far as actually and effectually to hinder those Extravagances and
Heresies; or whether they would only establish a Maxim, which in supposing that
it should be followed, and that all men would receive it, should contain all in
the Unity of the Faith. Let them take which of those two sides they please,
they cannot rationally say any thing. The first contains a rash and absurd
pretense, for to go about to seek a humane means that shall actually hinder all
Errors and Heresies, is to seek for that which they can never be able to find.
To retain men in the Unity of the Faith and of True Piety, two things are
necessary, the one, That they teach all the pure Truths of God; and the other,
That they give them all a right understanding, to the end they should follow
it. Their Pastors might very well do the first, but the second, which does not
depend on them, none but God alone can do. And that also he does in regard of
all his Elect and truly Faithful for whose sake only there is a Church, and
Pastors in the World. For he bestows on all those his Holy Spirit, in that
measure that shall suffice to unite them in the same Faith, and to hinder them
from falling into Errors wholly inconsistent with their Salvation. As for the
others, as he has not ordained their Salvation, so he would not actually hinder
them from casting themselves into Heresies, or into Errors. On the contrary, he
has resolved to permit those strayings, the better to distinguish them from his
True Children. There must be also, says St. Paul, Heresies among you, that
they which are 1. Cor. 11.
approved may be made manifest among you. And elsewhere he says, That God
should send strong delusions to them that perish, that they should believe a
lie. So that God who alone is Lord of the hearts 2 These. 2.
and minds of men, not having propounded that end to himself in establishing
his Visible Church, to hinder any Heresies from being in the World, nor that
they should not arise within that very Church it self, but only that his Elect
and truly Faithful ones should not be infected with them, it is a great
rashness, for those men who cannot dispose hearts as he does, to extend not
only their desires but their pretensions also farther, and to search out a way
by which there should not be in effect any Heresy. I confess that we ought to
desire the destruction of all Heresies, that we ought to labor for their
Extirpation, and that as the Elect and true Children of God are not distinctly
known, the cares that we should take for them ought to be extended
indifferently to all. But I say, that we cannot make use of any thing for so
great a work, but those external means, which are the pure Preaching of the
Truth, and Confuting the contrary Errors. When their Pastors shall acquit
themselves well in that duty, they may rest assured that God will bless their
conduct and their word, not to all men, but to the persons of his true
Children. If their Pastors would urge their pretensions from thence, and would
find a human expedient that might absolutely hinder those Heresies from
touching them, and from actually and effectually springing up as well among the
good, as the wicked; I affirm, that they would be wiser then God, that they
would encroach upon his rights, that they would hunt for a Chimaera, and that
by that very means they would change the Ministry into a Tyranny; for under
that pretense of rooting out those Heresies, they would come to be Sovereign
Lords over men's Souls and Consciences, which cannot nor ought to be suffered,
and which is so far from being a means to avoid them, that it would fill the
Church with Heresies.

If they say, they intend only to establish a Maxim, which supposing that it
would be followed, and that all men would receive it, would contain all in the
Unity of the Faith, and that Maxim is, That they ought to refer themselves
absolutely to their Pastors. I say, in the first place, That, that Maxim is as
proper to contain men in the Unity of Heresy and of Schism, as in the Unity of
Faith. For the Heretics and Schismatics have their Church and their Pastors,
to whom they should absolutely refer themselves. So that they could never
discern whether they are in Unity of the Faith, or in that of Error and
wandering from the Truth, if they were not before all things, assured that they
were in the true Church. But who shall warrant us, that when they would be so
assured of the true Church, that men would not divide themselves by different
sentiments, and that that which pleases one, should not displease another? What
principle of Unity would they give us, to settle all in the same thoughts, in
that search which they should make of the true Church? The Jews would say, We
are the true Church of God, the Mother Church, from which the Christians have
separated themselves, The Pagans will say, We are that Mother Communion, for as
well the Jews as the Christians came out of the midst of us. The Mahometans
will say, That as Christianity was the perfection of the Law, so their Religion
is the perfection of the Gospel. The Greeks would come forth and maintain,
That they are the true Catholic Church, and not the Latins; the Copticks, the
Abyssines, the Jacobites, and Armenians maintain, That as well the Latins as
the Greeks departed from the Church, when their Council of Chalcedon had made
void the Council of Ephesus. The Arians will say, That if one latter Council
could abrogate what had been done by a former, as it appears from the Example
of the Council of Chalcedon, then that of Ariminum, might very well correct and
repair the Errors of that of Nice. In fine, every one would allege his
Reasons, and concern himself to know which of all those Communions was the true
and good one, and which had the true Faith. Tell us what means of Unity would
you have beyond that, to hinder men from dividing themselves? For if it be true
that in yielding men a right to examine the matters of Religion, they open a
Gate to let in Divisions and Heresies, by reason of the Confusion of men's
minds, it is not less true that in leaving them a liberty to examine those
Churches and Religious Societies, to come to know which is the True, you open
the same Gate to Errors and Apostacies. If you would further take from them
that Liberty of searching out the true Church, and if you say that they ought
to suppose the Latin to be it, without other reason; besides that that is very
absurd, you introduce a Maxim that under a pretense of shutting the Door to all
Divisions, shuts it also to all Conversions. For why should not every Society
have right to say the same thing? So the Jew, without any other Reason, would
presume for the Jewish Communion; the Heathen for the Heathen; the Greek for
the Greek, and every one for that wherein he finds himself set. That then would
not be so much a Principle of Unity in the true Faith, as a Principle of
Confusion and Obstinacy, a Principle that would be not so proper to keep men in
the Unity of the true Faith, as in that of any Religion whatsoever it might be,
without coming to know whether it were good or bad.

In the second place, I say, That with all that, they do not yet make any thing
of that which they would lay down, if they would avoid those Heresies, and
those Divisions which may arise from the inequality of humane understandings,
when men are left to be Masters of their own Sentiments. For to obtain that
effect, they must suppose that that Maxim of referring ones self absolutely to
the Pastors of the true Church, when they shall be so assured, will be received
and followed by all men. But who can tell them that men will not divide upon
that very Principle, and that when they endeavor to make them receive it, they
can make them agree? If they apprehend so much those Divisions and Errors in
the matters of Religion, what assurance can they have that there shall not be
any upon that point of the Authority of the Church? Is it because men's minds
will less differ about that subject then about others, or that that same
Authority proves it self, as the First Principles do? Who has told them, that
those who shall once have received this Maxim, will not be un-blinded in the
end, and that they will not be weary in fine of remaining slaves to men in
respect of their Consciences, which is the most considerable part of
themselves, and that which should give them the greatest Jealousy? So that
that pretended Remedy of Schisms and Divisions is null, for you must always run
upon that Rock you would avoid, to wit of the humane understanding, and wipe
off its differences, its inequalities, its humors, at the same time that you
would have them give away that liberty of judging the points of the Faith. Let
us suppose, since our Adversaries would have us, that that Principle of
absolute obedience to the Guides of the Church, had had place from the birth of
Christianity, would it have hindered the Heresies of the Valentinians, of the
Gnostics, of the Marcionites, of the Montanists, and the Manichees? Would it
have hindered the Arrians, the Samosatences, the Eutychians, the Nestorians, and
so many others, that in the first Ages of Christianity troubled the State of
Religion? To say that those men were presumptuous and rash, is but to say what
we would have, which is, that there can be no humane means that can stop that
rashness and presumptuousness of men, and that it is a folly to go about to do
it. They may by the force of Torments and Prisons, by their Threats or their
Promises hinder the external effects, but that is not to contain men in the
Unity of the Faith, but it is to contain them in that of Hypocrisy, and of
Treachery.

A second Inconvenience is, That they cannot give to the Church, that is to
say, to the Body of the Pastors, that respect which is due to them; for where
they should be set up to be Judges of Controversies, private men would rise up
against them, and those private men would on the contrary become their Judges.
But that Inconvenience is not so great, as that it should make us hazard our
own Salvation. How many Judges have in we our Civil Society, to whom we yet
give that respect that is due to them, though still we are not bound to believe
that all that they have judged, is well judged? The respect which men owe to
their Pastors is not unlimited, it has its bounds and its measures; while they
act as true Pastors, in Teaching the pure Truth, and acquitting themselves of
their Duty, they are worthy to be heard, to be followed, to be respected. But
when they come to be Deceivers, if, that in stead of Teaching the Truth they
oppose it, if they mix with Gold and Silver, Wood, Hay, and Stubble, (to make
use of the words of the Apostle) they deserve in that regard, neither the
Hearing, nor Respect. For they are neither Pastors, nor the Church, but only as
they Teach the Truth, and follow Righteousness; and when they withdraw
themselves from it, give us their own Fancies, or when they follow their
Passions, then they are but private men, who belie their Character, and they
can owe them nothing for those kinds of things, but repulses and contempt, or
at the most but Indulgence, if the Evil be yet tolerable; that is to say, if
their word and their conduct do not destroy the Gospel, or hinder a saving
efficacy. But if they may see their Ministry to become so corrupted that their
is an eminent danger of loosing their Salvation, who can doubt that they ought
not to be looked on, only as the Enemies of God and the Church, rather then the
Ministers and their Pastors, and that they should not fail to take heed of them
and their Doctrine, as pernicious leaven, in stead of blindly following them?
The Duties are then reciprocal between the Pastors and the People: The Pastors
ought to guide their Flock well, to give them good pasture; and the people owe
them, Respect, Obedience Teachableness and Love: on supposition that the
Pastors well acquit themselves of their duty, those who are under them will
become guilty before God and Men, of the Crimes of Rebellion Profaneness, and
Ingratitude, if they do not acquit themselves of theirs. But if the Pastors
abuse their charges, if they overturn the Gospel, or if they do any thing
coming near to it, if they abuse their Titles; their Sees, their Dignities,
their Sacerdotal Ornaments; all that will signify nothing, they owe them no
more in that regard, either that Respect or that Obedience. The Reason is
manifest, because they ought to respect nothing but the cause of God, and upon
the Consideration of its saving Truth, when then they may see that they
withdraw themselves from God, and that Truth, that respect also which ought to
be given to God and his Truth should be withdrawn from them.

And as to what they say, that private men would become Judges of their
Pastors, where of right those Pastors ought to Judge of Controversies, who are
above private men; this is nothing but a playing with words. How many of our
Judges are there, who Judge us every day, without our finding any inconvenience
or ill in it? They Judge us with a Judgment of Imputation, by laying things to
our charge.
Indictment, which is a public Judgment, and they Judge us with a Judgment of
Distinction, which is a private Judgment. For they do not bind us blindly to
believe that all that they declare is equitable, because they so declare it; we
have in that respect a full liberty to examine those things as they are in
themselves, though we fail of always presuming in their favor. But say they,
whatsoever liberty we have to examine their Judgments, their Judgments must be
executed notwithstanding, when we our selves believe them unjust; I confess it,
but it is because their Execution consists only in those things, or in those
external Actions, which leave the thoughts of the mind always free, and not in
an inward acquiescence. And this is that that puts a difference between their
Sentences, and the decisions of Pastors concerning the matters of Religion, for
the Execution of these latter consists in an acquiscence of the Soul and the
Conscience, which cannot but examine them in the end, and be decided but by the
knowledge we have of the Equity and Truth of those Doctrines. The same thing
may sometimes happen in the Civil Society, where in stead of putting in
Execution the Commands of Superiors, one shall be bound formally to oppose and
resist them; as when the Sates of a Province, or a Governor shall command
things prejudicial to the Obedience that one owes to one's Sovereign, and which
would engage the people in a Rebellion; Then, we may not only Judge our Judges
by a private Judgment, but our private Judgment is a thousand times more
general and public then that of those Judges, yea though it shall not be
accompanied with any formality. For those formalities signify nothing, when the
fidelity which we owe to our Prince is concerned. Then neither respect of
Magistrates, nor consideration of Order, nor the Authority of our Governors
ought to turn us aside, but they must all give place to that Great and
Fundamental Duty. It is the same thing in a Religious Society, God and our
Salvation are to be preferred before all things, and if it fall out that the
Pastors, either in their Pulpits, or in their Writings, or in their Councils,
would plunge us into errors, and into a worship that dishonours God, and
corrupts his Christian Religion, we may not only judge them by a private
judgment, but we ought also at the same time to labor to make that private
judgment to become public, and as general as it can be made; and howsoever we
do it, we do not in any thing withdraw our selves from that fidelity which we
all owe to God. The Inconveniences that arise from that Conduct, ought to be
imputed not to private men, who do but what they are obliged to do, but to the
Pastors who abuse their Charge, and pervert the rule and natural design of
their Ministry.

But, say they, Is not this to introduce a private spirit into the Church,
where we all ought to have but one same spirit, which is that of the Church?
There is, says St. Paul, but one Body and but one Spirit, Ephesians. 4.
and therefore it is that he himself exhorts us to abide all in the same
spirit, and to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. I answer,
that there ought to be in the Church in effect but one and the same Spirit; but
that that ought to be the Spirit of God, the Spirit of Truth, the Spirit of
Wisdom: not the spirit of the World, not Phil. 1.
the spirit of Error. God gives his holy Spirit immediately to all his truly
Faithful ones, whether they be Pastors, or whether they be Laymen, which is in
all but one same Spirit, though the measure according to which each receives
may be different: Grace, says Ephesians. 4.
the Apostle, is given unto every one of us according to the measure of the
gift of Christ. And in that Description of the State of the Church under the
new Testament, which is set down by the Prophet Joel. God says, That he will
purer out his Spirit upon all flesh, Joel. 2.
that their Sons and their Daughtes shall Prophecy, and that he will give this
Spirit to his Servants and to his Handmaids. Elsewhere, God promises his
Children, That he will give them a new heart and Ezekiel. 36.
a new spirit, and that he will put his Spirit within them: Saint Paul teaches
the same thing. By one Spirit, says he, we are all Baptized into one Body,
whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or 1 Cor. 12.
free, and have been all made to drink into one spirit. Because ye are
Children, says he to the Galatians, God has sent forth the Spirit of Gal. 4.
his Son into your hearts; and in the Epistle which he addresses to the Saints
and Faithful of Ephesus, he tells them, That they were Ephesians. 1. Ibid.
sealed with the holy Spirit of promise, and desiring that they might receive a
more abundant measure of it, he prayed God to give them the Spirit of Wisdom
and Revelation: St. Peter tells the faithful of his age, who were persecuted
for the name of Jesus Christ, That the Spirit of Glory, and the Spirit of God
rested upon them, 1 Pet. 4.
In fine the whole Scripture is full of this Doctrine, that the Spirit of God
is immediately given to every Believer, even down to that place where St. John
tells them, That they had an Unction from the Holy Spirit, and that they knew
all things; that the anointing which 1 John 2.
they had received of Jesus Christ abode in them, and that they needed not that
any man should teach them, but that that anointing taught them all things. From
whence these two Truths result, the one, That every faithful one in particular
has Fellowship with the Holy Spirit, which animates and governs him immediately;
and the other, That that Spirit is not a mere Spirit of Docility, and resting
in what is taught them, to make the Faithful receive the words of their
Pastors; but a Spirit of discerning, which makes them capable of knowing things
by themselves, and to judge of them. For this is that St. Paul means by that
Spirit of Wisdom and of Revelation, and St. John by that Unction which teaches
all things, and frees us from the necessity of being taught by men; that is to
say, of depending absolutely on their Authority, as those men would do who
should not be capable of discerning by themselves; and there is this thing very
considerable in that Discourse of St. John, that he makes the subjects of it,
those false Teachers who labored to seduce the Faithful. I have, says he,
wrote these things concerning those who seduce you; But the anointing which you
have received abides in you, and you have no need that any man should teach
you, etc. Which lets us plainly see that he meant, that that Unction was
sufficient to secure them from that Seducing, and by Consequence to make them
discern by themselves the true from the false. As to all the rest, they do but
mock when they call that Spirit a private Spirit, under a pretense that it is
given to each Believer: for it is the same Spirit that animates the whole
Mystical Body of our Savior, that Regenerates and Sanctifies them, it is in
one word, the Spirit of the whole Church. It may with far greater reason be
said, that they introduce a private Spirit, who restrain to the Pastors alone
the right of discerning the good from the bad, and who would not that any
Laymen should interpose. For if the whole body be animated but by one only and
the same Spirit, why should not all the Faithful have the same right with the
Pastors, since they all partake of one same Light, though in a different
measure? In fine, if they would have it, that to yield to every one a right to
examine the matters of Religion, would be to bring in a private Spirit, let
them tell us, by what Spirit they would have one examine the question of the
Church? by what Spirit they would have every one know and rest assured that the
Latin Church is the True Church of Jesus Christ? by what Spirit they would have
the Faithful choose that side where they should refer themselves to their
Pastors? for in all those points, they cannot deny that men ought to follow
their own light, since they cannot in the least make those judgments by the
Eyes of their Prelates, as we have noted before. Behold then that private
Spirit, since it pleases these Gentlemen to call it so, which they themselves
are constrained to admit, which shows us the nullity of that inconveence that
they would pretend to remedy.

We ought then to go higher yet, and to examine that great Argument which the
Author of those Prejudices has chose above all others, as being alone
sufficient to make us acknowledge the necessity of referring ones self blindly
to the Church. It consists in letting us know, That all the men in the world
may deceive themselves, In his Preface.
that the darkness of our Understandings, our Prejudices and our Passions
engage us to that. And if M. Claude, says he, can propose evident falsehoods as
proofs of the highest certainty, who can assure us that we are not in the
number of those who deceive themselves, and make an ill choice in the matters
of Religion, and that the persuasion that we have well chosen is not any effect
of our Prejudices and our Passions, and other secret obstinacy in our Opinions;
from whence he concludes, that it must be a thing to be despaired of ever to be
able to distinguish the true Religion, amidst so many Sects who all lay claim
to it, or to choose among so many Opinions which they propose as Authorized by
the Scripture, those which one ought to believe, from those that one ought to
reject, unless that same impotence that lies upon us to discern the Truth by
our own light, and which would not open a way to find it, should make us go
from the way of Reason, wherein we should see nothing but uncertainty, to that
of Authority, which would draw us out of that confusion, and in the end he
advertises us, that that Authority is that of the Catholic Church, that is to
say, the Latin Prelates.

We see then, that thanks to the Philosophy of this Author, all must be good
Pyrrhonists, to become good Catholics, we ought to doubt of every thing if we
would be assured of any thing. But to speak what appears to me, that Argument
cannot make any impression on the mind, because it destroys it self, as usually
those false subtilties do. For if we cannot be assured in those judgments that
we make by our own Light, because that may deceive us, who can assure us that
that Authors Argument will be good and concluding, since we cannot judge of it
but by that same Light, which will not give, according to him, any certainty?
If the use of our Reason produces nothing but doubts, why would he yet give us
a Reason, the Consequence whereof can be no other than doubtful, and by which
he cannot also gain any thing over us? It may be it is good, it may be it is
not so; our Light deceives us in other things, it may very well deceive us in
that. What likelihood then is there that we should be persuaded by an Argument
that combats it self, and which takes away from it self the force of
persuading?

Moreover, That Argument destroys the design of the Author of those Prejudices,
and overthrows the Cause it would Establish. For if there be no certainty in
the judgments that we make by our own Light, who shall secure us that we do not
deceive our selves in choosing the way of Authority, since we cannot make choice
of that, but by that same Light, which is, says he, so deceitful? We cannot
less fear in that very thing, the obscurity of our Understandings, our
Prejudices and Passions, the inclination that we have to Error, and who shall
assure that Author, who shall assure us our selves, that that persuasion where
it is, and which he would communicate to us, is not an effect of his
Prejudices, of his Passions, or of some obstinacy in his Opinions? Who shall
warrant us that we do not deceive our selves in that particular choice that we
make of the Authority of the Latin Church, to refer our selves to her? For we
must in that choice rely on our own Reason. Who shall secure us that the Lain
Church herself does not deceeive her self in the discerning that she makes of
the Tenets of Religion? That Church is composed of the People and Prelates,
those people have not more Light than other men, and those Prelates are not
less subject than the others to that darkness of understanding, to Negligence,
to Prejudices, to Passions, to a secret Obstinacy in their Opinions, and beyond
all, that they have not a peculiar Interest to favor men's Errors and
Superstitions, to retain them the more easily in their obedience. But those
People and those Prelates are a very great number. What does that signify? The
Heathens and their Guides are yet a far greater number than they, and yet they
fail not to deceive themselves. They are, say they, rich and powerful, and
raised in dignity. The Heathens and the Mahometans are not less. They have
external marks, but who knows whether those marks are good, and whether they do
not abuse themselves in the Consequence they pretend to draw from them? They
assure you that they do not deceive themselves, they condemn you if you do not
believe that which they believe; and they live, as to themselves, in a perfect
peace of mind. But the Author of those Prejudices has taught us to answer, That
all those who compose other Societies, appear to have the same assurance with
us that they are in the Truth, they do not condemn the Latins with less
confidence, than the Latins condemn them with, they are not less exempt from
the fear of deceiving themselves, they live also in as great a Des Prejugez
Chap. 1.
Peace and Tranquillity. That assurance also, and that confidence, that freedom
from trouble and fear, that Peace and that Tranquillity grounded upon the
belief that they are in the right way, and that they walk after their Light,
are marks so ambiguous and so deceitful, that they may be found most frequently
to be joined infinitely more frequently with Error, and the way of Hell, than
with Truth and the way of Salvation. These are the very words of the Author of
those Prejudices, whereof we change only the Application. But, say they, yet
farther, Do you not believe that the Latin Prelates have a more clear light
than you? We cannot know any thing by that, and they do not know anything
themselves from thence, since no person can make himself certain by his own
light, according to the Author of Prejudices.

They may from thence methinks see of what Nature that Argument is, but they
will be more apt to be distasted with it, if they will but consider that their
Principle tends to confound all Religion, and to render the very existence of a
Deity suspected. For if there be nothing of certainty in those Judgments that
we make by our own light, why do we follow the Christian Religion, more than
the Pagan or the Mohammedan? Is it because that the Church has bid us do so?
This is but a very bad reason, for the Church would never tell us that its
Religion was bad, when it would be so in effect; there is no Society
whatsoever, but would say that its Religion was good, and better than all
others. Is it because our Birth, our Education, Interest, Reputation, or the
the friendship that we have with some persons, or the Laws of the Country
wherein we are, will not suffer us to embrace any other Religion, and suchlike
motives that engage us? These are yet but the very worst Reasons, and those who
are not Christians but from thence, though possibly they may not be a small
number, may say, that they are not at all such: for if those very ties had been
applied to Paganism, they would have been Pagans, as they are now Christians.
How then ought we to be Christians? It is necessary that we should be so from
out of a Love, and Approbation of that Religion it self. But that Love and that
Approbation ought to be the effects of our own Light, and not of that of other
men, and our own light ought to dictate to us what is the Religion of God, and
to make us approve of, and love it, under that quality. Should we then have
nothing of certainty in that matter? should we be always in doubt, under a
pretense that our Light might deceive us? and those admirable effects that
Religion produces in our souls, that confidence, quiet, joy, that tranquillity,
hope, freedom from trouble, and from fear, would they be nothing but ambiguous
and deceitful marks, which are most frequently to be found more joined with
error and the way of Hell, then with the Truth and way of salvation? thither it
is that that Principle of the Author of those Prejudices leads us. Besides, how
do we come to believe there is a God? Is it because the Church tells us so?
That would be a very ill reason, for we believe on the contrary, that there is
a Church, but by the belief that we have that there is a God; we believe it
without doubt by the impression of a thousand Characters of the Deity in our
minds, and on our hearts, that appearin the Fabric of the World, in his
Government, or his ordering the Affairs of it, and particularly in man himself,
and in his most pure and most natural inclinations. Our Reason it self is a
lively Image of it. But that impression is wrought but by our own Eyes, which
make us see a Deity in things, it is not by others Eyes that we see it, but by
our own. Is it necessary then that we should doubt whether there be a God or
not? Must we never be certain, because our Eyes deceive us sometimes, and
because we are not Infallible?

The Author of the Prejudices will say, without doubt, That we urge his
Principle too far, that he never pretended to show, that we could not be
assured by our own light, without the Authority of the Church, that there was a
God, and that the Christian Religion, in opposition to that Religion which the
Jews now profess, or to all those Fantastic Religions that reign in the World,
and are the mere effects of the impostures and humors of men, cannot but be
the true Religion; That that discernment is not hard to be made the advantage
of the Christian Religion, above all those others, being most clear and
manifest. Indeed so he has explained himself from the very beginning of his
Preface: whence it appears, that he would not hinder the examination of the
matters of Religion, but when particular controversies that divide the diverse
Sects of Christians shall be treated of.

I may say then, if I am not mistaken, That there are two parts in his
Hypothesis, that in the first, he yields to every one a liberty to judge by his
own Light of the Truth of the Christian Religion, and that he does not take
away from them in that respect the certainty of their Judgments, but that in
the second, he takes it from them over other particular matters; but all that
is but an Artifice whereby he would prevent and elude, if he could, those just
and natural Consequences which he foresaw might be drawn from his Principle.
For the very same Reasons which he proposes to hinder us from the examining the
particular points of Religion, and the very same grounds upon which he builds
his Conclusion, have place also in the comparing the Christian Religion with
other Religions. So that one may say, that the second part of his design
destroys the first, and that he himself overthrows that that he had established.
For, tell me, if the uncertainty of our Judgments founded upon this, that we
see that others deceive themselves by the darkness of our understanding, by our
Prejudices, by our Passions, and by those secret Attacks that we have of our
thoughts, tell me, if that has not place as well in the Judgment that they
make, That there is a God, and that the Christian Religion is alone from God,
and the only True one, as in that, that we make, That their Purgatory is but an
imaginary Fire, that their Transubstantiation is but a human invention, and
that the Sacrifice of the Mass is no where to be found in the Scripture? Are
there no Profane or Atheistical persons in the World? Are there no Jews, nor
Pagans, nor Mahometans? As we are persuaded that they deceive themselves, so
are they persuaded that we deceive our selves: but may not they demand of us,
what assurance we have that the darkness of our Understandings, our Prejudices,
our Passions, or some other secret tie that lies upon our thoughts have no part
in our persuasion? What will the Author of the Prejudices answer to them? Will
he say, That the advantage that the Christian Religion has over all other
Religions is most clear and manifest? I may say to him the same, that the
advantage that the Protestant Religion has above the Roman, is most clear and
manifest; and in saying so, I shall affirm nothing whereof I am not well
convinced. If he replies to me, that I ought not to be so confident of my own
Light, that that which appears to me to be most clear and manifest, does not
appear so to others, that the darkness of the Mind, Prejudices, Passions, etc.
make men deceive themselves, and that I have no assurance that I am not of that
number. The Jew, the Mohammedan, the Pagan, the Libertine, the Atheist, who
shall come behind him, will exclaim, as often as they shall have occasion,
after the same manner. This is justly what we have to say, this Author pleads
our cause admirably well.

After all, That Principle of the Author of those Prejudices was so far from
turning aside our Fathers from examining by themselves the matters of Religion,
that on the contrary it bound them to do it the more. For being concerned for
their own salvation, there was no person more intrested than themselves, and
being so easily apt to deceive themselves in the choice of those Opinions that
they were enjoined to believe, and of that Worship which they were to practice,
they ought not naturally to have trusted any but themselves. They might, it is
true deceive themselves, but their Prelates might deceive themselves as well as
they, and if in the Church the people must refer themselves to their Prelates,
and each of those Prelates in particular must refer themselves to the whole
body of the Church, they will find that neither the one nor the other will be
cured, and that that Church to which they should all refer themselves, would be
but an Ens Rationis, as they speak in the Schools, and a Platonic Idea.
Prudence then bound our Fathers to examine that which they should know, both
from the imperfections of the Minds or the Hearts of men, and from the examples
of those before them who fell into error, together with the danger which men
are in, on the account of their Prejudices, their Passions, and their
Interests; all that could produce no other effect in them than to excite them
to make an examination the most exactly and diligently that it was possible for
them to do, cleansing their Hearts from every evil thought, and imploring the
Grace and Blessing of God upon them: For they were assured, that if they did
the Will of the Father, they James 1.
should know his true Doctrine, and that if any did lack Wisdom, and begged it
of God, that he would give it them, since he gives to all liberally and
upbraideth not. Those are the promises of the Gospel. John 7.


Those to whom God grants that Grace which inlightens the mind and opens the
Heart, do not only, not deceive themselves in the choice of Saving Doctrines,
and in the rejecting of those that are Damnable; but they have for that all the
assurance that they can reasonably wish for: for the Truth makes it self to be
perceived by far other Characters than those of a disguised falsehood. The
Invocation of Saints, the Worshipping of Images, the Adoration of the Host, the
Conceit of Purgatory, have never produced in the souls of the Devout Persons of
the Church of Rome, that sweet joy, that Peace, and that Contentment of the
Soul, which the Protestant rejoices in, when he calls upon God alone, when he
Worships him without Images, as he has commanded him, when he Adores Jesus
Christ sitting at the Right Hand of his Father, and when he places his only
Confidence in his Satisfaction, and in his Merit; a deceived Conscience may be
sometimes in Security; but that security is never enjoyed like a true Quiet. It
is the Rest of a Lethargy where a man's feels no pain, because he has no
feeling, which is very different from that Rest that gives a perfect Health:
besides that, the security of a deceived Conscience is not long continued,
inquietudes return from time to time, chiefly in the Affections, and at the
time of Death, where that Tranquillity that the True Religion gives, is solid
and well grounded, and displays its virtue peculiarly in the most grievous
Accidents of our Life, and in the very Agonies of Death it self: Such are those
Divine impressions that David felt, when he said, The Law of the Lord is
perfect, Converting the soul: the Testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise
the simple; The statutes Psalm. 19.
of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart; his judgments are more desirable
than gold, and sweeter than honey. And elsewhere, Thy word has been sweet unto
my taste, yea sweeter than honey to my Psalm. 119.
mouth. And yet further in another place. The secret of the Lord is with them
that fear him, and he will show them his covenant. The (...)
Disciples of our Lord Jesus Christ felt them when they said, Did not our heart
burn within us, while he talked with us by the way, and while he opened to us
the Scriptures? And upon another occasion, Luke. ^.
Lord to whom shall we go? Thou have the words of Eternal Life. And we believe,
and are sure that thou art that Christ the Son of the living God. If those of
the Church of Rome were accustomed John. 6.
to the reading of the Holy Scripture, they would find the proofs of this Truth
in a thousand places, but the far greatest part of our Controversies come from
the neglect they have of that Divine Book, and that neglect it self is one
fruit of that excessive confidence they have in their Guides.

The End of the First Part.
An HISTORICAL DEFENSE OF THE Reformation; Against a Book Entitled. Just
Prejudices against the CALVINISTS.
THE SECOND PART: Of the Justice of the Reformation.
CHAP. I.
That our Fathers could not expect a Reformation either from the hands of the
Popes, or from those of the Prelates.

WE may now, methinks, suppose it evident and proved, That our Fathers had a
right and were bound to examine by themselves the matters of Religion, and not
to refer themselves absolutely to the Conduct and Authority of their Prelates.
But from thence it manifestly follows, that they had a right to Reform
themselves. For since they could examine only in order to discern the good from
the bad, and the true from the false, who can doubt, that they having a right
to make that discernment, would not also have had a right to reject that which
they should have found to have been contrary to, or alienated from
Christianity, which is precisely that which is called Reformation. I
acknowledge that it yet remains to be inquired into, whether those things which
they have rejected are indeed Errors and Superstitons, as they are pretended to
be, and whether they did not deceive themselves in the Judgment that they made.
But who sees it not necessary, for the deciding of that Question, to go to the
bottom, and to enter upon that discussion which our Adversaries would avoid?
From whence it may appear, as I have said in the beginning, that all that
Controversy which they raise against us about the Call of our Reformers, is
nothing else but a vain amusement; and that to make a good Judgment of that
Action of our Fathers, and to know whether it be just or unjust, we ought
always to come to the bottom of the cause, and to those things themselves which
are Reformed, for upon that the Question does wholly depend, whether they did
well or ill.

Notwithstanding to show that we would forget nothing that may serve for our
Justification, and that after the desire to please God, we have not a greater
then that of approving our selves to our Countrymen, and in general to all
men, we shall not fail to make yet some particular Reflections upon the
Circumstances of the Reformation, which will more and more confirm the right of
our Fathers, and manifest the Justice of their Conduct, and at the same time we
shall answer to some Objections of the Author of the Prejudices. That shall be
the business of this Second Part.

Our first Reflection shall be, on that deplorable State of the Latin Church in
the days of our Fathers, in respect of its Prelates; for its Condition was such,
that there was no more hope of ever seeing a good Reformation to spring up by
their Ministry. In effect, what could be expected from a Body that had almost
wholly abandoned the care of Religion, and of the Salvation of Souls, (which
was plunged in the intrigues and interests of the World) which kept the People
in the ignorance of the Mysteries of the Gospel, and in the most gross
Superstitions, and with which (the whole body) it self did entertain it self,
and was found to be possessed by Ambition, by Luxury, and by Covetousness, and
engaged in the vilest manners, and living in almost a general opposition to
overthrow of all Discipline? They will SEE then what a German Bishop says in a
Book entitled Onus Ecclesiae, who lived and wrote in the year, 1519. that is
to say, Onus Eccles. Cap. 20. Sect. 2.
near the very time of the Reformation, but one who was no ways Luthers friend,
as it appears by his writings. I am afraid, says he, That the Doctrine of the
Apostle touching the Qualifications of a Bishop is but very ill observed in
these days, or rather that we are fallen into those Times, which he noted, when
he said, I know that after my departure, ravenous Wolves will come among you,
not sparing the flock: Where may one see a good man chosen to be a Bishop? one
approved by his works and his Learning, and any one who is not either a Child,
or Worldly or Ignorant of spiritual things? The far greater number come to the
Prelateship more by underhand canvassings, and ill ways, then by Election and
lawful ways. That Disorder which may be seen in the Ecclesiastical Dignities,
sets the Church in danger of perishing; for Solomon says, There is one evil
which I have seen under the Sun, as an Error which proceeds from the Ruler,
when a fool is raised to high dignity. It is therefore that I said, that the
Bishops ought to excel in Learning, to the end that by their Instructions and
their Preaching they might govern others profitably. But alas! What Bishop have
we now a days that Preaches, or has any care of the Souls committed to him?
There are, besides that, very few who are Sect. 3.
contented with one Spouse alone, that is to say, with one only Church, and who
seek not to appropriate to themselves more Dignities, more Prebends, and what
is yet more to be condemned, more Bishoprics. Our Bishops are feasting at
their own Tables then when they should be at the Altar, they are unwise in the
things of God, but they love the wisdom of the World, they are more intent on
Temporal Affairs, say it may be, that I suffer my self to be carried away by my
Passion, and that all these clamourous Accusations are but the effect of that
Engagement in which we all are set against the Church of Rome. But to leave no
ground for that Suspicion, besides what I have set down in general in the
second Chapters of my first Part, I will further produce here more particular
Testimonies of that Truth, by applying them to the Ages of our Fathers. I will
say nothing of my own head, I will make their Authors that are not suspected by
them, to speak, whose passages I will faithfully relate, which they may see in
the Originals if they will take the pains. And as I hope that they will not lay
to my charge what may appear to be too vehement in their Expressions, so also I
not do pretend to impute to the Prelates of these days, that which those Authors
censured in those of the former Times.

then on the work of Jesus Christ. Their Bodies are adorned with Gold, and
their Souls defiled with filth, they are ashamed to meddle with Spiritual
things, and their glory lies in their Scurrilous humor and carriage. Whence it
was that Catherine of Sienna told them, that in the blindness wherein they
were, they placed their glory in that which was truly their shame, and that on
the contrary they held those things to be a reproach to them whereon their
honor and Salvation did depend; to wit, in humbling themselves under their
Head, which was God. Furthermore they have no love for any but sinners they
despise the poor, and howsoever the Canons forbid them they keep about their
persons Pimps, debauchers of Women, Flatterers, Buffoons, Players, where they
should have had wise and holy men. -- In fine, instead of the Law of Truth, the
Law of Vanity is in the mouths of the Bishops, and the lips of the Priests
preserve knowledge, but it is that of the World, and not of the Spirit. And a
little after, At present, says he, Sect. 6.
the State and Dignity of the Bishops may be known by their Earthly riches, by
their affairs and sordid cares of the World, by their troublesome Wars, and by
their Temporal Dominion. Alas, the Lord Jesus said plainly that his Kingdom was
not of this World, he retired himself alone into a Mountain, when he knew that
they went about to make him a King. How then is it that he who holds the place
of Jesus Christ, not only accepts Dominion, but seeks it; and that he whom
Jesus Christ has taught to be meek and lowly in heart, should reign in
pleasures, in luxury, in violence, in pride, in haughtiness in riches and in
rapines? And yet a little after, The Bishops have renounced Hospitality, they
neglect the poor of Jesus Christ, but they Sect. 9.
make themselves fat, and feed their Dogs and other Beasts, as if with a formed
design, they would be in the number of those to whom Christ shall say, I was
poor and you relieved me not; go ye cursed into Eternal fire. For Generally
almost all the Bishops lie under the evil of Covetousness, they are ravishers
of others goods, and but ill despencers of the Churches; turning aside to other
uses, that which they ought to employ in Divine uses, or the feeding of the
poor. What Bishop is there, adds he, who does not more love to be a rich Lord
Sect. 13.
and Honored in the World, then to help the poor? The whole design of their
lives is but for the things of the World, They love to array themselves after
the Fashion of that, and as for the Ecclesiastical Ornaments, whether they be
Corporal or Spiritual, they scarce make any account of them: and therefore it
was that S. Brigit said, That the Bishops took the counsel of the Devil, who
said to them, Behold those honors which I offer you, the riches that are in my
hand. I dispense pleasures, the delights of the World are sweet, you must enjoy
them. -- That same Saint says further that the Covetousness of the Bishops is a
bottomless Gulf, and that their pride and their luxurious Lives was an
unsavory steam, which made them abominable before the Angels of Heaven, and
before the Friends of God upon Earth.

As to the other Prelates and the Curats, the same Author represents them to us
after this manner. In these Times, says he, Idem. Cap. 21.
there are very few Elections that are Cononically made, and without under hand
canvassings; on the contrary, the greatest parts of the Prelates and Beneficed
men, are made by Kings and Princes in an unlawful manner, and which is more,
being brought in by Canvassings and Simony, they are confirmed by the Popes,
against the Privileges of the Churches, and the Statutes of Germany, and
against all manner of Justice. Furthermore the Bishops ordinarily promote to
dignities and the Cure of Souls, their Cooks, their Collectors of their
Tribute, their Pensionaries, the Grooms of their Stables: Hence Ubertine said,
That the Ancient Holiness of the Prelates wasted away by degrees, and that it
began to fall by Canvassings, by Pomp, and by Simony, by unlawful Elections, by
Covetousness, and by the abundance and superfluity of Temporal things, by the
promotions that the Bishops made of their Creatures, by neglecting the
Divine-worship, and by other perverse works; and that by Reason of those ill
dispositions, the Devil was let loose against the present State of the Church.
-- Now, none of them who are called to the Pastors Charge and the Cure of Souls
inform themselves either of the quality of their Flock, or of their manners, or
their vices. Not one Prelate called to the Government of a Monastery will take
the pains to Observe either its Rules, or the Order of its Ceremonies, or the
Discipline of the Religious, there is not wholly any more mention made of the
Salvation and Edification of those that are under them, but they only inform
themselves very exactly of the plenty of their Revenues, and what such a
Benefice may bring in Yearly, though yet they do not reside there. It is these
Curates that Vincentius cried out upon, when he said, O what Obduration is
there in the Church of God! The Prelates are Proud, Vain, Sumptuous, Simonists,
Covetous, Luxurious Men, that regard only this Earth. They neglect their
Ecclesiastical Duties, they are void of Charity, Intemperate, Lazy. For they
neither perform Divine Offices, nor Preach, and do nothing but what creates
Scandal. They despise the foresight of their Holy Mother the Church, which
ordains that when the Rectors of Churches shall not be able to Preach, they
should employ fit persons, which should in their stead edify the people by
their word and their Example, and that they should supply them with all needful
things. But on the contrary the Prelates and Curates are only careful to put
into their places, men that are very well skilled, not to feed the sheep, but
to poll them, to destroy, and flea them. He goes on with that vehemence
throughout a large Chapter, where he relates the many complaints of the Abbot
Joachim, Saint Catherine of Sienna, and of Saint Brigitt; Behold Ibid*
this last among the others; Those who Rule the Churches commit three sins, the
one is that they live a beastly and luxurious, life the other that they have a
Covetousness as insatiable as the Gulphs of the Sea, and the third is, That
they are Prodigal to satisfy their own vanity, as the Torrents that pour forth
their waters impetuously, such horrible sins which they commit ascend up to
Heaven before the face of God, and hinders the Intercession of Jesus Christ as
the black Clouds disturb the purity of the Air? The Revenues of the Church are
given, not to the Servants of God, but to those of the Devil, to the Debauchers
of Women, to Adulterers, Gamesters, Hunters, Flatterers, and such like men, and
hence also it is that the house of God is become Tributary to the Devil. The
Abbot who ought never to be out of his Monastery, but to be the head and
example to the rest of the Religious, is become the head of a whole Troop of
lewd Women, with their Trains of Bastards: instead of being an Example to and
feeder of, the poor, he makes himself Master of their Alms, and he may be seen
far oftener in the field with the Soldiers, then in his Cloister. He ought to
be the Father and the Instructor of his Brethren, but he is their Seducer, and
their Tyrant. For while he enjoys himself, and lives in Pomp and Delights,
those poor miserable Religious, pass away all their days in murmurings and
afflictions. That Author describes in the same Style the Lives of the Canons,
Monks and other Ecclesiastics, and that which he has said does not leave us
any more room to doubt that there was in the Church in those days, as great and
as general a disorder as can be conceived.

He does not spare the Court of Rome, but on the contrary, Idem, Cap. 6. Sect.
6.
he sets forth livelily enough their excess, even to say, that that Court is
the Seat of the Beast, that is to say, the Church of the wicked, that is, the
Kingdom of darkness. That it is a loathsome pit that devours Riches, and is
filled by Covetousness, That the Law is far Sect. 8.
from the Priest, the Visions of the Prophet, and the Council of the old men.
That the heads of the Church serve themselves by Simony and Ambition, and that
in a word, the sins of those people are such, that they cannot be either
concealed or denied, since Rome is become a Gulf of Crimes. Where the Pope
ought to cry with Jesus Christ, Sect. 12.
Come, and you shall find rest for your Souls; he cries, Come and see me in a
far greater Pomp and Pride then ever Solomon was in, come to my Court, empty
your purses there, and you shall find destruction for your Souls.

The disorder of that Court, and that of the whole Clergy of those times was a
thing so little to be contested, that Adrian the sixth did not scruple to
acknowledge it in the Memoirs that he gave his Nuntio for the Diet of
Nuremberg, and which Raynaldus Relates. For he gave him an express charge to
confess, That the Troubles of Germany, about the matters of Religion, had
fallen out by Reason of the sins of Men, and particularly of the Priests and
Prelates of the Church; That the Scripture showed that the Roynald ad Anna, 1522.
sins of the people came from those of their Priests, for which Reason it was,
as Chrysostom says, that when our Savior would heal Jerusalem, he entered
first into the Temple to correct the sins of the Priests, doing like a wise
Physician, who goes to the root of the evil. That for many years past,
abominable things had been committed in the holy See, that spiritual things had
been abused, through the excess of its Injunctions, and that all things had
been perverted there. That the evil had spread it self from the Head to the
Members, from the Popes to the Inferior Prelates, and that as many as they all
were, that is to say, Prelates and Ecclesiastics, they were come to that pass
that for a long Time there had not been any that were good, no not so much as
one.

We could produce a multitude of other such Testimonies if we did not hope that
unbiased persons would agree upon it, as not long since an Author in these
Times has done in a Book Entitled, Motives to a Reunion to the Catholic
Church. The cause Motifs de Reunion, premeir Motif. Page 6.
of the Separation, says he, was the open abuse of Indulgences, and the
Ignorance, Covetousness, and the Scandalous lives of the Churchmen. The
Superstition of the meaner sort of people who had not been well instructed, the
immense riches, and riotous profuseness of the Prelates, their too great care in
Externals, in their Magnificence, Ornaments, and increasing of Ceremonies, and
little Devotion in the Chief-worship of God, the indiscreat zeal of some
Brethren, who seemed to have cast off all honor for the Master, to give it to
his Servants. The Tyranny that Parents exercised over their Children to
imprison them in Cloisters; the wickedness of those who contrived false
Miracles, to draw to themselves the concourse of the People. Add to that,
Politic humane Considerations of some Princes and Kings, who had not received
from the Pope all possible Satisfaction, or who took occasion from thence to
cast themselves among a Party of persecuted men, the better to Establish their
affairs; in brief, all that which Ignorance, Superstition and Covetousness
could Contribute, served for a pretense to those who would separate themselves
to Reform those Disorders. The Ground was not only specious, but it had been in
a manner accompanied with Truth, if the Church in those days had been
throughout in that miserable condition, which we have described, and
principally so in those places wherein that detestable Separation began. Those
who separated were aided indirectly by the zeal of some good men, who cried out
loudly against those disorders, abuses, and corruptions of manners. The people
who judged no otherwise then by the appearance suffered themselves to be easily
carried away with that Torrent, seeing that they did not complain but of those
things which they knew were but too true, and which the better sort of
Catholics granted.

Behold then in what a condition the Church was in those days, and we may from
thence, methinks ask all rational persons, whither they believe in good
earnest, that our Fathers ought to have expected a Reformation from the hands
of a Clergy, which on the one side had so many worldly interests that bound
them to oppose it, and which on the other found it self so deeply sunk into
Ignorance, Superstition, and Corruption.

But to urge that matter yet further, we need but to set down those just
complaints which they had made for a long time touching those disorders, and
the continual demand that all the World made for a good Reformation, at least
in respect of manners, of Discipline, and those most gross abuses, without ever
being able to obtain it. I pass by the complaints of the Tenth and Eleventh
Centuries, which would be but too great, if they were compared, with those just
grounds that all honest men in those days had for them. For those two Centuries
were famous for wickedness, (grievous) crimes, and those who know any thing of
History cannot deny it. But, not to go so far, not to say any thing either of
the Scandalous Lives of the Popes of that Time, or the Wars wherewith they
filled all the West, or of the Abuses they committed in their Excommunications,
or of the Baptizing of Bells: Wherewith they increased the Ecclesiastical
Ceremonies, or of the vices which reigned then throughout all the Clergy, can
they tell us what good effect those smart Censures of Saint Bernard wrought,
and those of Petrus Cluniensis, of Abbot Joachim, of Petrus Blesensis, of
Conrard Abbot of Vrspurg, of Honorius of Autun, of Bernard Monk of Cluny, of
Arnoul an English Monk, of John Bishop of Salisbury, of Matthew Paris, of
William Durandus Bishop of Mande, of Robert Bishop of Lincoln, of Francis
Petrarch Archdeacon of Parma, of John Vitoduram of Dante, of Marsilius of
Padua, and I know not how many others, who cried out as loudly against the
abuses of the Court of Rome, as those of the rest of the Prelates? Can they tell
us what effect the complaints of Emperors, of Kings, of Princes, and of the
People produced who for so long a Time panted after a Reformation? It is a
hundred and fifty Years said Arnald du Ferrier the Ambassador of France to the
Council of Trent See his Oration set down by Thuanus, lib. 35.
since a Reformation of the Church has been all along in vain demanded in
diverse Councils, at Constance, at Basil, at Ferrara. Let them tell us what good
change has happened since St. Bernard wrote, That the Dignities of the Church
were managed by a most dishonest bartering, Bernard, Sermon. 6. in Psalm. Qui
habitat.
and with a Trade of darkness, That the saving of Souls was no more sought
after, but the abundance of Riches. That it was for this that they took their
Orders, that they frequented the Churches, and Celebrated Masses, and sung
Psalms. Now a days, says he, they strive without any shame for Bishoprics, for
Arch-Deaconries, and Abbeys, and other Dignities, to the end they may dissipate
the revenues of the Church, in Superfluity and Vanity. What remains but that
the Man of sin, the Son of Perdition should be Revealed? The Demon not only of
the day, but of the noon day, who transforms himself into an Angel of Light,
and lifts up himself above all that is called God, and worshipped. What good
change could they see since Cardinal Hugo borrowing the words of Saint Bernard,
had wrote, That those words of David could not be more properly applied to any,
then Hugo Card. in Psalm. 72.
to the Clergy, They are not in Trouble as other men. For every order of men
has its Labors and its pleasures, but I admire, says he, the wisdom of our
Clergy, who have chosen all the pleasures for themselves, and rejected the
Labor. They are as proud as Soldiers, they have as great a train of Servants
as they, and of Horses, and Birds, and they live as merrily as they. They are
arrayed like women with skins of great value, they have rich Bids, Baths, and
all the Allurements of soft delights. But they take great heed least they put
on a Breast Plate with the Soldiers, or pass away the nights in the Field, or
to expose themselves to Battles, and yet they take less heed to keep Modesty
and the Laws of Decency, which are proper to women, and to labor so much as
they do. At the Resurrection then, when men shall arise every one in his own
order, what place do you imagine those men will find? The Soldier will not own
them, for they took no part with them in their Labors, nor in their dangers.
The Laborers and Dressers of the Vineyard will not any more for the same
Reason. What then can they look for? But to be driven from and accused by all
Orders, and to go into those places where there is no Order, but where
Everlasting horror Dwells. Has it been amended since William Bishop of Mande
wrote these words, Alas! the Churches are reduced to that Condition, that when
they come to be vacant, one can hardly find any persons fit to be chosen to
succeed. And if sometimes, which rarely happens, there be found some good Man
hid as a Lilly among the Thorns, the Number of the wicked and incapable,
exceeds so much, that they will never let a good man be chosen Prelate; but
crying up such as themselves they choose men after their own hearts, to the Ruin
of the Church, and the people that are under them. Else if the greater part in
the Church were good, the Elections would be made by the Majority of voices,
and they would be good and Canonical, for those that would choose for God, would
be the far greater number then those who should choose for the Devil. But in
these days it is quite the contrary. It is the Fashion, that there must be more
wicked then good, so that usually, the Elections are rather Diabolical then
Canonical, and not made by the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, but by a
Conspiracy, or Treacherous Machination. All these Complaints were to no
purpose, the evil was too general, and too inveterate to be stopped or remedied.

In the Council of Constance, all those Nations who lived under the disorders
of a long and obstinate Schism, propounded some Articles to Reform as well the
Head as the Members, and correct the ill manners of the Church. But Martin the
Fifth, who was then Pope, eluded that Proposition, with saying, That that
Council Platin, in vit. Martin 5.
had already lasted four years to the great damage of the Bishops and the
Churches, That it was needful to turn over that business to another Time, and
that that Affair deserved to be thought on more leisurely; because, says he,
according to St. Jerome, every Province has its Maxims, and its opinions which
cannot be changed without stirring up great Troubles. As if Justice, Piety,
Holiness, and good Discipline, were not the same among all people and in every
Country.

The Council of Basil assembled some Time after, with a design to proceed to a
Reformation of the Head and the Members; A Declaration was made very Solemnly
that there the very beginning, and their first Acts should contain no other
thing. But when they would have meddled with the Court of Rome, and the Popes
Sovereign Authority, every one knows after what manner Eugenius the Fourth
exalted himself against them, and what endeavors he used to separate them, or
at least to render their designs unprofitable. That produced new Troubles, and
new disorders, and cast the Latin Church into a new schism. For that Council
declaring its right, deposed Pope Eugenius, and chose Amadeus Duke of Savoy;
but all that came to nothing. For Eugenius remained Master, Amadeus was at
length constrained to renounce the Papacy. The Council of Basil and all its
good designs, were brought to nothing, and things remained in the same State in
which they were before. Which made an Author in those Times say, That there
could not be any thing expected from those who presided Jacob. de Paradiso de
Septem Statib. Eccles.
in the Councils on the behalf of the Popes, unless that, when they saw the
affairs of the Council ordered against their Masters and against themselves,
they should oppose their Decrees either by Dissolving the Council, or making
Divisions spring up in it. So that, says he, matters come to nothing, and
return into their old Chaos, that is to say, into Error and Darkness, which no
man can be ignorant of, at least, that has any knowledge of things past; and
the Tragedy that happened in our Age at the Council of Basil, is a most manifest
proof of.

Some Time after that, Pope Innocent the Eighth being dead, and all
preparations made for a new Nomination, Lionel Bishop of Concordia made a long
and fine Oration to the Cardinals, who were to go into the Conclave to persuade
them to make a good Election, that might answer the desires of the whole
Church; he represented to them, That Christianity was threatened every day by
the Power of the Turk, that the Hussites were in Arms against their Brethren
the Catholics, that pernicious Errors against the Orthodox Faith might be
observed to increase in all places, That the Raynald ad Ann. 1492.
Church of Rome, the Mother and Root of the Universal Church, was every day
more and more despised, that Luxury reigned in the Clergy, and that it was
extreme among the people. That the Patrimony of Saint Peter was wasted, That
Christian Princes, animated with a mortal hatred one against another, were just
ready to destroy one another, and that in fine, to make use of the words of
Jeremy, One desolation called to another, which made him to weep over the
Church, and say to it, Daughter of Sion thy Desolation is great as the
stretching out of the Sea; who is it that will bring thee any Remedy? After
having represented those things, he adds, That although the affliction of the
Church was exceeding great, yet they might notwithstanding mitigate it, if
laying aside their own passions, their Canvassings, and their Cabals, they
would look to nothing else in choosing a Pope, but Holiness, Learning, and
Fitness, or Capacity. That the Eyes of all the Church were upon them, to beg of
them a Pope who might by the good odor of his Name allure the Faithful people
to Salvation. He urged that discourse much farther, in showing them the
necessity that the Church stood in of a Holy man, whose life should be without
reproach. He added to his Exhortations, threatenings on Gods part, and passed by
nothing that might move the minds of those Cardinals to do some good. Will you
not say that words so weighty and so pungent ought to have made some Impression
on the minds of those Cardinals, and that, at least for that Time, they should
have done well? They saw the whole Church in disorder, the Conquests that the
Infidels made, Christian Princes in Arms one against another, Church Discipline
overthrown, the lives of the Clergy profuse, Piety violently beat down, and
Christianity degenerated in all places, could any one imagine that such sad
representations would not have been considered? But be not hasty, All the
effect that they produced was the Creation of Alexander the sixth. That Name
alone, sufficiently Celebrated in the History of the Popes, was enough to make
men understand of what disposition those Prelates were, and how little they were
touched with the wounds of the Latin Church. Let us hear nevertheless what
Raynaldus says, who in these kind of things is an Author that can no ways be
suspected. The greatest part of the Cardinals, says he, were very remote from
those good Counsels: for Authors complain that some corrupted with Money,
others gained by promises of Benefices and Places, and others drawn by the
Conformity of a vicious and impure life, gave their Voices to Roderic Borgia.
So that, in stead of choosing a chaste man, they chose one who was infamous for
his uncleanness and fornications, for which he had been reproved by Pius the
Second, yet was so far from amending under that reproof, that he took no care
to conceal his impurities. For on the contrary he lived with Vacosia a
Courtisan of Rome, as if she had been his real Wife, and he had diverse Children
by her, upon whom he heape'd Riches and Honors as much as it was possible for
him to do, as if they had been his Legitimate Children. Behold what the Court
of Rome was then.

Alexander the Sixth being dead, and Pius the Third who succeeded him having
lived but thirty days after his Election, the Cardinals met again in the
Conclave. And because the Life and Government of Alexander had given scandal to
all the World, and that the Cardinals themselves had been but very ill
satisfied with it, before they proceeded to an Election, they drew up some
Articles, which every one swore to observe upon condition the Nomination should
fall upon him; and there was one among the rest which carried this with it,
That the new Pope should call at the end of two years a General Council for the
Reformation of the Church in its Head and its Members. Julius the Second was
Vide Raynalud in Jul.
chosen, but he did not believe himself bound to keep his Oath, for seven years
past away without any thing being talked either of a Council or a Reformation.
And therefore it was that this Pope thought the less of it. Nevertheless it
fell out, that, having ill Treated one party of the College of Cardinals, and
having moreover stired up the Emperor Maximilian, and Lewis the Twelfth the
King of France against him, those two great Princes joined with the disgraced
Cardinals, and called a Council at Pisa. The Act of that Convocation, on the
part of the Princes, says expressly, that it was for the Extirpation of Heresies
and Errors, which through the negligence of Superiors had sprung up in diverse
parts of the World, and particularly for the Reformation of the manners of the
Universal Church in the Head and the Members, and for the amendment of many
great, notorious, long continued, and almost incorrigible crimes, which had
scandalized the Universal Church. The Cardinals also alleged the Oath that the
Pope had took, just before his promotion, in these very words, I swear to
observe and perform these Articles throughout, and in every particular,
sincerely, unfeignedly, seriously and in good earnest, and under pain of
falling under perjury and an Anathema, from which I cannot absolve my self, nor
give power to any other person to absolve me. They added to that, that by
another Article they all, and Julius himself had sworn, That if he who should
be chosen should not perform his promise in good earnest, he should be held
guilty of perjury, to be a breaker of his Vow and of his Faith, a disturber of
the Church, and the cause of Scandal to all Christianity, and that then two
thirds of the Sacred College should have power to assemble a General Council.
The Council then being assembled, declared openly, That there was a most
evident necessity of Reforming the Church in the Head and the Members; and made
a Decree formed in these words, The Holy and sacred General Synod of Pisa,
lawfully called in the name of the Holy Ghost, composing a General Council, and
representing the Catholic Church, does define and declare, That that Holy
Synod would not, nor could not, dissolve it self, till the Universal Church
should be Reformed in Faith and Manners, as well in the Head as the Members,
and till the Heresies and Schisms that had sprung up should be Extinguished.

Behold, hitherto, the fairest hope in the World. It is not necessary for us to
inquire, whether that Reformation was the true Cause of the Calling of that
Assembly together, or whether it was only a pretense, and according to all
appearances it was the latter. But whatsoever it might be, whether a pretense
or not, three thing result from it; the one, That that Reformation was
generally judged to be most necessary; the other, That it was extremely desired
by the people, for they would never have contrived to have took up those things
for a pretense which did not appear necessary, and which were not wished for;
and the Third is, That a Reformation so necessary and so much desired should
extend it self to Faith as well as to Manners, even, say they, 'till the
Universal Church should be Reformed in Faith and Manners.

See then what was the success of so weighty a business. Julius on his side,
who according to the general mind of the Popes, mortally hated those
Propositions of a Reformation, displayed all the Authority, Force, and Artifice
that he had to elude that Council, and to turn all those projects into Air. And
first of all, he made void and disanull'd that Convocation that had been
called, he declared them the Authors of Schism, and Rebellion, as Dathan, and
Abiram, and their Council, a Conventicle of Schismatics, a Synagogue of Satan,
and a Church of Malignants, he forbad all Prelates to go thither under pain of
Anathema, and excommunicated all those who should afford them any help or
assistance directly or indirectly, and in fine, he interdicted the Towns and
Churches that should receive them. But as that way of Authority alone could not
produce the effect which he desired, since the World did not care always to be
frightened with the Papal Thunder, so it was necessary for him further to elude
that pretense of a Reformation which those of Pisa had taken up. He then had
recourse to that Ordinary Artifice of the Popes, which is, that when they
cannot longer avoid a Council, they labor to make themselves Masters of it, to
the end that nothing may pass there but what agrees with their Interests and
their desires. For this Reason he called he called one at Rome it self, and to
make himself more sure, taking up as well as his Adversaries that pretense of
the Reformation of the Church; the better to color his Affairs, and to
strengthen his Party, he created some new Cardinals. Nevertheless as he would
not omit any thing, he had recourse to Arms, he made a League with Spain
against France, he assaulted Ferrara that was held by the French, he went
himself in Person into his Army, he filled all Italy with War, he drew the
Switzers and Venetians to his Interests, he gave Battles, he Excommunicated the
King of France and all his Confederates, and after having got off the Emperor
Maximilian from them, he gave away their Kingdoms to him who should first
Conquer them, and in fine he set up his Conventicle at Lateran, where he and
his Successor Leo the Tenth made all things pass that they would have. I say,
he and his Successor Leo the Tenth, For Julius died after the fifth Session,
and Leo not being yet thirty seven years Old was chosen in his place, by the
Faction of the young Cardinals, against the mind of the elder sort, by Reason
of which Alphonsus Petrucius, a young Cardinal, having had it given him in
charge to declare the new Election to the people, he did it in these words, We
have chosen Leo the Tenth for our Pope, Let the young men live. Leo then,
continued that Council, in which, in favor of some light Reformations which
consisted but in words without any effect, he more then ever established the
Sovereign Authority of his See, and confirmed the Abuses of his Court, and the
disorders of the Latin Church. For he there Solemnly made void the Pragmatick
Function, which was almost the only good thing that remained in the Government
of the Latin Church, he there made the Council of Basil to be declared a
Conventicle, and caused it to be determined, That the Authority of the Popes is
above all Councils; which obliged the University of Paris to reject that
Decree, and to sue forth an appeal made to a Council lawfully called.

After this, I know not whether they can any farther say with any confidence,
that our Fathers ought to entertain good hopes of the Latin, Prelates, and that
they ought to have expected a good Reformation from their hands. All the World
desired that there should be a Reformation in the Government of the Church,
they impatiently demanded it, they themselves acknowledged the necessity of it,
in the Head and the Members, the Pope found himself engaged to do it by a
Solemn Oath, but when it was urged to be put in Execution, he chose rather to
inflame all Christendom, then to deliberate to reform himself, and to
re-establish Order, and he managed his party so well, that he found a whole
Council disposed blindly to do whatsoever should please him, without any regard
had either of God or the Church, or of themselves. Did not all that give a fair
hope of a Reformation?

They will say, it may be, that Adrian the sixth, Successor to Leo, after
having ingenuously confessed, in the Diet of Nuremberg, the disorders of the
Court of Rome, and of all the Prelates, as we have seen before, promised also to
Reform them. For he declared. That he was resolved, as well, from his own
inclination, Raynald. in Adrian. 6.
as from the duty of his place, to labor to correct so great an Evil; And he
would do it in such sort, that first of all the Court of Rome, whence possibly
the evil had grown so extreme, and so destructive, should be reformed; and so
much the more, as he saw that all the World passionately desired it. I confess
those Historians give a good Testimony enough of the Intentions of that Pope in
that respect; but we ought also to adjoyn, what they add, to wit, that that
Confession and promise of his, which he made were very ill taken at History of
the Council of Trent. Book 1.
Rome, and moreover, that they generally offended the Prelates, that they seemed
to be too ignominious for them, saying, that it rendered them yet more odious to
the Seculars, and contemptible to the People, and that especially, they were
amazed to see a door opened for the introducing a diminution of their
conveniences, or convincing them of an incorrigible obstinacy. We ought not
also to omit, that Adrian dyed soon after the Return of his Nuntio from
Germany, not Vide Raynald. in Adrian.
without a suspicion of being Poisoned, as William Lochorst, insinuates in a
Letter set down by Raynaldus, Seu nimio, says he, Estu laboreque fatigatus, seu
infesto esu aut potu refectus, incidit in Morbum; by Reason of which, Paulus
Jovius relates, that immediately after the Death of Adrian, some young
debauched persons went by night and set up a wreathed Garland on the door of
the House of his Physician, with this Inscription, Liberatori Patriae S. P. Q.
R. We ought not likewise to pass by in silence what the Author of the History
of the Council of Trent has told us, That Clement the Seventh, who succeeded
Adrian, saw clearly History of the Council of Trent. Book 1.
that Pope Adrian, having too far abandoned the Ordinary Style of the wiser
Popes, had been too facil, as in Confessing the Faults of the Court of Rome, so
in promising a Reformation, and that he was too mean spirited, in asking the
Counsel of Germany how provision might be made against the Contentions of that
Kingdom. For thereby he drew upon his back the demands of a Council, which was
of great importance, especially with a condition to Celebrate it in Germany,
and had given too much courage to the Princes, that they dared not only to
send, but to print also a Book which they called the Centum Gravamina, or
Hundred Grievances, a writing that was ignominious to all the Ecclesiastics of
Germany, but more to the Court of Rome. That notwithstanding having considered
all things well, he resolved, that it was necessary to give some satisfaction
to Germany, yet so, that his Authority might not be endangered, and that the
advantages and profits of the Court of Rome might not any ways be diminished.
In effect, he sent a Legate to Nuremberg, where the Princes of Germany were
afresh assembled, who propounded to them such a Reformation, as should only
respect the inferior Clergy; So that it was judged, that that Reformation
would not only foment the evil as light and palliating Medicines usually do;
but that it would serve to enhance, and raise the Dominion of the Court of
Rome, and the greater Prelates, to the Prejudice of the Secular Powers, and that
it would open a door to a greater Extortion of Money, so that it was not
received, being looked upon merely as a mockery to elude the Expectations of
Germany, and to reduce it to a greater Slavery.

CHAP. II.
A Confirmation of the same thing, from the History of that which passed in the
First Quarrels of Luther, with the Court of Rome, concerning Indulgences.

BUt we ought to add something to all that we have said, that if so many
public Proofs will not be sufficient to make that Conclusion, That there could
not be any Reformation hoped for on the part of Rome and its Prelates; they may
further see, if they will, something more particular. Let us Examine after what
manner they received the first complaints that Luther made against the
Preachers of Indulgences, and the Questors that Leo the Tenth had sent
throughout the whole extent of his Empire, and especially into Germany, there
to sell publicly the Pardon of sins, under a pretense of the building of the
Church of Saint Peter at Rome; but in effect, to have by that means,
wherewithal to Enrich his Kindred, and satisfy his own profuseness. The History
of that, which is as a Preamble to that of the Reformation of our Fathers, must
needs give us a great deal of light to judge rightly of their Conduct, and to
decide the Justice or the Injustice of their Actions. See then well near how
that business was managed. Besides the manifest abuse that there was in the
using, and in the very Doctrine it self of Indulgences, the Questors were
constrained to set before the people every day diverse Novelties upon that
subject, to enhance their price and value before them, and they lived further
and guided themselves in that affair after a very filthy and dishonest manner.
Luther who was then Professor of Divinity in the University of Witenberg,
thought himself bound by the duty of his Charge, and his Conscience, to oppose
himself to a Traffic so Mischievous, and so destructive of true Piety. To
effect that, he proposed some Theses for the clearing of that matter, and wrote
them to the Archbishop of Mayence, who was also Bishop of Magdeburg,
beseeching him to make use of his Authority to put a stop to those excesses,
and representing to him, that it was the Duty of Bishops thoroughly to instruct
the people in the Doctrine of the Gospel, and not to suffer their credulity to
be so abused. He wrote also almost to the same sense, to the Bishop of
Brandenburg, under whose Diocese he was, and sent him those Theses which he had
framed on that Subject; with a more large Explication of them, which he added
to them. He wrote the same to Pope Leo, he sent him his Writings, he complained
to him of the Follies that his Questors taught, and of the havoc that they
made, reposing themselves upon him, and abusing his Authority; he cleared
himself before him of the false imputations of his Adversaries, and was so far
from having any ways violated that respect which as yet he believed due to his
Dignity and to his See, that he stooped even to excessive submissions, which
his Adversaries did not fail to make use of in the end.

Hitherto the most rigid Censurers cannot find any thing blameable in the
Conduct of Luther. For I pray tell me what could any one have done better? He
beheld a sort of men that dishonored Religion, that made a mockery of the
Devotion or rather of the superstition of the People, who were a scandal to the
whole Church, who promoted false and destructive Maxims. He opposed himself to
them, but of the duty of his place, he made his Complaints to those, to whom
ordinarily it belonged to repress those excesses, he went even to the Pope
himself, he acquainted him with the Mischief that his Questors wrought. He
begged of him to give Order about them, he used all the Terms of respect that
the Pope could desire. What can any find to blame in all that? They will say,
it may be, that his Complaints against the Preachers of Indulgences were false,
and ill-grounded. To clear this matter, we need but to see what his most fiery
Enemies wrote. Miltitus, the Apostolic Nuntio, says Ulembert, Raynald. ad ann.
1918.
one of the most fiery Enemies of Luther, had sufficiently acknowledged, that
the Questors and Preachers of Indulgences, who had first given occasion to
Luther to oppose himself, were not altogether blameless. That therefore he had
earnestly reproved Tetzel (who was the Chief of the Questors) that he had not
hindered those abuses that were intolerable to all honest men, and that
grounding himself on the Authority of the Pope, he had done diverse things of
his own head, which could neither be approved of, nor defended; So that he had
brought dishonor on the Holy See, and given ground for a most dangerous
complaint, whereof he must one day give an account to the Pope. Florimund of
Raymund acknowledged the same, that those Questors committed most enormous
Crimes, in Publishing their Raynald. ubi supra.
Indulgences, and taking care for nothing else but to extort Money from the
People. Belcair Bishop of Mets, said, That the Impudence Idem. ibid.
of the Popes Ministers was so great, that they made amongst themselves a
public Merchandise of Indulgences, sometimes debauching themselves in the
Taverns, they played them away, and at Dice, and other Games, especially in
Germany; and it was the common talk That the Pope had given away all the Money
that should be collected in some Countries of Germany to his sister Magdalen.
Guicchiardin goes so far as to blame the Pope himself, in that following the
Counsel of Cardinal Peccius he had published the largest Indulgences, without
any distinction of Places or Time, not only for the living, but to Idem. ibid.
draw Souls out of Purgatory also by means of his suffrage. That it was
manifest, that he did that to extort Money from the People, and that those who
were employed to do it had bargained for the place, of the Court of Rome, by
Reason of which the thing came to be turned into a public Scandal, chiefly in
Germany, where the greater part of those Ministers, sold them at a cheap rate,
or gamed away the power of delivering Souls out of Purgatory. He adds, That
which rendered this Affair yet more odious, was the Donation that Leo had made,
of a sum of the Money that should be raised by those Indulgences to his sister
Magdalen, and the Commission that was given for that to a certain Bishop
Archimbald, a man unworthy of such an Employment, and who behaved himself with
an extreme Covetousness and Rigor. Behold then two things indisputable, as it
seems to me; the one, That Luther had right at the Bottom, and that the
business which gave him occasion to speak and write [against it] was filthy and
scandalous in all respects; and the other is, That he guided himself after a
most prudent and respectful manner, and that had nothing in it of any disorder.

Let us see now, after what manner he was Treated. The first See Sleidan, and
the History of the Council of Trent.
thing that fell out was, that neither the Pope, nor the Archbishop of
Mayence, nor the Bishop of Brandenburg vouchased to take any care to put a stop
to those abuses that were committed. They know that afterward the Archbishop
of Mayence was himself concerned in a part of those Indulgences, and that he
got considerable sums by them. The second thing was, That Luther instantly
raised against himself not only that whole swarm of Preachers and Questors, but
the whole Empire of the Pope, that is to say, all the Creatures of the Court of
Rome spread abroad throughout Europe, who stirred up all their Endeavors to
ruin him, raising against him the Princes and the People by many false
imputations. Ecc us Doctor of Divinity, Silvester Prierias, Master of the
Sacred Palace at Rome, and James Hockstraten Inquisitor, wrote against him, the
last of whom exhorted the Pope to make use of fire and Sword, for the
Convincing of that Heretic. Luther defended himself against this sort of men,
by Public Answers, See those pieces in the first Tome of Luthers Works.
wherein he laid open their Absurdities, and their false and scandalous
Assertions which they had proposed: but he did yet always contain himself
within the bounds of a great Respect for the Pope, and for the Church of Rome,
holding, nevertheless, that they were not infallible, and that the Authority of
a Council lawfully assembled was above that of the Pope; in which he said
nothing, that the Faculty of Paris, and Gallican Church, does not say likewise.
It appeared that it was their last interest that urged them to irritate Leo
against him, and all his Court. Who, else, were not well contented with that
which he had undertaken to put a stop to, or at least, to trouble the course of
their exactions. Howsoever it was, when they set themselves to find out a way
to repress those manifest Excesses of the Ministers of See Sleidan the History
of the Council of Trent, by Father Paul, the first Tom, of the Works of Luther
and Raynald.
Indulgences, and those who defended them Luther was cited by the Pope, to
appear in person at Rome to give an account of his writings, and his Conduct in
that business, before the Judges that Leo had assigned to him, who were Jerome
Bishop of Ascoli; Auditor of the Chamber, and Silvester Prierias Master of the
sacred Palace. Leo wrote, at the same time, to Cajetan his Legate in Germany, a
Letter full of Fire and Choler, against Luther, whom he treated as an Heretic
and Seditious person, and gave him order to cause him to be seized as an
Heretic, and conducted safely to Rome, commanding all Dukes, Marquises, Earls,
Barons, and all Universities, Communities, and Powers, under pain of
Excommunication, with a reserve of the Emperor only, to use all their force to
seize Luther, and to give him up into the hands of his Legate. He wrote also to
the same purpose to Frederick the Elector of Saxony. Luther seeing so violent a
proceeding against him, proposed the Reasons that hindered him from obeying that
Citation, which were taken from the infirmity of his health, which would not
permit him to expose himself to the wearisome toils of that Journey; from his
povery, to which did not afford him wherewithal to do it; from the Tie that he
had at the University of Wittenburg, from whence it was not in his power to
depart without the consent of his Prince; but more especially from that evident
oppression which he suffered, in that he had the same person ordered to he his
Judge, to wit, Sylvester Prierias, who was, not only of the same Order with the
Preachers of Indulgences, but the same person, who had immediately before wrote
a Dialogue against him; so that it was visibly to give him up into the hands of
his Adversaries, and the Parties themselves. The University of Wittenberg wrote
to Rome in his Favor, and the Prince Frederick of Saxony, having most
earnestly applied himself to the Legate, obtained, in the end, with a great deal
of difficulty, that the cause should be tried in Germany, and that for that
business, Luther should come and appear before the Legate at Auspurg.

Although Luther could not be further ignorant, what Spirit the Court of Rome,
and all its Ministers were animated with, as to himself, yet he did not fail
notwithstanding to appear before Cajetan; but it was after his friends had
obtained a safe Conduct for him from the Emperor Maximilian. Cajetan was vexed
with such a prevention, that broke all his measures, nevertheless he received
Luther honestly enough, and propounded at first to him on the part of the Pope,
To Recant, and to promise for the future, that he would not fall back again
into his Errors, nor any more disturb the Church. Luther answered, That his
Conscience did not accuse him of any Error, that he entreated him to tell him
in what he had Erred, and that he was ready either to justify himself, or yield
himself to be instructed. Cajetan then objected to him, as two great and
fundamental Errors, That he had wrote, That the Merits of Jesus Christ did not
belong to the Treasure of Indulgences, against the Extravagance of Clement the
Sixth, and that Faith, that is to say, a firm belief of ones Justification, was
necessary to those who came to the Sacrament, and those who should appear
before the Judgment of God; for on the contrary, said he, it is uncertain
whether those who draw near to God shall obtain his grace or not: Luther
defended his Propositions, and the discourse falling upon the Sovereign
Authority of the Pope, whom Cajetan affirmed to be above a Council, above the
Scripture, and above all that was in the Church; Luther formally denied it to
him, and maintained, on the contrary, that the Pope was beneath the Scripture
and a Council. The next morning Luther presented to him a justification of his
Propositions in Writing, in which he inserted a great many words full of
respect to the Pope, to the Church of Rome, and to the Legate himself in
particular. But Cajetan, without being willing to hear him speak of his
justification, shut up all with this, That it was his pleasure that he should
revoke his Errors, under pain of incurring the Censures, with which he had
received Orders to punish him; adding, That if he would not recant, he had
nothing to do but to withdraw himself, and to come no more before him.

Luther withdrew from the Legates House, and having been advertised some days
after, that they endeavored to imprison him, notwithstanding the safe Conduct
of the Emperor, he withdrew himself from Auspurg, not being ignorant of what
had befell John Hus and Jerome of Prague in the Council of Constance. Before
his departure he wrote to Cajetan, two very submissive Luther Tome. 1.
Letters, in one of which he acknowledged that he had not in treating of that
business of the Indulgences, preserved all that respect which he ought to have
had for the name of the Pope, and that howsoever he had been urged by the
carriage of his Adversaries, he confessed, that nevertheless he ought to have
handled that matter with more modesty, humility, and respect; that if he had
any ways displeased him, he begged his pardon, offering to publish it himself,
and to use civiller Terms for the Future. He offered likewise not to speak any
more from thence forward of Indulgences, provided he imposed silence on the
Questors also, or obliged them to observe the same measures in their
discourses. And as to the Recantation which they required of him, he protested
that he had done it in good earnest, if his Conscience had allowed him to have
done it, but that there was no command, nor Counsel, nor Consideration of any
person in the World, that could make him say, or do any thing against his
Conscience. In the second Letter observing all along the same submissive and
respectful Style, he declared to him, That he had withdrawn himself from
Auspurg, and begged that he would not think the worse of him, if he appealed
from him to the Pope, and at the same Time he sent him his Act of Appeal. That
Appeal was founded. 1. Upon this, That he had not determined any thing upon the
point of Indulgences, but that he had only proposed some Theses to be disputed
on according to the Custom of the Schools. 2. That the Opinions of the Doctors,
as well Canonists as Divines, being very different, and there being nothing
defined for certain in the Church upon that subject, he had had right to choose
one side to choose one side to maintain in the dispute, much more when he was
urged to it by the indiscretion of the Questors, who under a pretense of those
Indulgences had dishonored the Church of Rome, and the power of the Keys, by
their detestable covetousness, and scandalous Conduct, seducing the People unto
new opinions and selling Justifying Grace for Money. 3. That he had not only
submitted his Disputation to the Judgment of the Church, but even to the
Judgment of every man more Learned then himself, and in particular to Pope Leo.
From whence he concludes that he had had no just Cause to Cite him. That
nevertheless he had offered to his Legate to refer himself to the judgment of
the Church of Rome, and of the Universities of Basil, of Friburg, of Lovain,
and of Paris; which his Legate would not accept. That he would not let him see
wherein his Error lay; but that he had only pressed him merely to recant,
threatening him if he did not, or if he did not go to Rome, he would
Excommunicate him and all who adhered to him; howsoever that he had always
protested, that he had not any opinion but what was founded on the Scripture,
on the Fathers, and the Canons. That therefore finding himself oppressed by
that whole proceeding, he appealed from the Legate, and from all that the Pope,
through ill Information, had done against him, to the Pope himself better
Informed. Notwithstanding, he withdrew himself from Auspurg, and by his
retreat, rendered vain and ineffectual all the Conspiracies they had contrived
against his person, to make him a Prisoner.

Cajetan having failed of his intent, Wrote to Frederick Duke of Saxony,
against Luther, accusing him as guilty of a heinous Crime, in that he would not
Recant; and further exhorted and required that Prince, either to send him to
Rome, or to drive him out of his Territories. Luther very solidly justified
himself before his Prince, and made him see the oppression, and most evident
Tyranny that they used against him. And because that the Cardinal had formally
declared in his Letter to Frederick, that so weighty and Pestilentious an
affair could not remain a long Time in that Condition, and that the Cause
should be carried on at Rome. That menace obliged Luther to make an Act of
Appeal from the Pope, and from all his proceedings against him, to a Council
lawfully called. At the same Time almost, Leo sent a Bull into Germany
confirming his Indulgences, and the Doctrine upon which they were grounded.
That Doctrine was, That by the Power of the Keys given to Saint Peter, and to
his Successors, The Bishop of Rome had a right to pardon to the Faithful all
the guilt and punishments of their Actual Sins, to wit, the guilt, by means of
the Sacrament of Penance, and the temporal Punishment by means of Indulgences,
whether in this Life, or in Purgatory, and that by those Indulgences he could
apply to the Living and the Dead, the superabundance of the merits of Jesus
Christ, and the Saints, either by way of Absolution, or by way of Suffrage, so
that the Living and the Dead participating of those Indulgences, were delivered
from the Punishment that the Divine Justice would inslict on them for their
actual sins. He commanded therein all under pain of Excommunication, from which
they could not be absolved till the point of Death to believe it also: and to
the end no person might allege ignorance, he gave Order to all Archbishops,
and Bishops, by virtue of their Holy Obedience, to cause his Bull to be
published in all their Churches, giving nevertheless power to his Legate to
proceed against the disobedient, and to punish them as he should think fit.

Behold here the true History of the first Quarrel of Rome with Luther! Let
them judge now, whether our Fathers, under whose eyes all that business past,
could any more hope for a Reformation either from the Popes hand or his
Prelates. Instead of making a Holy and Christian Reflection, upon the just
complaints of this man, how mean and contemptible soever he might appear to
them, they thought of nothing but keeping up that evil, which they did, then in
publishing their Indulgences, which they knew had not any Foundation, either in
the Word of God, or in the Practice of the Primitive Church. They thought of
nothing but how to protect them, and indirectly to forbid those scandalous and
wicked excesses of their Ministers, instead of correcting them severely and
repressing them. They thought of nothing but their own Interest, and not to let
slip any occasion that might be offered to heap up money, without having any
regard either of the Honor of the Christian Religion, or of the Salvation of
Souls. They thought of nothing but how to settle more and more the Sovereign
and Monarchical Power of the Pope of Rome, where they should have wholly
applied themselves to make Jesus Christ Reign in the hearts of men. They
thought of nothing else but putting a stop to the happy breakings out of those
first bright Beams of the Truth which came out of Luthers Mouth and Pen; where
they should have received them, and made use of them to obtain from God a
further and greater Light. They made it a Fundamental matter, to get Luther to
recant; and not being able to compass that, they thought of nothing but how to
ruin him by all the ways they could use. They raised a strife and process about
a matter of Faith, of Religion, and of Conscience, and a process that was
unjust, and that could not be defended in the very Form of it. For what kind of
proceeding was that, openly to cite a man to appear at Rome, who had done
nothing but only proposed some Theses to dispute of, on a matter upon which
there had not yet been any thing defined? What manner of proceeding was it, to
give him a party himself to be his Judge, and to declare him a Heretic before
ever he had heard him, as the Pope did in his Letter to Cajetan, to stir up
Kings, Princes, and the People against him, and to show it was his mind to
begin to Treat of so weighty a matter with his Imprisonment, without any regard
had, either of the Protestations which he made, or of the Reasons he alleged,
or of his respectful Submissions toward the Pope and his Legate? Who may not
see in all that, an inflexible Resolution always to retain the Latin Church in
that deplorable condition wherein it was found to be then, and even to make its
Yoke heavier, if it had been possible? So far were they from having any design
to Reform it, and to free it from those Enemies and Superstitions under which
it groaned.

I am not ignorant, that some way to excuse so violent a proceeding, one has
said, That almost at the same time wherein Luther Raynald. ad Ann. 1518.
had wrote his first Letter to Pope Leo, full of respect and submission, he had
caused to be Printed two little Books against the Epitome of Sylvester Prieras,
wherein he spoke of Rome and its Bishops in terms extremely injurious, that
which, says one, evidently discovered a wicked and deceitful Spirit, that
should send forth nut of the same mouth sweet and bitter. But all that is
nothing else but a discourse of a certain Vlemburg, full of falsehood and
calumnies, a sworn Enemy of Luther and his Doctrine. For it is manifest that
the first Letter of Luther to Pope Leo, which is that that is treated of, was
wrote in the beginning of the Year 1518. when he had not as yet any other
dispute then with the Questors and Preachers of Indulgences, and that those
little Books that Vlemburg speaks of, which served for an answer to that
Epitome of Sylvester, were not wrote till the Year 1520. after the Sea both his
Letter, and his Writings in the 1 Tome of the Works of Luther.
Pope and his whole Court had openly declared themselves against Luther, after
Luther had appealed from the Pope to a Council, and after the Pope had made his
Doctrine to be condemned as Heretical by the Divines of Lovain and Cologn;
which evidently appears from that very Epitome of Sylvester, which makes
mention of that Appeal of Luther to a Council, and from the Marginal Notes that
Luther made upon that, which also make mention of those decisions of Lovain and
Cologn. It is then a false report of an Enemy of Luther, who not being able to
find any thing till then blameable in his Conduct, has on purpose confounded
those times to render him odious, and to justify, after some manner, a
proceeding that cannot be defended. They know not how to deny, that the
violence which they used against him, was not openly condemned, not only by the
common people, but by the more wise and knowing Persons themselves. He
complained, says Coclaeus, that is to say, one of his most fiery Enemies, that
he was unjustly oppressed by his adversaries, whom he openly produced, and
gained to himself in a little time the favors not only of the simple people,
who easily believed him, and who listened after all sorts of Novelties; but that
also of diverse grave and learned men, who giving credit to his words, through
an ingenuous simplicity, thought that that Monk had no other end, than
defending the Truth against the Questors of Indulgences, who as Luther accused
them, appeared to have a greater zeal for the drawing of Money to themselves,
then for procuring, the good of Souls. He adds, That the Learned men, Poets and
Orators, defended him, and charged the Pretats and the Divines with
Covetousness, Pride, Envy, Barbarousness, and Ignorance; saying that they only
persecured Luther for his Learning, because he appeared to be more Learned than
themselves, and more free in speaking the Truth against the cheats and
impostures of Hypocrites.

Some time after that Luther had appealed from the Pope to a Council, the
Emperor Maximilian dyed, which obliged Leo to send Charles Miltit into Germany
in the Quality of his Nuntio. He presented a golden Rose to the Elector of
Saxony, which the Pope had sent him as a Token of his particular Friendship,
but that Present was accompanied with Letters which were sent both to the
Prince and his Council, in which the Pope all along requested them, that they
would give up Luther into his hands as an Heretic, and a Child of the Devil.
Luther has wrote in some part of his works, that Miliet was laden with sixty
six Apostolic Breves, to cause Preface to Tome. 1.
them to be stuck up from place to place, and by that means to conduct him more
securely to Rome, in case that Prince Frederick should give him up into his
hands. But all those Breves, and all those Letters were to no purpose; for that
Prince would not leave Luther to so unjust a Passion.

This obliged Miltit to betake himself to other measures: He thought that to
make up that business, he ought to take a course contrary to that of Violence
and Authority. He would then have some private conferences with Luther to
reconcile him to the Pope, he highly blamed the lewd conversations of the
Sellers of Indulgences, and persuaded Luther to write yet once more to the Pope
with respect and submission, and yet notwithstanding it was Ses Sleidan and
Reynaldus.
agreed that he should impose silence on both Parties, and that the whole
business should be committed unto some Bishop of Germany, as to him of Treves,
or to him of Saltzburg. Luther performed on his part in good earnest all that
was agreed on; he Luther. Tom. 1.
wrote to Leo with all the respect imaginable, and let him see that the
Questors, and those who had till that time upheld them, had dishonored his See
and his Church; that as to himself, he found himself very unhappy to see that
their Calumnies should have prevailed over his Innocence, and he further
offered to give over that matter of Indulgences, and wholly to be silent in it,
provided that his Adversaries should do the like. But whether it was that all
that Negotiation of Miltit was but feigned on his part, or that in effect his
counsel was not approved by those of his Party, as Luther himself insinautes,
it is certain that from the time that that Letter had been drawn from him,
George Duke of Saxony, a Prince that stuck very close to the Interests of the
Pope, desired that he would make a public Disputation at Leipsic upon the
matters in controversy; the dispute was managed, the beginning between Eccius
and Carolostad concerning Free Will and Grace, but they drew in Luther himself
upon the subject of Indulgences, of Purgatory, and the Power of the Pope. And
they procured almost at the same time from the Universities of Cologn and
Lovain, a condemnation of diverse Articles drawn out of his Books. He defended
himself against these new Adversaries, and made the World Luther. Tom. 2.
see by his public writings the truth of his Doctrine, and the injustice of
those Condemnations.

But within a little after, Pope Leo being unwilling to try any thing further,
published his terrible Bull of Excommunication Extat apud Luther tom. 2. and
apud Raynald ad an. 1520.
against him, which they call the Bull Exurge; There, after having earnestly
importuned Jesus Christ, Saint Peter and Saint Paul, with all the Saints in
Paradise, to come to the succor of the Church of Rome, he sets down in
particular one and forty Articles of Luthers Doctrine, which he declared to be
respectively pestilent, destructive, scandalous, false, heretical, offending
pious Ears, seducing Souls, and contrary to the Catholic Truth, and to the
Charity, to the respect and obedience that was owing to the Church of Rome,
which is the Mother of all the Faithful, and the Mistress of the Faith; and as
such severally, he condemned them, disproved them, rejected them, and declared
that they ought to be rejected by Christians of both Sexes. He forbad all
Bishops, Patriarchs, Metropolitans, and generally all Churchmen, and Kings,
the Emperor, the Electors, Princes, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Barons,
Captains, etc. and in a word, all sorts of men, to hold those Articles, or to
favor them in any manner what soever, under the penalty of Excommunication,
and being deprived of their Lands and of their Goods, and treated as infamous
Heretics, favorers of Heretics, and guilty of High Treason. And as to
Luther, he complained of him, that he would not come to Rome, where he would
have let him have seen that he had not done so much evil as he believed, and he
agravated it as a great rashness in him to have appealed to a Council, against
the Constitutions of Pius the Second, and of Julius the Second, who would have
those punished as Heretics that made such appeals. That therefore he condemned
as Heretics, him, and all his Adherents, if in the space of fifty days they
did not renounce all their Errors; he forbad all Christians to have any
Commerce or Conversation with them, or to yield them any necessary things, and
gave his Orders to the Emperor, to Kings and Princes, etc. to seize their
Persons, and to send them to Rome, promising great rewards to those who should
do so good a work.

Luther, some time after, wrote against that Bull, and appealed afresh to a
Council lawfully called; notwithstanding he justified himself with great
solidity about all those condemned Articles. And it is pertinent to note, that
among those Articles that the Pope Anathematized as Heretical, or Rash, or
Scandalous, and contrary to the Catholic Truth, these following Propositions
might be found: That, that Proverb was most true, that said, That the best
Penance is a good Life, that it would be very well if the Church in a Council
should ordain that the Laity should receive the Communion in both kinds. That
the Treasure of the Church, from whence the Pope drew his Indulgences, is not
the Merits of Jesus Christ and the Saints. That the Bishop of Rome, the
Successor of Saint Peter, is not the Vicar of Jesus Christ over all the
Churches of the world, nor that there was any one established by Jesus Christ
himself in the Person of Saint Peter. That it is not in the power of the Church
or of the Pope, to make Articles of Faith, nor to establish new Laws for
Manners or for good Works. That though the Pope should hold with a great part of
the Church, an opinion, which should not it self be erroneous, yet it would not
be a sin or an heresy to hold a contrary opinion, especially in things not
necessary to Salvation, until a General Council should have disproved the one
and approved of the other; that the Ecclesiastical Prelates and Secular Princes,
did not do ill when they abolished the Order of begging Friars. That Purgatory
could not be proved by the Holy Canonical Scripture. These Propositions are
declared to be either pestilent, or pernicious, or scandalous, or heretical,
without specifying any one in particular, for the Pope speaks of them only in
the whole, that they are such. So it was that Leo and all his Court managed
those matters. To affirm that a true amendment of Life, a holy and sincere
return from Vice to Virtue, is the best of all Pennances, appeared to be a
detestable crime to them. To wish that a General Council might establish the
Communion of the Eucharist, according to the Institution of Jesus Christ and
the Custom of the Primitive Church, was such an abomination with them, as was
thought sufficient to deserve the Flames. Not to believe that the Merits of
Jesus Christ and of the Saints, made up a certain Treasure, which neither Faith
nor Holiness, nor Repentance could give the Faithful any part of, but which
were to be dispensed only by the way of Indulgences for money, passed in their
Judgments for a Hellish Heresy. To hold that our Faith has nothing else but
the Word of God for its object, and not that of men also, and that God alone
can impose moral Laws on the Conscience, was in their opinion, an astonishing
wickedness. To believe that one may without Herefy hold an opinion contrary to
that of the Pope, in matters not necessary to Salvation, and not determined by
any Council, was a pestilent error. To give the least blow to the interests of
Monks, or the Fire of Purgatory, was an horrible sacrilege, for which there
was not any remission.

After that condemnation, the Pope wrote to John Frederick Elector of Saxony,
earnestly entreating him not to give any more protection to Luther, and he sent
Hierome Aleander his Nuntio into Germany, to cause that condemnation to be
executed. But Aleander not being able to obtain of Frederick what the Pope
desired, obliged the Emperor Charles, who had been Elected in the Room of
Maximilian, and the Princes assembled at Worms, to cite Luther to appear
before them. The Emperor gave him, to that effect, his Letters of safe
Conduct; and Luther having compared and constantly maintained his Doctrine,
without any ways regarding either the threats or the solicitations of the
Partisans of the Court of Rome, they were upon the point to imprison him,
notwithstanding the safe conduct of the Emperor, and to treat him as they had
heretofore done John Huss and Jerome of Prague in the Council of Constance. But
the Elector Palatine vehemently opposing himself to that breach of the public
Faith, they were contented with proscribing him by a public Edict. In that
Edict* they treat him as a Lunatic, as one possessed by the Devil, and as a
Devil incarnate; Extat apud Rayna'd. ad ann. 1521.
they banish him all the Territories of the Empire, they forbid him Fire and
Water, Meat and Drink, they order that his Books should be publicly burnt, and
threaten to all that contradict, the most rigorous punishments in the world.

After all that, who can say that our Fathers could yet with any shadow of
Reason hope for a Reformation on the part of the Popes and the Prelates? We may
see in their Conduct, not only a repugnance to a Reformation, but a settled
design, and an unshaken resolution to defend their Errors, Superstitions, and
Abuses, of what nature soever they were, and to hazard all, rather then once to
consent that the Church should be purged. We may see that they made use of all
that the most exact and refined policy could make them contrive of all the
Authority that the splendor of their Dignities, and the places which they held
could give them amongst men, and of all that force and violence, that the
Favor of Princes and the credulity of the people could afford them. They went
so far as loudly to declare themselves Lords of men's Faith: They exclaimed,
they wrote, they disputed, they accused, they condemned, they terrified, they
excommunicated, they had recourse to the secular power; and could our Fathers,
without being blind, look any further for a Reformation from such persons as
those?

CHAP. III.
That our Fathers, not being able any more to hope for a Reformation, on the
part of the Pope, or his Prelates, were indispensably bound to provide for their
own Salvation, and to Reform themselves.

WE come now to inquire what our Fathers were bound to do, in so great a
Confusion. They were persuaded, not only, that it was possible for the Latin
Church to have within it a great many Corruptions and Abuses, but that it
really had a very great Company of them; that false worship, Errors and
Superstitions had broke in as an Inundation, upon the Christian Religion, and
that those abuses growing more gross, and growing every day more strong, put
Christianity into a manifest danger of Ruin: Moreover, there was not any hope
of Remedy, either on the part of the Pope, or on the part of the Prelates; For
the Court of Rome with all its Associates, had loudly declared against a
Reformation, maintaining that the Church of Rome could not Err, that she was
the Mistress of Men's Faith, and not to believe as she believed was a Heresy,
worthy of the Flames; and as to the Prelates, they had all servile obedience to
the wills of the Popes, besides that Ignorance, that Negligence, that Love of
the things of the World, and those other Vices in which they were plunged.

How be it, the business was not about matters of small Importance, nor about
the Questions of the School, most commonly unknown to the People, nor about
some speculative notions, which could not be of any Consequence to the Actions
of true Holiness. The Controversy was about diverse things essential to
Religion, which not only fell within the knowledge of the People, but which
likewise consisted in matters of practice, and which by Consequence being
wicked, as our Fathers could make no doubt that they were, could not but be
very contrary to the right Worship of God, and men's Salvation. For the debate
was about a Religious Worship which they were to give not to God alone, but to
Creatures also, to Angels, to Saints, to Images, and to Relics; about certain
and infallible Springs from whence they ought to draw their Salvation, in
building their confidence upon them; for besides the mercy of God through the
Merit and Satisfaction of Jesus Christ, they joined to that, the merit of our
good-works, our own Satisfactions, the over and above Satisfactions of the
Saints, and the Authority of the Bishop of Rome in dispencing of Indulgences,
They Treated of other works which they held that we ought to do through the
Obligation of our Consciences, and with assurance that they were good, and
those they made a part of our Sanctification, for they added to those that God
had commanded us, those that the Popes and their Prelates commanded out of their
mere Authority. They Treated of ill actions, from which we ought to abstain out
of the motions of our Consciences, and which one could not commit without sin,
for besides those that God had forbidden us, they likewise placed in this Rank,
those which it should please the Church to forbid us. They Treated about a
certain and infallible Rule of Faith upon which the Minds and Consciences of
Christians might stay and rest, for they would have that principle consist in
the Interpretations, in the Traditions and Decisions of the Church of Rome or
its Prelates. The Controversy was about Jesus Christ himself; for they said that
the Sacrament of the Eucharist was the very Person of the Son of God, and they
adored it under that Quality. the Question was about diverse Customs, introduced
into the public Ministry, or generally established by the Customs of the People
that our Fathers thought very contrary to the Spirit of the Gospel, and true
Piety. In fine, in all those and other such like things they Treated about the
peace and just rights of the Conscience, the glory of God, the hope of
Salvation, and the Preservation of the Church of Jesus Christ upon Earth. Let
them tell us then precisely what our Fathers ought to have done. Was there any
thing in the World of greater concernment then those things which I have set
down? Or to speak better, was there nothing that could any ways stagger them,
or hold the minds of all honest men in suspense, for so much as one moment?
Were they bound to renounce their Conscience, their God and their Salvation,
under a pretense that the Flatterers of the Church of Rome speak of her, what
the Holy Scripture says of the Godhead, That if she pulls down, there is no
person that can build up, if she shuts, there is none can open, if she retains
the Waters Decret. 1.
all is dried up, if she lots them out they shall overflow the Earth. Part.
Did. 40.
Can. 6. in not is.
Do they believe that, they ought to have precipitated themselves into a
inevitable Damnation, and to have precipitated others by their Example, to
consent to the Ruin of the Christian Religion, and utter extinction of the
Church, and that lest they should have been wanting in that respect, and blind
Obedience that the Court of Rome, and its Prelates require of all the World?
This would be in Truth to set that obedience at two high a price, and it would
cost us very dear: but they will find but few persons of good understanding,
who will not confess that that would be to push on things a little too far.

They will say, it may be, that we ought not also to suppose a thing so much in
Question; that that prodigious corruption of the Latin Church whereof we speak,
and those pretended Interests of the Christian Religion, and Men's Salvation,
which according to us obliged our Fathers to Reform themselves, without having
any regard of the Court of Rome or its Prelates, were nothing else but
Chimaera's that we our selves have formed at our pleasure, or specious
pretenses that our Fathers took, for occasions to separate themselves, and that
we take after them to defend them with.

To answer to this Objection, I will not say, that there is no appearance that
our Fathers made use of those motives, as a pretense to cover their other
Interests with. They can scarce know how to imagine any interests interwoven in
a business that evidently drew after it a Thousand persecutions, and a Thousand
afflictions, and wherein they were necessarily to go through the most violent
storms, as the sequel will justify. In effect, let them say as much as much as
they will that Luther was hurried away by his resentments, it belongs to those
who Treated him with so much injustice, to dispute that matter with him before
the Tribunal of God, who will one day render to every man according to his
works. But as to our Fathers, who had no part in those personal Quarrels, they
can no ways be suspected to have had an interest of Passion, or Animosity. I
will not likewise say, that if our Fathers themselves had had other interests
then those which they have set before us, which is contrary to all appearance,
that yet it cannot be said in respect of us, that we do not follow them in the
True Faith, since we have had leisure enough to acknowledge what our
Reformation has drawn along with it, and what it has cost us. But I will only
say, that I make that supposition only to let our Adversaries see, that without
amusing us any more with those formalities, and those perplexing ways which
they make use of continually which are proper for nothing, but to defend
Errors, and to destroy the Church by the Tyranny of those who govern, they
ought to come to the bottom, and to Determine with us those Fundamental
Articles upon which we ground the right that our Fathers had to Reform
themselves. I do not then prejudge any thing by my supposition, I explain only
the sentiment of the Protestants, and the persuasion that they entertain. If
what they say, is not true, it is certain that they have had Reason to Reform
themselves for without any more Reasoning, a man ought always to prefer God,
and his own Salvation before a hundred Popes, and before ten Thousand Bishops.
We ought then to come to an Examination of those Matters.

This is what the Author of those Prejudices, as hot as he is in his
Controversy, has been forced to acknowledge. For to In Chap. 7.
disintangle himself from an Argument, to which he says the whole Book of the
Apology of Mr. Daille is reducible, [and which he represents in these words.]
We ought not to remain united to such a Communion as binds us to profess
Fundamental Errors against the Faith, and to practice an Idolatrous and
Sacrilegious Worship. But the Church of Rome binds us to profess diverse
fundamental Errors, and to practice Idolatrous and Sacrilegious Worship diverse
ways, as in the Adoration of the Host, etc. Therefore we ought not to remain in
her Communion, etc.] He distinguishes between two sorts of Separation, one of
which he calls simple and Negative, which, says he, consists more in the
Negation of certain Acts of Communion, then in Positive Acts against that
Communion from which we separate. The other he calls a Positive Separation,
which includes the Erecting of a separate Society, the Establishing of a new
Ministry, and the positive Condemnation of the former Communion, to which it
had been United. Upon that Distinction, he says, That it is to no purpose that
the Calvinists say, That their Consciences will not any more allow them to be
united with the Catholics sheltring themselves under that Ambiguous Term of
Union, That their Consciences cannot any further hinder them from taking part
in some Actions, which their false Principles make them look upon as criminal;
but they would no ways engage them to all those excesses to which they are
carried out. That in fine, if it were true, that without betraying your
Consciences, they could not give that honor which we pay to the Saints and
their Relics, they ought to content themselves not to give it. But that it
will in no wise follow from thence, that they ought to go about to set up a
body apart. That it is this latter sort of Separation whereof they accuse us,
and that it is that kind of it that we ought to justify our selves from. And a
little lower, If says he, the Calvinists should make what suppositions they
pleased upon the State of the Church of Rome, if they should as much as they
had a mind to do, accuse it of Error, and Idolatry; it would be enough to
Answer them in one word, That if those pretended Errors should give them any
right to refuse to profess them, and to practice those actions which should
include them, yet they no ways gave them any night to set up themselves against
the Church of Rome, to anathematize her, to set up a body a part, and to take
to themselves the Quality of Pastors, although they had neither Authority nor
Mission.

I do not now meddle with that positive Separation, which the Author of the
Prejudices makes so great a Crime in us. We shall show in the end, that our
Fathers did nothing in that respect, but what they were bound to do in their
Consciences, and with the neglect of which they could not dispense without Sin.
But this we shall come to consider in its proper place, it may be enough for us
at present, to know, that with the consent of the Author of Prejudices we may
suppose it as a thing indisputable, That our Fathers, obeying the Dictates of
their Consciences, had right to resuse to profess those Errors, in which they
believed the Church of Rome to be entangled, and no more to take any part in
certain actions that involved those Errors. I profess it were desirable that
the Author of Prejudices had told us a little more clearly his own thoughts of
that Negative Separation; But howsoever he has carried himself in his
Expressions, I may say, if I am not mistaken without fear of any opposition,
that that which he has here granted us is not one of those Concessions, which
are sometimes given to adversaries, only to cut off the Dispute; but that
indeed he has spoken according to his real thoughts. For when in a Controversy
of this nature a man distinguishes about this general Thesis; That one ought to
separate from a Church which binds one to profess Error, in noting, that it may
be said in two senses, the one That one ought to separate ones self Negatively,
in not meddling with that which would wound the Conscience: and the other, That
one ought to separate positively, that is to say, that one ought to set up a
Society separate from that, and to establish a new Ministry. That he quitted
the former sense, in saying only, that it was very ill applied to the Catholic
Church, restrained himself only to the latter, that he would say, that it was
this latter kind of Separation whereof he accused us, and about which we ought
to justify our selves, that our Consciences could not any further hinder us,
then from taking part in those actions which our Principles should make us look
on as Criminal; that if we could not without betraying our Consciences, render
that Honor to Saints and Relics which they give them, we ought to content our
selves with not doing it. When a man, I say, speaks as the Author of Prejudices
after this manner in the heat of a dispute, which he believes to be as weighty
as that; there is a great likelihood, that it is not a mere condescending to
his adversaries, but a true and lively expression of that which he finds in
himself to be very Just and Reasonable. Howsoever it be, without informing our
selves further about a thing wherein we are little concerned, we will suppose
it, since he will have it so, as a proposition not to be disputed, That our
Fathers could lawfully separate from the Church of Rome, by a Negative
Separation, that is to say, in not to taking any part in that which would wound
their Consciences. But that signifies, in our style, that they had right to
reform themselves, since we call nothing else precisely Reformation, but that
public Rejection, which they made of diverse things, which they judged to be
ill, and contrary to Christianity. Whether they did ill to go further and to
proceed to a Positive Separation, that is a Question apart, which does not in
the least hinder, that their Reformation taken only as a Negative Separation,
might not have been done with Justice and according to that right, that
Conscience gives to every man.

But now, methinks, this point being so well cleared, clears a multitude of
others, and we may, by that concession of the Author of Prejudices, very well
decide some Questions. In the first place, They ought no further to set before
us that absolute obedience to the Orders and decisions of the Church of Rome in
the matters of Faith and Worship, to which they would hitherto have all the
Faithful indispensably obliged. For if those, whose Consciences shall tell
them, that, That Church binds them to believe Errors and to practice a false
worship, may refuse to profess to believe those Errors, and to perform that
Worship, who sees not that that absolute obedience is overthrown? Since it will
depend on the dictates of the Conscience of every one, and that the Conscience
of each one will give it its bounds, and suspend it, in respect of some certain
things and actions. 2. The Church of Rome can no more treat those as
Disobedient and Rebellions, who through the dictates of their Consciences
refuse to profess to believe that which she decides and to practice that which
she ordains, nor persecute them as such, and whatsoever she should make them
suffer upon that pretense of Rebellion and Disobedience, would be but an unjust
persecution, of which she will be bound to give an account to God and men. 3.
They cannot also any farther demand of us what Call our Fathers had to reform
themselves, that is to say, to reject their Superstitions, and the Errors which
were to be found in the Church of Rome in their days; for they needed nothing
else but the motions of their Consciences to give them a Right to refuse to
profess them. 4. They ought also to acknowledge that the Authority of the
Church, how great soever it may be, is it yet far less then that of the
Conscience, since it is not only limited, but surmounted, and that whensoeveer
they should be in oppositian, a man would have right to leave the Authority of
the Church, and to follow his Conscience. 5. And since even an erroneous
Conscienes, such as the Author of the Prejudices supposes ours, and that of our
Fathers to be, could suspend Acts, commanded by the Church, it follows
necessarily from thence, that to reconcile the Church and the Conscience when
they should be set in opposition, we must come to the Foundation, and discuss
the things themselves, for there is no other way to free the Conscience from
Des-abuser.
Errors. And how much more are we obliged to do it, when the Church abuses her
Authority, in teaching those things which are really false, or in commanding
those actions which are indeed unjust and criminal. All then depends on the
discussion of those matters by themselves.

But, they will say, your Fathers ought to have been contented to have made use
of their rights, each one in particular, they could have kept themselves from
making any profession of believing those pretended Errors, and not have taken
any part in those actions which they disapproved, and yet nevertheless have
kept silence. Wherefore did they disturb the public peace by their Tumults?
Why did they divulge by their outcries the Judgment which they made of the
Tenets and Customs of their Church? Did they not in that, sin against that
respect which they owed to their Prelates, and that Charity which they owed to
their Brethren?

To answer to this Objection, I say, That the keeping silence is not always
equally just, it has its bounds and its measures according to the weight of the
things that are treated of, and to the Circumstances of Times and Persons. If
the business had been only about some mere Questions of the School, upon points
of Speculation, or about some unprofitable Ceremonies, or some bad order in the
Government, or even about some popular Superstitions, which should not have
proceeded so far as to corrupt the saving Efficacy of the Gospel, I confess our
Fathers had been more obliged to have kept silence, then to have encountered
their Prelates, and raised those troubles through the diversity of their
Opinions. The Love of Peace, respect for Order Christian Charity, bidds us to
bear things of that nature well, which we do not so well approve of our selves,
and even there to follow the Fashion as far as we can, without wounding our
Consciences, and if we happen to speak or write of them, it ought to be done in
a gentle and prudent manner, with a regard had to the Times, and the
dispositions of Men, always remembering that the Church of God will never be in
a State of complete perfection upon Earth, and that God himself bears with the
defects of his Children through his mercy. But we ought also to take heed how
we stretch the keeping of that silence too far; for there are certain Seasons,
wherein one cannot hold one's peace, without betraying of God, without weakly
abandoning the true interests of the Church, and without falling into that
detestable Sin, which Saint Paul calls, holding the Truth in unrighteousness.
Such was the Time of the Triumph of Arrianism, in the fourth Centuey, for there
the matter being a capital Heresy, which had then took hold of the public
Ministry, there was not any more place for silence, there was a necessity on
the contrary of crying out, and of crying very loud, without any regard had
either to the compleasance which they owed to their Brethren, or to the Love of
peace, or the Dignity of the Prelates, or the Authority of Councills, or to all
those false reasons of silence which humane prudence ordinarily suggests.
Therefore it was, that a simple Monk of those Times, called Aphraates, although
he neither had any other Call, or Office, then that of the concern that every
one has for the Conservation of the Truth, yet could not contain himself within
his Cell, nor be hindered from opposing himself with all his might to that
Heresy; and the Emperor Valens, who favored the Arrians, having checked him
for that boldness, in telling him, that he ought to have kept himself in his
Cell, and to have applied himself only to pray to God, according to the
Conditions of that Religious Life into which he had entered, Aphraates answered
him, If I were a maid, and should keep my Chamber with my Father, and if I
should see Fire take hold of the House, should I not be bound to go out of my
Chamber, and run on every side to bring water to put out the Fire. Meaning by
that, That when the safety of Christianity was in danger of being destroyed, it
was a Crime to hold ones peace and sit still in quiet.

But this is exactly the Case wherein our Fathers found themselves. For they
beheld the Christian Religion, and by consequence, The Latin Church ready to be
Ship-wrackt, as a Vessel that takes in water on every side. They saw in that
miserable Church, Divinity falsified and corrupted by a thousand vain and
ridiculous Questions. The Schools infected with the Art of Sophistry and
Cheats, the Pulpits prostituted to Tales, Jests and Legends, Benefices filled
with persons unworthy and incapable. Church Dignities sold to those who bid
highest, good Learning banished, and persecuted, Religion loaded with a rabble
of childish Ceremonies, the People abused by a thousand Follies,
Church Government changed into an intolerable Oppression. The Worship of God
transferred to Creatures, and even to those Creatures that were dead and
insensible, the saving Truths of the Gospel neglected, Errors and Fancies of
Men's minds Preached up in stead of them. The Study of the Holy Scripture
abandoned, the Actions of true Piety, altered by false Ideas, the Commands of
God broken, his Sovereign Authority usurped, his mercy set in partnership with
Satisfactions of men, his Laws associated with the Laws of men, and his Grace
with our Free Will, the only Sacrifice of his Son multiplied, the Virtue of his
Intercession communicated to Saints and Angels. The Substance of Bread adored
as his Divine Body, his Sovereign Prophetic and Kingly Offices Transported to
the Pope, and his Priestly to the Priests, his Sacraments altered, his clearest
words eluded by their Glosses, and rash Distinctions, and his Ministry changed
into a Despotick Empire over men's Consciences. In a word, they saw nothing that
remained entire in that Religion. Whether their Sentiments, in that regard,
were just or unjust, Reasonable, or ill grounded, it is what a discussion will
justify, when they will seriously come to consider it. But nevertheless our
Fathers were persuaded of all that which I have mentioned, and under that
persuasion who can doubt that they ought not to have loudly declared
themselves, and that a deep silence would not have rendered them Criminal before
God and men? And they were the more Obliged to speak, in that as we have shown
in the foregoing Chapter, they had nothing more to look for from their Prelates,
and in that the injust and violent Proceedings of the Court of Rome against
Luther, made them sufficiently know that the Evil was not to be Remedied on
that side, and that the Time for each man to Reform himself, was already come.

CHAP. IV.
That our Fathers had a Lawful and Sufficient Call to Reform themselves, and to
Labor to Reform others.

ALthough this Question about the Call of our Fathers for a Reformation, is
already sufficiently decided, by what I have before Represented, since they
cannot require a more lawful Call, then that which is founded upon the
indispensable Obligation of our Salvation, I shall not fail notwithstanding, to
Treat of this matter yet a little further, to omit nothing that may serve for
our Justification.

I say then, that the chief thing that ought to be done to make a right
Judgment of a Call, in the business of Religion, is to search into what nature
those Actions are of, about which it is engaged, whether they be just or
unjust, good or ill in themselves; for there cannot be the least lawful Call
for that which is ill, but there is always one naturally for what is good,
which I shall name a Call of things, to distinguish it from that Call of
persons whereof I shall speak in the sequel. But now upon this Principle, which
to me seems indisputable, we have little else to do, then to demand of our
Adversaries whether they do not believe, that as it is naturally just to
embrace and to defend the Truth, so also that it is as just to reject and oppose
Errors, and to banish them not only out of that Society wherein a man is, but
even out of the world it self as much as it lies in his power to do: We need, I
say, but only to demand of them, whether they believe not, That a Falsehood has
not in its own nature any right to be believed, or to be taught, and that it is
for that Reason, that she makes use of the Colors of Truth, to make her self
to be received under another Name then her own, because that when she appears
in her natural dress, it excites, or at least it ought to excite the hatred and
aversion of men. I know very well that all Falsehoods do not equally deserve
that Aversion, and that there are some that may appear indifferent enough in
comparison of others, but I say that there are also some, of which one cannot
tell how to pass so favorable a Judgment. Errors in Religion have a far
different Character from those in Philosophy, and in Religion it self those
which always when they arrive vitiate the mind and heart, are far more odious
then those which do not deprave the mind; and those which hinder all the saving
Essicacy of the Gospel are infinitely more so; how much more when they are
gathered together to an exceeding great number, and mutually uphold and sustain
one another, not unlike those black Clouds which in the most Stormy days of
Winter join themselves one to another to make up but one general one, and to
deprive us of the light of the Sun. Hitherto, possibly they will not contest
any thing. But if it be reasonable enough that there should be no quarrel made
about those general Propositions, they ought not further to make any in this
particular Question, if the Actions of our Fathers were in their own nature
good and just, since we suppose, not only, that those things which they
rejected and caused others to reject, were Errors, but also that they were
Capital Errors of that last sort which I spoke of just before, which one cannot
look on without dread and amazement. For it is upon that supposition that we
defend our Fathers, and if they dispute it with us they ought to quit this
dispute about Forms, and to enter upon a Discussion of the very Foundation it
self.

They may allege, that they had a long continued possession, in favor of
those things which our Reformers opposed; since they were found established in
the Church many Ages ago; and that, as in a Civil Society, the Laws forbid
those to be molested, who are in a long and Ancient possession, and to be bound
to produce their first Title, though at the same time it should be maintained,
that they are Usurpers. So also our Fathers ought not to be heard any further,
against the Sentiments and Customs which the Times had in some sort
consecrated and made venerable. But this Answer will be of no Use to them; for
not to allege here, That the greatest part of those Opinions and Practices
were new, enough as has been sufficiently Justified; not to say, that they had
been publicly disputed, and by consequence, That that possession whereof they
speak was not peaceable: Who knows not, that there can be nothing prescribed in
matters of Faith and Worship against the True Religion, since that Religion is
of God in all its parts, and that there is neither any Time, nor Custom, nor
possession that can make a true thing of a false, or a Divine institution of a
humane Tradition, or any Virtue of a Vice? In a Civil Society, Laws Establish
Prescriptions with very good Reason, because without them, the peace of the
Community, which is the only end that those Laws propound to themselves, cannot
be well preserved. But in a Religious Society, the principal end is the Glory
of God and Salvation of the Faithful, which are two things that are established
on certain Perpetual, and Invariable Foundations, and by consequence have no
respect to any long prepossessions on the contrary side how Ancient soever they
may have been. If Religion were capable of any such Prescriptions; Christianity
would be bound to let Paganism alone, for how long time past has Paganism been
seated in the Possession of the Faith of men? Saint Paul himself acknowledges
it in those very places wherein he exhorts such to be Converted. Turn you, says
he, from these Vanities unto the living God who made Heaven Acts. 14.
and Earth, who in Times past suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways,
and elsewhere, God having winked at the Times of Ignorance commands now all men
every where to Repent. They cannot Acts. 17.
therefore bring any thing of Prescription against us, and it will always
remain certain, that, if that which our Fathers have said concerning the
Corruption of the Latin Church in their days be true, as we suppose it to be,
the Reformation was an Action good and just in it self, and by Consequence in
that respect, they can have nothing to say against their Call to it.

But as it is not enough to establish a Lawful Call, to suppose that what is
done is good in it self, and as it is further necessary that the person that
does it should have right to do it, it remains yet to be further inquired into,
whether our Fathers had power to do what they did. For how many Actions are
there that are just in themselves which it does not belong to all the World to
do, and which then become unjust and ill, when every one thrusts himself in of
his own Authority without being lawfully called? It is not permitted, for
Example, to all the World, to punish the wicked, although that punishment might
be just, it is not permitted to all men to change public Customs, although
those changes should be good and advantageous to the Society. We ought then to
see what Call our Fathers had to Reform themselves, and others. But this
Question would be easily decided, if it be considered, that in all Societies
there are two sorts of Common Actions, the one fort of those that are so
Common, as to belong to all the Body taken Collective as they speak in the
School, and not to each particular person. So in a Parliament, to pronounce a
Sentance, to absolve a man, or to condemn him, they are the Actions of the
whole Body, and not of each of those who compose it, so, to declare War and to
make peace, are the Acts of him or those who hold all the Rights of the State
in their hands. But there are other Actions which are so Common in a Society,
as to belong to each particular person, or as they say to all Distributive, and
not to all Collective. So, to give ones advice in an Assembly, is the Act, not
of the whole Body, but of each particular person who composes it; and to live
in a Kingdom, to contract Alliances, to possess one's goods, to labor, to
defend one's self against the incommodities of Life, are Actions so Common, as
to belong to all particular Persons. And so the Civilians have very well
distinguished, in saying, that there are some Acts which respect, Omnes ut
singulos, and that there are others, which belong ad Omnes ut universos.

To Apply that Distinction only to our present Subject, I say, that in
Religious Society which is the Church, Faith, Piety, Holiness, and by
Consequence the Rejecting of Errors, of false Worship, and of Sins, are those
common Actions that belong to all private men. The Just Lives by his Faith,
says the Scripture, and as it would be ridiculous to demand of any man in a
Civil Society, what Personal Call he had to live, to labor to avoid that which
would be hurtful to his Life, and to have a care of his own preservation, so it
is also an Absurdity to demand of our Fathers, what call they had to believe
aright in God, to worship him purely, and to remove far from them, all that
which they believed to be contrary to a Spiritual-Life and their own Salvation:
For they need not for that, any other Call, then the Obligation that lies upon
every one to save himself, and the necessity of beating back all that which
would oppose it self to so just an Obligation, There are not in a Civil Society
any certain Select Persons, who only have a right to Live, to Act, and to
labor for others, whilst those others should be dead, or not able to move. So
also there are none in a Religious Society, who ought to believe and to be good
for others, whilst those others should remain in ignorance or in sin; and that
Implicit Faith, which some have invented, by which a man is to believe in
general that which the Church believes, to go no further, is in truth the most
Commodious way of all others for those men who have something else to do then
to serve God; but it is also most proper for the Damnation of men. Faith then
is a thing so common as to belong to particular Persons, she is so one in the
whole Body of the Church, as to distribute her self to each one, and one could
not be of that Body of the Church, if one were not a believer, as one could not
be of the Body in a Civil Society, if one were not a man and had not Life. So,
each man, has not only a personal Call, but lies also under an Obligation to
believe, and to live as a good Christian, whence it follows, that each man has
a Call to remove far from him all that he shall judge to be contrary to the
Truth of his uprightness, Faith, and Piety, as also that being under an
Obligation to live Holily, and Justly, he has a Call to avoid Sins, and to
repent of them when soever he shall commit them.

But is not this, some will say, to rend the Church by Divisions, and to make
ones self guilty of a Schism, so to reject, out of self-will, the common
Sentiments and Customs, without the consent of the whole Society? No
certainly, for the true Union of the Church does not consist in holding of
Errors, how common soever they may be, nor in any false-worship, after what
manner soever it be Established. These things do not only, not belong to a
Christian Communion, but they destroy it, as diseases, how popular and general
soever they may be, do bring nothing but desolation on a Civil Society, instead
of being the Bonds to Unite it. So the Union of the Church does not bind any
person in that respect; on the contrary, it engages us to show our Brethren a
good Example in beginning to Reform by our selves. For the greater Love any one
has for the Church, the more he ought to free it from those evils that press in
upon it, and especially then when those evils shall put it into a manifest
danger of Ruin. If it is so, our Adversaries will yet further reply, Is not
that some way to break that Communion, when those things that you renounce, are
Public and common? I confess, that it is to break a Society, but a bad
Society, which being against the right of Christianity, gives no lawful Call to
any person to enter into it, or to defend it, but on the contrary, she gives a
Call to all, and binds them at the same time to break and oppose it. A
Corrupted Church has two bonds of its Communion, the one consisting in what is
good, the other in what is ill, the one of which makes it to be a Church, the
other a Corrupted Church, the one binding not only men among themselves, but
with God also, and the other, that in Uniting men among themselves, tends to
divide and separate them from God. The former of those bonds ought to be
regarded, and preserved entire, as much as lies in our power, but the Second is
a mortal bond, which no person has a right to make, and which all men have a
Call and Obligation to dissolve. It is as certain, that the first of those
bonds gives us a right, and Call to Act against the other; for Truth and Piety
Authorize us against Error and Superstition, and it is the Love that we bear to
the Church that opens our mouths against its Corruptions. There can then be
nothing further contested about the personal Call of our Fathers concerning
their own Reformation. But had they any Right to Labor in the Reforming of
others? Who can doubt it? Charity would have bound them to procure that good
for others, which they had thought it their duty to procure for themselves.
That Christian Communion in which they lived among their Brethren, did not less
oblige them to it. The Interest of the Glory of God which appeared to them to
cry loudly for a general Reformation urged them on to it, and their own
Innocence exacted it of them that they should make it appear to the Eyes of the
Public, in laying open the Foundations of those Errors, which they were
constrained to forsake, which could not well have been done without exhorting
others to imitate them. Being then bound to all these Duties, none can deny,
that they had not a sufficient Call to stir up their Brethren to Reform
themselves with them.

That which I have said will appear more evident, if we pass on to the
Consideration of the Circumstances of the Reformation, for we have already seen
after a long and vain Expectation, there could be nothing more hoped for on the
side of Rome or its Prelates. We have seen also that the evils whereof our
Fathers made such Complaints, and which they would have cured, did not lie in
things indifferent, that were trivial or tolerable, but in the very Essentials
of Religion; and these two Circumstances added to what I have just before
represented, let us see that our Fathers were not only in the right, and not
only under an Obligation, but under a necessary and indispensable Obligation to
do that which they have done. I confess that if the Court of Rome and its
Clergy would have labored in good earnest for a Reformation, it had been the
Duty of our Fathers to have received it from their hands; for how rude and
corrupt soever their Call had been, that Action had rectified it. I confess
also that if the Dispute had been only about things of small imporstance, our
Fathers had done better to have kept themselves quiet, as I have acknowledged
in the foregoing Chapter. But they can allege neither the one nor the other;
for Rome and its Bishops were obstinate in the design to Reform nothing, and
matters were reduced to the very utmost extremity, so that the Call of our
Fathers appears yet more indisputable, being grounded on these three
Foundations, of Right, of Obligation, and Necessity, and that same Necessity
was so much the greater, as the evil was more inveterate, and had spread it
self almost over all the parts of the Body of the Church to which those words
of Isaiah might be generally applied. From the Crown of the head to the sole of
the foot there was no soundness in her.

But if any would have us yet further Examine the other Circumstances, they
will find that they all concur to establish that Call whereof we Treat: I rank
in this place all those extraordinary Qualities wherewith it pleased God to
enrich those among our Fathers who contributed most of all to the work of the
Reformation. Who may not perceive in them a lively and penetrating
understanding, a solid Judgment, an exquisite and profound knowledge, an
indefatigable propension to Labor, a wonderful readiness to compose and to
deliver, an exceeding exact study of the Scripture, and the Principles of the
Christian Religion, a great and resolute Soul, an unshaken courage, an upright
Conscience, a sincere love of the Truth, an ardent zeal for the Glory of God, a
solid Piety, without Hypocrisy, and without Pride, a plain and open Carriage,
an entire disengagement from the things of the World, an admirable confidence
in God, and in his Providence, a Cordial Friendship to all good men, and the
greatest aversion to the Vices, Profanation, and Sophistry of others? These
were the Gifts and Talents wherewith the Divine Favor Honored the greatest
part of them, there yet remains the liveliest Characters of them in their
Writings, and they were as the Seal wherewith God would confirm their Call. For
when his Wisdom designs persons to any great work, it is wont to bestow on them
those necessary qualifications to acquit themselves in it, and we may say
without fear of being charged with derogating from the Truth by those who know
History, that from the Sixth Age until that of our Fathers, that is to say, for
the space of more then nine hundred Years, there could not be found any space
of Time so fertile in great men, as that of the Reformation was which shows
that God had a design to make use of them for that Work, as the event has
justified.

Add to all that, The Ardent and almost Universal desire among the People to
see a good Reformation spring up in the Church; for even that is a yet further
Seal to the Call of the Reformers, in as much as it is a Testimony that God had
marked out that Age wherein to purge his floor, as the Scripture speaks. Who
knows not that that desire was such, as neither the Artifices, nor the
Violences, nor the Calumnies wherewith they labored to darken the Reformation,
could wholly put a stop to. The Church was left in Ignorance, and in
Superstition, she panted after the Light of the Gospel, which had been for so
long a Time hid under a dark vail, and that general Disposition wherein she
was, may let us see that the Time of her Deliverance was come.

But, lastly, is it not true, that then the greatest part of those who labored
in that Reformation, were Ecclesiastical persons, whom the Duty of their place
obliged more particularly then others, to root out Errors from the minds of
men, to purify Religion, and to endeavor that God should be worshipped
according to his Will? Every one knows that Luther, and Zuinglius who appeared
the first in that Great Work, were not only Priests, but ordinary Preachers
also, the one at Wittenburg, and the other at Zurich, and that the former was
Professor in Divinity. And they are not ignorant that those who joined
themselves to them to advance that design, were also in Public Offices in the
Church, as the whole University of Wittenburg, a very great Number of Priests,
and other Churchmen, with Bishops, and Archbishops in Germany, in Swedeland,
and in Denmark, and some even in France, and the whole Body of Bishops in
England. They will say, it may be, that the Pope Excommunicated them all,
whence it follows that they had no more either any public Call, or lawful
Ministry. But that Answer would be fallacious; For the Pope having
Excommunicated them for nothing else, but that business of the Reformation, his
Excommunication can be considered no otherwise then as null in this Cause,
without an Obligation to enter upon an Examination of the Validity of his
Thunders in general. In effect, if they did their Duty, if they obeyed their
Call in Reforming themselves, and in reforming their Flocks, it ought not to be
questioned, that those Excommunications which they suffered for so good a
Cause, did not fall, of right, upon those who unjustly pronounced them, and
that not only what our Reformers had done before, but also what they did
afterward, was well and lawfully done. Who can deny that an Excommunication
contrary to the Glory of God, to the good of the Church, and to the Salvation
of men, should not not be Null? But if the Reformation was just, and the Glory
of God, the good of the Church and the Salvation of the People called for it,
as we suppose they did in this Dispute, they may very well see that the
Thunders of Rome, upon this Subject are unjust, and by consequence of no
consideration. They ought not then to propound things so to us, nor to deny the
first Reformers to be public persons who had a part in the Ministry of the
Church, and who for that Reason had a most strict Obligation to Labor in the
Re-establishment of its Purity. And to declare what we think; those
Excommunications of the Popes were so far from diminishing the Right and Call
of the first Reformers, that they did on the contrary confirm them the more,
and that for two Reasons. The one, in that they made them see more and more,
that they could hope for nothing on the part of Rome, or the Bishops of its
side, from whence there arose an indispensable necessity on our Fathers to
employ themselves in it; and the other, in that those pretended
Excommunications furnished them also with a just Subject, of laying open more
and more to the Eyes of the people, the gross and fundamental Errors, whose
Protection the Popes took up with so great an Ardour. To which I add, That as
much as the Popes and the Prelates of their party opposed themselves to the
Reformation, so much they lost of that Right which yet remained to them in that
public Ministry, which they abused with so great Injustice, and that very
thing did but strengthen the Right of the other Party, and render their
Ministry more Public and more Lawful. For in those contests that divide a Body
or a Society, that which one of the parties loses by its ill Conduct, is
re-assembled together and reunited in the other. But as it is only proper to
our present purpose to Treat of the Call that our Fathers had to Reform
themselves and to Labor to Reform others, that is to say, merely to reject
Errors, and to excite others to do the same; and not to go further to talk of
their Right, or Call to the public Ministry; We ought not to insist more upon
this matter, which shall be Treated of in its place. In effect, there are two
sorts of Calls which we ought not to confound, That of the Reformation, and
that of the perpetual Exercise of the Gospel Ministry. And the Author of the
Prejudices himself seems to have Judiciously enough distinguished them, when he
lays down two sorts of Separation, the one Negative, which consists only in a
rejecting of those things that are ill; and the other Positive, which goes so
far as to set up a Body apart with the Exercise of the Ministry. We shall
therefore speak elsewhere of the Right that our Fathers had to set up a public
Ministry, and it shall suffice for the present to have solidly Established
their Call to Reform.

To shut up this Chapter, it remains only that we speak a Word to a Question,
which they here raise about this Call, in the same sense in which we here
consider it! For they demand of us whether it was Ordinary or Extraordinary? To
which I Answer, That it was both the one and the other, in different respects.
It was Ordinary as to its Right, since all men have an Ordinary and perpetual
Right to reject Errors, and Superstitions, and to employ themselves in making
their Brethren to reject them, according to the Common Laws of Piety, and
Charity. The Pastors also have an Ordinary and perpetual Right to do the same
Thing, and to make use of that Public Authority which their Function gives
them for the guidance of their Flocks. It was Ordinary as to the Obligation
which lay as well upon the People as the Pastors to do that which they did,
because it was a Law of Christianity, and not a new Law or Commandment that
bound them to it, their Duty was founded upon the principles of that very
Gospel, and of the same Christian Religion which Jesus Christ had Founded, and
whereof they made a Profession. But I affirm that it was likewise Extraordinary
in two things.

First of all, in respect of that extreme and indispensable Necessity which lay
upon them, to do what they did. For although we have always a Right to reject
those Errors, and that false Worship which may creep into the Church, and
although we should be always bound to make use of it also, if it were so, yet
it is not always Necessary to come to the practice, or the Exercise of that
Right and of that Obligation, at least to so Public and Splendid a one as that
of our Fathers was, because the Church is not always in a State of Confusion
and Disorder, as she was in their Time. Things Ordinarily glide away in a more
regulated course; the Public Ministry is more pure, and the Gospel more
disingaged from the oppression of Traditions, or Humane Superstitions.

Secondly, That Call was Extraordinary in respect of those qualities wherewith
God invested our first Reformers, and those who joined with them in so great a
work; for it is not an Ordinary thing to see such eminent gifts, and that in so
great a Number, as those which appeared in the Age of the Reformation,
accompanied with such an Heroical Spirit, as our Fathers had, and such a great
Love for the purity of the Gospel, as the People had, who received their
Instructions; All which constrains us to acknowlede, a particular and special
Providence of God, throughout the whole Conduct of that great Divine Work, who
raised up Laborers, fitted for the Harvest which he had prepared.

CHAP. V.
An Answer to the Objections, that are made against the Persons of the
Reformers.

WE have hitherto, methinks, sufficiently justified the Action of our Fathers
in the business of the Reformation. It appears, that they had but too many
Reasons to suspect a great Corruption, not only in the Government of the
Church, but in the Worship and Doctrines of it also, and too just motives to
engage them to make a more particular Examination. It may not less appear by
what we have said concerning the Infallibility of the Church of Rome, and that
absolute Authority which she ascribes to her self over men's Consciences, that
her pretensions have no Foundation, and that all the Faithful have a Right to
Judge of the matters of Religion by themselves, and to discern what is good
from what is ill. We have seen nevertheless that our Fathers were not moved so
publicly to make use of their Right, but by an extreme and utmost Necessity,
and if they will do them Justice, they ought freely to acknowledge, what the
Author of the Prejudices has not dared to deny, that they had a sufficient
Call, to go as far, as a Negative Separation, and openly to refuse to believe
and to Act, what their Consciences should not allow them to approve.

But as that Motion of Conscience was not Universal, or common to all those of
their Time, and as it had encountered the interests of a great Body, that was in
possession of the Government of the Latin Church, they have labored to render
it odious by all sorts of ways, and even those, who were not able directly to
condemn it, have not failed to search out diverse pretenses to cry it down; and
having nothing to say against their Actions, they have taken up something
against their persons. This is that that the most of our Adversaries endeavor
with great Care; this is that, that their Writers of Controversies and
Missionaries, who are spread abroad on all sides among us, and who make use of
all sorts of ways to gain Proselytes, do, even now, all their days; and this is
that, that the Author of the Prejudices in particular, has done.

His Argument may be well nigh reduced to this: That there is no likelihood
that God committed the care of Reforming his Church, to persons whose Life and
Conduct was Disorderly and Scandalous. And the Conclusion that he pretends to
draw from it is, that we ought to reject, without any further Examination, that
Reformation, and to put our selves into the Communion of the Church of Rome.

1. It will be no difficult matter to show him, that, Blessed be God, we have
as to what concerns us, on every side matter of Edification, from the manners
of those who were first of all made use of, in so Holy and so Necessary a Work;
and this we shall presently make out. But before I come to that, I am obliged
to tell him, that his way of Reasoning, is the most captious and the most
contrary to the interests of the true Religion that can be imagined, and that
it is contrary even to the Interests of that Church of Rome which it would
defend. I say in the first place that it is captious, For since our Fathers
Reformed themselves only out of the motion of their Consciences, which dictated
to them that they ought to do it for the Glory of God and their own Salvation,
how can he pretend that we who have followed them out of the same Reason, can
revoke an Action which we believe to be just and lawful, out of merely Foreign
Considerations, taken from the persons of those who excited us to do it, if
otherwise it does not appear to us that the Consciences of our Fathers, and our
own were deceived, and that our Action is unjust in the Foundation? If the Law
of the Conscience obliges us, and gives us a right to separate our selves, at
least Negatively, how can we depart from that Separation on the account of
personal Actions, in which neither our Fathers nor our selves have had any
part, and which have nothing of common with our Separation? Our Reformation
being good and just, as we are persuaded it is, is it not true, that we ought
to hold our selves to it, whatsoever they tell us further of the Passions of
Luther, or of the Marriage of some Monks? These things are wholly separate; For
our Fathers might very well Read the Writings of Luther, and hear the Preaching
of these Monks who should discover to them the Abuses of the Church of Rome,
they might very well Reform themselves in the end, out of a motion of their
Consciences stirred up by their Teachings, without either approving or
Canonizing their other Actions. But they will say, to have avoided falling into
that motion of Conscience, your Fathers ought not to have heard them. And why
ought they not? That same motion that their Teachings stirred up, and that
produced a Reformation, sufficiently notes that they ought. But whether they
ought, or whether they ought not, they did hear them, the thing was done; and
that which they heard having caused that Sentiment of their Consciences which
obliged them to Reform themselves, we should be impious if we should quit that
Reformation, without any ones satisfying us about that Sentiment, or showing us
that it is ill, and fit to be condemned. But that they can never do by those
personal Actions which have no Relation to it; else, they would be bound to
condemn the comfort which we every day receive from the Psalms of David, under
a pretense that David had committed Adultery with Bathsheba, and to reject that
Instruction that we gather from the Books of Solomon, under a pretense that
Solomon was not so constant as he ought to have been in the Worship of the True
God. There is then nothing else but a Sophism in all that.

2. But if that way of Reasoning is captious, it is not less contrary to the
interests of the True Religion, since it would have us Judge of the
Reformation, by the Quality of the persons who Preached it, and not by it self
or the Nature of the things it Treats of, which would Establish a Principle
whose Use could not but be very pernicious to the Church; For if we ought not
to consider its Doctrine in it self, but to judge of it by the Persons who
should teach it us, how could any one discern the Angels of Darkness, when they
should be disguised into Angels of Light, and be able to know the false
Prophets when they should work signs and wonders even to deceive if it were
possible the very Elect? How could any know those Impostors and those
Hypocrites, who come in Sheeps clothing but inwardly are ravening Wolves?
Moreover would it be a hard matter for those men who should be interested
against the sound Doctrine to invent a Thousand Calumnies against the persons
of the Teachers of it, and how many did they invent in the beginning against
the Apostles, and the Primitive Christians, whom they represented to the people
as the most wicked among men? I confess it is a great means of Edification,
that those who Preach a good Doctrine confirm it by good Examples, and that on
the contrary, it is Scandalous when their works do not correspond with their
words. But nevertheless it does not follow, that one ought to receive a Word
because it is spoken by persons of an honest life, or to reject it for the
contrary Reason; for this Maxim would make us very often reject Truths and
receive Heresies. It is then certain that we ought to examine that Word in it
self without any dependence on those who Preach it; For Truth is not in Men,
but in God alone, she cannot change her Nature nor lose her right through the
Vices of its Ministers. If our Fathers were Reformed by the Authority of
Luther, or by that of Zuinglius and Calvin, they would have some Reason to draw
us back to the Examination of their manners, since in that Case, they would
treat of that that would either establish or destroy the Right which they would
have had to believe their mere words. But how many times have our Fathers and
we protested, that we do not believe that which our Reformers said, because
they said it, but because they proved it; and because those things appeared
sufficiently evident in themselves. We look upon them only as persons whom God
made use of to teach men their Duty; they discovered it, our Fathers saw it, we
see it also, and it is on the sight of this Duty alone, and not on their
Authority, that the Reformation depends. As it frequently falls out that our
very Enemies make us know our Duty in reproaching us with our faults: suppose
we that a Jew or some other Infidel should have accused and convinced the
Latins that they had corrupted their Christianity, and had not preserved the
Gospel in that State wherein Christ and his Apostles left it, is it not true,
that without any regard to the person, the Latins would be bound to do that
which our Fathers have done, and that the Quality of him who should have so
reproached them, would not have been a sufficient excuse before God, to hinder
them from the doing of their duty. It is then very evident that we ought to
Judge of those matters by the matters themselves, and not by the persons who
teach them to us, and by Consequence, that the Principle of the Author of
Prejudices is false and contrary to true Piety.

As to what he says, that there is no likelihood that God has committed the
Care of Reforming his Church, to Scandalous Persons; I answer, that God has
committed to all his Faithful, the Care of Reforming themselves, and to all his
Pastors that of Exhorting their Flocks. If it falls out, that among those
Pastors who have acquitted themselves, in that respect, of their charges, there
should have been some few who did Actions worthy to be blamed, that ought not
to create any Prejudice against the Word, nor put a stop to the motion of the
Consciences of the Faithful, any more then the defection of Saint Peter, or his
excessive compliance with the Jews ought to have hindered the Conversion of
People to Christianity. The Ministers that God makes use of, are men who have
their faults, and faults sometimes of the highest nature, as may appear from
the Example of Aaron who encouraged the Israelites in Idolatry, and of Jonas
who fled to Tarsis when he was bound to have gone and Preached to Ninive; but
their faults make the word of God lose nothing either of its Truth, or its
Authority.

3. It is a very strange thing that the Author of the Prejudices has not taken
any heed, in laying down a very bad Argument against us, of furnishing us with
a very good one against the Church of Rome in that Estate, wherein it was in
the days of our Fathers. For if we ought to Judge of the Doctrine by the
Qualities or the Actions of those who Teach it I pray consider, what Judgment
could our Fathers make of that Religion that the Court of Rome and its Prelates
taught, and whether they had not all the grounds in the World to reform
themselves. If there be no likelihood that God committed the Care of Reforming
his Church to persons who were guilty of Scandalous Actions, there is far less
that God has given Infallibility, and a Sovereign Authority over men's
Consciences to such persons as the Popes and Prelates in the days of our Fathers
were, according to the Description which the unsuspected Authors that we have
quoted, give us of them, and diverse others that we might here add to them if we
so pleased. And that which makes these two Arguments differ, is, that his
concludes upon a Principle which we maintain to be false and ill; where ours
concludes upon a Principle which he himself admits and acknowledges to be good;
so that in his own Judgment, we have a sufficient Fundation whereon to
Establish the Justice of our Reformation.

Let us see, nevertheless, of what Nature those Actions are wherewith he
reproaches our first Reformers. I will not, says he, Prejugez. Chap. 3. p. 64.
stay to examine the Accusations wherewith they have been charged by diverse
Authors. I do not pretend to detain my self in any but those public things
that are so manifest, and so exposed to the Eyes of all the World. I confess he
has Reason, not to stay upon all that which his Passion has invented against
them; for who knows not, that Calumny has no bounds especially when interest
and passion stir it up? Our Reformers are not the only persons who have been
attacked after that manner, The Jews said of John the Baptist that he had a
Devil, and of Jesus Christ that he was a Blasphemer, a Samaritan, a glutton and
a Wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans and sinners. If then they have called the
Father of the Family Beelzebub, what will they not say of his Servants?

But what then are those things that are so Public, so manifest, and so
exposed to the Eyes of the whole World, which the Author of the Prejudices has
found fit to be insisted upon. That new Chap. 3. p. 65.
Gospel, says he, was Preached only out of the mouths of those Monks, who had
quitted their habit and their profession, ouly to contract Scandalous
Marriages, or from the mouths of those Priests who had violated that Vow of
Virginity which the Calvinists themselves confess to have been imposed on all
Priests, and on all Monks in the West, by diverse Councils, and on all the
Monks, and all the Bishops in the East, and the first fruit of this Doctrine
was the setting open the Cloisters, the taking off the Vails of the Nuns, the
abolishing of all Austerities, and overthrowing of all manner of discipline in
the Church. This is that that forces him to say, That the Reformers struck men's
Eyes, with a Spectacle that could not but create horror, according to the
common Idea's of Piety and Virtue, whech the Fathers give us.

The Author of the Prejudices will not take it ill, that in order to our
Answering him, we must put him in mind, what he himself exhorts us to, To
Transport our selves into another Time then Chap. 2. p. 51. and 52.
that wherein we are at present, and to represent to our selves our Separation
in its first rise, and during the first years wherein it was made amidst the
Switzers and in France. Upon his thus placing us in that State which he
desires, we will declare to him, that, The general Depravation which reigned
amidst the Monks and the Priests, is to our Eyes a Spectacle worthy of horror,
according to the common Ideas of Piety and Virtue which the holy Scriptures and
right Reason give us. We will tell him, that that which Scandalizes us, is to
see that for a respect of a purely humane Order, they endured for so long a
time a disorder that dishonored the Latin Church, that drew upon it God's
Judgments, and that laid open the Ministry of the Church to an everlasting
reproach. It is in the detesting of those Infamies and those Impurities, that
the true zeal of Christians ought to consist, and it is to the searching out of
a solid remedy for them that one ought to apply the Discipline of the Church,
and not to keep them up under a pretense of observing rash Vows and a Caelibasy
that God never commanded. If the Author of the Prejudices is more Scandalized
to see Priests and Monks Married, then to see them plunged into all the
filthyness of Debauchery, I cannot hinder my self from telling him that he
makes Christianity a Law of Hypocrisy, and it may be yet somewhat worse; for
Hypocrisy does not content it self with mere Names, she would have fair
appearances without, of those things which she really rejects. Whereas for him,
he rejects not only the things but their appearances also, suffering patiently
the loss of any more seeing either the things, or their appearances, provided
we do not meddle with those empty names of Caelibacy and Virginity. But true
Moral Christianity inspires other Sentiments, she would have us honor that
Caelibacy and Virginity as gifts that come from God; but she would also have a
Contempt and horror for those specious names when they shall be applied to
those beastlinesses and excesses which both God and Men condemn. She would have
us in that Case instead of being Scandalized to see a false Caelibacy made
void, and a vain shadow of Virginity abolished, that we should on the contrary
be edified to see them got out from those snares of sin, and to have recourse
to a lawful Marriage that God has allowed unto all, and that he has even
commanded unto those who have not received the gift of Continency. It was in
the View of this that our Fathers looked upon the Marriage of those Priests and
Monks as the Abolishing of an unjust Law, contrary to the express words of
Saint 1 Cor. 7.
Paul, if they cannot contain, let them Marry, and which moreover had produced
such mischeivous effects as it was no longer possible for them to endure.

But, says the Author of Prejudices, we do not intend to speak of the Interests
of Families, of Marriage, nor of base and fleshly Chap. 3. p.64.
passions in the lives of those Great Bishops, and all those great men of old,
whom God opposed to the Heresies that rose up against his Church, as Saint
Cyprian, Saint Athanasius, Saint Basil, Saint Gregory Nazianzen, Saint Jerome,
Saint Epiphanius, Saint Chrysostom and Saint Augustine. They were all of them
eminent in Sanctity, in a disingagement from Interests; and continency was
always joined to their Ministry. We may say of that Author, without doing him
an injury, that he does not write ill, what he thinks, but that he scarce
thinks well, that which he writes, and that which I shall here come to show is
an Example of it; for he here lays down a great Trifle under the show of one of
the fairest things in the World. Saint Cyprian, Saint Athanasius, and those
other Bishops were not Married. I see it, but who told him, That they did it by
virtue of a general Law that forbad Bishops to be Married? Who told him, that
diverse other Bishops, who were not less great then those, for their Sanctity,
their disengagement from the interests of the World, never lived in Marriage,
as Saint Spiridion, Saint Gregory the Father of Gregory Nazianzen, Saint
Gregory Nysscne, Saint Prosper, Saint Hilary, Sydonius Apollinaris, Synesius,
Saint Eupsychus of Cesarea and diverse others? Who told him, that Priests were
not generally Married in the Primitive Church, whether it were in the East, or
in the West, as may be justified by a Thousand Proofs? And in fine, that they
do not vainly wrangle in saying, that those Bishops or those Priests were
really Married before their Ordination; but that they were not during their
Prelateship or Priesthood, whether it were that their Wives were dead, and
whether they were put away, it is good to Note what the History of Saint
Eupsychus of Cesaria in Cappadocia relates, whom Saint Athanasius formally
called a Bishop, suffered Martyrdom within a little after his Marriage, being
as Athanas. Orat. 1. contra Arian. Sozomen. Hist. lib. 5. cap. 11. Hist. trip
artit. lib. 6. cap. 14. Cyprian. Epist. 49.
yet as it seemed in the days of his Nuptials, and what Saint Cyprian relates
of Novatus a Priest, who was accused to have kicked his Wife who was great with
Child, and to have caused an Abortion; which evidently concludes the use of
Marriage during the Prelateship and Priesthood. What then can the Author of the
Prejudices conclude from the Example of Saint Athanasius, and Saint
Chrysostom, and those others unmarried unless this, that each one was in that
regard in his full liberty, and that as there were some that did marry, so
there were also some that did not? Did he need for so little a matter to
declaim Rhetorically, and to set down these great words with an Emphasis, That
our Reformers struck men's Eyes with a Spectacle, that could not but Create
horror according to the general Idea's of Piety and Virtue that the Fatheri
give us. I shall not say, that the Idea's of Piety and Virtue do not depend on
the Fathers, but on the Gospel and right Reason, and that it is by them that we
ought to judge the Fathers, and not those by the Fathers. I will not say that
the Fathers of the purer Antiquity, are so far from giving us an horror at the
Marriage of Ecclesiastics, that Chrysostom assures us on the contrary, that
what Saint Paul wrote to Titus concerning Chrysostom. Hom. 2. in Ep. ad Tit. Cap.
2.
a Bishops being the Husband of one Wife, he has wrote wholly to stop the
months of those Heretics who condemned Marriage, and to show that Marriage is
not only an Innocent thing but that it is so Honorable also, that according to
him it may be elevated as high as the Episcopal Throne. But I will only say,
and I will say it with an assurance of its being approved by all honest and
upright men, that the Marriage of Churchmen, which of it self is an honest and
Holy State practiced under the Old Law, practiced in the primitive Church, and
Authorized by the Scripture, cannot be considered but with the greatest
Edification when it shall be set in opposition to the disorders, and
filthinesses that Caelibacy has produced, which is but a purely humane
Institution, without any lawful Foundation. It belongs therefore to those of
the Church of Rome to tell us, whether they are much edified by the lives that
their Priests led, in the Age of the Reformation, and by that permission which
they gave them, for a Sum of Money, publicly to keep their Concubines. They
are to tell us, whether they have no horror for those strange assertions of
their Doctors, That a Priest Sins less who through the infirmity of the flesh
Rosius Confess. Cap. 56. Pighius. Costerus and alii.
falls into the Sin of Fornication, then if he should marry, and that it is a
less evil for Priests to burn then to Marry. As for us, we have that general
precept of Saint Paul, which has its use as well in respect of Churchmen, as
others, if they cannot contain let them Marry, and the Doctrine of the same
Apostle, Marriage 1 Cor. 7. Heb. 13.
is Honorable in all, or in all things, but the Whoremongers, and Adulterers
God will judge.

But the Author of the Prejudices says, That the Law of Celibacy, whether it
were just or unjust, or whether it did not begin if they will have it so, till
Pope Siricius's time, they cannot at least deny, That the spirit of God did not
carry out all the Famous Bishops of Old, and those who have been eminent for
Sanctity, to imitate Saint Paul, and to follow that Counsel which he gives to
renounce Marriage, to set themselves wholly to please God, and that the same
spirit did not from the very first Ages of the Church inspire a very great
number of Christians of both Sexes to remain Virgins all their Lives, as Saint
Justin witnesses, and Origin against Celsus. Whence then comes it to pass that
there should have nothing appeared of that instinct, or of those motions of
Gods spirit in the pretended Reformers, nor in the Societies which they have
established, any more than all those other Graces which shone so Illustriously
in the Saints of Antiquity.

Here is yet further, another example of that which I said just before, that
that Author does not take too much care of that which he writes. For can there
be a rasher thing in the World than to offer to thrust ones self into the
Counsels of God, and magisterially to decide, what qualities the Reformers
ought to have had? Continency and Virginity are the Cifts that God distributes
to men as he pleases, but it is what he has given only to some Persons, it no
ways follows either that their Persons were not acceptable to him, nor, that he
could not make use of them in the greatest works of his Providence. Abraham,
the Father of the Faithful, as the Scripture calls him; was not he Married?
Isaac, Jacob, and the twelve Patriarchs who founded the Church of Israel, were
not they? Moses the deliverer of the Ancient People, by whom God gave his Law,
and by whom he had wrought so many Miracles, was not he? Aaron and all the
High-Preists who succeeded him, were not they? All those Calls and diverse
others whereof the Scripture speaks, were methinks, most weighty and for the
greatest part extraordinary, and nevertheless we do not see, that God in giving
them, has made any Reflection upon the Advice of the Author of the Prejudices.
Who ever gave him a right to lay down Rules with such Authority of what God
ought to do, and what he should not have done, and by that means to raise
himself so high as to be a Censor of God's Actions? He ought at least to have
called it to mind, that Jesus Christ made no scruple to choose married men, out
of whom to make his Apostles and Evangelists. The Scripture mentions the
Mother-in-law of Saint Peter, that is to say his Wives Mother; for that word in
Greek can be taken in no other sense but that. It speaks also of the four
Daughters of Philip the Evangelist. The Author of the Commentaries upon the
Epistles of Saint Paul under the name of Saint Ambrose, assures us that all the
Apostles had Wives except Saint Paul and Saint John; and Saint Ignatius, and
Saint Basil say the same thing without any exception. Virginity is not then an
inseparable character of the Call of God, as the Author of the Prejudices
would persuade us.

But after that first assault of the Author of the Prejudices, which was made
with all the weapons that he first found in his hands, he reproaches the
Reformers, with the little fruit that their Preaching wrought for the
Sanctification of those people who followed them. Their Ministers themselves,
says he, have been constrained by the Evidence of the Truth, to acknowledge,
That all their pretended Reformation did not produce any Renovation of the
spirit of Christianity, and that it had rather increased then lessened the
disorders of those who embraced it; and for that he produces the complaints of
some Ministers as of Capito and Calvin himself, and of Luther against the Vices
of their Age. I acknowledge that if they compare our Fathers manners and ours,
with the Grace that God has given us in renewing his Gospel in the midst of us,
they would find but too much reason to make us cover our Faces with confusion,
that we were unworthy of so great a Favor. I confess also that there may be
many found among those who at first embraced the Reformation, who instead of
profiting by it, abused it, as the best things may be abused. But I say, that
they ought not to insult over that Confession that we make in that regard; for
besides, that a Doctrine is not the less found, for not being so carefully
observed as it deserves, we can yet further say for our selves, and say it to
the Glory of that God whom we serve, that he has poured forth a sufficiently
abundant measure of his blessing on our Fathers, and that if any compare their
manners with those of the other Party who rejected the Reformation, they will
find reason enough to confess, that God was in the midst of us. It is true
indeed, that they might not see there those Pharisaical Devotions of which the
hypocrites and superstitious make a vain show: They might not see there those
men who publish to all the world their Mortifications and their Fasts, who
withdraw themselves out of the crowd, to make themselves to be more taken
notice of, and who never enter into their secret retirements but with the
greater ease to be able to mix themselves in all that that is common in the
World. But they may there behold a solid Piety, plain and natural, without Art
and Affection, a true fear of offending God, with a free and open carriage,
which never sought to hide it self by distinctions and illusions; but in good
earnest to follow the dictates of Conscience, without saying, to hinder them
from doing their Duty, either what will become of us, or what will become of
our Brethren or Sisters? Because they knew that those Events were in the hand
of God, and that poor worldly interest ought never to prevail over the love of
the Truth.

As to the Wars that the Author of the Prejudices imputes to the Reformation,
it had been, methinks, his prudence not to have turned the Dispute upon a
Matter, on which he well knows that we have but too many things to say for our
Justification. If some Princes of Germany took up Arms to defend themselves
against the assaults of their Enemies, they thought that the Justice and Law of
Nations authorized that defense, and that being Sovereign in their States, they
were bound to protect their Subjects and to preserve that Trust that God had
put into their hands. And as for those Commotions that happened in France in the
times of the Reformation, there is no person who is ignorant of their true
Causes. It is true, that the Interest of our Religion had some part in them;
but it had at least the good fortune, to be found joined with that of the
preserving of that great Kingdom to its just possessours, against those
pernicious designs which made but too great a noise afterward; and whatsoever
sad Remembrances the Author of the Prejudices has awakened, by his undeserved
reproaches, yet we shall not fail to maintain, that the blood of our Fathers
was very well spent for so good a Cause.

Luther, says he, was not afraid of animating his followers to Murders, and
Blood, by those horrible words which are to be found in his first Tome of his
Works of Wittingburg Edition; If we hang up Robbers on Gibbets, if we punish
Heretics and Thieves with the Sword, why do not we assault with all our Forces
those Cardinals and those Popes, and all that scum of the Roman Sodom, that
ceases not to corrupt the Church of God, why do we not embrue our hands in
their Blood? It is certain, that there can scarce be any passage related after
a more invenomed and base manner, than the Author of the Prejudices relates
that, and this will appear if they well but make these following Observations.
1. That he separates those words from the sequel of the Discourse to give them
quite another Sense than Luther intended by them, which is, to speak Properly,
a kind of falsification, more dangerous then that of corrupting the words of a
Sentance. 2. That he would make us imagine that those words are addressed to the
followers of Luther, to animate them to Blood and Slaughter, which is a perfect
Calumny. 3. That he quotes them not as spoken upon a supposition, but as spoken
purely and simply, which is further contrary to the Truth. Behold then what the
matter truly was; Sylvester Prierias Master of the Sacred Palace at Rome,
having wrote against Luther's Doctrine concerning the Pope, and in particular
against his Appeal to a Council, had peremptorily maintained, That it was not
lawful to Appeal from the Pope to a Council, because the Pope was a Sovereign
Judge, and liable to no Appeal, and that those who sued out such Appeals were
cast out of the Church and Excommunicate. That the Pope alone was the
Infallible Rule of Truth, whose decisions were certain and irrefragable without
a Council; where those of a Council were nothing without the Pope, nor bound
any person if they were not authorized by the Pope, so that whatsoever should
not receive the Doctrine of the Pope as the Infallible Rule of Faith, from whom
the Holy Scripture it self heretofore and now, derives all its force, he is a
Heretic; and many other Propositions of that nature. Upon that Luther writes,
that, All those things were maintained only out of a hatred of a General
Council, and to hinder any one from being heard who should give any succor to
the afflicted Church. That the Popes Creatures seeing well that they could not
hinder a Council, began to seek out ways to elude it, by saying, that the Pope
was above a Council, and that without his Authority, none could either be
called or held; in a word, that a Council had not any Power, but that the Pope
alone was the Infallible Rule of Truth. That it seemed to him then, that if the
Fury of those men took place, there would not further remain any other Remedy
but this; That the Emperor, the Kings and Princes should make use of their
Arms against those public Posts, and that those matters should not be decided
by Words, but by the Sword. In the close of which, he adjoyns those words which
the Author of the Prejudices has related.

So that his meaning is not to Animate his Followers to Blood and Slaughter, as
the Author of the Prejudices interprets it; but only to draw an absurd
consequence from his Adversaries Hypothesis, which is, That if he would also
take away the only Remedy that was left to provide against the desolations of
the Church in assembling a Free Council, he would set the Emperor, the Kings
and Princes in Arms against the Popes and the Cardinals and all the Court of
Rome, and would reduce things to the utmost extremity. I my self will not say,
that there may not be somewhat too violent in those kind of expressions; but
after all, his design is not to animate his Followers to Blood and Slaughter;
but only to let Sylvester see the necessity of a Council, that might judge
above the Pope, from that inconvenience, that otherwise there would remain no
other course to the Emperor, to Kings and Princes, to re-establish Order in
the Church, then to make use of their compelling power. And that further
appears to be the Sense, because he adds immediately after, That the Authority
of the Bishop of Rome, whether it were of Divine Right, or whether it were of
Human, could not be urged, but by the Precept, Honor thy Father and thy
Mother, which in granting him to be a Father, puts him under the first Table;
so that if he should do any thing in opposition to them, he might be
admonished, and even accused by the least of the Faithful. Which let us see
that his meaning was no other than that which I have represented.

I confess it were to be wished that Luther had observed more of the mean, than
he did, in his manner of writing, and that, with that great and invincible
Courage, joined with that ardent zeal for the Truth, and with that unshaken
Constancy, that he always showed, there might have been discernable more of
stayedness and moderation. But those faults which most frequently proceed from
Temperament, do not take away men's esteem of such, when besides them they may
see a good foundation of Piety in them, and Virtues Heroical throughout, as
they may discern-to have shone in Luther. For they cannot cease extolling the
zeal of Lucifer Bishop of Cagliari, nor admiring the eminent qualities of Saint
Jerome, although they do acknowledge too much sharpness and passion in their
Style. And it may be that there was even some particular necessity in the time
of the Reformation to use vehemence of expression, the more easily to rouse men
out of that profound sleep wherein they had lain for so long a time. However it
be, I had rather come to agree that Luther ought to have been more moderate in
his expressions, and if the Author of the Prejudices would be coutented with
complaining of the sharpness of his Style, he should be also contented, for
every answer to be entreated, that hereafter, he will not himself any more
imitate that which he condemns in another; especially, in writing against
those, who having lived in the last Age, cannot have given him any personal
occasion, to be carried away against them with passion, after the manner that
he has been, in many places of his Book.

If in the Judgment that he passes on them, he would not hearken to Charity, he
ought, at least, to hearken to Justice, and not to have charged them with foul
Accusations, under the pretenses of having mistaken and misunderstood; I place
in this Rank, that Chap. 2. Page 57. 58.
which he furthers forms against Luther in these words. There never was any
one, says he, but Luther, who durst to boast in his Printed Works, that he had
had a long conference with the Devil, that he had been convinced by his reasons
that private Masses were an abuse, and that that was the motive that had
carried him out to abolish them. But common Sense, adds he, has always made all
others conclude, not only that he was in an excess of extravagance, to take the
Devil for a Master of Truth, and to give himself up to be his Disciple; but
that all those who had any marks that they were his Ministers and his
Instruments, and who had not any lawful Authority in the Church to make
themselves be heard, did not deserve, that any should apply themselves to them,
or that they should so much as examine their Opinions. Behold here Luther, a
Disciple, a Minister and Instrument of the Devil, if one will believe the
Author of the Prejudices.

To refute that Calumny, we need but to represent in a few words what that
business was that he there speaks of. Luther following the Style of the Monks
of those days, who were wont by a Figure of Rhetoric to fill their Books with
their exploits against the Devil, relates, that being one time awakened in the
midst of a dark night, the Devil began to accuse him for having made the people
of God Idolatrize, and to have been guilty of Idolatry himself for the space of
fifteen years, wherein he had said private Masses, and that the Reason of that
Accusation was, that he could not have any thing consecrated in those private
Masses; from whence it followed that he had adored, and had made others adore
mere Bread and mere Wine, and not the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ. He adds,
that that accusation struck him at his heart, and that to defend himself he
alleged that he was a Priest, that he had done nothing but by the Order of his
Superiors, and that he had always pronounced the words of Consecration very
exactly, with the best intention in the World; from whence he concluded, that
he could see no reason to have the Crime of Idolatry laid to his Charge: That
notwithstanding the Tempter did not fail to reply, that those excuses would
nothing avail him in that the Turks and the Priests of Baal obeyed also the
Order of their Superiors, with a very good intention, and that, nevertheless
they were truly Idolaters. Upon this, he says, that he was seized with such a
violent agitation of Spirit, accompanied with a general sweat over all the
parts of his Body, and a confusion wherein he found himself, having been made
to understand that his defense was not Solid, since besides a good intention
and obedience to his Superiors, he ought to have examined further whether the
Action disputed was good in it self and agreeable to God, and on that he made a
Resolution to renounce all private Masses.

This was the Discourse of Luther there, upon all which I shall make no scruple
to profess, that that manner of expressing things under the form of a Combat
with the Devil, appears to me indeed, a little remote from common Use, and
makes that return into my thoughts, that Luther himself has said somewhere in
his Works, Pium Lectorem oro ut ista legate cum Judicio, and sciat me fuisse
aliquando Monachum. In effect he could not wholly throw off, as he would the
Style of the Convent. But I say, notwithstanding, there is nothing in all that
which is remote from the Duty of an honest man, nor which may not be entirely
innocent, whether one take that Narration Literally, or as a kind of Figure and
Parable. He says, that the Devil accused him in his heart, That signifies, that
he represented to himself, in his Conscience, the Accusations that the Devil
might one day form against him, before the Tribunal of God; What crime was
there in all that? Is not the Devil called in Scripture, The Accuser of the
Faithful? And does not the History of Job introduce him as appearing before the
Throne of God, to render the Piety of that Holy-man suspected? Luther adjoyns,
that in his first Defenses, he alleged his Priesthood, his Obedience to his
Superiors, his good intention and exactness. What is there extraordinary in
all that? It is not very natural that those sorts of pretenses should come in
to the succors of a burdened Conscience? He says in the sequel that these
Defenses were opposed by the Accuser, as insufficient and incapable to hide him
from the sin of Idolatry. What is there here that may deserve any blame? May
not the Devil speak Truths in Accusing us? Does not he know how to exaggerate
our sins, and strongly to oppose our vain Excuses? At last Luther says, that to
render those instances of the Accuser unservicable for the future, he resolved
within himself to abandon private Masses, which served for the ground of that
Accusation. What is there in all that, that may not be the Motion of a good
Conscience? He would shut the mouth of the Adversary, and take away from him
any means of accusing him before God, as if he had been a wicked person and an
Idolater, he would snatch away from him those weapons that he made use of to
combat and terrify him. Let the Author of the Prejudices turn all that as he
pleases, he can never find it in a bad sense. Every Christian is bound to order
his conduct so that he may be sheltered from the Attempts of the Devil, for he
is a Roaring Lion, says Saint Peter, who walks daily about us, seeking whom 3.
Pet. chapter 5.
he may devour, and when to put a stop to the Accusations of that Enemy, a man
Examines his own Actions, with a design to amend them, and to forsake the evil
of them, He had need be a good, Detractour and well skilled in Calumniating,
that can take a pretense from that to say of him, That he has taken the Devil
for a Master of Truth, and that he has given up himself to him to be his
Diseiple, his Minister and Instrument. Would the Author of the Prejudices take
it well, that we should give those horrible Titles to Dominic, one of the
greatest Saints of the Church of Rome under a pretense that Antonine has Wrote
of him somewhat like that we have seen of Luther? He says, That Antonius.
Chron. 3. Part tit. 23. Cap. 4. 6.
Dominic saw the Devil one Night, holding in his Iron hands a Paper, which he
Read to him by the Light of a Lamp, and that having asked him, what that meant
which he Read, the Devil answered him, That it was a Catalogue of the Sins of
his Brethen. Upon which Dominic having commanded him to leave the Paper to him,
and the Devil doing it accordingly, that Saint found therein certain things,
about which, says Antonine, he Corrected his Religious. See here then,
according to the Style of the Author of the Prejudices, the Disciple, the
Minister, and the Instrument of the Devil; Not only because it was he who
taught him the disorders of his Covent, but also, because the Accusations of
the Devil gave him an occasion, and a Motive to make new Orders in his Society,
neither more nor less, then those that Luther made use of for the Abolishing of
private Masses. But as it would be no difficult matter to defend Dominic, by
saying, that he did but make use of that Paper against the Intention of that
Accuser, and to shut his Mouth for the future. So also it is not a difficult
thing to justify Luther by saying precisely the same thing, since that was in
effect against the intention of the Devil, that he made use of his Accusation,
and that he did so, only to confound him, and to take from him for the future,
any ground of Accusation.

I will end this Chapter, in desiring the Author of the Prejudices to
Remember, that we have seen not a long time since, men taken up in defending
themselves, not only against those common reports, that are spread abroad of
them amongst the People; but also, against those public Writings that charge
them with very strange Accusations. We have heard their The second Letter of
Monsieur Arnaud. 2. Part Page 110. 111.
Complaints, that they have seen, so many Mouths of Calumny opened to tear
them, So many Enemies conspiring together to destroy their Honor and
Reputation, and those Enemies vomiting up against them all that Hell can invent
of the blackest and foulest Calumnies, and violating the Truth by a hundred
infamous Lies, even to lay to their charge Crimes against the State. We have
heard them complain in these Terms. That one has broken Charity by Latin
Printed Poems, where one heaps upon them all the Curses that the most inflamed
Choler is capable of conceiving, and where one cries down their Solitude as the
Hell of the Heathen Poets, and as the residence of damned Souls. That beyond
all that, one has yet further violated all Modesty, and broke all the bounds
that should have restrained persons of the most deplorable Consciences before
God, and lost honor before men, if they had not wholly prostituted themselves
to Calumny, in forging a Chimerical Assembly at Bourg-fontaine, and charging
six Divines, with abominable designs to destroy the Incarnation of the Son of
God, the Gospel, all the Sacraments, and all the other Mysteries of the
Christian Religion, and to Establish Deism upon the Ruins of Christianity. Let
him learn then, by that Example, not lightly to believe the Calumnies wherewith
they have labored to darken our first Reformers, and to cease to give himself
over to a passionate Spirit that suggests those odious accusations against
persons, whose lives have appeared pure and entire to a great people, who
having known and followed them, can give a better Testimony of their Conduct,
then their interested Enemies do. Let him Remember what Monsieur Arnaud has
wrote to justify some of the Religious of our time, whom he accuses to have
been Uncommunicants, Asacramentarians, and foolish Virgins, who in all matters
affected an Extravagant and Schismatical Singularity. That there was Second
Letter of Mons. Arnaud. First part. Page 105. The same Page 103.
a Time in the life of Saint Teresia her self, who was the Ornament of these
last Times, wherein she was decried not only concerning the Faith, but
concerning manners also. That moreover, diverse, have thought her possessed with
a Devil, and would have her Conjure. That after that and toward the end of her
life, she was Treated as one possessed with a Devil, as a Hypocrite, and
Dissembler, and one that had lost all Honor. They publicly defamed her in the
Pulpits in the Churches, and they compared her with one Magdalen de la Craix, a
Woman filled with a lying Spirit, and Famous throughout all Spain for her
Forgeries, and her Communication with the Devil. That they witnessed against
her and her Religious, things of so foul a nature, that they were accused in
the Sacred Office, and charged with having committed a Thousand Forgeries; That
the Inquisition was forced to inform against her and her Nuns, and that they
expected every day when they should be made Prisoners. That her Books were
seized by the same Inquisition to be censured. That her General marked out one
of her Monasteries to be a Prison for her. That the Popes Nuntio Treated her as
a turbulent Woman, and a common Whore. That he thought to have overturned from
top to bottom a new Edifice of the Dechaussez. That he used them with the
greatest rigor, banishing some, imprisoning others, and generally condemning
them as if they had been a People of a new Sect infected with Errors, or such
an ill life as it was necessary to cut off that course, that they might not
infect and destroy the whole World. This is well nigh the Treatment that they
give the first Reformers, they have labored to cover them with reproaches, to
weaken the efficacy of their Preaching, and those very persons themselves that
so loudly complain, that we load them with Calumnies by so unjust a proceeding,
are now a days the first that make use of it themselves against us.

CHAP. VI.
A Further Justification of the first Reformers, against the Objections of the
Author of the Prejudices, contained in his Tenth and Eleventh Chapters.

AS the Book of the Prejudices is nothing else but a confused heap of
Objections, and unjust Accusations, that the Author of that Book has piled up
one upon another, without Connection, and without Order, So I find my self
constrained, that I may not break off the Connection of my Subject, to break off
that of his Chapters. Therefore after having answered his third where his
Invectives begin, against the manners and conduct of the first Reformers, I
shall dismiss the Examination of his 4th. 5th. and 6th. Chapters, where he
Treats about the Call of the Ministers of our Communion to my Fourth Part, and
where he Treats of the Right that we have to a Gospel Ministry, and that which
he afterward says in the 7th. 8th. and 9th. Chapters concerning our pretended
Schism, to my Third Part wherein we shall Treat of our Separation from the
Church of Rome, and I shall now pass on to the Examination of his 10th. 11th.
12th. and 13th. wherein he renews the same personal Invectives against the
first Reformers. But as those Chapters are composed of almost nothing else but
frivolous matters, swelled up with Declamatory Exaggerations, by Injuries and
Passion. We shall not think it unfit, if setting aside all that in them which
is to no purpose, or too passionate, we set down in a few Words all that that
is more Essential in those Objections, and that we Answer them also in a few
Words.

1. Objection, is, That Andrew Carolostadius Archdeacon of Prejug. legit.
Chap. 10. Page 234.
Wittenburg, whom Melanchton runs down as a brutish Fellow, without wit, and
without Learning who embraced the Fanatical Doctrine of the Anabaptists, was
the first who had the boldness to assault, the Doctrine of the Real presence,
and to that effect he invented an Extravagant Explication of those words, This
is my Body, saying, that by the word, This, Jesus Christ did not mean that
which he held in his hand, but that he pointed to his own true Body.

Answer. It is not True that Carolostadius was the first that opposed the
Doctrine of the Real presence. Bertram, Erigenes, Rabanus, opposed it in the
ninth Century when Paschasius spread it abroad: Berengarius opposed it in the
Eleventh, and in the Age of the Reformation it self the Bohemians called
Taborites, and those of the Valleys of Piemont and Province, called Waldenses,
openly rejected it. So, that although all they have said of Carolostadius were
true, yet we have not any particular interest in him, and we shall say in
respect of him, that which Saint Augustine said in respect of Caecilianus.
Caecilianus is not my Father, for Coll. Carth. 3. cum Donat.
Jesus Christ has said, call no man Father upon Earth, for one is your Father
even God, but I call Caecelianus my Brother, my good Brother, if he be a good
man, but my bad Brother if he be not good. Notwithstanding I know not whether
that pretended Anabaptism of Carolostadius is not an ill-grounded Accusation,
into which Mclancthon and Luther himself, who did not love Carolostadius, might
have been surprised, as it frequently happens among persons divided in their
Opinions, at least it is certain that Carolostadius defended himself by public
Writings, and that he protested that he was innocent. And as to that
Explication that he gave of the word, This, in the words of Jesus Christ, it is
an Error from the Truth, and a false gloss on the Signification of that Word,
but it is an Error notwithstanding that does not hinder, that the ground of his
sentiment concerning the Eucharist should not be true and right, and how many
different interpretations are there of the same word, upon which they refute
one another amongst the Doctors of the Church of Rome, and who almost all say
things very remote from common sense?

2. Object. Zuinglius had already began his Reformation before Prejug. Chap.
10. page 238.
ever he spoke a word of the Real Presence, and Adoration of the Host, although
he notes in his Works that from that very Time he was persuaded in his heart
that Jesus Christ was not really present in the Eucharist. But as it is very
hard to believe that during all that Time he never said Mass, that he never
assisted at it, and that he never administered the Sacrament, that he should not
all the while be discovered by those who adored it, and that he should never
have done the same Actions that were practiced by others, they may very well
understand what Judgment their Ministers used in their Conduct during those
first Years. For according to all their Principles they ought to have Condemned
it, since it was as little allowable to Zuinglius to partake with that Worship,
as it is at present to the Calvinists, and since they pretend that it is so far
forbidden them, that they urge the Obligation that they say lies upon them not
to take any part in it, as the chief Reason of their Separation. So that
Zuinglius remaining yet in Communion with those who adored the Eucharist,
contributed to that adoration by his Ministry and joining himself to their
Assemblies, rendered himself guilty of all those sins which the Calvinists
apprehend to be committed in remaining united to the Church. He would every day
have betrayed his Conscience, he would every day have committed a criminal
Idolatry. And it is in that condition, that the Calvinists pretend that God
made use of him for the greatest Work that ever was done, which was the
Reformation of the Error of all their Fathers.

Answer, As that Accusation is founded upon this only thing, That it is very
hard to be believed, so also we shall here Answer in saying, That it is very
hard to be believed, That Zuinglius did any thing during that Time that should
be repugnant to the Dictates of his Conscience. All the Histories of his Life
show that he was a man of strict Piety, and of a severe Virtue, that he was not
used to those Juggles of the Hypocrite, which we may see practiced by so many,
and even by those who would appear the most severe, and that moreover he never
did any thing remote from the sincerity of an honest man. They cannot then
without equally violating the Laws of Justice and those of Charity, suspect on
those mere Conjectures, that he went contrary to his sentiments on that
Occasion, and the Author of the Prejudices ought to produce the proofs of his
Accusation, or to suffer himself to be condemned for Injustice and Malignity.
It is true that during that Time Zuinglius neither quitted his Ministry nor
forsook those who adored the Eucharist; but who has told the Author of the
Prejudices, that men ought to forsake a People that are in Error, in the same
Time that they have hopes of disabusing them, and labor to reduce them into
the right way? As the Reformation of a Church is not the work of a Day, none
can think it strange that Zuinglius did not propose all of a sudden all that he
had to say, and that he did one thing after another. It is sufficient, that
during the Time wherein he set himself to that Work, he did not in the least
partake in the abuses which he had a design to correct, and therefore the
Author of the Prejudices ought not to have accused him without ever laying down
the proofs of his Accusation. The History of Zuinglius relates that he was
called to the Chair.
Church of Zurich in the beginning of the Year 1519. and that from the first
moment wherein he was there, he set himself with all his might to the
Instruction of his Flock, to the Reformation of those grosser Errors wherewith
the Ministry was then infected, and to the correcting of men's manners, which
succeeded so well with him by the blessing of God, that within less then four
years he changed the Face of that Church, and disposed it to a thorough
Reformation. But among those Errors that he opposed, he applied himself
particularly to the Sacrifice of the Mass, showing the People out of the
Scripture that there could be no other real Sacrifice, then that upon the
Cross, whence it is very easy to conjecture that he carefully avoided to assist
in a Ceremony that he so openly opposed, and from which he himself withdrew his
Hearers.

3. Object. Zuinglius engaged the Magistrates of Zurich to call a Synod, and to
make themselves Judges and Arbiters for the Ordering Hospin. Hist. Sacr. Part.
Alt. Fol. 22.
the State of the Religion of their Canton. There was never till then a Synod
of that Nature spoke of, and it is an astonishing thing, that men's rashness and
insolence should have been able to have carried them out to so great an excess.
The Council of two hundred, that is to say, Two hundred Burghers of a Switz
Town, as learned and ready in matters of Divinity, as one may believe the Switz
Burghers were, called together all the Churchmen under their jurisdiction, to
dispute before them, with an Intention to Order the State of Religion with the
understanding of the matter.

Answer. It were much to be wished that the discourse of the Author of the
Prejudices were as well Ordered as that Action of the Senate of Zurich was;
besides these Abuses and Superstitions that were Ordinary, they had seen for
some Time past a Preacher of Indulgences in that Church called Samson, sent by
the Pope to distribute his Pardons. That Preacher managed his part so well,
Hospin. Hist. Sacra, Part. Alt. Fol. 22.
that there were not any Crimes how great soever they were, that were or should
be committed which he did not set a price upon, without making any other
difficulty then about the Sum that was be paid to him; and by that means he put
the whole Country into a dreadful disorder, filling it with profligate Persons.
Zuinglius opposed this Seducer with all his might, and at the same time he
labored to give his Flock the knowledge of the true Principles of the
Christian Religion, and to reduce them back to one only Jesus Christ, and his
Scripture, in freeing them from the Errors and Superstitions of Men's Invention.
But as the Word of God was never yet without Adversaries, the greater number of
the Churchmen lifted themselves up against Zuinglius, and accused him before
the people to be a Heretic, which forced the Senate it self to take knowledge
of those Accusations, and to call together a Synod composed of all the
Churchmen of its State, wherein every one had the liberty to propose what he
would against Zuinglius, and Zuinglius that of defending himself. And that very
thing was done by the consent of the Bishop of Constance, who sent his Deputies
thither, and among others John le Fevre his Vicar General. What was there in
all that that might not come from the Justice and Prudence of a Senate? If the
Accusations wherewith they charged Zuinglius had been well grounded, it had
been the Duty of the Magistrate to have enjoined him Silence; and being false
as they were, it was the Magistrates duty to uphold him. What is it that the
Author of the Prejudices can blame in that Conduct? They called a Synod. We
maintain it to be the Right of Kings and Sovereign Magistrates within the
extent of their States. The Holy Story Testifies that Josias intending to set
up the pure worship of God in his 2 Kings 23.
Kingdom, called together an Assembly of Priests, Prophets, and the Elders of
the People. Can they deny that the Christian Emperors did not heretofore call
Councils to Order the State of Religion, and to provide against disorders in
the Church? Can they deny that our Kings have not often done the same in their
Kingdom? But the Senate of Zurich would of it self take Cognizance of the
matters of Religion. I say that that very thing was its Right, for if it be the
Duty of every Christian, for the Interest of his own Salvation, to take
Cognizance of those things that the Churchmen Teach, and not blindly to refer
themselves to their Word, as I have made it appear to be in the first Part, it
is not less the Duty of Magistrates to do the same, to bind the Churchmen to
acquit themselves faithfully in their Charges, and to Teach men nothing that
might not be conformable to the Word of God. So that if the Ministers of the
Church go astray from that Word, and if they corrupt their Ministry by Errors
and Superstitions, it belongs to the Magistrate to Labor to reduce them to
their Duty, by the mildest and justest methods he can use. Thus the Kings of
Judah used it heretofore as it appears from the History of Hezechias, Josias,
and of some others who made use of that lawful Authority that God gave them for
the Reforming of their Church by the Word of God. We all know that the Ancient
Emperors took Cognizance either by themselves of their Commissioners of
Ecclesiastical Affairs, and not only of those that respected the Discipline,
but of those also which related to the Doctrine and the very Essence of
Religion it self, to that degree, that they frequently published under their
Names in the Form of Edicts, Decisions of Opinions, Condemnations of Heresy,
and the Interpretations of the Faith, which they had caused to be disputed in
their Presence in Synodal Assemblies. We ought not therefore to imagine, that
Magistrates ought not to interpose in matters of the Faith, under a pretense
that they are Laymen, for on the contrary they ought to interpose themselves
more in those, then in those of Discipline, because the Faith respects every
man, where Discipline relates to the Clergy more peculiarly. Therefore it was
that Pope Nicholas the First told the Emperor Michael, who was present in
person in a Council where only the Fact of Ignatius Patriarch of Constantinople
was treated of, whom that Emperor had deposed, That he did not find that the
Emperors his Predecessors had been present at Synodal Assemblies, unless they
might possibly have been in those where matters of the Faith were Treated of,
which is a common Thing, relating Generally to all, and which belongs not only
to the Clergy, but the Laity also, and universally to all Christians. There was
nothing therefore in that Action of the Magistrates of Zurich that was not a
Right common to all Sovereign Magistrates within the extent of their
Jurisdictions.

But they will say, Was it not to break off the Unity of their Church, with the
rest to go about so to order the State of Religion within their Canton, without
the Participation of other Churches, and were they not Schismatics in that
very thing? I answer, That when a Prince or a Sovereign Magistrate is in a
condition to call a General Council together to deliberate about the Common
Faith, he would do better to take that way. But when he is not, as the Senate
of Zurich evidently was not, ought he to abandon all care of the Churches of
his State? They will see in the end of this Treatise, that the States of
Germany seeing the Oppositions that the Popes made to the calling of a general
Council, often demanded a National one of the Emperor Charles the Fifth. They
will see also that that Emperor was sometimes resolved to do it, and that he
Threatened the Popes to cause diverse Colloquies or Conferences of Learned men to
be held, to labor to decide those Articles that were Controverted. They will
see that our Kings for the same design, have sometimes deliberated about
assembling a National Council in France: And no body is ignorant of the
Conference of Poissy under the Reign of Charles the Ninth. There was nothing
therefore in the Conduct of that business that did not belong to the Right of
Sovereigns, and nothing which they can charge with Schism in it. For when a
Prince or a Senate Assembles a Synod, to condemn Heresies or Reform Errors, and
by that means takes Cognizance of matters of Religion, provided that in effect,
that which it condemns be a Heresy, or that which it Reforms be an Error; he is
so far from breaking Christian Unity, that on the contrary he confirms it, as
much as he can, in freeing it from a false and wicked Unity, which is, that of
Error, which cannot be other then destructive to the whole Body of the Church,
and which cannot be too soon broken. So that we ought to Judge of their Action,
more by the Foundation, then the Form or Manner. For the Foundation being good,
its Action cannot but be approved. When a Man is Sick, with diverse others, as
it frequently happens in Epidemical Diseases, it would be Injustice in him, not
to provide for his own particular healing, but to stay for a general one; and
it would be a great absurdity to say that if he did do so, he violated the
Rights of the Civil Society, for the Civil Society does not consist in being a
Communion of sickness, but in being a Communion of Life. On the contrary it
ought to be said that in healing himself in particular, he established as much
as in him lay that Civil Society which he had with his diseased Companions,
because he encouraged them by his Example to heal themselves with him, the
better to enjoy in common the advantages of Life. It is the same case here,
where a Church sees it self infected with Error and Superstition with diverse
other Churches, she no ways violates Christian Unity in laboring to reform her
self particularly, for the Christian Unity does not consist in the Communion of
Errors and Abuses, it consists in the Communion of that True Faith and Piety.
It establishes therefore on the contrary that Unity, because it gives others a
good Example, and thereby encourages them to reform themselves, as it has done.
All that which a Prince or Sovereign Magistrate ought to observe in those
Seasons, is, on one side to take heed that he makes a just discerning of good
and evil, I would say, that he reforms nothing, which would not be in effect an
Error, or a Superstition, or an Abuse, and that he does not give any wound to
the True Religion under a pretense of Reformation; and on the other side, to
offer no violence to Men's Consciences, but to purify the Public Ministry as
much as he can, by the general consent of the People that God has committed to
him. But this is that, which not only the Magistrates of Zurich, but those also
of other places who labored in the Reformation of their Churches religiously
Observed. They constrained no person, and they rejected nothing that was not
Alien to the Christian Religion.

But, says the Author of the Prejudices, Those two hundred Burghers of a Swisse
Town were as Learned, and ready in matters of Divinity, as we may easily Judge
Swisse Burghers to be. I answer that this is the Objection of the Pharisees:
This People, said the Enemies of Jesus Christ, know not the Law. But Jesus
Christ did John 7. Luke 10. 21.
not answer them amiss, when he said to them, Father I thank thee, Lord of
Heaven and Earth, that thou have bid these things from the Wise and Prudent,
and revealed them unto Babes. Let the Author of the Prejudices, if he will, be
of the number of those wise and prudent ones, we shall not envy him his
readiness and his Learning, and we shall rest satisfied with this, that it has
pleased God to place us in the same Rank, with those mean Swisse Burghers, to
whom, as much Babes as they were, God vouschafed to make his Gospel known. The
true knowledge of Christians does not consist in having a head full of
Scholastic Speculations, and a Memory loaded with a great many Histories, and
multitudes of passages of diverse Authors, or a great many Critical Notions, nor
in having well-studied Lombard, Albertus Magnus, Thomas Aquinas, Scotus,
Bonaventure, Capreolus, Aegidius Romanus, Occham, Gabriel Biel, the Canon Law,
the Decretals; and all those other great Names wherewith they stunned the
People in times past. Our True knowledge is the Holy Scripture, Read with
Humility, Charity, Faith and Piety. See here all that those poor Burghers of
Zurich knew, they were neither Prelates, nor Cardinals, nor Doctors of Lovain,
nor of the Sorbonne, but they were good men, they feared God, they studied his
Word, and for the rest of the State of their understandings, and the degree of
their light, may appear by the Reformation which they made, for the Tree may be
known by its Fruits.

4. Objection, The matter which was to have been handled in that pretended
Synod cannot be more considerable. For they Treated therein about abolishing
all at once the Authority of all the Councils that were held in the Church
since the Apostles days, under a pretense of reducing all to the Scripture.

Answer, Since the True Authority of the Fathers and Councils consists in their
Conformity with the Divine writings, the way solidly to establish them is to
reduce all to the Scripture, as they did in that Synod. If the Author of the
Prejudices pretends to give the Fathers and Councils and Authority quite
different, from that of the Word of God, whereof they ought to be the Ministers
and Interpreters, we may answer him, that he affronts them under a pretense of
Honoring them. For as it is the greatest real injury that can be done to a
Subject, to give him the Authority of his Prince; So it is the most real injury
which they can do to the Fathers, to invest them with the Authority of God.

5. Objection, They meddled with the Faith of all the other Christian Churches,
which the Switzers could not but condemn in embracing a new Faith.

Answer, The Swisses did not embrace a new Faith, but they renounced those
Errors, that it may be might have prevailed for some Ages, but which were new
in regard of the Christian Religion. They did not condemn other Churches in
that which they had of good, but they condemned that evil which they had in
them. A sick person who has cured himself condemns the diseases of others, but
he condemns not that Life which remains in them. On the contrary he exhorts
them to be healed, for fear least remaining in that sick condition they should
die.

6. Object. They treated about all those dangerous Consequences, which that
Change of Religion would have produced, and which were easy to have been
foreseen.

Answ. They Treated also about the Glory of God and their own Salvation: and
all those dangerous Consequences which could Page 243.
not but come from the blindness and passion of those who would hold the People
of God under their servitude, ought not to have prevailed over two such great
interests as that of the Glory of God and Men's Salvation. All these Objections
are well near the same that the Pagans made against the Primitive Christians,
and it seems that the Author of the Prejudices has studied them out of Celsus,
Prophyrie, and Julian, to make use of them against us.

7. Object. Moreover they declared that they would have men make use of the
Authority of the Scripture only, and by that rash Page 244.
and unheard of Prejudice, they condemned the procedure of all the foregoing
Councils, wherein they were wont to produce the opinion of the Fathers to
decide the controverted Questions.

Answ. The Scripture is the only Rule of the Faith of Christians, and there is
no other but that alone whose Authority we ought to admit as Sovereign and
decisive of Controversies. It is not True that all the foregoing Councils
admitted of the Opinions of the Fathers and their Traditions under that
Quality. The Author of the Prejudice lays it down, without Proof and Reason.

8. Object. The Church being in possession of its Doctrine, they Page 244.
ought to have forced Zuinglius to produce his Accusations against that
Doctrine, and to have made the proofs which he alleged against it to have
been examined. But in stead of that they ordered that he should appear in that
Disputation in Quality of Defender, and that it should be the others part to
convince him if Error.

Answ. If the Church of Rome would have the World believe the Doctrine that she
Teaches, it is fit she should furnish it with proofs, and her pretended
possession cannot assure it. Those who propound any thing as matter of Faith
are naturally bound to prove it, and it is absurd to say that Possession
discharges that Obligation, for the Faith ought to be always founded upon
proof, and it never stands upon mere possession, otherwise the Heathens ought
to have kept their Religion which was established on so Ancient a Possession.

9. Object. All that Examination was further grounded upon this ridiculous
Principle, That if there could not be found any person within the Territory of
Zurich that could make the Errors of Zuinglius appear by the Scripture, it
ought to be concluded that he had none. As if the weakness of those who opposed
his Doctrine could not be an effect of their Ignorance, rather then a default
in the cause they defended.

Answ. This Objection is no more to the purpose then the foregoing. What could
the Senate of Zurich have done more then to have assembled all the Clergy of
their States to have called the Bishop of Constance or his Deputies thither, to
have received all the World, and given all liberty of propounding their
Arguments and Proofs? It belonged to them to propound them if they had any and
if they had none, they ought to have acknowledged that 'till then they had
abused the Conduct of the people, in Teaching them those things which they had
no proofs for. Notwithstanding I see well that the Author of the Prejudices
tells us how he understands we should be bound to believe things upon this
frivolous Foundation, that there may be some in the World able to prove them,
or that it may be there might be some to come hereafter to do it. This is the
Faith which he wishes that the Magistrates and People of Zurich would have had
for the hindering their Reformation. He would have had them imagined that
although they should have seen nothing that should have persuaded the
Worshipping of Images, and that of Relics, the Sacrifice of the Mass, and the
other points that were in Controversy, yet that they ought not to have ceased
from believing them with a Divine Faith, and to have devoutly practiced them,
because there might have been possibly some men in the World ready enough to
prove them, or that if there were none then there might have some arose
afterward to have done it. By this Principle the Jews and Heathens, may yet at
this day accuse all the Conversions of the first Christians of Rashness.

10. Object. The Calvinists cannot deny that their pretended Reformation, was
not established on the Spirit of Error, and that the Page 248.
Burger-masters of Zurich were not persuaded of falsehood, since they
immediately rejected diverse things which Zuinglius had maintained there with as
much obstinaecy as those points of Doctrine which they have yet common with
him. He laid down also some Propositions manifestly contrary to the Scripture,
without taking any pains to explain them.

Answ. When the Author of the Prejudices will take the pains to consider well
the sense of Zuinglius and ours, he will find a perfect agreement. Zuinglius
denied the Intercession of the Saints, we do no less in the sense wherein they
understand the word Intercession in the Church of Rome, to wit, that the Saints
intercede for us as True Mediators. We deny not that the Saints pray in general
for the Church a Prayer of Charity and Communion; Zuinglius denied it no more
then we. Zuinglius denied that it was allowable to make Images for the use of
Religion; we deny it with him. We believe that it is indifferent to make them
for a Civil use; Zuinglius never said the contrary. Zuinglius said that the
True way not to err was to cleave wholly to the Word of God, we say so also. He
said that Jesus Christ alone was given us for the Pattern of our Life, and not
the Saints; But he meant it of a first and perfect Pattern, and so he explained
himself when he added these words, Capitis enim est nos deducere non Membrorum:
It belongs to the Head to guide us, and not to the Members. There is nothing in
that contrary to the Scripture.

11. Object. Zuinglius, to gain the Burgermasters to his side, had Page 255.
the art to pick out certain vulgar Reasonings, and very well sitted to the
Understandings of the Switzers, he declaimed fiercely against the Popes, who
had forbidden the Priests Marriage, he highly exaggerated the Rigidness of the
Command of the Church which enjoined Abstinence from Meats, which he Attributed
to the Popes only.

Answ. Those Vulgar Reasonings were nevertheless very pertinent Reasons, for
they made them see that the Prelates had Usurped a Tyrannical Domination over
their Consciences and that they Exercised it after the most Scandalous manner
in the World, enjoining a Caelibacy that filled the Church with beastlinesses
and impurities, and forbidding the use of Meats on certain days, which they
abstained not from themselves. For the rest, those injurious Discourses against
a whole Nation which had always a great deal of Virtue and Glory, are not
methinks within the Rules of Christian Charity, nor even within those of Civil
Honesty. If the Switzers have not naturally as florid a wit as some other
Nations have, they have a Solid, Right, Judicious, Laborious, Constant,
Faithful, Sincere mind, which are Qualities far more estimable then those which
usually accompany that which they call the Heat of Imagination.

12. Object. Zuinglius answered to a Reason of the Chancell ur of Zurich, after
a very False and Sophistical manner at the Foundation, Page 257.
but proper enough to confound the understandings of the Switzers. He accused
the Chancellor of Ignorance in that he took, he said, these words, The field
us the World, for a Parable, whereas they were only an Explication of the
Parable, and not the Parable it self. But the Chancellor would have said no
more but this, That these Words, The seed is the Word of God, could not be
taken according to the Letter, since they were the Explication of a Parable to
which they had Reference, therefore Zuinglius took great heed how he answered,
and he was forced to save himself by a trick in giving the words a change. For
there is no body who sees not that what the Chancellor said was indisputable;
and that those words, The seed is the word of God, being the Explication of a
Parable, could not be taken in the Letter, but that it is as if Jesus Christ
had said, When I spoke of the seed in this Parable, I mean by that the Word of
God. But these words, This is my Body, being no Explication of any Parable, and
not being accompanied with any circumstances that should oblige us not to take
them according to the Letter, there is nothing more ridicul us then to compare
them with the Expressions that explain Parables.

Answ. This is no great subtilty from a man who talks of nothing but a gross
and Suitz understanding. As we ought not to take literally those words which
explain a Parable, so we ought not to take literally those words which explain
a Sacrament. For in this respect a Sacrament is as a Visible Parable, since it
is a Visible sign, that represents an invisible Grace. The Reason for which we
ought not literally to take those words that explain a parable, is because we
see the matter Treated of there, is one thing that represents another, and
which by consequence cannot be that other thing Substantially and Really. And
the whole Reason for which we ought not to take literally the words that
explain a Sacrament is, because we see the matter Treated of there is one thing
which signifies another, and which by consequence cannot be that thing
Substantially and Really. So that these words, This is my Body, and those, The
seed is the Word of God, are alike, and if we ought not to take the latter
literally because they are the Explication of a Parable, we ought not also to
take the others literally because they are the Explication of a Sacrament.

These are the principal Objections of the Tenth Chapter of the Book of
Prejudices, excepting one which is taken from the manner wherein they formed
our first Assemblies at Paris, at the beginning of the Reformation, and the
Election that they made there of a Layman to the calling of the Ministry, for
the Solution whereof I remit you to the Fourth Part, where it shall meet with
its fit place. We are now to go on to the Eleventh Chapter.

13. Object. All the Discourses, and all the Writings of the Reformers, Prejug.
Chapter II. Page 272.
says the Author of the Prejudices, breathed forth nothing but a poisonous
malignity, and an implacable hatred against the Church of Rome, and that Spirit
is so plain to be seen, that it astonishes me how persons, be they never so
Little equitable, can endure it, and not conclude, as Reason would force them
to do, that it is impossible they should have done that by the Spirit of God.

Answ. To answer to that Reproach, I shall not here make an Apology for
injuries and outrages, under a pretense of zeal, as Mr. Arnaud has done in his
pretended, Overthrow of the Morality of Jesus Christ. For I acknowledge that
zeal ought to be moderate and discreet. I shall not also say, that the Author
of the Prejudices may with very good Reason leave that Censure to a Pen less
violent and less passionate then his own, which in giving us Lessons of
Mildness and Charity, should it self fill his Pages with nothing but these
words, Insolent, R^sh, Ridicul^us, Impostors, Calumniators, Furious, Devils,
and Instruments of Devils. For any one may very well apply these words of the
Gospel according to the Translation of Mons to him. Take out first the Beam
Mat. 7. 5.
that is an thine own Eye, and then shall thou s^e how to take out the mote
that is in thy Brothers Eye. But I shall say, that when they find in the
Writings of the first Reformers Expressions that plainly appear to be too
vehement, whether in respect of things or persons, equity would require it of
them, that before they Judge, they should consider, whether they had not some
particular Circumstances that obliged them to speak after that manner. But
although we acknowledge that our first Reformers were not wholly free from
faults, and that we no ways pretend to Canonize all their Words, nor all their
Actions, yet if they take heed to the Circumstances of the Times wherein they
wrote, they will see that they ought to Judge of them far otherwise then the
Author of the Prejudices has done, and that it is neither through malignity,
nor hatred, that they spoke with so much vehemence against the Church of Rome,
but that they were urged to it by Reasons which they Judged most Weighty. First
of all, they thought that there was some necessity of using such a Style, to
awaken men out of that profound sleep wherein they appeared to have been for a
long time, and to put all of them into that just fear which they ought to have
of God's Judgments, when they were plunged into Errors like to those, wherein
they pretended the Church of Rome then was. And it is most true, that until
their days, the World had lain under a great Insensibility. Not, that they did
not know the evil, that they did not bewail it, that they did not thirst after
a remedy, and that they did not readily hear all who would proclaim it; but
after all, they remained all along in the same State, or to say better, they
grew worse and worse every day. Upon that account it was, that our first
Reformers thought that they ought to represent things livelily, without
extenuating words, to make the greater impression upon those minds that
security or fearfulness had held bound in sleep. 2. They were obliged to all
that, by the Protection that Errors and Abuses found in their days, among the
greater part of the Prelates, and the Monks of the Church of Rome, who had
Orders from Rome, as I have proved elsewhere, to lift themselves up in all
places for the defense of that which they called the Ancient Religion, and who
accused the Reformers of Heresy and Impiety. For then it was necessary, to make
use of all the force of Expressions that they had, to dissipate those
accusations, and to discover to the World the grosness of the Abuses which the
Court of Rome maintained. 3. They saw themselves further constrained to it, by
the severity which they had to wipe of, on the part of their Adversaries, for,
as they were persuaded of the Justice of their Cause, the most natural effect
of the Persecutions which they were to endure was to open their eyes more, and
the more to urge their understanding to acknowledge that Justice, and to make
all the World acknowledge it, not only to comfort themselves and to encourage
themselves in their afflictions, but also to strengthen their Brethren whom
they saw every where in the Fetters of the Inquisitions. Being then provoked to
it by these Three Reasons, the one taken from the stupidity wherein they saw
the greatest part of men, the other from the obstinate defense that was made of
Errors and Abuses, and the Third from the Persecutions which they had to
endure; it must not be reckoned such a wonder that they spoke with vehemence
upon the Subject of the Roman Religion. It had been ill done to have done so
otherwise. 4. They themselves ought to acknowledge that the greater part of
those Abuses were of such a nature, that it had been a very hard matter not to
have spoke of them without Indignation. As for example, that vain Devotion that
they had kindled in the minds of the People for Images, Relics, for Agnus
Dei's, for Pilgrimages; that credulity which they had instilled into them for
all sorts of Miracles, for Apparitions of Saints, for the returns of Souls out
of Purgatory, and I know not how many other things which our more enlightened.
Age has some kind of shame of, but which yet made up the greatest part then of
Religion with respect to practice. How could they coldly Treat of the Abuse of
Indulgences, which had gone so far as not only to give pardon of sins for Money
by means of Confession and Contrition, but even to pardon them in express words
without either, as Pope Bonif^ce the IX. did to the whole State of John
Galeacius Viscount of Milan, For so Corionel relates it in his Carionel la sua.
Hist. di Milan. p. 203.
History, where he says that, The Lombards not being able, by Reason of the War
which they were engaged in, to go to Rome to gain Indulgences, Pope Boniface at
the request of John Galeacius, gave the same Indulgences to Milan that were at
Rome, and would that all the Subjects of that Viscount should be absolved from
all their sins, without any Contrition or Confession. Sianche non fosse
Contrito ne Confesso, fosse absoluto di qualcunque peccato. With a charge
nevertheless to remain Ten days at Milan, and to visit five Churches every Day,
and to offer to one of those Churches, the two Thirds of that which they should
have dispended if they had gone to Rome. The Pope took one Third part to
himself, and designed the rest to the building of a certain Church.

Behold here that which refers to things. As to Persons, I confess there may be
found lively complaints in the writings of the first Reformers against the
Abuses of the Court of Rome, against the ignorance and negligence of the
Prelates, against the Scandalous lives of the Clergy, against the Tyrannical
Government wherewith they ruled the Church. I acknowledge also, that when they
looked upon that Great Body of the Roman Hierarchy, its Props, its Pretensions,
its Maxims, its Interests, its Occupations, they could not hinder themselves
from speaking of it as an Empire very opposite to that of Jesus Christ, but
they ought to be so far from laying it to their charge, that they said it out
of a hatred or an implacable aversion toward the Church of Rome, as the Author
of the Prejudices does, that they ought on the contrary to attribute it to a
real compassion which they had for the People of God, to see them so ill
instructed, so ill guided, so ill governed, and to an ardent desire to procure
a good Reformation throughout the whole Body of the Latin Church. And the
greater their compassion was, the more difficult it was to manage that matter
without giving some touches to persons in whom the source of all that evil
resided, and especially in a Time which they saw overspread on all sides with
injuries and Calumnies, and exposed in diverse places to Rigorous Persecutions.

14. Object. To that Reproach, the Author of the Prejudices adds another, which
he begins ^o express in these words: Although Page 273.
they should have had a right to have drawn away from the bosom of the Church
of Rome its Children, they had certainly no right to make use of Impostures and
Frauds for that purpose, and if they did, it is a visible conviction that it
was the Devil that acted by them, and that their pretended Reformation was his
work. He alleadges in the close a passage of Calvin's, wherein he pretends that
Calvin calumniated the Church of Rome in laying it to her charge, that Calvin.
Instit. lib. 4. cap. 10. Ss. 10.
she had a far greater care of her Traditions then of the Commandments of God,
and that she reckoned it a lesser sin to be defiled with the debaucheries of
the Flesh, then not to be confessed or not to have fasted on Friday; to have
broken all promises, then not to have fulfilled a Vow of Pilgrimage; and upon
this the Author of the Prejudices makes his Exclamation with his usual heat.

Answ. I Answer that Calvin speaks in that Passage not of that which the Roman
Church Dogmatically taught; but of that which might be seen in the common
Practice of his Time, and unless they should deny the most clear Truths, they
cannot deny that the Idea which the Authors themselves of the Church of Rome
give us of its deplorable State in the Age of the Reformation, does not fully
confirm the Testimony of Calvin. That which I have set down upon this sad
Subject, justifies the too little care that the Prelates and other of the
Ecclesiastics took to root out Vices from the midst of their Flocks, and
settle in their places a True Holiness, when they had then a far greater ardour
to make men's Traditions to be observed, and if we had need to urge this proof
further, it could be done without doubt with a great deal of ease.

15. Object. Another kind of Calumny is, to lay to the Charge of the Church the
Opinions which she either rejects, or which she never Page 276.
Authorized as matters of Faith. Examples of this may be seen in every Page of
the Books of their Ministers, as when they reproach the Catholics with setting
up as Articles of Faith, the Corruption of the Greek and Hebrew Text, the
immunity of the Clergy to be of Divine Right, the certainty of the Declarations
that the Popes make of the Holiness of particular men which they call
Canonization, the efficacy of Agnus Dei's, the Infallibility of the Pope, his
Temporal Power over Kings, his Pre-eminence over Councils, the Jurisdiction of
the Church over the Souls in Purgatory, and many other opinions of that nature
that the Church does not prescribe to its Children, that she does not insert
into the Confession of Faith, which she requires of those that return to her,
and which she never defined by the Voice of her Councils.

Answ. If the Author of the Prejudices would be satisfied about all the Points
that he has noted in that Objection, he ought to cite those passages of the
Ministers against whom he forms his complaints, and not to make as he does a
Captious heap of diverse things wherein he may mix the false and true together.
Notwithstanding I shall not omit to say by the way something of my own head
upon each of those Articles. Upon the first I can easily believe that there
have been some Ministers who have reproached the Church of Rome with the having
Canonized the Corruptions of the Greek and Hebrew Text, because that in effect
there are a great many such Corruptions in the Vulgar Version, which the
Council of Trent has Canonized, not only in declaring it Authentic, and
forbidding any to reject upon any pretense whatsoever, but also in saying that
they ought to be held under the penalty of an Anathema for the Canonical Books
of the Bible, prout in Ecclesia Catholica legi consueverunt, and in veteri
vulgata Council. Trid. Sess. 4. de Canon. Scrip. and decret. de edit.
Latina editione habentur. All the Question therefore may be reduced to this,
to wit, whether we ought to hold under pain of Anathema some ill Translations
which are to be found in the Vulgar, for the Corruptions of the Greek and
Hebrew Text, and for Bellarm. de Cler. lib. 1. c. 28.
us, we believe that they cannot rationally contest it. As for the Immunity of
the Clergy, it may be also that some Doctors of the Church of Rome, have been
reproached for holding it as a matter of Faith, because there are some among
them that in effect ground it upon the Scripture, and every one knows that all
that which they hold as out of the Scripture, ought to be held as a matter of
Faith. But they would have said nothing against the Truth, when they should
have maintained that Pope Leo X. in the Council of Lateran defined, That there
was none either Divine or humane right Council. Lateran. sub. Leon. X. Sess. 9.
in Bull. reform.
that gave the Laity any power over the persons of the Clergy; which implies
that the Clergy are excepted by Divine right from that general Rule that
subjects all the Word to the Higher Powers: We all know that our Kings opposed
that rash decision, but in the end it was a Council that did it which had the
Pope for its Head, and it belongs to the Author of the Prejudices to tell us
whether he believes that that Pope and that Council erred. As to the Certainty
of Canonizations, since there is no body in the Church of Rome that makes any
scruple to invocate those Saints which the Pope Canonizes, and that moreover
they agree in that Maxim of Saint Paul, that whatsoever in the matter of
Religion is not of Faith is Sin, methinks it is not ill grounded to say either
that the Church of Rome Sins, when she invocates those Canonized Saints without
any certainty of Faith, or that she holds it as a matter of Divine Faith that
the Pope cannot be deceived. The Author of the Prejudices shall choose which
side he pleases, if he takes the last, he contradicts himself; if he takes the
former, Saint Paul condemns him; for he condemns all those who throw away the
Acts of their Religion after that manner at all Adventure. If the Efficacy of
Agnus Dei's has not been established by the Councils, that belief may be found
at least heretofore so strongly and universally established in the Church of
Rome, that it may be very well ascribed to her without any fear of mistaking.
They tell us that Pope Urban V. sent to John Palcologus the Emperor of the
Greeks an Agnus folded up in fine Paper, wherein there was written Fine Verses
which explained all its properties. Those Verses carry with them, That the
Agnus was made of Balmsanus and Wax with Crisom, and that being Consecrated by
Mystical words, Andr. frust. in fine lib. Epigr. in haeret.
it drove away Thunder and scattered Storms, that it gave Women an easy Birth,
that it prevented one from perishing on the Seas, that it took away Sin, that
it kept back the Devil, that it made a man to grow Rich, that it secured one
against Fire, that it hindered one from dying a sudden death, that it gave a man
Victory over his Enemies, and that in Fine a small piece of the Agnus had as
much Virtue as the whole. As for that which regards the Infallibility of the
Popes, their Temporal power over Kings, and their Pre-eminence over the
Councils, we do not say that those were Articles of the Faith received
throughout the whole Church of Rome. There is not one of us that knows not that
those pretensions were always opposed by the Sounder part of the French. But
they cannot deny that they were not at least the Pretenses of Rome, and that
its Extravag. Commun. lib. 1. cap. 1. De Major. and Obed. Decret. 1. Part.
did. 19. cap. 1. Ibid. cap. 2. Decretal. Gregor. lib. 3.
Popes did not Determine, That it was necessary to the Salvation of every
Creature to be subject to them. They cannot deny that Pope Gregory VII. did not
decide in a Council, That the Church of Rome did never Err, and that it would
never Err according to the Testimony of the Scripture, nor that the opinion of
those who believe that the Pope is Infallible in his decisions of Faith, is not
the more common and general one in the Church of Rome, and that those who hold
it speak of the other only as an opinion that the Church Tolerates for the
present, and that they look upon tit. 42. cap. 3. Baron. ad Ann. 1076. Bellarm.
de Romans Pont. lib. 4. cap. 2. See the Doctrine Ancienedes Theologde la Faculte
de Paris, par Jacques de Vernaut. And the Testimonies that he Relates. Council.
Trid. Sess. 7. De Baptis. can. 3. and Sess. 14. cap. 3. and Sess. 22. cap. 8.
Raynald. ad Ann. 1479. Council. later. Sess. 11. in Bull. abrogat. Pragmat.
Sanct. Bullaleon. X. contr. Luther. apud Raynald ad Ann. 1520.
it as an Error, and such a one as approaches even to Heresy, for those are
the express words of Bellarmine. They cannot deny that they generally hold in
the Church of Rome that the Pope is by Divine right the Sovereign Monarch of
the Church, whom all Christians are bound to obey, the Sovereign and Universal
Vicar of Jesus Christ, his Sovereign Pastor, to whom Jesus Christ has given a
fullness of power, which goes not far from ascribing Infalliblity to him. They
cannot deny that the Popes did not often define that the Church of Rome is the
Mother and Mistress of all other Churches, and that the Council of Trent has
not also declared it in diverse places. They cannot deny that the Popes did not
pretend to be above the Councils, that Sixtus IV. did not condemn a certain man
called Peter de Osma, for having taught that the Pope could not dispense with
the Ordinances of the Universal Church, nor that Leo X. did not declare in the
Council of Lateran with the approbation of the Council, That it was evident as
well from the Testimony of Scripture, as that of the Fathers, and of other
Bishops of Rome who had gone before, and by the Holy Cannons, and by the very
Confession of the Councils themselves, that the Pope alone had a right and
power to call Councils together to transfer and dissolve them, as having
Authority over all Councils. They cannot deny that the same Leo did not condemn
Luther for having appealed from him the Pope to a Council, against the
Constitutions, says he, of Pius II. of Julius II. who ordained that those who
made such Appeals should be punished with the same Penalties that were decided
against Heretics, nor that the Council of Trent did not submit it self to its
Confirmation of the Pope, as it may appear by the last Act of that Council. And
as to the pretenses of the Council. Trid. Sess. 25.
Popes over the Temporalties of Kings, they cannot deny that Clement V. has not
declared in one of his Clemintines, as they are called, That it ought not not
to be Questioned, but that he had a Clementin. lib. 2. tit. 11. cap. 2.
Superiority over the Empire, and that the Empire being void he sucbeeded in
the power of the Emperor, nor that Alexander VI. did not give out of his pure
Liberality, says he, of his certain knowledge Raynald. ad Ann. 1493.
and fullness of power, to the Kings of Castile and Leon all the Lands newly
discovered in the Indies, as if they had belonged to Baron. ad Ann. 1076.
him, nor that Gregory VII. did not decide in his Council of Rome, That the
Pope could depose Emperors, and dispence-with the Oaths Council. Lateran. 3.
Sub Innocent. 3.
of Allegiance to their Subjects, nor that Innocent III. did not ordain in the
Council of Lateran, That if any Temporal Prince neglected to purge his
Territories of all Heresy, the Bishops should Excommunicate him, and that if
within a Year he gave no Satisfaction they should make it known to the
Sovereign Bishop, to the end that he should declare his Subjects absolved from
their Duty of Fealty, and that he should expose his Land to be taken by
Catholics. They cannot also deny as to Practice that there are not diverse
Examples to be found of Popes who undertook effectually to depose Emperors and
Kings, and to give away their Kingdoms to others. In fine, as to that which
regards their Jurisdiction over Souls in Purgatory, no Body is ignorant that
the Popes pretended to have Power to draw Souls out of Purgatory, at least
through the dispensation of the Treasure of the Church, which is that, which
they say is made up of the Super-abundant Satisfactions of Jesus Christ and the
Saints. It is upon that also that their Indulgences in respect of the Dead are
Founded, and Leo in his Bull Bulla Leon. ubi supra.
of Excommunication against Luther had wrote, That Indulgences were neither
necessary nor useful to the Dead. Furthermore I cannot forbear taking notice
here of the Fallacy that the Author of the Prejudices gives us, and which is
common to him with a great many other persons. He would have us Judge of that
Doctrine of the Roman Church, but only by that which she has decided in her
Councils, or by that which is contained in an Act of the Profesion of the Faith
which she makes those make who embraue her Communion. This I say is a perfect
Fallacy.

1. Because we ought also to Judge of her by her common Practice, which being
open to the Eyes of all the World, discovers much more clearly the true
Sentiments of that Church, when the decisions of the Councils do not, and the
Act of which the people scarce know any.

2. Because the Council of Trent it self and the Act of the Profession of the
Faith, obliging as they do those who submit themselves to it, to receive in
general unwritten Traditions and those things which the Church of Rome
Observes, they engage them by consequence to receive and practice all that
which is commonly observed and practiced in that Church, under a pretense of
Tradition and observance, although it should not be formally contained either
in the decisions of Councils, or in that Profession of Faith. So that the
Conscience of a man who is in that Communion, binds him to believe, and do all
that others believe and do.

16. Objection, The Third kind of Calumny is not less ordinary Prejug. Page 281.
in their Ministers, nor less unjust in it self. It consists in running down as
blameable Errors certain Articles of the belief of the Church, which not only
were no Errors, but about which they have been at last constrained to
acknowledge that the difference between them and the Church consists more in
words then in the thing it self, whether they themselves have forsook their
first thoughts, to take up those of the Catholics, or whether by a blind
rashness they had openly condemned them without understanding them. To prove
this Corruption, the Author of the Prejudices lays down the point of
Justification, which, he says, the first Reformers took for the chief ground of
their Separation, and yet nevertheless he adds one of their Professors of Sedan
named Ludovicus le Blanc, who has made some Theses of Justification, after
having examined the Doctrine of the Catholics, and that of the Protestants and
their principal differences about that matter, concludes upon all the Articles
that that of the Catholics is good, and that the Protestants are only contrary
to them in name.

Answ. I acknowledge that in this Controversy the Church of Rome takes the word
Justification in one sense, and that we take it in another, and I do not deny
but that has sometimes produced in that dispute, ambiguities and differences or
Words. This is also that which M. le Blanc had a design to clear in his Theses
of Justification, which the Author of the Prejudices has abused. But besides
that in that very thing we have two advantages over the Church of Rome, the
one, that we speak as the Scripture has done, and that we take the words after
the manner that Jesus Christ, that Saint Paul, and Saint James have taken them,
when they have Treated about this Doctrine, whereas the Church of Rome gives
them another sense, and the other, that in so taking the words in their true
Signification that Idea that we give of Justification is distinct and clear,
where that of the Church of Rome is embroiled and confused. Besides that, I
say, it is certain that we have but too real differences upon that point which
no ways consists in words, but in the very things themselves, and which make
very weighty Controversies. To Manifest this Truth, we need but to cast our
Eyes upon the four chief Doctrines that form the Idea of our Justification
according as the Scripture has given it us. The First is, That it is an Act of
the Sovereign mercy of God that pardons our sins, and which by Virtue of the
Satisfaction of Jesus Christ, discharges us from the punishment we have
deserved by them. The Second is, That God out of that same mercy in pardoning
our sins adopts us for his Children, and gives us a right to his Eternal
Inheritance by the merit of Jesus Christ his Son. The Third, That we apply to
our selves the satisfaction and merit of Jesus Christ by a lively Faith,
accompanied with a sincere Repentance, and a Holy Recourse to the Divine Mercy,
and that it is this Faith that puts us into the Communion of our Redeemer. And
the Fourth, That God in pardoning and adopting us, imposes this Condition upon
us, that for the time to come we live Holily according to the Laws which he has
given us, and that this very thing is a necessary Consequence of that Communion
which we have with Jesus Christ, as well as of our Faith, our Repentance and
our Recourse to the Divine mercy. There is not any one of these parts of our
Justification upon which we have nor very considerable differences with the
Church of Rome. For in the First we differ,

1. Concerning him who Pardons us; The Church of Rome would have it, not only
that it should be God in the Quality of a Sovereign Judge, but men also, that
is to say Priests and Bishops in Quality of inferior and Subordinate Judges,
and that their Absolution is a Judiciary Act, for so the Council of Trent has
Council. Trid. Sess. 14. Can. 9.
defined it to be. But we believe that there is none besides God who can pardon
our sins under the Quality of a Sovereign Judge, and that the Pardon which we
receive from the Mouth of his Ministers, is a Ministerial Pardon, which
consists in a Declaration that they make to us of Gods Pardon, as the
Interpreters of his will revealed in the Gospel.

2. We differ about the extent of that Pardon; The Church of Rome would have
it, that God in pardoning the Sin retains the Punishment, that is to say, that
he acquits us from eternal Punishment, but that reserves to himself the
inflicting of Temporal Punishments; and we on the contrary hold that he remits
all sorts of Temporal and Eternal punishments, and that the Afflictions which
he sends us are not the Punishments of his Justice, but the Corrections and
Chastisements of his Fatherly Discipline.

3. From whence there arises a Third difference, which consists in this, that
the Church of Rome believes that those Temporal Punishments wherewith God
visits us, are true Satisfactions to his Justice for our sins, which we deny.

4. There arises from thence yet another difference concerning that, which they
call those penal works which every one imposes upon himself, or which their
Confessors impose on their Penitents, for they would that these should be also
satisfactions to the Justice of God, which we do not believe.

5. The Church of Rome would have it, that those satisfactory Punishments
should go beyond this Life, and it is partly upon this that they ground their
Doctrine of Purgatory, which we reject.

6. It is also upon that very thing that the Indulgences of the Church of Rome
are grounded, which cannot be taken for mere Relaxations of Canonical
Punishments, since they extend most frequently very far beyond the life of man,
and sometimes even unto five and twenty, and Thirty thousand Years.

7. We may say also, that it is a difference which we have with them, by which
we understand that first Act of the mercy of God that Pardons our sins, which
comes from the difference which we have with them, concerning the Opinion of
the Necessity of Auricular Confession, for that Opinion is partly founded upon
this, that Absolution of the Priests is a Judiciary Act, and that in that
respect the Church has a true Tribunal before which the Faithful are bound to
appear, and partly upon the Opinion, that the penances which the Priest enjoins
are true Satisfactions to the Divine Justice which they are bound to undergo.

8. Lastly it is from the same source that the difference proceeds which we
have with them concerning the Super-abundant satisfactions of the Saints, of
which they will have it that the Faithful may partake, and whereof in part they
compose the Treasure of the Church.

Behold here Eight Controversies included in the Explication of the first Act
of our Justification. Upon the second we differ about the Foundation upon which
the right that God gives us to life eternal is established; or if you will,
about the proper and direct cause in consideration of which God gives us that
right, for we establish it alone upon the merits of Jesus Christ in Virtue of
that Comunion which we have with him. But the Church of Rome Establishes it
upon the merit of our works also, for she would have it, that after God has
given us his Grace by which we do good works, we truly inherit not only an
increase of Grace but Eternal life, and even an increase of Glory, and she
Anathematizes those who do not believe it.

2. We differ also about those to whom God gives that right, for we believe
that God gives it only to his Elect, in whom he preserves it by his Grace, and
by the gift of perseverance; but the Church of Rome believes that he gives it
also to diverse Reprobates whom his Grace abandons, and who finally Perish in
their Sins.

Upon the Third Doctrine, we differ concerning the Nature and the Definition of
Justifying Faith, for as for us, we look on it as an Act of the Soul that
embraces or accepts the satisfaction and merit of Jesus Christ, and which
applies the promises of God's mercy made to us in the Gospel, and we labor as
much as we can to live according to that thought. But the Doctors of the Roman
Church frame an Idea of that Faith of a very great coldness and negligence, for
they content themselves to say that it is a consent that we yield in general to
all the Truths revealed in the Word of God; and there are some that go so far
as to say, that Faith fails not to Justify us, although it should not have the
least regard to the particular mercy of God toward us, which is a thing that
we cannot understand without horror. For the rest, when I shall say that the
Doctrines of the Imputation of the merit of Jesus Christ, and his satisfaction
are known but to a very few in the Church of Rome, as that also is, of the
Application that we make of them to our selves by the internal Act of our Souls
which receives them; when I shall say that these Truths so important and so
necessary to the practice of Christianity* are almost stifled, by that great
Multitude of external Exercises with which they busy the People, I shall say
nothing in my Judgment, that the more sincere persons will not acknowledge, and
of which, God grant they may be able hereafter to convince me of a falsehood in
that respect.

In fine, the last Doctrine that fully makes up the Idea of our Justification
according to the Scripture, produces of it self a considerable Controversy
between the Church of Rome and us. For as for us, we limit our selves to the
good works to which our Justification Obliges us, and which God has enjoined
us, without going any further. But the Church of Rome extends them even to
those which she her self Commands, for the pretends that her Laws properly and
directly bind the Conscience under pain of mortal Sin; and therefore it was
that Leo X. condemned Luther for having wrote that the Church had no power to
make Laws concerning manners or good works. All these Controversies that
naturally arise from the different Explications which they give of the Tenet of
Justification, let us sufficiently see that the Author of the Prejudices is
mistaken, if he thinks that we should have no more upon this matter then
differences about words, and M. le Blanc is too sincere and too Learned to have
pretended to deny any of those things which I have mentioned, although he has
Judiciously remarked, that men may easily Equivocate upon the different
Significations of the Terms.

It is therefore neither a piece of Rashness, nor Impertinency, that our first
Reformers had such a regard to the matter of Justification, as being a thing of
the greatest importance in Religion, and it is on the contrary most Just, that
having seen that Doctrine of the Salvation of Christians, neglected, obscured,
and depraved, that they should have Judged it necessary to set themselves upon
the re-establishing of it.

CHAP. VII.
An Answer to the Objections of the twelfth and thirteenth Chapters, of the
Prejudices.

TO understand well what is in the Twelfth Chapter of the Author of the
Prejudices, we must in the first place take notice of the design he propounds
to himself, and the means he makes use of to reach it. As to his design, he
Explains himself in the very Title of the Chapter, which bears this, That the
Spirit of a Politician, every way Humane, that appears in the differences that
the Calvinists Prejug. Chap. 12.
have had with the Lutherans, gives a right to reject them, without any further
Examination, as a sort of men without any Conscience. He explains himself yet
further in the beginning of his discourse after this manner. It has been
demanded, says he, of the Calvinists with good reason, how it could come to
pass, that if Luther, Zuinglius and Calvin, had received a Mission from God,
and were the Instruments that he made choice of for the greatest work that ever
was, which is the Reformation of the Errors of sixteen Centuries, they should
not avoid being openly divided between themselves, to dismember themselves from
one another, to persecute one another, after so outrageous a manner, and to
Treat one another, as the declared Enemies of God and his Church. He explains
himself also in another place, where he speaks after this manner. The Innocence
or the Crimes of Luther equally condemn the Calvinists, either for having
declaimed against an innocent person, or for having given unjust praises to one
of the most wicked men that ever was, and that monstrous conjunction which they
have made in his person, of holiness, with the most detestable Crimes, is an
evident proof, that they have not the least Idea of Christian Virtue, nor of
the Spirit of Christianity. See yet further how he speaks in the same Chapter,
If Luther were an instrument of the Devil, a wicked person, a Schismatic, a
violent and passionate man, what will become of the Reformation that he has
established, and which serves as a Foundation to that of the Calvinists. In
fine he explains himself in the 321 Page, where he says, That our behavior in
respect of the Lutherans is enough to give a ground to conclude that the Heads
of the party of the Calvinists have been such as have guided themselves more by
Policy then Conscience; which being, adds he, most contrary to the Spirit of
God, and remote from that which ought to be found in those new Prophets which
he would extraordinarily raise up, for the reforming of his Church, it is not
possible for us to take them for men of that kind, and we have a most just
ground to refuse to hearken to them. It results from thence that the Author of
the Prejudices had a design to conclude,

1. That they ought to reject us without Examining any thing that we say, and
without so much as hearing us.

2. That we are a sort of men without any Conscience, who have no Idea of
Christian Virtue, nor of the Spirit of Christianity, and who guide our selves
by Worldly Policy.

3. That we overthrow the Reformation of Luther, which serves nevertheless for
the Foundation of our own.

4. That our First Reformers had none of their Mission from God, and that they
were not the Instruments which he made choice of to Reform the Errors of the
Church of Rome. To establish these propositions he heightens on one side the
differences that were between Luther, Zuinglius, and Calvin, and all that the
heat of Disputation made them say on one side and on the other, and in the end
he sets down the esteem that we have always had of Luther notwithstanding those
Divisions, and the Condescension that we have for him and those of his Party,
in oposition to the hatred that we have always, says he, Testified against the
Church of Rome.

All that unjust Reasoning is founded upon diverse false Propositions that the
Author of the Prejudices has supposed as evident and beyond all doubt, and of
which notwithstanding he has captiously suppressed one part, to give the more
Color to his Invective.

1. His Reasoning is founded upon 'this Proposition, That we hold our First
Reformers to be new Prophets, or as he speaks, to be the Apostles of a new
Gospel. But this is a false and calumnious Supposition, for we hold on the
contrary, that our Reformers Preached nothing new, they were not under the
Quality either of new Prophets, or Apostles of a new Gospel; they did not boast
that they brought a new Revelation into the World, but they only opposed humane
Errors that had no Foundation in the old Revelation, and in that respect I have
shown that they had a more then sufficient Call in the Right that is Common to
all Christians and in the Ministry which they themselves exercised in the Latin
Church, without any necessity that there should be any Extraordinary and
immediate Mission of God for that, and I have explained in what sense it must
be understood that there was something of Extraordinary in their Call.

2. That Reasoning supposes, That we ought not to hear any Reformers 'till
first we have examined the Quality of their persons, and if the Quality of
their persons do not satisfy us, we ought to reject their words, and to remain
in the State we were in before. But there is nothing more pernicious then this
Principle, to which I oppose a contrary Principle, which is, That we ought to
judge of that which our Reformers said by the word of God, and by the proper
Characters of Truth or Falsehood which are in the things themselves, after a
manner abstracted from the Judgment that we may make of those persons, and that
it is a way to Error to Judge by the Qualities of the persons. This is that
which I have made appear elsewhere, and shall not omit to establish it yet
further in this place, for the greater clearing of this Truth. I say then that
when it falls out that those who Preach have personal Qualities that do not
satisfy us, it is indeed a Reason that Obliges us to take the greater heed to
their Doctrine. But those matters being at the bottom, as they are, true or
false in themselves, without the persons that propound them changing their
natures, they ought to be chiefly considered in themselves, if we would assure
our selves in a good Conscience that we are in the way of Truth; for we cannot
have that assurance if we Judge only by the persons, since the Faith is
immediately founded upon the word of God, and not upon that of men, whosoever
they be. Moreover, every one knows that a Judgment concerning persons, is
oftentime far harder and more subject to Error then that of the things
themselves, whether it be because ordinarily it depends upon a great number of
particular circumstances, which one cannot exactly know, and which yet one
ought to know before a man can be able to Judge, or whether it be also because
it is open to the Illusions of Hypocrisy, which hides real vices under the
appearances of Virtue, and to those of Calumny, which turns the best actions
into a bad meaning, that suppresses the good and heightens the bad. Besides
that it is certain that the Judgment which is made of persons ought partly to
depend on that of things, so far is it from that, that what is made of things
should depend on that of persons. For on the one side how many Founders of
Heresy have there been whose life has appeared to have been very exemplary, and
who were notwithstanding ravenous Wolves? how many Pharisees who have boasted
of their righteousness, while their Doctrine was a Leaven, whereof great heed
was to be taken? There have been some who have even gone so far as to have
wrought Miracles, and Jesus Christ has foretold, that false Christ's, and false
Prophets shall arise, who shall work great Signs and Wonders, capable of
seducing the very Elect, if it were possible. And on the other side do not
sufficiently understand the ways of Divine Providence, to be able to conclude
without rashness, that it never makes use of persons guilty of many crimes
either for the Propagation of its Truth, or the Reformation of Errors. Saint
Paul says, that God puts his Treasure into Earthen 2. Cor. 4. 7.
Vessels, that the Excellency of his power may be of God and not of man. The
same Apostle Teaches us that diverse in his Time Preached Jesus Christ out of a
Spirit of Envy and Contention. God heretofore made use of Solomon, not only for
the building and preservation of his Temple, but also to give the Church one
part of the Canon of its Scriptures, which is much more then the Temple, and
yet notwithstanding that Prince gave himself over to the love of Women, and
fell into Idolatry; and lastly, Jesus Christ made use of a Judas at first, that
sold him into his Enemies Hands.

But to decide this Question by Examples drawn out of the Scripture, we find in
the History of the Church of Israel, that 2. Kings 1*
Jehis King of the Ten Tribes Reformed that Church, that he took away the
Worship of the False gods which Ahab had introduced, that he demolished the
Temple of Baal, and broke down his Images; see here without doubt a good
Reformation. Notwithstanding it is said that he did not depart from the sins of
Jeroboam, but that he retained the worshipping of the Golden -Calves that were
at Dan and Bethel. It is also related that he accomplished that Reformation in a
very odious manner, and very unworthy of a Prince that made profession of the
fear of God. For having assembled all his People, he told them that he would
serve Baal much more then Ahab had done, he commanded that all his Prophets and
Priests should meet together, and all the worshippers of that false God to
Celebrate a Solemn Feast for him. He himself pointed out the day of the Feast,
and caused a Publication of it to be made. But when the Assembly was come into
the House of Baal, and all those poor People who trusted in his word, when they
thought of nothing but their Devotions, he put them all to Death without
letting any one escape. Suppose we, that we ought to Judge of a Reformation by
the persons that make it, what may not be said against this here? Jehu made use
of Hypocrisy and Treachery, he broke the public Faith and his own, in the most
Scandalous manner in the World, and the most contrary to the sincerity of an
honest man. Besides that, he yet remained in the Superstitions of Jeroboam, and
made the Israelites remain in them too. If we would believe the Author of the
Prejudices, the Reformation that he made would be rather the work of the Devil,
then that of the Spirit of God. Jehu would not have been Extraordinarily chosen
by God to reform his Church and purge it from Idolatry. But this is not the
Sentiment of the Scripture, it does not without doubt approve of the Treachery
and Hypocrisy of Jehu, it condemns the Golden Calves that he kept up, but it
does not omit the praising of that Reformation in that good which it had, and
to say that it was well pleasing to God. And it is True that Jehu was
extraordinarily called to that, as it appears by the Anointing that the Prophet
Elisha gave him by one of his Disciples.

We find in that same Scripture, the History of diverse other Reformations which
were made in the Church of Judah, but we find also that they were almost wholly
different among themselves. Some went so far as the abolishing the usage of the
high places and the Groves, which were Heathenish Superstitions, and the
incense that was offered to the Serpent of Aaron, which was a kind of Idolatry;
others yet retained all these things. Some even of those who made these
Reformations committed Actions very unpleasing to God, which the Scripture
Reflects on. It says of Asa, who was one of those Reformers, that being sick of
2 Cron. 16.
the disease whereof he died, he sought not to God, but to the Physicians, 2
Cron. 20.
It says of Jehoshaphat, who was another, that he aided a wicked King, and that
he loved those whom God hated, because he joined himself with wicked Ahab. It
says of Joash, who was yet 2 Cron. 24.
another, that he fell in with the people into the Exercise of Idolatry and the
use of the Groves, and that he cruelly killed a Prophet, because he opposed
those Superstitions. If you Judge of those Reformations by their persons,
according to the Principle of the Author of the Prejudices, you must say not
only that those Reformers ought not to be heard, but that the Spirit of God was
not there. For you see their Dissentings, since some went further then the
others, and that some condemned what the others retained; you see their
personal Actions that you cannot excuse, since the Scripture it self condemns
them. But if you Judge according to the Scripture, which is more worthy to be
followed then the Author of the Prejudices, you will give to those Reformations
the Praises which they merit in themselves, you will approve of the more
perfect ones, you will distinguish in the imperfect the good from the bad,
without having respect to the Persons; and when at last you would Judge of the
Persons, you would do it as Justice and Charity would Ordain you to do.

If the Principle of the Author of the Prejudices were reasonable in regard of
the Reformers of the Latin Church, it is certain that it would be so further in
regard of the Propagators of the Christian Religion and of its Ordinary
Teachers. I would say, that if those of the Church of Rome had reason not to
hear the Reformers because they had differences among themselves, because they
spoke injurious words of one another in the heat of their disputes, because
they can take notice of some Vices in them, or a Conduct that may be suspected
to have had too much Worldly Policy, it follows from thence, by a far greater
reason, that the Heathens ought not to have heard the Christians as often as
they should have seen the same things to have appeared among them. But when was
it that they might not have seen them appear? The Age of the Apostles, which we
may justly call the Age of innocence, and of the peace of the Church, in
comparison of others, was that exempted from Divisions and Vices? Those who
have read the Epistles of Saint Paul cannot be ignorant, that there were diverse
among the first Preachers of Christianity, who would yet have retained Moses
with Jesus Christ, and the Law with Grace, that there were diverse who opposed
themselves to Saint Paul about diverse points of his Doctrine, and who labored
to blast the honor of his Ministry, that there were some who in Preaching the
Gospel, discovered themselves to be too much Transported with humane Passions,
that there were even some who went so far as to deny the Doctrine of the
Resurrection. Saint Paul does not spare them, and the Just Complaints that he
frequently makes of them, sufficiently note that they had not on their parts
all the respect for him which they ought to have had. Notwithstanding
whatsoever complaints he made of them, howsoever vehement he was in his
disputes, yet we do not see that he Excommunicated them, nor that he delivered
them over to Satan as he did the incestuous person of Corinth. He defends his
Apostleship, he calls them deceitful workers, Ministers of Satan Transformed
into the Ministers of Righteousness, but he fails not yet in 2 Cor. 11. 13, 15.
the same Chapter to give them the Title of Ministers of Jesus Christ. Are they
Ministers of Jesus Christ? I speak as a Fool, I Verse. 23.
am more. Would the Author of the Prejudices have thought it well done if the
Heathens of that Time had followed his Maxim, and if without ever Examining the
Christian Religion in it self, they should have presently prejudged, upon the
Divisions which they beheld, and upon the Moderation that Saint Paul yet kept
toward those persons, whom elsewhere he Treated roughly enough, that the
Spirit of God did not accompany the Christians, and that their Doctrine could
not proceed from Heaven?

Will they say that those Infidels ought to have carried themselves after that
manner in the time of Constantine, when the Bishops that composed the Council
of Nice appeared so eager, Socrat. Hist. Eccles. lib. 1. Cap. 5.
and so divided among themselves, that they presented the Emperor with Books
of Accusations one against another, managing a bloody War while they saw
themselves united together in the same Assembly? Will they say that they had
Reason to be prejudiced against Christanity, then when they saw the quarrels
that Vide Baronium.
rent the Church upon the Subject of the Consubstantiality of the Son of God,
or then when they saw those which fell out about the word of Hypostasis between
the Orthodox themselves who accused one another to be Heretics, or then when
the East and West were divided about the concurrence of Meletius and Paulinus
for the Bishopric of Antioch, or when the Two great and Illustrious Reformers
of the Church, in the Time of the Arrians Eusebius of Verceil, and Lucifer of
Cagliari, were divided upon the Subject of the Arrian Bishops who returned to
the Orthodox Faith, or when the Catholics and the Donatists mutually
persecuted one another, and that in the very Flames of those Persecutions, the
Catholics did not cease to call the Donatists always their Brethren, although
they oftentimes called them also Heretics, Schismatics, Pharisees, etc. And
though they loaded them with injuries, and though the Donatists on their part
Treated the Catholics with all the indignities imaginable, even to the
outragiously rejecting of the name of Brethren, which they gave them.

Those who are well versed in Ecclesiastical History, will yield that we might
urge those Examples a great deal further if we would but take the pains to do
it, for there have been very few Ages wherein Christians have not been divided
between themselves, and that frequently upon grounds trivial enough, and
wherein there may not have been found in their Conduct that very thing which
the Author of the Prejudices believes to be incompatible with the Spirit of
God, that is to say, the heats of Dispute on the one side, and on the other
some Radourcissemens.
Measures of that which he calls Humane Policy. I shall not here mention the
disorders which happened about the business of Nestorius and his Heresy, nor
those which followed quickly after on the occasion of the Eutychians and
Monothelites. I shall omit the Schism of the Greeks and Latins, and the
re-unions which they made up sometimes among themselves out of a Humane Policy.
I shall say nothing of the confusions wherewith the Latin Church was agitated
in those Times, which Baronius calls unhappy, and wherein he says Baron. ad
Ann. 908.
the Popes made void the Acts of one another. Infelicissimo tempora cum alter
alterius res gestas intrusus quisque Pontifex aboleret. In effect, Formosus
having accepted of the Papacy against the Oath that John VIII. had made him
take in deposing him, that he would never think of being Bishop, Stephen VII.
his Successor made him to be condemned in open Council, and all the
Ordinations that he had made, to be void; and having at last caused his Body to
be taken out of his Grave, he made the three Fingers wherewith they give their
blessing to be cut of and thrown into the River Tiber: but John IX. Successor
to Stephen, Assembled another Council at Ravenna, wherein he not only made all
that Stephen and his Council had done against Formosus to be void, but he even
made all his Acts to be Canonically burned, re-establishing the memory of
Formosus, and the Ordinances that he had made. Some Time after, Sergius a great
Enemy of Formosus, came to the Papacy, and he annulled in his turn the Acts of
the Council of Ravenna, and made void all the Ordinances of Formosus.
Notwithstanding the Church of Rome reckons all those men among her Popes, and
acknowledges them all to have been lawful ones: And which is further
remarkable, John IX. in the same Act wherein he makes void the Council of
Stephen, and wherein he condemns it to the Flames, he does not fail to call
Stephen his Predecessor of Holy Memory, Piae recordationis predaecessorem. Upon
which Baronius exhorts his Readers to Consider, that although Baron. ad Ann.
904.
the Popes have had Predecessors very worthy of blame, yet they have been wont
notwithstanding to have a great deal of respect for them. So that, says he,
although Stephen had been a Detestable Pope, who had invaded the Sea, and who
during his Papacy had committed all sorts of Execrable crimes, yet John
nevertheless calls him his Predecessor of Holy Memory; which may appear at lest
as strange as the Moderation of Zuinglius and Calvin in respect of Luther.

I might add to all that, another Example drawn from the Conduct of the Church
of Rome, upon the occasion of her latter Schisms. Every one knows the Divisions
of the Fourteenth Century, which divided all the West about the concurrence of
two Anti-Popes. Both Parties were extremely Animated, they looked upon one
another as Excommunicated as Antichrists, the Enemies of God and his Church,
they mutually Anathematised one another, they took up Arms one against another,
and made a bloody War, Urban VI. on his side, in a Bull that began, The Vine of
the Lord of Sabbath, that is to say, the holy Church of Rome, Raynald. ad Ann.
1378.
has a great evil in her Womb, and sends forth grievous Sighs, etc. Treats his
Antipope and his cardinals as a child of iniquity and Son of Perdition,
Vipers, wicked Wretches animated with the Spirit of the Devil, Schismatics,
Apostates, Conspirators, Blasphemers, etc. He deposed, and spoiled them of all
their Honors, Dignities, Prelacies, Offices and Benefits, he confiscated their
goods, and declared their persons to be infamous and detestable; he
Excommunicated all those who believed, who received them, their Defenders and
Favorers, and even those who should give them Ecclesiastical burial, if they
did not pull them out of the Grave again with their own hands: he forbad all
faithful People of what Quality soever, even Kings themselves, Queens,
Emperors, to receive them into their Lands, to give or to send them either
Bread, or Wine, or Meat, or Wood, or Money, or Merchandise.

He Excommunicated particularly all those who should hold his competitor for
Pope, or who should call him Pope, or who should receive any Favors,
Indulgences, Dignities or Prelacies from him. And as if all that had not been
enough, he ordained a Holy Croisado against those Shismaticks and those
condemned Persons, to pursue and root them out, under the same Privileges
which are given to those who take up Arms for the Conquest of the Holy Land.

He absolved also the subjects of those Princes who should acknowledge his
Antipope, of their Oath of Allegiance, and he Excommunicated those subjects
themselves if they should yield any obedience to their Sovereigns. On the other
side, Clement VII. who kept his seat at Avignon, was not wanting to proceed
against Urban and his Followers, and to Treat him and his Party with the same
heat that Urban had showed against him. See here differences which were
methinks sufficiently heightened. Notwithstanding whatsoever Animosity there was
there between those two parties, whatsoever Wars they made one against another,
whatsoever Anathema's they mutually thundered out, the Church of Rome has not
failed to own and Canonize for Saints, those person who lived and died in those
two contrary Obediences, and who even died in the hottest Quarrels of those two
Anti-Popes. For she has Canonized on the one side Saint Catherine of Siena, who
took part with Urban, and who Treated his competitor as Antichrist, and a
member of the Devil, and his Cardinals as Devils incarnate; and on the other
side, she has Canonized Peter of Raynald. in Urban. 6.
Luxemburg, who died the Cardinal of Clement VII. and who had received that
Dignity from his hands, against the express prohibition of Urban VI. under pain
of Excommunication; so that here are two Saints on the one and the other side
lawfully Excommunicated.

Mr. Daille in his Answer to the Monsieurs Adam and Cottiby, intending Repons.
a Mess. Adam. and Cott. Part 2. Chap. 14.
to retort this same Objection, that the Author of the Prejudices gives us, has
set before us the Example of Saint Jerome, and Saint Cyril of Alexandria, who
were cruelly and passionately carried out against Saint John Chrysostom, so far
as to compare his fall, to the fall of Babylon, and to call him Traitor, Judas,
Jechonias, he has also alleged the Example of Stephen Bishop of Rome, who in
the Quarrel that he had with Saint Cyprian, calls him a false Christ, a false
Apostle, and deceitful worker. But the Author Prejug Chapter 12. Page 311.
of the Prejudices does not think that these Examples are to the purpose. He
says, That the Difference between Saint Chrysostom, and Saint Jerome, and
Saint Cyril, respected only personal Actions, in which none ever denied but
that it might happen to the Saints themselves to be surprised in respect of one
another. But this is only a shift, for if we may understand that it has happened
to the Saints to be violently carried out against another Saint after the
fiercest manner in the World, upon personal differences which have no other
Foundations then a Surprise, I see not why we may not also understand, that it
may happen to good men to be violently carried out against one another, about
the points of Religion, which afford a more just pretense of Animosity, when
each thinks he has the Truth of his side. Before I let go this Example, I
cannot forbear noting, by the by, that it is but very ill to the purpose that
the Author of the Prejudices censures M. Daille for having said that Theophilus
of Alexandria and Epiphanius had condemned, Excommunicated, and deposed
Chrysostom from his Bishopric, for it is evident to those who are not ignorant
of History, that Theophilus condemned and deposed him, and that Epiphanius
being gone to Constantinople before that same condemnation, refused to hold
Communion with Chrysostom, which is precisely that which M. Daille would have
said. But the Author of the Prejudices does not Answer me better upon the
Quarrel of Saint Cyprian and Stephen; Their difference, says he, was only upon
a point which had not then been decided by the Church. This Evasion Page 312.
is very pitiful. The more trivial the occasion is about which one is violent,
that passion is both the more blameable, and the prejudice against the persons
who are so carried away with it is the better grounded. To Answer after that
manner aggravates the passion of Stephen, in stead of excusing it. Stephen,
adds he, who had more reason at the bottom, was carried out by the ardour of
his Zealonly to some threats of Excommunication. Or if you will, to an
Excommunication which having had no ground would have produced no real
division, and would not have hindered but that Saint Cyprian should still have
been honored by the Church of Rome, and Saint Stephen by that of Africa. It is
not certain that Stephen had more reason at the bottom then Saint Cyprian, on
the contrary there were in their days as many Heretics at least, whose Baptism
ought to have been rejected, as there was whose ought to have been admitted.
And as for the rest, whether Stephen had in effect Excommunicated Saint
Cyprian, or whether he had merely threatened it, what is that to our Question?
If he contented himself with a mere Threatening of it, he remained in Communion
with a man whom he called a false Christ, a. false Apostle, a. deceitful
Worker, and with a man whom on his part he accused of Stupidity, of Pride, of
Obstinacy, of Presumption, of Folly, of blindness of Mind, and of Wickedness.
He abode in Communion with Firmilianus who had the same interests with Saint
Cyprian, and who also accused Stephen of Inhumanity, Boldness, of Insolence, of
Schism, and manifest Folly, who compared him to Judas, and said of him that he
took part with Heretics. If he actually Excommunicated them, it further notes
the excess of his Passion, which could not in effect have been Judged to have
been less then a Passion and a violent heat, since according to the Author of
the Prejudices himself, it would have had no ground, and would not have hindered
but that Saint Cyprian should have been always honored by the Church of Rome.

Since the Author of the Prejudices was in the way to refute the Answer of M.
Daille, it had possibly more conduced to the public Edification, if in stead
of shallowly insisting on those remote Examples, he had applied himself to that
wherein M. Daille adjoyns, the fierce injuries, wherewith the Divines of the
Roman Church may be every day seen to rend one another, although they then
remain and though they yet live in one and the same Communion. They acknowledge
one another for Brethren, they assist at the same Altars, they call upon the
same Saints, and yet nevertheless, as M. Daille relates, they write one against
another after the most passionate and violent manner in the World. One sort of
them say of their Adversaries, That they were infected with Heresies, and were
Enemies of the Apostolic See, and that their Opinion was full of Heresy and
Perfidiousness; That it was Presumptious, Injurious to the State of the
Religious, and that it savoured of Calvinism, and to speak Plainly, that it was
Erroneous in the Faith, that it openly stifled the word of God and the
Authority of the Fathers, that it was blasphemous against Jesus Christ and all
the Saints, plainly and evidently Heretical, and contrary to the Council of
Trent. The others say on the contrary That the Propositions which they have
laid down were false, rash, presumptious, pernicious to all faithful People,
that they were Erroneous, and injurious to the Bishops, tending to overthrow or
disturb the Hierarchy, and that some were even contrary to the word of God and
the Authority of the Councils. They add that a certain Book of their
Adversaries was full of Propositions that were Dangerous, Seditious, Impious,
Schismatical, Blasphemous, with some openly Heretical. See here what M. Daille
has set down immediately after the Examples of Cyril, Saint Jerome, Stephen, and
Saint Cyprian, in which it had been well if the Author of the Prejudices would
have satisfied us, for he cannot be ignorant that we could urge this matter a
great deal further then M. Daille has done, and that he who would make up a
Collection of all the Injuries that these Gentlemen say of one another, would
make a very strange Vocabulary. But he has Judged that he ought to pass over
this Article in silence, and that it was more fit for his purpose to answer
only upon Saint Cyril, Saint Jerome, Stephen and Saint Cyprian.

Howsoever it be, it seems to be clear to me by what I have said, a very ill
prejudice in matters of Religion, to make the Judgment that we ought to make of
a Doctrine to depend upon that that we may make of the Persons, instead of
Judging it by the Doctrine it self and by the word of God; and the Author of
the Prejudices may suffer us, if he pleases, to say to him on the Part of our
first Reformers, what Saint Augustine said on the Part of the Orthodox to
Cresconius. Since you are not the Judge of the Aug. contr. Crescon. lib. 1.
chap. 7.
inward motions of our heart, set your selves only to know whether we fight
for, or against the Truth. For if we Teach the Truth, if we refute Error, when
our intentions should not be good, and if we should seek either for secular
advantages, or vainglory, those who have a love for the Truth will not avoid
joining with us, since it would be the Truth that would be always declared,
after what manner soever it were so.

But besides those two Remarks which I have made, I must further take notice in
the Third place, that the Reasoning of the Author of the Prejudices, is founded
upon another supposition which is not less unjust, nor less rash then those
other Two which I have examined. For it is founded upon this Principle, That we
ought to Judge of Persons merely by that ill which appears in them; whereas in
order to the making an equitable Judgment, we ought at least to consider the
good with the ill, and after having made an exact discernment of the one and
the other, to approve of that good that may be seen, and to blame that bad that
may be found there. It was after this manner that Zuinglius and Calvin passed
their Judgments on Luther, and that we Judge him also; we discover a great many
Excellent things in him, an Heroical Courage, a great Love for the Truth, an
ardent Zeal for the Glory of God, a great Trust in his Providence,
Extraordinary Learning in a dark Age, a profound respect of the Holy Scripture,
an indefatigable Spirit, and a great many other high Qualities. We see that he
was in his Time one of the first who had their Eyes opened to consider the
Errors and Abuses that were then current in the Latin Church, that he earnestly
applied himself to it, that his Example excited diverse others to do the same,
that he endured upon that Account very great Persecutions, under all which his
heart never failed, and that by his Cares and Learned Labors he recovered
diverse people out of the Superstition wherein they were buried. Under this
prospect we cannot but give him the Just praise which we believe he merits; and
because we know that God is the Author of every perfect gift, as Saint James
says, we attribute all the good that we see in Luther to his Grace and his Holy
Spirit, and all the happy Successes of his Preaching to the Divine Benediction,
looking upon him as a servant of God, and an instrument which he made use of,
for the work of the Reformation. But because there is no person in the World
who has not his Excesses and his Faults, amidst that which Luther had of praise
worthy, we see also a great many things which we know not how to approve. We
believe that he had not light enough about the matter of the Eucharist, we find
that he was very much prepossessed about the Real presence, we acknowledge that
his style was too impetuous and too violent, and we make no scruple to say that
he has not well enough distinguished his differing opinions so as to be able to
support them without breaking the bond of Communion with those who could not
tolerate them, which makes him fall into a great piece of injustice in respect
of us. Thus far, methinks, we may go without impugning Christian Charity, if
any one among us have pushed his Judgment further, and would needs have
Penetrated into the heart of Luther, to impute his Actions to the Principles of
Jealousy, of Pride, and Hatred, as the Author of the Prejudices says that
Hospinian has done, it is what we do not approve of. For there is nothing in
the World wherein we are more easily deceived then in the Judgments which we
pass upon the internal Principles of any ones Actions. We may say, this Action
is good, this Action is not good; but when one Action may proceed from diverse
differing Principles, we ought to Judge with Charity; or if there be no place
for a Judgment of Charity, the surest way is not to Judge at all, but to leave
it to the knowledge of God.

If the Author of the Prejudices had followed this Rule, he had never
attributed, as he has done, our carriage toward Luther and the Lutherans, to a
piece of Human Policy: he had said on the contrary, that it was the effect of a
Just Discernment, which we could not tell how to hinder our selves from making
without being culpable. We blame in Luther and in the Lutherans, what we Judge
to be blamable there, we commend that therein which we Judge to be commendable;
we bear with that which we believe to be tolerable without approving it, and if
there be any excess either in that Praise, or Blame, or Toleration, we are
ready to amend it, when they shall make us to perceive it. Notwithstanding we
choose rather to incline toward the side of Charity, then toward that of
Rigor, and we would be much rather in a state, wherein by the Mediation of the
grace of God, all sharpness, animosity, harsh expressions, accusations,
complaints might be for ever banished, then that we should banish our Praises
and Toleration. We will always preserve toward the Church of Rome, the same
Charity and the same Justice, as much as it shall be possible for us to do; but
in Observing that equality, we are grieved to see that we cannot but make very
differing Judgments of her, and of those of the Confession of Ausburg, and
which produce contrary effects in us. These latter are in difference with us
only about the point of the Real presence, and about some Questions of the
Schools which we cannot yet impute to their whole Body; and as for the rest,
they reject with us the Invocation of Saints, Religious Worship of Images,
humane Satisfactions, Indulgences, Purgatory, worship of Relics, the public
Service in an unknown Tongue, the merit of good Works, Transubstantiation, the
sacrifice of the Mass, the Monarchy of the Pope, the opinion of the
Infallibility of the Church, and the principle of blind obedience to the
decisions of Councils. They acknowledge the Scriptures to be the only Rule of
Faith, they carefully practice the Reading of them, they own their sufficiency,
they believe their Authority independent from that of the Church, in regard of
men. They distinctly explain the Doctrine of Justification, and that of the use
of the Law, and its distinction from the Gospel, they do not conceive amiss of
the nature of Faith, and that of good works, and as for popular superstitions,
we can scarce see any reign among them. Would to God the Church of Rome were in
that condition, and that we could purchase it at the price of our Blood and our
Lives. But alas! We are very far from seeing any likelihood of success to that
wish; all those points that I have set down, are so many differences which we
have with her; and in our Judgments, there are so many Errors, and so many
abuses in her; and we are so far from any reasonable hope of their Correction,
that we see on the contrary that they strengthen themselves in them every day,
and that they discover every day more and more signs of their aversion for, or
contempt of a Reformation. Who therefore can think it strange that upon the
business of Religion we place a great difdifference between those of the Roman
Church, and those who are called Lutherans, the one appears to us as a Body
spread all over with a great many boils, which all together put a stop to the
Functions of Life, and the others, as a Body that has only one or two which do
not hinder its Life, or its Action. In a word, we do not believe that those who
have imbibed the Tenets of the Roman Church, where we differ from them, and who
practice them, are in the way of Salvation, as well by reason of the Quality of
the greatest part of those Tenets, as by reason of their number. But as to the
Errors which remain yet among the Lutherans we do not pass the same Judgment,
either as to their Quality or their number. I say as to their Quality, and the
reason that we allege is is very solid, whatsoever endeavors they have used to
elude it, for although the opinion of the Lutherans about the Real presence be
erroneous, though we are so far from approving of it, that we oppose it as much
as possibly we can, yet while they shall make a profession, as they do, to
distinguish in the Sacrament the substance of bread from that of the Body of
Jesus Christ, we cannot say that their Error compels them actually to adore the
mere creature of Bread, for the same Body of Jesus Christ that is
hypostatically united with the word. We can very well say that they deceive
themselves in imagining that the Body of Jesus Christ is in a place where it is
not, but we cannot tell them that they take another subject for the Body of
Jesus Christ, which really and in effect is not so. They do not therefore
deceive themselves in regard of the Object of their Adoration, for they do not
take the one for the other; I would say they do not take the substance of Bread
for the Body of Jesus Christ, but they deceive themselves in regard of the
place wherein they conceive the Body of Jesus Christ to be, for they conceive
it to be in the Bread, and it is not there. But this Error about the place, how
gross soever it be, does not, notwithstanding, include Idolatry, for as I have
said, they do not take one subject for another, the substance of Bread for the
Body of Jesus Christ. But it is otherwise in the Church of Rome, for if she
deceives her self, she does it not only as to the place wherein she conceives
the Body of Jesus Christ, but also as to the subject that she takes for the
Body of Jesus Christ, since it is in effect but the substance of Bread. There
is actually and really in the Sacrament but one only substance, the Church of
Rome does not distinguish it from the Object of her Adoration, on the contrary
she delieves it to be the Body of Jesus Christ, and she Adores it under that
Quality, if she deceives her self, it is manifest that in believing she adores
the Body of Jesus Christ, she adores that which is actually the substance of
Bread. It is to no purpose therefore that the Author of the Prejudices says,
That it is false that the Catholics adore the Sacrament in taking that word
for an external Vail. That makes nothing to the Question. Whether they adore or
do not adore the accidents of Bread, that is to say its figure, color,
roundness, is a thing by it self, whereof we do not now dispute, we speak now
of the substance which the Priest holds in his hands. But it is yet nothing to
the purpose what he further adds, That although the Bread should remain there,
as the Lutherans hold, yet we could not accuse the Catholics of adoring it,
their adoration terminates upon Jesus Christ alone, whom they believe to lie
hid under those sensible species. This is an Ordinary Fallacy of their
Missionaries, fit only to deceive Children. I distinguish, We cannot accuse
those of the Church of Rome of believing that they adore the Bread, or of being
willing to adore it, or of having an intention to adore the Bread; I grant it,
for they believe that it is no longer Bread, they believe that the substance of
Bread is changed into that of Jesus Christ, so that they can never be accused
of believing that they adore, or that they are willing to adore, or that they
have an intention to adore the Bread. They defend themselves in that whereof no
Body accuses them. But if the bread remain in effect no Bread, I deny that we
cannot accuse them of adoring, that which is actually and in the Truth of the
thing, Bread, in believing that it is the Body of Jesus Christ, and a man must
be of a very bad faith not to see it. For if I should imagine, for example,
that a Tree, that a Rock, that a flower was a God hid under the form of a Tree,
a Rock, a Flower, and if I should adore it under that Quality of a God which my
imagination gave it, it would be past all doubt that I should adore a Tree, a
Rock, a Flower, in believing my self to adore God.

But besides that we are, in regard of the Lutherans, in very different Terms
from those, wherein the Church of Rome would have us that we should be with
her: For in respect of the Lutherans the business is only about a mere
Toleration, which we give to those among them who desire it, with a Spirit of
Charity, waiting till it shall please God to dissipate their Error. But the
Church of Rome that calls it self infallible, would have us not only to have a
mere Toleration for her, but that we should make a profession of believing all
that she believes; for when she separated her self from us, she Anathematised
all those who did not believe all that she had decided in her Council of Trent.
The Matters therefore are not equal between the Roman and the Lutheran
Communion in respect of us. To put them into an Equality it is necessary that
the Roman Church should openly put her self into the state wherein the
Lutherans are, that she renounce the Invocation of Saints, Religious worship of
Images, humane Satisfactions, Indulgences, Purgatory, the worshipping of
Relliques, the public Service in an unknown Tongue, the merit of good Works,
Transubstantiation, Adoration of the Sacrament, the Sacrifice of the Mess, the
Papal Monarchy, the pretension of Infallibility, the blind Obedience that she
would have us give to her decisions. It is necessary, that she should
acknowledge the Scriptures to be the only rule of faith and manners, that she
should carefully recommend the Reading of them to the People, that she should
confess their sufficiency without the help of tradition, that she should
believe the Authority of that Scripture, independent (even in respect of us) on
that of the Church, that she should distinctly lay down the Doctrine of
Justification, and that of the distinction of the Law and the Gospel, that she
should form a Just Idea of the Faith, and of good works, and that she should
take care to abolish all the popular Superstitions which we behold among them.
When she shall have done all that, with some other things which the Lutherans
have done also, although she do retain the point of the Real presence after the
same manner that they do, we shall not fail to offer her the same Toleration
which we yield to the Lutherans, and the same conditions which we give to them;
which is, that we should not engage our selves to believe that presence, that
we should always protest against it as an Error, and that they shall do nothing
to force us to embrace it. When the Church of Rome shall be in that condition
which I have set down, if we do not make her these offers, if we do not even
make them with all the ardour imaginable, we will be very well contented in
that Case, that they should accuse us of humane Policy, and that they should
tell us that we are a sort of men without any Conscience, Justice, and Charity.
But 'till then we will take God and men to witness, that there is not the least
equity in those invectives, and that it is to oppress our innocence, to ascribe
that, as the Author of the Prejudices has done, to an interested Policy, or a
capricious humor, which is but too well founded upon the things themselves.

See here what I had to say upon the Twelfth Chapter of the Author of the
Prejudices. It may now be Judged of what force his Accusations are. We should
after that pass on to his Thirteenth Chapter. But as that Chapter is but a
sending us to a Book of Monsieur Arnaud's, Entitled, The Overthrow of the
Morals of Jesus Christ by the Calvinists, I shall also content my self with
referring my Readers to the Answer which I hope to make him. It shall suffice
for the present to say, That the Doctrine of the Saints Perseverance, as the
Synod of Dort has laid it down, is a Doctrine of the Scripture, and that all
the pretended Consequences which Monsieur Arnaud would draw from it, are of the
same nature of those which profane Persons draw from all the Doctrines of
Religion, when they would abuse them to their Ruin.

CHAP. VIII.
That our Fathers, in their Design of Reforming themselves, were bound to take
the Holy Scripture alone for the Rule of their Faith.

IT it now necessary to Examine by what Principle, or upon what Rule our
Fathers proceeded in their Reformation. But before we go any further, we shall
do well to weigh what the Author of the Prejudices says, who has made an
express Chapter upon this matter. The Argument of that Chapter is framed in
these words. That the way which the Calvinists Chap. 14.
propound to instruct men in the Truth, is ridiculous and impossible. After
having entered upon his subject, As the matter is, says he, about the promise
which they make of discovering diverse Truths of the Faith to the Catholics,
which are in their Judgments obscured and quite altered in the Church of Rome,
there will be nothing more Just, or more natural, then in the first place to
inquire into the way, which they would take to perform it, to the end that we
may Judge by the very nature of that way what we may justly expect. For if it
be found that they would engage us in an infinite way, and which could not come
to an issue, there could not be a more lawful excuse to hinder us from
hearkening to them, nor a more evident conviction of the rashness of their
enterprise. Behold here, methinks, Two Declarations of that Author sufficiently
express, concerning the means which we propound to instruct men in the Truth,
the one, That it is a ridiculous and impossible way; and the other, That it is
an infinite way, etc. and which can come to no issue; for we may well perceive
that that Periphrasis of expression, If it be found that they would engage us
in an infinite way, etc. made use of, in the beginning of a Disputation, means,
that it will be so found in effect, and that it is as much as if it had been
positively said, they would engage us in an infinite way, and which has no end,
there being no other difference between those two expressions, unless that this
latter is the more plain, and that the other has more of the Air of the
Philosophical Method of those Gentlemen. After that preamble the Author goes
on. It is true, says he, that if we will hear them speak upon this subject
without any more deep searehing into that which they say, we shall have reason
enough to be satisfied. For they baldly promise to lead us to the Faith, by a
short, an easy and a clear way, without confusion, without danger of wandering
aside, and this way say they, is the Examination of the Articles of the Faith
by the Scripture, which is the only Rule that God has given us for the deciding
of the differences of Religion, and assuring us of what we ought to believe,
all others being subject to Error. This is the Explication of the way which we
propose, which is to take the Holy Scripture for the only Rule of our Faith. He
adds, But because in a matter of this importance we should take the greatest
care to avoid dazzling our sight with words that would have more of show then
Solidity, it will be good to inform our selves more exactly whether this way is
so easy as they represent it, whether there do not occur some Obstacles that
hinder our passing further, and whether it be not of so excessive a length,
that we ought not rationally to hope to come to the end of it, whatsoever
diligence we use; whether it be fitted to all the World, and whether there be
not any person who may not going on faithfully in it, arrive to the end whether
it leads. Behold here another Conclusion against our way, inwraped under a so,
to wit, that it is of a length so excessive, as we ought not rationally to hope
ever to get to the end, whatsoever diligence we use, and that at least, it is
not fitted to all the World. In what follows he fills his Chapter with the
Objections and difficulties that tend to turn away men from the Scripture, and
to make them conceive that in effect it is that infinite way which has no issue
at all, of which he had spoke, and that way of so excessive a length that we
could never come to the end of, whatsoever Diligence we should use. But the
meaning of that is, that according to him, the way to be assured of the
Articles of the Faith by the Scripture, is absolutely unprofitable to all men,
of what order soever they be, and for what Truth soever it be. For an infinite
way which has no issue, and the length of which is so excessive that we could
never with all the diligence we should use come to the end of it, is equally
unprofitable to all, as well to the Learned, as the Ignorant. And moreover, the
greatest part of the difficulties that render it infinite, according to him,
being not to be found in some private passages, but in the Scripture in
general, it follows that we can never be assured by that means of any Truth. So
that, behold here, according to the Author of the Prejudices, the Scripture
absolutely unprofitable, and that for all sorts of men, and all sorts of
Truths. In one word, as the Tilte of his Chapter bears, it is a ridiculous way,
and impossible to instruct men in the Truth.

Whatsoever Prejudice there has been in the Church of Rome against the
Reformation, I cannot believe that it would not be shaken at so scandalons and
un-Christian a Proposition. For to treat the holy Scripture, which is the
Oracle of Christians, and the word of God, as a ridiculous way, and to reject
it as absolutely unprofitable, and improper to instruct men in the Truth,
without distinction, without Limitation, as much for one sort as for another,
as much for one truth as for another, is methinks a new Gospel, which we have
not yet heard spoken of, for there was never any thing spoke so high till this,
or to say better, none were ever yet carried out to such Excesses. We have read
in Pamelius and Pamel ex Quintino annot. 237. in prescript-Tertul. Pighius
contr. 3. Franchisi. Cordub. de. Eccles. cap 82. Charon verit. 3. cap. 2. art.
8.
some others, with Indignation and Horror, That the Scripture is a nose of
wax, which may he turned which way we please, and that it is far more easy to
wrest it to Profane and Impious things, then it is to make use of half the
verses of Virgil to Compose Epithalamiums. We have seen in Pighius and
elsewhere, that the Scripture is a dumb Rule, a dumb Witness, a dead and
lifeless thing, a Sword that cuts with both edges, and such other Expressions,
injurious to the Scripture; But no body, that I know of, ever went so far yet
as to make it a ridiculous way for the Instructing of men in the Truth.

There are enough in the world who know that these Gentlemen, of whose number
the Author of the Prejudices is, write nothing but for one and the same
Intrest, and with the same Spirit. I may therefore, methinks, with very good
reason make use for this occasion, of what the Author of the Translation of the
New Testament of Mons has wrote in his Preface, to oppose it to the Author of
the Prejudices, to show him that the Spirit that animates them is an unequal
Spirit, that blows both cold and hot. For behold what that Preface carries in
it; We hope that not only the Souls of the more learned but even of the Simpler
sort may find here (that is to say in the Translation) that which shall be
necessary for their instructtion, provided that they read at with an entire
Simplicity of heart, and Address themselves humbly to the Son of God in saying
to him with Peter Lord, to whom should we go? It is thou who have the words of
Eternal Life, and it is thou alone who can make us learn. They must go to
him, as those in the Gospel, of when it is said that they came to hear him, and
to be healed of their Diseases. And a little lower, The Holy Scripture is like
to a great River, says Saint Gregore, which has always slid (...), and which
will do so (...) the end of the world. The great and the small. The mighty and
the feeble may find there that living water which rises up even unto Heaven, it
^ffers it self to all, and is fitted to all, it has a simplicity that descends
even to the Souls of the most simple, and a height that excercises and elevates
the most raised, all may draw there indiffirently, but it will be far from
being able to be drawn dry by filling us, we may always lose our selves in the
bottomless depths of learning and wisdom, that we may adore without being able
to comprehend. But that which ought to comfort us in that Obscurity, is, that
according to Saint Augustine the holy Scripture sets before us in an Easy and
Intelligible manner, all that which is necessary to us for the Conduct of our
Lives, which she explains, and makes clear her self, in telling us clearly in
some Places, that which she said obscurely in others.

This Language is very different from that which they hold in the Book of the
Prejudices: The one says, That we shall find in the Scripture all that which is
necessary for our Instruction; and the other assures us, that the way of the
Scripture is Ridiculous and Impossible to instruct men in the Truth. The one
declares that the Scripture propounds to us after an Easy and Intelligible
manner all that is necessary for the Conduct of our lives, which it explains
and makes clear her self; and the other says, that it is a way of so excessive
a length that we ought not rationally to hope ever to come to the end,
whatsoever diligence we should use. The one makes it a means of Instruction,
proper not only for Enlightened Souls, but even for the Simpler sort, for great
and small, for strong and weak; and the other in making it an Infinite way
which has no Issue, makes it improper not only for the simple, but even for the
most learned. The one extends its use unto all that is Necessary for
Instruction and the Conduct of life, and the other in heaping up of general
difficulties, makes it unprofitable to Instruct us in the least Truths. What
Judgment can we make of this diversity, unless this, that the language of these
Gentlemen changes according to the difference of Times and Interests, as one
has said of them elsewhere. When the case is about gaining credit to their
Translation of the New Testament, they speak as advantagiously of the Scripture
as it is possible for them to speak; and when the business is to oppose a
Reformation made according to the Rule of the Scripture, but which
notwithstanding has not the happiness of their Agreement, you see what they say
of that same Scripture. The Scripture shall then, to speak properly, be only to
be commended, by the Intrest of their Translation, and as long as that Interest
shall remain, shall be the Collection of the divine Teachings The same Preface
of the N. T. of Mons.
of our Lord, The Testament that assures us of the Inheritance of our Father,
The mouth of Jesus Christ, who although he is in Heaven speaks continually upon
earth, not only the nourishment of sound Souls and those who are established in
grace, as the Body of the Son of God, but even the Consolation of Sinners, the
light of the blind, the remedy of the Sick, and the life of the dead. For these
are the Titles that the Preface gives it; but whenever that Interest shall
cease, those praises shall do so too, and it shall be nothing but a Ridiculous
way, and impossible for the Instructing of men in the Truth. I would therefore
very fain know of these Gentlemen, whether it were only upon the sight of their
Translation, that S. Cyprian, S. Augustine, and S. Gregory, wrote that which
the Preface relates, or whether those Fathers did not consider the Scripture in
it self. For if it be the first, they forgot to tell us that they only spoke
out of a Prophetic Spirit of that Translation; and if it be the Second, why
have they entertained us with that admirable proportion of the Scripture to
great and small, to the strong and weak, and that easy and intelligible manner
wherewith it propounds to us all that is necessary for the Conduct of our life
since that, without the Translation of Mons, it is an Infinite way, which has
no end, a ridiculous way, and Impossible to Instruct men in the Truth?

What can the Author of the Prejudices say to defend himself from this Manifest
Contradiction which he discovers between him and his Colleague? Will he say,
that the Scripture is in truth a good means for the Instruction of men; but
that it is so, only with the Interpretations of the Fathers? But the Author of
that Preface speaks for Scripture alone, separated from the Interpretation of
the Fathers, such as its Translation is; for he excuses himself in that he had
not made a collection of notes and explanations drawn out of the writings of
the holy Fathers, and he does not fail to say that in his Translation, as plain
as it is, not only the Souls of the more learned, but of the more simple also
and unlearned, may find that which will be necessary for their Instruction.
Will he say, that he does not mean to exclude the learned from the use of the
Scripture, but only the more simple, for the Instruction of which former, he
does not deny but that it would be a most proper means. But besides, that his
Brother speaks formally of the Instruction of the more simple, why has the
Author of the Prejudices made it a ridiculous and Impossible way, an infinite
way which has no Issue, a way which is of so excessive a length, that one can
never rationally hope to come to the end of it, whatsoever diligence one should
make? Will he say that the Scripture ought to be joined with Tradition, and
that without Tradition it cannot give a perfect Instruction? But the Preface
says expressly, that they will find in that Translation all that will be
necessary for Instruction. Will he say that in order to the Scriptures
Instructing one, the Sense of the Church ought to be added to it? But the
Preface says, that according to Saint Augustine the Scripture lays down all
that is necessary for the Conduct of our lives after a most easy and
Intelligible manner, and that she explains and makes clear her self. Will he
say that in order to the Scriptures being capable to Instruct us, we ought at
least to read it with Dependence upon the Church, and to take it from her hand?
But wherefore then would these Gentlemen have the People to read their
Translation, since they are only private Doctors, and not the Church? Wherefore
when the Prelates raised to the highest dignities have forbid the reading of it
by their Ordinances, have we seen Printed writings maintain on the contrary,
there was in those Ordinances, a Threatening of the Will and Commandment of God,
who would, that we should hear his Son, and not, that we should Dialog. of the
two Parish. of S. Hilary Montanus Dial. 1. page 23.
suppress his Gospel; a Contradiction to the Holy Scripture, which was set down
in writing for no other end but to be heard and practiced by all Nations of the
world, a Contradiction of all the Councils which have always taken the
Scripture for the Judge of the belief of the Church, and of all the
Difficulties and Questions that can arise in the Doctrine of Faith or Manners;
a Contradiction of all the Holy Fathers who advised the Faithful above all
things continually to read the word of God. Why has one Introduced two Laymen
Parishoners, Saint Hilary Montanus, saying one to another, The Bishops cannot
Dial. 1. page 2.
take away from us the Gospel that Jesus Christ has given us, that God spoke to
all his People, when he said, To day if you will hear my voice, harden not your
Hearts; a Bishop cannot take away our Eyes from us, to hinder us from seeing
and considering our way, we should not see Jesus Christ our Savior, our Pastor
and our great Bishop, who goes before us in his Gospel. That if a Bishop would
turn us away from, if an Apostle, if an Angel from Heaven would stop up this
way, and would go about to lead and guide us in another, we ought not to
believe him. Why has he made us see those Parishoners holding, That page 3.
there is nothing more contrary to the Gospel then a prohibition to read and
have it; that bread and nourishment is not more necessary to preserve the life
of the Body, then the word of God is to maintain Life in our page 25.
Souls, That all Christians have a natural right that cannot be taken from
them, of Instructing themselves by the word of God, and laboring to understand
it, and that the Holy Scriptures were given to the whole Dial. 2. page 9.
Church, and not only to the Bishops, who have no right to deprive the Faithful
of them. That this is, say they, what the Devil would preach up if he were
visible, and Transfigured into an Angel of light, and in the shape of a
Preacher in the Chair of Truth, and what else Dial. 2. page 17.
would he persuade the Faithful too, but that the Faithful ought to take very
great heed not to read the Holy Scripture, and not to meditate day and night
upon the words of life, that the Spirit of God has dictated to the Prophets,
and which God the Father has given to his Son for the Instruction of his
Church, and to draw it from the Corruption of the world, to render it Holy and
without Spot to his Father, who gave it to him -- Jesus Christ was the Word uf
God, and lived by that Word, and to make his Church live, he gave it his word
in an Intelligible Tongue, out of his own mouth, and by his Disciples: Search,
says he, and examine carefully the Scriptures, for they are they which Testify
of me.

Thus it is that they speak of it sometimes, Jesus Christ gave his Scripture to
the Faithful, with a Commandment to read it, to examine it carefully, and to
hear it. It was the Judge of the belief of the Church, and the Difficulties and
Questions that arose in the Doctrine of the Faith and Manners. The Parishioners
made use of them against their Bishops, They encountered even their Ordinances
by passages out of that Scripture, they maintained that the use of them
belonged to all Christians by a natural right, and that to go about to deprive
them of them, was to do an action of the Devil. But now a days they speak no
more after that manner, for they tell us on the contrary that it is a
Ridiculous and Impossible way to Instruct men in the Truth, an Infinite way
which has no Issue, and which is of so excessive a length that whatsoever
diligence we should use, we can never arrive to the end, and they labor to
heap difficulties upon difficulties, to drive them back, and to make a
Labyrinth full of Circles and confused ways, that so out of a fear of those
Confusions the world should take heed of entering into it.

For my own part I freely acknowledge, That I can comprehend nothing in all
that. For if, before one can assure ones self of one only Passage of Scripture,
whatsoever it be, we must needs go through a thousand tedious ways, and
overcome a thousand Obstacles that arise from the Question about the Canonical
Books, about the Conformity of the Translations with the Originals, about the
different manner of reading the Passages, and about the difference of
Interpretations, as the Author of the Prejudices would have it, according to
his ordinary Exaggeration, to what purpose is it to give the public a
Translation, which after the manner that it was given and received in, cannot
but be subject to the greatest part of those difficulties; and yet
notwithstanding, they put it into all men's hands, as well the Ignorant as the
Learned, as well of the simple as the more Enlightened, as well to women as to
men. The Church of Rome has not declared it Authentic, Two Bishops and a
Doctor have approved it, but two Archbishops, and a Cardinal, have forbidden
it; and yet one has not failed, notwithstanding those Prohibitions, to
maintain, that all the world ought to read them, and that that forbidding them
is a Violence, a Novelty, an unexampled Enterprise, a bold Attempt upon the
Liberty that God has given to the Church, ransomed at the Dial. 1. page 30.
price of the Blood of his own Son, that it is an usurpation, and the
Introducing of a Tyrannical Authority that was never excercised in the Church
until this day -- and that every one is bound not only not to obey that
Ordinance, but even to have an Horror for it, and to resist it as much as he
can. What will then become of those Difficulties, and those unconquerable
Confufions which hinder them, according to the Author of the Prejudices, so
that they cannot assure themselves of one only Passage of the Scripture,
through the uncertaitty wherein a man is of the unfaithfulness of the
Translations; through the Ignorance wherein we are of the different manner of
reading those Passages; and through the necessity of consulting Interpreters?
Is it because they would expressly engage the People in an Infinite way and
which can come to no Issue, and in a ridiculous way, and which is Impossible
for the Instructing of any in the Truth? or is it rather because they did not
propound to themselves in that Translation to Instruct men in the Truths of the
Faith, but only to satisfy their Curiosity, and to make them read good French?
The Author of the Prejudices may acknowledge therefore if he pleases, that the
heat of Disputation has carried him beyond the bounds of Right and Reason, and
the respect which he ought to have for the word of God, and that in
endeavoring to have troubled us, he has done it for himself and his Friends;
for if that which he has propounded were true, they would give us a ground to
accuse those who have published the Translation of Mons, of Rashness and
Imprudence. And it will be nothing to the purpose to say, that they Published
it for those persons who were already Instructed in the Truths which the Church
believes, that therein they might receive a Confirmation and increase of the
Faith, by the Conformity which they should find the Doctrines of the Church
have with it, and that it was necessary for that that they should go through
all the difficulties which the Author of the Prejudices has worked, since the
Sole Conformity of it with the Doctrines of the Church, would be sufficient to
assure them that it was truly the word of God. I say that answer will not
satisfy; For besides that it is an Injury to the word of God to make the
Efficacy that it has in our Souls to depend upon the Conformity which it has
with the Doctrine of the Church, whereas on the contrary the Efficacy of the
Doctrine of the Church ought to depend on its Conformity with the word of God;
besides that, the Author of the Preface, says expressly, That the Souls of the
simpler sort may find that in his Translation which is necessary for their
Instruction. He says not those who shall be already Instructed in that which
the Church teaches, but he says, the Simpler sort, he does not say that they
would be Confirmed in the Instruction which they had already, but that they
would find that which should be necessary for their Instruction. And elsewhere
he says, That the word of God, that is to say in his Translation, for it is
about the Subject of that Translation that he speaks, is the Light of the
Blind, and the Life of the Dead. Which signifies that it gives by it self the
first Impressions of the Spiritual Life. So that it was not in the view of the
knowledge that the simple might have of the Doctrine of the Roman Church, that
he published that Translation, if we believe the Parishioners of Saint Hilary
Montanus; But on the contrary in the view of that Ignorance under which they
were held. For see how they Dial. 2. page 23.
speak. Our Lord said, I have Compassion on the Multitude, for they have
nothing to eat; and you see the Complaint that the Prophet made, The Children
ask for Bread, and there is none to give unto them. It were a small matter if
they would content themselves with the not giving them the Bread of the Gospel;
They will not suffer them to take it, and if they take it, They snatch it out
of their Hands; They do not Instruct them, and they would hinder them, so that
they should not Instruct thenselves out of the word of God, and that that
Prophecy should not be accomplished, Erunt omnes docibiles Deo, and they shall
be taught of God.

I thought my self bound to make these first Reflections, to show the injustice
and inequality of these men that we have to do with. Nihil est, says Cicero,
quod minus ferendum sit, quam rationem vitae ab altero reposcere eum quinon
posset suae reddere. Notwithstanding after having a little cooled that
impetuous motion of the Author of the Prejudices, I shall not fail to Justify
our Fathers touching the Principle upon which they made their Reformation.

I say then in the first place, That they could not in that State wherein
things were, take the Church in their days for the Rule of their Faith, without
renouncing Common sense. The Church in their days, or to speak better, that
which they would call the Church, was made up of Three sorts of persons. The
Court of Rome, the Prelates and the other Clergy, and the People. The Court of
Rome was the source of all evil, it was that that had spread abroad all the
Errors and Superstitions in the Latin Church, or that had at least fomented and
maintained them when they took their rise elsewhere. Her Usurpations and the
disorder of her Government, was one of the complaints of our Fathers. They
complained of her Principles, her Maxims, and some decisions of the Faith which
she had caused to pass in Councils that were servilely subjected to her will
and her interests. She was therefore a resolute party in this affair, evidently
interested, and by consequence incapable of Judging. It is True that she called
her self the Mother and the Mistress of all Churches, and that one of her
pretensions was Infallibility in the Faith. But that very thing was one of the
Errors of which our Fathers required a correction, whatever probability she had
of ascribing it to her self. Adrian the sixth acknowledged a great part of the
disorders of that Court, in his instructions to his Nuntio whom he sent to the
Diet of Nuremberg, as we have already seen, and the General voice of the whole
Church, which demanded a long time ago a Reformation in capite and membris,
make it known enough to leave us out of all doubt. Moreover, the Court of Rome
did so loudly and vehemently declare her self against a Reformation, that it
could not be any further hoped for, and why should our Fathers have taken her
for the Rule of Faith, since not only the Gallican Church who lived in
Communion with her, maintained that she was not, but even the Experience of
many years had very evidently showed that she could not be: Does not
Tertullian, turned Tertull. advers. Prax. Cap. 1.
Montanist, Testify, That Eleutherius Bishop of Rome had received the
Prophecies of Montanus, of Priscilla and Maximilla, and that he had already
wrote Letters of Communion to the Churches of Asia and Phrygia which were
Montanists, and that those Letters should have their effect, although Praxeas
had not made them to be recalled, in relating false things concerning those
Churches and their Prophets? And has not the sixth General Council condemned
Pope Honorius as a Monothelite Heretic, with Sergius Patriaerch of
Constantinople, and some others? I know that some have said, that that Council
was deceived in the business of Honorius; but without entering upon that
Question, in which it is certain that they deceive themselves, as not long
since P. Louis Thomassin, Priest of the Oratory, in his Dissertation about that
sixth Council has acknowledged. It is enough that that Council condemned
Honorius for an Heretic, and that it proscribed his name and his Memory. For
that Condemnation, after what manner soever it happened, is an Authentic
Declaration that a General Council has held, that Popes may Err, and by
eonsequence that they are not the Rule of Faith. And it is nothing to the
purpose to say, as P. Thomassin has done, that Henorius Erred only in the
quality of a private man and not as Pope, or to speak more properly, That he
did not Err, but only that he had a mind to make use of a Dispensation for the
procuring the peace of the Church, which was divided about the Question whether
there were two wills, and two operations in Jesus Christ, or whether there was
but one, and that he desired that they would be silent about that point. Which
side soever they choose, it will always follow from that Example of Honorius,
that the Bishops of Rome are not the Rule of Faith. For to make a Rule of
Faith, it is not enough to be exempt from Error, either in quality of Popes, or
even in the quality of private men, it is further necessary that they should be
always in a state of not fomenting or entertaining Heresy, but of opposing it
on the contrary, of condemning it when it has made any progress, and of
maintaining the True Faith. But this is that which they cannot say of Honorius,
in respect of the Heresy of the Monothelites. That Heresy had overran all the
East, the Patriarchates of the East were infected with it, the Emperor
Heraclius had established it by a public Edict, a Council it self held at
Constantinople had confirmed it, whether therefore they say that Honorius
embraced Heresy in quality of a private man, or whether they say that by a
false Dispensation he would only have imposed silence on the Orthodox, which
way soever they take, it is manifest, that he was not in a state under the
quality of Pope, to put a stop to the course of Heresy, nor to succor the true
Faith. For what likelihood is there, that as Pope he should have condemned
himself as a private man; or that in quality of Pope, or as they speak, ex
cathedra, he should have Published the Truth that ought to be held, while his
own private opinion was that he should hold his peace about it and suppress it.
It is therefore a Mockery to make a Rule of Faith of such a Pope, who through
his own private Heresy, or his imprudent Dispensation, could not hinder
Monothelism from Triumphing. And it cannot be a less one, if they should
pretend that the Church of Rome should be the True Rule of Faith, while such
Popes are her Head, since she can do nothing without them, and since they might
render it incapable to defend the Truth.

I pass over in silence a multitude of other things, which sensibly show us the
falseness of that pretense of Rome, such as are the lapses of Marcellinus and
Liberius, the Contradictory decisions of diverse Popes, their inconstancy, their
capricious humors, their interested Judgments, and I know not how many other
Characters incompatible with a true Rule of Faith. It is sufficient to know
that that pretense has never been publicly received in France, and that our
Kings and our Parliaments have always most vehemently opposed it.

As to the Prelates and the other Ecclesiastics, after the sad Descriptions
that we have given of their state, in the days of our Fathers, and many Ages
before them, there is no likelihood that they can yet further with the least
shadow of Reason, propose them as a Just Rule of Faith, which way soever they
are considered, whether in General, or in particular, whether separated, or
assembled together. Their Ignorance, their negligence in spiritual things,
their sinking into vices, their excessive love of the World, and in a word all
that which we have have seen in them, will not permit us to believe that we
should be bound to trust absolutely to their word, about the Subject of the
Reformation. They had given but too many marks that they were subject to Error,
since the greatest part of those things which were to be reformed came from
them, or from those who went before them. And besides that they were themselves
express parties in that affair, considering the complaints that they made of
them, and that they were engaged to uphold the superstitions in which they had
held the People, we are not Ignorant that they had a servile dependence on the
Court of Rome to which they were bound by Oath that they would no stir, nor
speak, nor act but according to her Inspirations, and her Orders, as experience
has Justified it to us in the Council of Trent. In fine, their Prelates were
men, and such men as had made the Church to fall into that Lamentable
Corruption, out of which our Fathers sought to get out, and how could they take
them for an Infallible Rule?

As for that which respects the people, if the Author of the Prejudices is, as
is reported, the Author of the Treatise of the Perpetuity of the Faith, he
would it may be fain make them pass with us for Infallible, and give them to us
to be the Rule of our Faith. But we have shown him often enough already that he
is deceived in his opinion. What was there more liable to deceive them, and
more to incline them to abuses and superstitions, then the people, and above
all a people ignorant of the Mysteries of the Gospel, such as was for a long
time that of the Latin Church? How could a people that ought themselves to undo
the false prepossessions, with which they had been imbued, serve for the Rule
of a Reformation?

But some will say, if there had been nothing in the Body of the Church capable
of being a Rule of Faith, why did your Fathers demand a Council to hear their
Complaints, and give them a remedy? I answer that our Fathers demanded a
Council not such a one as that of Trent, made up of the Creatures of the Pope,
who waited for the Holy Ghosts coming from Rome in a Cloak-Bag, as the Roman
Catholics have reproached them; but such a free Council as wherein they might
yet have hoped that God would have presided, and his word have been heard. They
demanded it not as the Rule of Faith, blindly to submit their Consciences to
all that which should be there determined; for they well knew that they owed
that submission only to God; but as a humane Ordinary means in the Church that
Christian Charity and the love of Order made them desire, to try if they could
not by that way re-establish the purity of the Gospel in the West by the way of
the Scripture, I acknowledge, that there had lain a great difficulty in the
choice of persons; but if yet notwithstanding they would have proceeded
sincerely in it, and in the fear of God, without letting the interests of flesh
and blood enter in, the difficulties were not unconquerable. Passion,
Contention, a Spirit of Division was not as yet generally spread over all, they
were not as yet so obstinate in Error as they have been since. All the Learned
men that were then in it, acknowledged the necessity of a Reformation, and
desired it. They had therefore a ground to demand a free Council, and these who
know History; are not ignorant that to elude that demand which appeared to all
the World to be so Just and Reasonable, that the Court of Rome thought it
needful to make use of the most deep and imperceptible piece of its Policy. But
howsoever it be, there is a great difference between a Council that should
submit it self to, and Rule it self by, the Word of God, and between a Rule of
Faith. Our Fathers might very well demand the first, and expect to obtain it,
although he state of the Church was then extremely corrupted; for there was yet
some good desires, which without doubt would have wrought some effect, if they
had not been stifled or turned aside. But it does not follow from thence, that
they must after what manner soever have taken that Church, for the Sovereign
and Infallible Rule of their Religion.

They would not have more reason to say, that we ought to turn to the side of
Tradition, which the Council of Trent has raised to the same Honor and
Authority with the Scripture; We shall quickly see which ought to have been
believed. It shall suffice to say here, that although the greatest part of the
Roman Traditions are new, as the Protestants have often demonstrated them to
be, yet that in the Age of our Fathers which was as it were the sink of the
foregoing, there was scarce any Error, nor any Superstition how gross soever,
that they did not labor to defend, under the pretense of Tradition, so that
Tradition is so far from being able to serve for a Rule, that it ought it self
to be corrected and regulated according to that Maxim of Jesus Christ, In the
beginning it was not so.

As to the Ancient Fathers, I confess that their Writings may be of great use
to Learned men, to furnish them with a great measure of knowledge; but they can
never have Authority sufficient to serve for a Rule of Faith. The Fathers were
men subject to Error, to Prejudices, and Surprises, as well as other men, and
there appear but too many signs of it in their Writings. They have submitted
themselves to the Authority of the Scripture. They have called it, the balance
and exact Rule of all things, a sure Anchor, and Foundation of the Faith. They
have taken, Chrysostom. hom. 13. in 2. Cor. Athanas, in Synops.
in their Controversies Jesus Christ speaking in his Gospel, for their Judge.
They have Exhorted their Hearers and their Readers, to believe them only so far
as their words should be found confirmed by proofs drawn from the Scripture.
They have said that Optat. lib. 5. Cyril. Hieros. illnm. cat. 4. Clem. Alex.
Serom. lib. 7.
they did not care for the Testimony of men but that they would confirm what
they said by the Voice of God, which was more certain then all Demonstrations,
or to say better, the only Demonstration.

It is Evident therefore, that our Fathers could not take any other Rule of the
Faith, or Principle of the Reformation then the Holy Scripture. In effect, the
Scripture is the Word of God, the Law of our Sovereign Lord, according to which
we must all be Judged Pastors and People, great and small, Learned and
Ignorant. It contains the Foundations of Divine Revelation, without which there
is neither Faith, nor a good Conscience, nor peace of mind, nor hope of
Salvation, and if they would consider these things a little more carefully then
they ordinarily do, I am persuaded they would make no Difference with us about
this Article. All Christians are agreed that the Word of God is the only source
of all the Mysteries that are necessary to our belief in Order to our
Salvation; and that his will, is the only Rule of our Worship. This is a Maxim
about which there is no dispute between us and those of the Church of Rome; for
they know with us, that Faith comes out of the Word of God, and that Romans 10.
Mat. 15.
it is in vain to Honor God, when we follow the Commandments of men. All our
difference consists but in the knowing where that word and that will is; we
restrain it to the Scripture, our Adversaries extend it further; for they would
have it to be found in Traditions, in the writings of the Fathers, in the
decisions of the Popes, in the Determinations of the Councils, and in all that
which they call the belief of the Church, not only while those things are
conformable to the Scripture, but also while they are besides the Scriptures.

But as for the decisions of the Popes and Councils, our Adversaries themselves
consess, that God gives them not any new and immediate Revelation, that
discovers new Objects of Faith to them, or new ways of Worship, and that since
Jesus Christ and his Apostles, God has not given the like Revelations to men,
either in these latter or the proceeding Ages. It is certain, says Monsieur du
Val, his words being set down by Monsieur Arnaud in his second Letter, That the
Holy Ghost does not assist the Pope in Duvollius de Supr. fummi. Pontif. pot.
Part. 2. Quest. 5.
the decisions of points of Faith, by an immediate and express illumination, as
well because that Illumination would be miraculous, and that there would be no
necessity of establishing such a Miracle, as because that no Pope ever
attempted to prove that when he would decide any matter, he should be
immediately and expressly enlightened by the Holy Spirit. A Council also, adds
he, has not the like illumination, or ever had. And if ever any had had it, it
would have been without doubt, the first of all, which the Apostles held at
Jerusalem, at a time wherein the Holy Ghost visibly descended upon the
Faithful. And yet notwithstanding the Apostles, in that Council, did not
determine any point of difference about the Legal Ceremonies, by an express and
immediate illumination; but after a long debate and discussion.

It is therefore an unquestionable Truth, that there is no new and immediate
Revelation in the Church, and that Revelation ceased in Jesus Christ and his
Apostles. From whence it evidently follows, that all that is to be found,
either in the decisions of the Popes, or in the Definitions of the Councils, or
in the Writings of the Fathers, or the belief of the Church, or in that which
they call Tradition, or in a word, in all that proceeds from the Mouth and
hands of men, whatsoever Denomination they may pass under, is the word of God,
but as far as it may be found conformable to that Revelation of Jesus Christ
and his Apostles.

But that being so, as it is without any difficulty, how can they be certain of
that Conformity, but as they refer to and compare things with the Scripture?
They say, that there are certain Articles of that Revelation, which the
Apostles have delivered down in Trust from their own living voice, alone to
their Successors, and which from hand to hand have came down to us. But besides
that that very thing is a matter of History, about which we cannot have any
certainty of Faith, and upon which by Consequence we can build nothing firmly,
what certain sign can they give us to know those pretended Apostolical
Traditions by, or to discern the True by, when they should be mingled with the
false? From the first Rise of Christianity, Heretics, would say as may be seen
in Saint Irenaeus, to gain Iren. lib. 3. cap. 2. 3. Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 33.
credit to their Errors, that they had were the secret Mysteries which the
Apostles taught not to all in Common, but to the perfect in particular. Papias
himself, as Eusebius Testifies, had made a Collection of Tables, and New
Doctrines, under the Title of unwritten Traditions, which he had Learned, from
the Mouths of those who had seen the Apostles and conversed familiarly with
them. Saint Iren. lib. 2. cap. 39.
Irenaeus speaks of a certain Tradition, which had passed for current in his
Time in Asia, as immediately coming from the Apostle Saint John, to wit, That
Jesus Christ Taught after his Fortieth Year, which is notwithstanding now held
to be false by all Chronologers. They do not not hold the Opinion of the
M^llenaries to be less false, which diverse Ancient Fathers have approved and
maintained as a Tradition proceeding from the Apostles.

The Churches of Asia who have the Feast of Easter Celebrated precisely on the
Fourteenth Day of the Moons Age after the Vernal Equinox, boast for that
purpose of the Tradition of Saint John, and Saint Philip; and the rest of the
Church, hold on the contrary by Apostolical Tradition that it ought to be
Celebrated on the Sunday of our Lord's Resurrection. The Greeks, Nestorians,
Abassines, Latins, Armenians have their contrary Traditions; for Tradition
changes its Face and Form, according as the Nation changes; one sort hold for a
Tradition, the necessity of three immersions in Baptism, and that of the use of
Leavened bread in the Sacrament of the Eucharist; and the other mock at it and
reject it. The one sort believe a Purgatory by Tradition, the others believe it
not. The one by Tradition Circumcise their Children; the others have that
practice in horror, as being a Relic of Judaism. The one sort fast by
Tradition upon the Saturday; the rest have that fasting in Execration. One
sort, by Tradition Sacrifice Lambs at this day after the manner of the Jews;
the rest detest that custom. Who can say Justly in so great a Confusion, which
this is Apostolical, and this is not so?

Moreover, there are a great many Ancient Traditions, which public use
heretofore Authorized, and which Time has so abolished; that there remains not
the least shadow of them among the Latins, as that of not Baptizing, without a
Case of necessity but only at the Solemn Feasts of Easter and Whitsuntide, of
giving of Milk and Honey to the Baptized, of Administering the Eucharist to
little Children after Baptism, of Praying standing upon the Lords day, and from
Easter till Whitsuntide, of Celebrating the Communion on the Evening of
Fast-days, of every ones carrying home with him a piece of the Bread of the
Communion, of distributing the Cup to all the faithful Communicants, of
receiving the Communion not on ones Knees, but standing, of mutually kissing
one another before the Communion; and diverse others, which the Latins have
Abrogated. On the other side, how many Latin Traditions are there which the use
of the Church of Rome Authorizes at this Day, of which we cannot find the least
Trace in the Primitive Church, and which from thence visibly discover
themselves to be New, and by consequence false, and not Apostolical, as the
Worshipping of Images, Invocation of Saints, Transubstantiation, Adoration of
the Host. Use of Altars, that of Lights or Tapers, Masses without any
Communion, the Divine Service in a Tongue not understood by the People, the
Sovereign Authority of the Church of Rome over all other Churches, Auricular
Confession, the Number of the seven Sacraments, and as many more, that the
Primitive Church which came nearest to the Apostles never knew, as we have
often Justified, from whence it follows, that they are not Apostolical, and
descending from that only and last Revelation without which there is no word of
God. There is therefore nothing more improper to be the Rule of Faith then that
pretended Tradition, which is not established upon any certain Foundation,
which serves for a pretense to Heretics, which is embraced pro and con, which
changes according as times and places do, and by the favor of which they may
defend the greatest absurdiries, by merely saying that they are the Traditions
which the Apostles Transmitted from their own Mouths to their Successors.

In a word, if they would have us to believe a Mystery with a Divine Faith, if
they would that we should practice a Worship with a persuasion that it is
agreeable to God, they ought to show us that that Mystery, and that Worship
proceeds from the Revelation of Jesus Christ, and his Apostles; for without
that, all that is in the World is of Men's Invention, since after Christ and
his Apostles there has been no Revelation, as we are both agreed. But they can
only show us that by these two ways, either by that of the Scripture in showing
us that those Mysteries, and that Worship are conformable to it, or by that of
Transmission viva voce. But as to that Transmission viva voce, we are so far
from being able to have a Divine certainty, that we cannot have so much as a
humane, for the Reasons which I have alleged. Which are, that from the
beginning of Christianity, Heretics have boasted of them, and yet they were
not believed for them; that the Orthodox themselves, were deceived in them,
alleging them in false and vain things, which the following Ages have
rejected; that the Schismatical Churches allege them against the Latins, and
the Latins against the Schismatics, without one sides having any better ground
then the other; that the Church of Rome sets them before us for those New
things, which the first Ages never knew. It remains therefore that the way of
the Conformity to the Scripture, upon which we are all agreed, is that in which
the Divine Revelation is contained.

CHAP. IX.
An Examination of the Objections, which the Author of the Prejudices makes
against the Scripture.

BUt this way of the Scripture, according to the Author of the Prejudices, is
Infinite, Ridiculous, Impossible, it has such consusions and length that we
cannot come to the end of it, with all our diligence. The Principle of the
Calvinists, says he, includes all these Maxims without which it cannot subsist.
1. That the Church is not infallible in its decisions concerning the Faith. 2.
That Traditions do not make any part of the Rule of the Faith. 3. That the
Scripture contains in general all the points of Faith, and so that whatsoever
is not contained in the Scripture, cannot be of Faith. 4. That it contains them
clearly, and after a manner that is fitted to the under standing of all the
World. So that the certainty of that way, and the hope that we can rationally
conceive of it must depend upon the certainty of these Maxims. Upon that, we
must note, that it is not here Questioned whether the Scripture be Divine or
not, but that supposing that it is so, he says only, That he must demand of us
those formal and decisive passages that prove those four Propositions. And
that, when we do propose any one, we must first be assured that it is taken out
of a Canonical Book, and to that effect, we must examine the controversy of the
Canonical Books, and see by what Rules they may be known. 2. We must be certain
that that passage is conformable to the Original, and to that effect, we must
consult the Originals. 3. We must be certain that there are not different ways
of Reading it, that may weaken the proof. 4. That we must narrowly see into the
sense of the passage, not to give it too great a Latitude, nor to blind our
selves with an appearance. 5. That we must see whether there are no
expressions, or contrary passages, which force us to take the passage in
another sense. 6. That we ought to consult the Interpreters of one side and of
the other, and to know what they say upon that passage. 7. That after this, we
must come to the distinction of Fundamental points, and those that are not
Fundamental and prove it by Scripture. 8. That we must examine the passages
which each Sect produces in its Favor. 9. That lastly, after all this, it is
necessary that a man should trust his own Eyes and his Memory, which failing to
go through all the former reasons, and preserving only a consused Idea of them,
will not further allow him to make a Just Judgment of things. He concludes from
thence, that this way is not only interrupted with unconquerable difficulties
and obstacles; but that it is of a length so little proportioned to men's minds,
that it is evident that it cannot be that which God has chosen to instruct us
in the Truths by which he would lead us to Salvation. For, says he, if they
themselves who make a profession of spending all their lives in the Study of
Divinity, ought to Judge that Examination to be above their abilities, what
will become of those who are obliged to spend the greatest part of their Time
in other Occupations? What will become of Judges, Magistrates, Tradesmen,
Laborers, Soldiers, Women, Children, who have as yet a very weak Judgment?
What will become of those who do not understand so much as any of the Languages
into the which the Bible is Translated? What will become of the blind who know
not how to Read? What will become of those who have no understanding, nor any
readiness of mind? How can all those People examine all those Points, the
Discussion of the least of which notwithstanding, is evidently necessary to
make them rationally determine?

It is easy to see that all that heap of Objections and Difficulties which the
Author of the Prejudices has proposed against the way of the Scripture, tends
only to lead men to the Authority of the Church of Rome, to the end they should
subject themselves to that as a Sovereign and Infallible Rule. But as the
Doctrine of the Sovereign Authority of that Church is not one of those first
Principles which the light of Nature dictates to all men, since of Thirty parts
of our known World, there are at least nine and twenty who do not acknowledge
it, and as they cannot also say, that it is one of the first and common notions
of Christianity, since of all those who profess themselves to be Christians,
there are Three parts which reject it, The Author, may freely give us leave if
he pleases, that we should first demand of him upon what Foundation he would
build that Doctrine, to make us receive it, as a point of Divine Faith? I say
of Divine Faith; for if we should hold it only as a matter of human Faith, he
himself would see well that we could not believe the things which the Church of
Rome should teach, in virtue of its Authority, otherwise then with a humane
Faith, since the things which depend upon a principle, cannot make an
impression in us different from that which the principle has made. To the end
therefore that I should believe with a Divine Faith that which the Church of
Rome shall teach me by its Authority, it is necessary that I should also
believe its Authority with a Divine Faith. Thus far methinks we should not have
any Controversy.

Let us see therefore upon what Foundations of Divine Faith he would pretend to
establish this Proposition, The Authority of the Church of Rome is Sovereign
and Infallible: He can only do it by these Three ways: The first is, by a new
Revelation that God should have made to us of this Truth; the Second, in
showing that it is one of the Articles that is contained in the Revelation of
the Apostles; and the Third, in showing us the Characters of Divinity and
Infallibility impressed upon the Church of Rome, even after the same manner as
every thing proves it self by the marks that distinguish it; and thus it is
that we pretend that the Scripture forces the acknowledgment of its own
Divinity. The first of these ways is nullified, since they agree with us that
since Jesus Christ and his Apostles there has been no new Revelation, and that
there must not be any expected. The second would be proper, and necessarily
supposes a recourse either to Tradition or the Scripture; for there are but
these two Channels in which we can seek for the Revelation of the Apostles. But
that of the Scripture is forbidden us by the Author of the Prejudices, by
reason of the unconquerable difficulties which he discovers there. It is, says
he, a way full of obstacles and difficulties, and even those who profess to
spend all their days in the Study of Divinity, ought to judge that Examination
to be above all their abilities. He must therefore content himself with the way
of Tradition. But before he can make use of that, he must be first assured, and
that with a certainty of Divine Faith, that that which that Tradition contains
is come down from the Revelation of Jesus Christ and his Apostles, or at least,
that this particular point of the Authority of the Roman Church, in the state
wherein it is at present, must have proceeded from thence, that the Apostles
must have Transmitted it viva voce down to their Successors, and that their
Successors must have received it and Transmitted it down to those who
descended from them in the same sense, and every whit the same, as the Apostles
had given it to them. If he cannot be assured of that Transmission, all that he
would build upon it will be uncertain, and if he cannot be assured of it with a
Divine Faith, that which he would build upon it will not be more so. But how
can he be assured of that? He has no more that living Voice of the Apostles to
represent it to us, he must rely upon Testimonies; would it therefore be the
Roman Church that must assure us? But her Divine and Infallible Authority is as
yet in Question, and while it shall be questioned, it remains suspended, it
cannot be believed any further then with a humane Faith. Shall it be the
Scripture that must give Testimony to that Tradition? But there are so many
Difficulties in that way, says the Author of the Prejudices, That it is Evident
that it is not that which God has chosen to Instruct us in his Truths. Must we
learn it from that Tradition it self? But to decide that point, whether that
Tradition came from the Apostles or no, Tradition it self can be yet no other
than a humane Testimony. I mean that the Successors of the Apostles declare to
us that they have received such and such Doctrines from the Apostles viva voce,
and that they have received them in the same sense in which the Apostles gave
them to them, we cannot at the most have more then a humane Faith for them, for
they are men as well as others. Hitherto therefore there cannot be had a Divine
Faith concerning the point of the Sovereign and Infallible Authority of the
Roman Church, and nothing, by Consequence, that can assure the Conscience, and
set the mind of man at rest.

Let us therefore pass over to the third means, which is that of examining the
Characters of Divinity and Infallibility, that may be seen in the Roman Church.
It is, in my Judgment, in the sight of this, that they give us certain external
Marks, and we have already seen that the Author of the Prejudices establishes
upon this, that Authority about which we dispute. The most eminent In his
Preface,
Authority, says he, that can be in the world, is easily discovered to be in
the Catholic Church, because though there are Sects that dispute with it the
Truth of its Tenets, yet there are none that can with any Color contend with
it for that eminence of Authority which arises from its External Marks. But
without entering here far into the Controversy touching those Marks, I say, that
he is very far from being able to establish such a certainty upon them as we
ought to have of a Principle of Religion. And this will appear from these three
Reasons: The First is, That the greatest part of those marks are common to
false Societies, and even to Schismatical Churches, which not only are not
Infallible, but which are actually in Error, as I have shown in the first part
of this Treatise. The Greek Church, for example, in its greatest contests with
the Latin, was always a Catholic Church, she was of as great Antiquity as the
Roman, she had an uninterrupted duration from many Ages ago, she had her large
extent, and her multitude, as well as the Roman, she had a Personal Succession
of her Bishops down from the Apostles, she gloried in a Conformity to the
Doctrine of the Fathers, she had her members united among themselves, and with
her Patriarchs, she did no less then the Roman, affirm her Doctrine to be Holy,
and her word to be Efficacious, and that her Authors were holy men; she has yet
at this day her Miracles, which she boasts of, she had her Prophets and
Temporal Prosperity; in a word she might propound all that which the Church of
Rome alleadges. The Ethiopian Church on her side, may do it as much, and yet
nevertheless those Marks no ways conclude a Sovereign and Infallible Authority
for them, they do not therefore conclude it for the Roman Church. The Second
Reason is, that of all those pretended marks, some are disputed with the Church
of Rome, others are fallaciously attributed to it, and others conclude nothing
less then that which they pretend. We dispute with her, her Conformity to the
Fathers, the Unity of her Members between themselves and with their Head, the
Holiness of her Doctrine, and the Efficacy of her Word. It is true that she
boasts of these advantages; but if we should come to examine them, we should
find they would have nothing of Solidity in them, she fallaciously ascribes to
her self the name of the Catholic; The Antiquity and Holiness of her Authors,
Miracles, Prophecy, and the Personal Succession of her Bishops; For before they
can make any advantage of those marks, they ought to show that she is a
Catholic not only in name, but in deed, that she has changed nothing in the
Ancient Doctrine, nor in the Ancient worship, that she has in nothing
degenerated from her first Authors, that she is conformable to her first
Christians, whose Miracles and Prophecys are beyond all question, that her
Bishops are the Successors of the Mind and Doctrine, as well as of the Sees of
the Ancient Bishops; and unless they do so, those marks are an Illusion. She
produces others, which conclude nothing less then that which she should
conclude, as the Multitude of her Children, or the largeness of her extent, and
Temporal Prosperity; which are wordly advantages more proper to denote a
corruption, then an Infallibility. The third Reason is, That there are contrary
Characters in the Church of Rome, which note, not only, that she has been, and
that she is yet subject to err; but that she has actually erred, and we have
proposed some in the beginning of this Treatise, which it may be, deserve to be
better considered. No man can therefore establish any thing of certainty upon
those pretended external marks; and in general that principle of the Sovereign
and Infallible Authority of the Church of Rome cannot be a matter of divine
Faith, on which side soever he takes it, nor by Consequence can any of those
things be so, which depend upon that Authority. See here then the Obligation
which lies upon those in the Roman Communion to the Author of the Prejudices,
for having thus Abolished all manner of Divine Faith, for those things which
that Church teaches by her Authority, in shutting up, as he has done, the way
of the Scripture, with his Obstacles, and unconquerable Difficulties, he has
reduced all to mere Conjectures, or almost all, to humane Testimonies. Is it
therefore after that manner that he would have us believe Transubstantiation,
the Real presence, Purgatory, The Sacrifice of the Mass? Is it upon the
Foundations of that nature that he would have us to Invocate Saints, that we
should worship Images, That we should adore the Host, and receive the
Indulgences of the Pope, and Absolutions of their Confessors? But he has done
yet worse; for it is not only the Laity and private men from whom he has taken
away a divine Faith, he has torn it away even from the whole Body of his
Church, from her Prelates, her Popes, and her Councils, since if this Point of
their Sovereign and Infallible Authority is founded upon nothing but
Conjectures and humane Testimonies, They can neither have a Divine Faith for
those Conjectures and those humane Testimonies, nor for all those other things
which depend upon them. Have they a Revelation, an immediate Illumination that
instructs them? There is no more either for the Popes or Councils. Should they
have it from the Scripture? The Author of the Prejudices has told them, that it
is an Infinite, a Ridiculous way, to Instruct men in the Truth, a path which we
cannot know how to find an end of, whatsoever Diligence we use. But it may be
he says that only for the Laity, and not for the Clergy. Let us see his words:
Even those, says he, who profess to spend their whole Lives in the Study of
Divinity, ought to judge that Examination to be above all their Abilities. The
Church of Rome, the Body of her Prelates, the Councils, cannot at furthest but
be made up of those men, who profess to spend their whole Lives in the Study of
Divinity, and that Examination is above all their Abilities. He ought not to
say that they can altogether do that which it would be impossible for each one
to do in particular. For when they go about to decide the matters of Faith by
their Sovereign Authority, as they pretend that Councils should do, each
particular man ought to be assured by himself of the Truth, and not to refer
himself to the knowledge of his Brethren. With what Conscience therefore can
they exercise their Authority? With what Conscience can they decide the points
of the Faith, and propose them to be believed as points of a Divine Faith? With
what Conscience can they retain men in their Dependence? And with what
Conscience can men remain therein?

The Author of the Prejudices may disintangle this Business with his Church as
it shall please him, we have no peculiar Interest in it, but only to let him
see more and more, the Truth of that which I have said elsewhere, that he does
not sufficiently consider what he has wrote. Let us grant him, that there is no
necessity of a Divine Faith for the establishing of that Article of the
Sovereign and Infallible Authority of the Roman Church, let us yield, if he
will have it so, that he may be contented with the having a humane certainty,
such as he may have; it is clear, that whether he takes the way of Tradition,
or that of the Examination of the External marks, we shall find the same
Difficulties there, these me Obstacles, the same Hindrances, the same length,
that the Author of the Prejudices pretends to have discovered in the way of the
Scripture; And as the External Marks themselves cannot be otherwise justified
then by Tradition, it shall suffice to show what I have said in the way of
Tradition; for all will be reduced to that.

1. In the first place, it is certain that we ought not to take all sorts of
Traditions to be true, indifferently, since we have already seen that there are
some false and Apocryphal; so that we must learn plainly to distinguish it by
it self, the good and the Authentic from the others, and to that effect to
know certainly the rules by which we ought to make that distinction, always
remembering that the Authority of the Church of Rome is not here of any use,
because it is in question, and that it is that Authority which we are treating
of in that search. See here already a no small Confusion; for we must, for
this, turn over a great many Books, be well read in Histories, Pass a great
many Judgments, which cannot be very easy to a man who will not help himself
with the Authority of the Scripture.

2. After we have set aside Apocryphal Tradition, and it being restrained to
the True, we must enter upon the Examination of the question that is
controverted, to wit, Whether the Authority of the Church of Rome, as it
pretends at this day, be taught in that Tradition? And to this effect, he must
see whether the Passages that are brought to prove it, are faithfully related,
and for that he must consult the Originals, and compare them with the
Translations, which require a great knowledge of the Tongues, or at least as
the Author of the Prejudices says, that one should referr himself to a
sufficient number of fit persons, to have no occasion to doubt of the Fidelity
of their Relations. And as the number of Ancient Books is not small, that
Consultation could not but be long enough.

3. He must not forget also to inquire, whether there be not diverse ways of
reading the Passages that may weaken that proof. For since the Author of the
Prejudices would have us observe this Precaution to assure our selves of one
only passage of Scripture, why would he not have it observed to assure himself
of the Passages of that Tradition? It will therefore be necessary to consult
the Manuscripts of Libraries, or at least, to read the notes which the Critics
have made upon the Books out of which those Passages shall be taken; this would
be yet a matter of further Labor.

4. But must he not also be bound to examine narrowly the meaning of the
Passages, not to give them too great a Latitude, and avoid being blinded with a
mere Appearance? For if there are in the Scripture, as the Author of the
Prejudices assures us, that the Passages that appear clearly to Contain certain
Truths, and which do not in Effect contain them, are an occasion of deluding
those who are Chap. 14. page 341.
too easily led by that Appearance which at first sight presents it self. Why
must it not be so in Tradition also? They ordinarily allege that Passage of
Saint Irenaeus in Favor of the particular Church of Rome, Ad have Ecclesiam
propter. Potentiorem Principalitatem necesse est omnem, convenire Ecclesiam hoc
est cos qui sunt Iren. lib. 3. cap. 3.
undique Fideles, in qua semper ab (...) qui sunt undique, Conservata est ea
quae est ab his Apostolis Trad^tio. These words seem clear to the Partisans of
the Court of Rome, for the establishing a necessity of being united with the
particular Church of Rome, and living in Dependence upon it; and yet if we look
a little narrowly into them, we may see that they signify nothing less then
that which they pretend they signify, and that Irenaeus would only say thus
much, That the Faithful came from all parts to the Church of Rome, by reason
of the Imperial power which drew all the World thither, and that from thence it
was that they all together preserved the Doctrine that the Apostles had left,
without their having any considerable difference between them. That this was
the meaning of Saint Irenaeus, appears from the Connection of his discourse,
wherein he proposes to prove that the Pretended Traditions of Heretics could
not come from the Apostles, and his reason is, that if they could have come
from them, they would have been yet found in his Time in the Churches which
they had instituted, and particularly in the Roman, which was in a manner an
Abridgment and Composition of all others, by reason of the concourse of all
Nations to Rome. So that to show that the Church of Rome in those times did not
own any of the Tenets of those Heretics, was at once to show that they were
Traditions unknown to all the Churches, and by Consequence false and not
Apostolical. This Example therefore shows us that one ought not to let himself
be dazzled by the first Appearances of a Passage; but that it ought to be
narrowly examined, and that, as every one may see, requires time, and is not
altogether so easy to be done.

5. To carry on that Examination well, in respect of the Passages of the
Scripture, the Author of the Prejudices would that we should carefully consider
the like Expressions and contrary Passages, to see whether we should not be
bound by them to give another meaning to those Passages which we gather. He
says, That Common Sense dictates this Rule, and that it is full of Equity and
Justice. I see not therefore how he can exempt his Catechumeni from it, in
regard of the Passages of Tradition. It is requisite that he should carefully
remark the ways of speaking in the Fathers, in diverse matters, in order to the
making them mutually give light to one another. It is necessary, that he should
look after the contrary Passages of the Ancients, and that he compare them one
with another, to draw out clear Observations from them. But this will be yet
further no small Business; for it is very well known that there are things
enough in the Ancients directly opposite to the Pretensions of the Church of
Rome.

6. But not to detain the Readers much longer upon so clear a matter, all the
Intricate Perplexity which he pretends to find in the way of the Scripture,
f^lls back again upon the way of Tradition, when they would by this, without
the aid of the Scripture, be fully satisfied concerning the Authority of the
Church of Rome. It is necessary to discern a true Tradition from a false one;
It is necessary to consult the Originals; It is necessary to know the Different
Ways of reading passages; It is necessary to search out the meaning with great
Attentiveness; It is necessary to examine the like Expressions, and contrary
Passages; It is necessary to see diverse Interpretations of both sides; It is
necessary to know why the Roman Church distinguishes between points which every
Faithful man is bound to believe with a distinct Faith, and those which it is
enough to believe upon the Faith of the Church; It is necessary to Examine
that, which each Sect that does not acknowledge the Roman Church, says against
her; And after all that, it is necessary that every one should mistrust his own
Eyes, and the defects of his memory, and that he should be always recollecting
his first thoughts to keep himself from passing a wrong Judgment.

In fine, we will also demand of the Author of the Prejudices whether he would
not give the Scripture this Honor, to reckon it for one part of Tradition,
since it contains the first Sermons of the Apostles, from whence we may draw a
great deal of light for the deciding of the Question upon which we are, which
is that of the Authority and Infallibility of the Church of Rome? For how can
any man rationally determine himself, upon a point of that weight, without
consulting the first and the most Ancient piece of Tradition? But that being
so, we see here how we are fallen back into the difficulties and perplexities
which the Author of the Prejudices pretends to be unconquerable. And as those
Gentlemen are liable enough to be beaten with their own Weapons, we will only
turn against him the conclusions that he pretends to draw against us from his
Principles, and demand of him, Whether he believes this way very proper for
those who are Obliged to spend the greatest part of their time in other
Employments? Whether he believes it proper for Judges, Magistrates, Tradesmen,
Laborers, Soldiers, Women, Children, for those who do not understand any of
the Languages into which the Fathers are Translated, for the Blind who cannot
Read, and for those who have no quickness of understanding?

If I only propounded to my self to refute this Author, I might content my self
with what I have said, and wait with patience for what he should have to
propose, to disintangle his Catechumeni from the Difficulties and lengths
whereinto he himself has plunged them. But because I desire also to satisfy
men's Con- Consciences, I think my self bound to Answer directly to his
Objections. Let us therefore see those four Maxims, which he says, our
Principle includes, and without which he is certain it cannot subsist. As to
the first, we shall tell him, that it does not belong to us, to lay down the
proofs of this Proposition, That the Church of Rome (for this is that we are
about) is not infallible in her decisions concerning the Faith, she is
naturally subject to be deceived; if she pretends to have a privilege that
exempts her from a weakness common to all men, it belongs to her to show it,
and to convince the world of it; but till then we shall always have a ground to
presume that she is subject to that general Law, and that is sufficient,
without any other proof, to hinder us from acknowledging her for the Rule of
Faith.

As to the Second, which is, That Traditions do not make up any part of the
Rule of Faith; we shall tell him, That it is not necessarily incumbent on us to
bring a passage of Scripture to exclude Traditions, that Common sense is enough
for that, because it dictates to all men, even to the most simple, if they
would take heed, that after sixteen hundred years, or thereabouts, which are
gone since the Apostles days, Tradition cannot but be a very confused and
uncertain thing; and that being so vagous as it is, after its having passed
through the hands of an infinite number of men, naturally unsettled and
changeable, it is not imaginable that they should not have altered, increased,
lessened it, since that happens through a long tract of Time to all other
things; and by consequence, that it could not at present but be out of a
condition to serve for a Rule of Faith. Thus far the most simple are within the
limits of nature and general Experience. If they pretend that Tradition ought
to be exempted, it does not belong to us to show that it is not, it is their
part who make that pretension to produce their Reasons; and yet for all that,
it must be presumed on the side of Nature, and general Experience.

It appears therefore already, that the Two First Propositions which our
Hypothesis includes, according to the Author of the Prejudices, to wit, That
the Church of Rome is not Infallible in its decisions concerning the Faith; and
that Traditions do not make up any part of the Rule of Faith, do not give us
the least difficulty, but they give an infinite one to our adversaries. For
they ought solidly to prove the contrary Propositions, not only to the
Learnned, and knowing persons; but to the most simple also, to Tradesmen, to
Laborers, to Soldiers, to Women, and generally to all; or otherwise they
abuse their credulity; retaining them without Reason and without Justice in
their Communion, in which they cannot remain with a good Conscience, unless
they are assured of the Truth of these two Articles, That the Church of Rome is
Infallible in her decisions of Faith, and that Traditions make up a part of the
Rule of Faith. But how can those people have that certainty?

As for what respects the Third Proposition, to wit, That the Scripture
contains all the points of the Faith generally, it has no more need then the
others, to be proved by passages of Scripture. It is sufficient to establish
it, to see, that we cannot be assured of the Faith either by the decisions of
the Church, or Tradition. For that thing it self necessarily leads all
Christians to the Scripture alone, there being nothing besides the decisions of
the Church, and Tradition, that can Dispute a part with it.

There remains therefore only the Fourth Proposition, which is, That the
Scriptures generally contain all the points of Faith, after a manner fitted to
the understandings of all the World. But this proposition so framed, is not
ours, neither is it included in our Hypothesis. We only say, that that which
the Scripture contains in a manner fitted to the understanding of all the World
concerning the Faith and Manners, is sufficient for Salvation, provided that
moreover they have not Errors that hinder that effect. But there is no need of
proving this proposition by Texts of Scripture. It sufficiently proves it self,
as well by the very nature of the things that the Scripture clearly Teaches, as
by the light of common sense and the first notions of the Conscience. For those
first notions dictate to all Christians, that although God be free in the
dispensation of his Call, he is notwithstanding in good earnest toward all
those to whom his Call is addressed, and that there being among those the weak
as well as the strong, the simple as well as the Learned, it must necessarily
be concluded that he would render his Salvation inaccessible, or impossible to
the simpler sort, provided that they seriously applied themselves to it
according to their Call. The Author of the Prejudices himself acknowledges this
Principle, and he calls it, a principle of In his Preface. Page 11.
common sense. He draws ill consequences from it, but the True Consequence that
must be drawn is, Those things which the Scripture clearly Teaches, and after a
manner fitted to all the World, are sufficient to Salvation.

The Author of the Prejudices may choose therefore, whenever it shall please
him, other Propositions to exaggerate the pretended difficulties of the
Scripture. But what choice soever he should make, and what side soever he
should take, it is certain that those unconquerable difficulties, which
according to him render the way of the Scripture ridiculous and impossible to
the simpler sort, are nothing else but the Visions and Dreams of Fancy, which
admits, or would create changes; and that he can say nothing more vain and
chimerical then that which he has displayed in the 14th. and 15th. Chapters.

This is what will manifestly appear, if we consider that the Scripture is the
Rule of Faith two ways; for it is so either to form the Faith to a degree of
perfection and compleatness, as much as a Man is capable of it in this Life; or
to form it to a degree of mere sufficiency for Salvation. In the former
respect, it is the Rule of Faith, not only for the things which it clearly
contains; but generally for all that which it contains, whether in express
Terms, or in equivalent, whether by near consequences, or remote; in a word,
after what manner soever it be. In the Second, it is the Rule of Faith merely
for the things that are Essential to Religion, which it clearly contains, and
after a manner fitted to the understanding of all the World. To make a Just and
Right use in the former respect, I confess that we must necessarily go over a
great many Obstacles, and conquer a great many difficulties. We must weigh the
words exactly, examine the Style, consider the Reasons, compare it with like
expressions, consider the passages that seem contrary to it, penetrate into the
true sense of ambiguous and obscure places, look to the connexions of the
Discourse, to the matter treated of, and to the end and design of him who
speaks. To this effect, it is necessary to know how to distinguish the
Apocryphal Books from the Canonical, to understand the Original Tongues, to
Judge of the Translations by, and even to consult Interpreters. All that
requires, without doubt, a great deal of care, earnest application, a great
deal of study, and it is very true, that to acquit ones self well of it, the
whole life of a man is not too long. I shall even say, that it is too short,
and that humane abilities are too weak to exhaust the Scripture, which is an
infinite depth of Mysteries and Heavenly Truths; and therefore it is, that the
Author of the Preface to the New Testament of Mons, has very well said, that,
we may always lose our selves in the abysses of Learning and Wisdom, which we
adore without being able to comprehend. Notwithstanding, it is our duty to
advance in that knowledge as far as we can, and it would be but a very bad
reason for dispensation in that Case, to allege the lengths and difficulties
of it; for however we cannot attain to an entire perfection, yet we may
notwithstanding make a considerable progress, and the more a man advances in
that study, the more Joy and Comfort he has.

But as to the Second way in which the Scripture is the Rule of the Faith, to
wit, to form the Faith in a degree of mere sufficiency for Salvation, through
the Essential things which it clearly contains; in this regard I say, its use
is freed from all those lengths and all those difficulties, and accomodated to
the capacity of the meanest, requiring nothing else but good sense and a good
Conscience, which God gives to the smallest of his Children. First, There is no
necessity for that, that a man should study the Question of the Apocryphal and
Canonical Books; for that discussion which is necessary when they would
penetrate into the abstruse things of the Scripture, which may be drawn from it
by (...) consequences, or by a narrow Examination of its terms, and the
structure of the discourse, because those particular things do not carry so
sensible a Character of their Divinity with them as the rest; That Discussion I
say, which is necessary in that Case, is not so when they restrain themselves,
as the simpler sort do, to the essential things which the Scripture clearly
Teaches, because those things make themselves sensibly to be owned to be
Divine, and by consequence Canonical, which is sufficient for the certainty of
their Faith, if they remain in that Degree.

Secondly, They have no need either to consult the Original Tongues, or the
different ways of Reading, because, that those exact Observations which are
necessary when we would make use of the Scripture in the first Degree, are not
so, when they would in the Second. Imperfect Translations sufficiently contain
those clear things that make up the Essence of Religion, and the different ways
of Reading do not make any difference. Those things are neither in one only
passage, nor in one only Book, they are so abundantly spread over the whole
body of the Scripture, that the faults of Translators, or varieties of
Manuscripts, cannot hinder us from finding them there. And if sometimes it
happens, that the boldness and unfaithfulness of a Translator should go so far
as on set purpose to falsify any place of Scripture, as Veron, has done not
long since in reference to a passage in the Acts, which says, that the Apostles
served the Lord, and which Veron has Translated, that, they said Mass in the
Lord, or as the Authors of the Translation of Mons have done, who have inserted
into that same passage, that the Apostles Sacrificed to the Lord; and another
in the Epistle to Philemon, wherein Saint Paul says that he trusted to be given
to the faithful through their Prayers, where they have Translated it, that he
trusted he should be given to them, through the merit of their Prayers; when
that I say should fall out, there would be found enough persons in the Church,
who would not fail to advertise the people of such unfaithfulness, that they
might take heed of them.

Lastly, I say, That it is not necessary that the simpler sort should consult
the interpreters of the Scripture, to assure themselves of its true meaning;
for the Objects of their Faith are so clearly explained there, they are laid
down in so many places, they are so well connected with one another, they are
there in such a manner that provides so well for all that is necessary for the
instruction of the mind, for the consolation of the conscience, and the
Sanctification of the Soul, that with the Grace of God which accompanies them
in his Elect, they have no need of any thing but their mere view to insinuate
and enter into their hearts, and to form therein a True Faith.

To dissipate in a few words all that the Author of the Prejudices has set
down in his 14th. and 15th. Chapters, I shall only tell him, that he can
require but these four conditions in the Objects of Faith, to render them
capable of forming a true and saving Faith even in the hearts of the most
simple: The First is, That they be sufficient for the Salvation of the most
simple; The Second, That they be fitted to their capacity; The Third, That they
should have a certainty great enough to form a true persuasion in their Souls;
and the Fourth, That they should form a pure faith and freed from all Damnable
Errors. But all these conditions may be found in the Object we are speaking of,
which are clearly propounded in the Scripture. They are sufficient for
Salvation; For who will dare to deny that it is not sufficient for the
Salvation of the most simple, to know the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost,
one only Eternal God, wholly perfect, the Creator and Preserver of the World,
the absolute Disposer of all events, the Sovereign Lord of all things, Author
of all, Judge of men and Angels, and to form an Idea which inspires, in an
infinite Degree, Respect, Love, Obedience, Trust, Invocation, and
acknowledgment of what we owe to him, and which makes up the Sole Object of our
Religion? To know the profound misery of man, his natural corruption, his
ignorance, his sin, his damnation, his impotency to get out of that misery
wherein he is, and to form an Idea that excites humility, horror at his own
state, fear of Gods Judgments, and those holy inquietudes of Conscience which
Jesus Christ calls hunger and thirst after Righteousness. To know that Jesus
Christ the Son of God is our only Remedy, who out of love to us was made man,
who dyed for our Salvation, who is risen again, who is ascended up into Heaven,
who reigns there now over all things, who interceeds there before God for us,
and who from his high Heaven sheds abroad his Holy Spirit into the Souls of his
faithful ones; and to have those thoughts which make us run to him, to place
all our hope in him, to do nothing that may displease him; to do on the
contrary all that he commands us, to imitate him, and to glorify him as he
deserves, as much as we are able. To know the mercy of God which pardons us our
Sins through Jesus Christ, which gives us Heaven, with all necessary graces to
carry us thither, and to have Sentiments that carry us out to Repentance, to
Confession, to Prayer, to Thankfulness for the Favors which he communicates to
us, to patience in afflictions, to Trust, to Charity as well toward God as
toward our Neighbor, to Justice, to Goodness, to Compassion toward those who
are in misery, to forgive those injuries that are done to us, and to hold a
Religious and brotherly Society with those who have the same Sentiments with
our own. Who can doubt, but that these things well known and well practiced, as
we have laid them down, are not sufficient to the Salvation of the most simple?

But, says the Author of the Prejudices, It is not enough that these things
should be sufficient for the Salvation of the most simple, it is further
necessary for the quiet of their Consciences, that they should know that they
are sufficient. But they cannot know that, without scrupulously examining the
Question of the Fundamental points and the not Fundamental, which requires a
long and difficult discussion. This Objection is vain, For if those Articles
which I have before set down in general, are alone sufficient for the Salvation
of the most simple, it is impossible that a good Soul of that order, should not
understand their sufficiency, since those Objects satisfy all the just and
natural desires of the Conscience. In effect, They make the most simple know
the God whom they ought only to serve, they discover to them their own misery,
they mark out their Remedy, and the means of their delivery, they inspire into
them Piety, Holiness, Justice, Charity, Repentance, Consolation in their
Afflictions, and the hope of a life to come; and they furnish them with
necessary motives to the love of God and their Neighbor, which is the
fulfilling of the Law or as Saint Paul speaks the end of the Commandment. It is
not therefore necessary to the establishing the quiet of the Conscience of a
man, for him to enter upon the Question of the Fundamental, and the
not-Fundamental points, nor that he should engage himself in the difficulties
and distinctions that study, and Meditation might furnish the Learned with on
that Subject. That Peace is sufficiently established by the things themselves
which I have mentioned; and provided that one believes and practices them well,
they will never fail to appease the troubles of a Soul, and of settling in it a
firm hope of its Salvation.

But, says the Author of the Prejudices yet further, The Roman Church and the
Greek Church deny that all the Tenets necessary to Salvation should be
restrained to the things that are clearly contained in the Scripture, so that
of necessity they must enter upon, enter into the Examination of this Point;
for the Authority of the Church of Rome well deserves that we should not
without Examination, prefer the rash affirmation of a Minister before it. I
answer, That the Sentiment of a good Conscience, which contents it self with
the things clearly contained in the Scripture, finding it self upheld by these
two Reflections, the one, That God has not any more made the Souls of the mere
simple, then those of the most Learned to be deluded with the inventions of the
humane understanding, under the pretense of Tradition, or of the decision of
the Church; and the other, That God has not made his Salvation inaccessible to
them, well deserves to be prefered without any further Examination, before all
the interested pretensions of the Roman Prelates, and all the Superstitious
Reveries of the Greeks. And after this manner it will not be necessary to enter
into any dispute upon that subject. They may dispute of it as much as they
please in the Schools, the simpler sort need not do it, they are sufficiently
contented to hold to all that which they find to be clearly expressed in the
Scripture.

We must therefore pass on to the second Condition, and see whether those
things which I have noted are not clearly to be found in the Scripture, and
that in a way fitted to the capacity of the most simple. But it is certain that
they are to be found there, and that they are laid down with sufficient
Evidence, not to surpass the reach of their understandings, and that they are
few enough for number, not to exceed the force of their memories.

But the Author of the Prejudices, demands of us what clearness we mean, when
we say that all the things that are necessary to Salvation are clearly
contained in the Scripture? For, says he, if Mr. Claude means such a clearness,
as will convince all well disposed and ill-disposed persons, and that no
prejudice can darken it, so that he acknowledges nothing necessary to Salvation
but what is expressed in the Scripture in that manner to be necessary to
Salvation, I will maintain to him that his proposition is impious, that it
manifestly tends to make Socinians and Arrians to be received into the Church,
and almost all Heretics, since it bannishes out of the number of the Articles
of the Faith all the Tenets which those Heretics dispute, and which they do
not see in the Scripture. But it is not very difficult to satisfy that demand.
I speak of such a clearness as will convince a sincere person, who does not
blind himself either by passion, or malice, or interest, or prejudice, but lets
his Reason and his Conscience act in good Earnest. This is well near the Answer
that the Author of the Prejudices would make, if we asked him the same
Question, touching the clearness which he pretends there is in Tradition, or in
the infallible voice of the Church; for his Justice is so great, that he does
never propose any difficulties of our Principle to us, which are not common to
the Principle of the Church of Rome, and which by consequence, he would not be
bound to answer himself, as well as we. Notwithstanding I shall tell him that
he grossly deceives himself, if he imagins that we will only acknowledge those
things for Articles of Faith which are clearly contained in the Scripture. It
is true, that we acknowledging them only for the Articles of Faith which are
necessary to the Salvation of the most simple, does not hinder, but that other
things which are contained in the Scripture with less evidence, may also be
Articles of the Faith, although not absolutely necessary; for all that which is
in the Scripture, after what manner soever it be contained there, is of Faith.
He does not less deceive himself, if he imagins that although the Articles
which the Socinians and Arrians and other Heretics dispute, were of the number
of those which are not so clearly contained in the Scripture, and the knowledge
of which is not absolutely necessary to the Salvation of the simple, yet that
we ought to receive those Heretics into the Church. There is a great
difference between simple persons who do not conceive a Fundamental Truth
otherwise then under a general notion, and indistinctly, without going any
farther, and those going so far as a distinct Idea of the Truth, expressly deny
it, and substitute a false and deceitful Idea in its place. The former may be
in a State of Salvation, and ought to be received into the Church; whereas the
second sort ought to be banished, as persons infected with a pernicious Error.
A Peasant may be made to believe in good earnest that Jesus Christ is God, and
that the Father the Son and the Holy Ghost are but one only God, without going
any farther, because he will not understand the terms of, Nature, Essence,
Person, Hypostatical Union, and others that are made use of upon that subject,
and he will also be ignorant of the subtle and frivolous distinctions of the
Heretics. Who can deny that such a man holds the Truth under a General Idea?
And who will not yet place a very great difference between him and a Socinian,
who very well knowing what these Propositions mean, Jesus Christ is God by his
Essence, The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are Three Persons and one only Divine
Nature, will deny them, and substitute in their places these other
Propositions, Jesus Christ is God only by the dignity of his Office, and Glory
of his Exaltation; The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, being only so by
Denomination. It would be a very hard case in my Judgment to exclude the former
from the Church, but it would be a sin to admit the latter; and this shows us,
by the way, the falsehood of the reasoning of the Author of the Prejudices.

But we ought to resume our discourse. I say therefore the same thing of the
Third condition as of the two Former, The things whereof we treat persuade
themselves, and make themseves to be perceived as true and Divine, as well by
the weakest as the strongest. For although the weaker are not in a condition to
render a Reason exactly of their persuasion, as a Learned man would do, yet
notwithstanding we must not doubt but they are rightly persuaded. A Tradesman,
a Peasant, a Labourer, know not how to explain either the rules of right
reasoning, or the mediums that Logic affords to discover the faults of
Sophistry or false reasoning, and yet nevertheless, they do yet apprehend a
just reasoning, and reject a bad. It is the same thing of a good Doctrine and a
false, the weaker sort may receive the one and reject the other, when it shall
be presented to them and they would make that discernment by the mere Judgment
of their Consciences though they should not be capable of Explaining their
Reasons well. For there are two ways of being persuaded of a Truth, and knowing
a falsehood, the one is, by a simple apprehension, and the other by reflection;
the first comes from a mere impression of the Objects, that make themselves to
be discerned by their very nature; and the other comes from Meditation and
Study, through the application of certain Rules. I confess that there is more
confusion in the first, but that has also sometimes more force and more
certainty then the Second.

As for that which regards the Fourth Condition, which is, That the Faith
should be pure and freed from every damnable Error; besides that which I have
said that the mere sentiment of Conscience is enough for the weaker sort to
make them discern the good from the bad, and by Consequence, to reject the
false Doctrines that shall concern their Salvation; besides that, I say, it is
certain, that damnable Errors, that is to say, those which are incompatible
with a true and saving Faith, have a natural repugnancy with the Truths that
are Essential to Religion, wherewith the simpler sort are endowed; so that
those Truths alone are sufficient for the rejection of Errors, without any
absolute necessity that they should have a greater stock of Learning. For
Example, The principle of the Adoration of one only God, in the Souls of the
weakes sort in our Communion, is sufficient to make them reject a Religious
worship paid to Creatures, without their lying under a necessity of entering
further into the Controversy which we have with the Church of Rome upon that
subject. The Principle of confidence in God alone, is sufficient to make them
reject invocation of Saints, and Angels, and a confidence in their merits. The
principle of the one only Sacrifice of Jesus Christ upon the cross for the
Expiation of our sins, is sufficient to make them reject humane Satisfactions,
Purgatory, and the Indulgences of the Pope. The Principle of the Mediation of
one only Jesus Christ is sufficient to make them reject the Intercession of
Saints and Angels. The Principle of the Truth of the humane nature of Jesus
Christ like unto us in all things except sin, is sufficient to make them reject
the Real Presence, Transubstantiation, the Sacrifice of the Mass, and the
Adoration of the Host. And that which is yet further considerable is, That as
the Essential Truths of Religion are so linked with one another, that there is
not any one, that may not be, as I may so speak, the Center of all the rest,
that is to say, which may not have references to all the rest, and immediate
connexions, and which all the others may not serve to prove and uphold, which
makes out diverse ways or manners of establishing them in the minds of the most
simple; even so those Errors that are destructive, are so repugnant to those
Truths, that there is not any one which may not be opposed not only by all in
general, but even almost by each one in particular, which shows that there are
diverse ways of overthrowing them and destroying them in the minds of the
weakest, and when they shall escape one of those ways, they will be
sufficiently overthrown by another. For Example, Transubstantiation which is
repugnant to the sincerity of God, is also repugnant to the Truth of the humane
nature of Jesus Christ, to the formation of his Body of the substance of the B.
Virgin, to the state of that Glory wherein he is at present, to the Article of
his Ascension, and of his existence in Heaven, to the manner in which he dwells
in us, which is by his Spirit, and by our Faith, to the nature of that hunger
and thirst which we should have for his flesh and for his blood, which is
Spiritual, to the Character of both the Sacraments, wherein there never is any
Transubstantiation made, and to the perpetual Order that God observed when he
wrought Miracles, which was to lay them open to men's Eyes and Senses; so that
when a man should not be capable of perceiving any of those repugnances, he
would perceive the others which would produce the same effect, and which would
be sufficient to make him reject those Errors.

See here then all the Conditions, that are necessary for the forming of a True
Faith even in the Souls of the most simple, behold them found in the Scripture,
and by consequence behold the Scripture remaining the Rule of Faith, in spite
of all the endeavors of the Author of the Prejudices. It is in vain that he so
strongly opposes it, it will always be what God has made it, that is to say,
the Fountain and only source of the Truth of Religion, or as St. Irenaeus
speaks, the Foundation and Pillar of our Faith, which only can give us quiet of
mind, and Iren. lib. 3. cap. 1.
peace of Conscience. The Difficulties which the Author of the Prejudices forms
against the Scripture, have these Three Characters; The one, That they may be
turned against himself, that is to say, that as he has made them upon the
subject of the Scripture, We may also make them upon the subject of Tradition
and the Church of Rome, to which he would send us back; the other, That in
regard of the Scripture they are null and to no purpose; and the Third, That in
regard of Tradition and the Roman Church, they are solid and unconquerable; and
this is what will appear, if what I have said in this and in the foregoing
Chapter be well Examined.

The End of the Second Part.
An HISTORICAL DEFENSE OF THE Reformation; Against a Book Entitled Just
Prejudices against the CALVINISTS.
THE THIRD PART: Of the Obligation and Necessity that lay upon our Fathers to
separate themselves from the Church of Rome.
CHAP. I.
That our Fathers had just, sufficient and necessary Causes for their
Separation, supposing that they had right at the bottom, in the controverted
Points.

WE should certainly be the most ungrateful persons in the World, if, after the
favor that God has shown us, in re-establishing the Purity of his Gospel in
the midst of us, we should not think our selves bound to give him everlasting
Thanks. So great and precious an advantage, highly calls for our resentments,
and that in enjoying it with delight, we should pay our Acknowledgements to the
Author of it. But what ground soever we should have to rejoice in God, we must
notwithstanding avow, that we should be very insensible in regard of others, if
we could behold without an extreme affliction, the misery of so many men who
voluntarily deprive themselves of that good. Those who are at present engaged
in those Errors and Superstitions, from which it has pleased the Divine
Goodness to deliver us, are our Brethren, by the External Profession of the
Christian Name, and by the Consecration of one and the same Baptism; and how
can we entirely rejoice, while we see them in a state which we believe to be so
bad and so contrary to our common Calling? I know, that God only, who is the
Lord of men's hearts and minds, can dissipate that gloomy darkness which they
are involved in, and that it is our Duty, to pour out our ardent and continual
Prayers to him for his Grace for them; but we ought not to neglect humane
methods, among which, that of justifying the Conduct of our Fathers in the
subject of their Separation, is one of the most efficacious: and as it is by
that especially that they labor to render us odious; so is to that, that I
shall allow the sequel of this Work.

The Separation of our Fathers ought to be distinguished into three Degrees:
the First consists in that which they have loudly pronounced against the
Doctrines and Customs of the Church of Rome, which they judged to be contrary
to Faith and Piety, and which they have formally renounced: the Second consists
in this, that they have forsook the External Communion of that Church, and
those of its party: and the Third, in that they have made other Assemblies than
hers, and that they have rank't themselves under another Form of Ministry. We
have treated of the First already, where we have shown, the Justice and
Necessity of the Reformation which our Fathers made; the Third shall be spoken
to in the Fourth Part, and this is designed to examine the Second. Our Inquiry
therefore at present, will be to know, whether our Fathers in Reforming
themselves, ought to have separated themselves from the other Party, who were
not for a Reformation; or whether, notwithstanding the Reformation, they ought
yet to have abode with them in one and the same Communion, and to have lived in
that respect as they did heretofore. This is that which I pretend to make clear
in this Third Part of this Work.

To enter upon this business, I confess, that if we could suppose it as a
certainty, That all Separation in matters of Religion is odious and Criminal,
we ought to be the first in condemning the Actions of our Fathers, and that
whatever aversion we should have for the Errors and Abuses which we see
reigning in the Church of Rome, we ought to labor to bear them as patiently as
it could be possible for us to do, in waiting till it should please God to
correct them, and notwithstanding to enter into its Communion, and to live
under its Ministry. But so far are we from being able to make a supposition of
this nature, that on the contrary, there is nothing more certain, than this
Truth, That as there are Unjust, Rash and Schismatical Separations; so there
may be also not only Just and Lawful ones, but Necessary and Indispensable ones
also. So the Primitive Christians withdrew themselves from the Jewish Church,
after it had obstinately remained in its unbelief: and afterward, the Orthodox
in the first Centuries held no Communion with the Valentinians, nor with the
Manichees; nor in general, with those Heretics who disturbed the Purity of the
Gospel with their Errors. Nay, when the Arians had even made themselves Masters
of the Synods and Churches, there was an actual Separation made of a very great
number of persons, as well of the Body of the Clergy, as that of the People,
who would not have any Communion with them, and who endured upon that account
all sorts of persecutions. Therefore also it was that S. Hilary Bishop of
Poictiers earnestly exhorted the Bishops and the Orthodox people by a public
Letter that he addressed to them. The Name of Peace, says he to them, is
indeed very specious, and the mere appearance of Unity has Hilar. adv. Arianos.
something splendid in it: But who knows not, that the Church and the Gospel
acknowledges no other Peace than that which comes from Jesus Christ, that which
he gave to his Apostles before the glory of his Passion, and that which he left
in Trust with them by his eternal Command when he was about to leave them. It
is this peace which we have taken care to seek when it has been lost, and to
re-establish, when it has been disturbed; and to preserve, after we have found
it again. But the sins of our Times, and the Ministers or Forerunners of
Antichrist, will not suffer us to be the Authors of so great a good; nor that
we should so much as partake of it. They have their Peace which they boast of,
which is nothing else, but an Unity of Impiety, while they carry themselves not
as the Bishops of Jesus Christ, but as the Prelates of Antichrist. And about
the end of his Letter, I exhort you, says he, that you take heed of
Antichrist. Be not deceived by a foolish love of Walls, nor respect the Church
more on Roofs and in Houses, nor strive no more, on such frivolous
considerations for the Name of Peace. As for my self, I find more certainty in
the Mountains, in the Forests, in the Lakes, in Prisons, in Gulphs; for there
it was that the Spirit of God animated the Prophets. Separate therefore your
selves from Auxentius, who is an Angel of Satan, an Enemy to Christ, an open
Persecutor, a Violator of the Faith, who made a deceitful Profession of the
Faith before the Emperor, in which he joined Blasphemy to that Deceit. Let him
assemble as many Synods as he pleases against me, let him make me be declared a
Heretic, as he has often already done, let him proscribe me by Public
Authority, let him stir up the wrath of the Great Men against me as much as he
will, he can never be any other to me than a Devil, since he is an Arian. I
shall never have peace, but with those who following the Decree of our Nicene
Fathers, would anathematize the Arians, and acknowledge Jesus Christ to be
truly God.

S. Epiphanius also relates, that before the Synod of Seleucid, Epiph. haeres 73
wherein Arianism was established, many people who found themselves to be under
the Jurisdiction of Arian Bishops remained firm in the confession of the True
Faith, and set up other Bishops themselves. And the Histories of Socrates,
Theodoret, and Sozomen may teach us, that while the Arians possessed the
Temples, and the Sees of the Churches, the Orthodox held their Assemblies
apart, in the Fields as well as in private Houses.

With the same Judgment S. Ambrose teaches, That Jesus Ambros. Comm. in Luc.
lib. 6. cap. 9.
Christ alone is he from whom we ought never to separate our selves, and to
whom we ought to say, Lord, to whom shall we go, thou have the words of eternal
life. That above all things, the Faith of a Church ought to be regarded, that
we ought to hold it there if Jesus Christ dwells there; but if a people may be
found to be there who are Violaters of the Faith, or that an Heretical Pastor
has polluted that habitation, we ought to separate our selves from the
Communion of Heretics, and to avoid all commerce with that Synagogue. That we
ought to separate our selves from every Church that rejects the true Faith, and
does not preserve the fundamentals of the Apostles Preaching, without fear lest
its Communion should brand us with some note of Perfidiousness.

There could not therefore be a more unreasonable thing in the World, than to
prepossess ones self in general against all manner of Separation: for it is
manifest, that the communion of men is no otherwise desirable, than as it can
consist with the communion of God; and that when that of men shall be found to
be directly opposite to the true service of God and our own salvation, which is
the only End of a Religious Society, we ought no longer to hesitate about our
Separation.

But to make out this Truth yet a little more clear, we need but to set before
their eyes what we have already said in the First Part, that the Church may be
considered either in respect of its Internal State, in as much as it is the
Mystical Body of Jesus Christ, the Society of the truly Faithful and the true
Elect of God, without any mixture of Hypocrites and the worldly, pure
throughout as she is in Gods sight; or in respect of its External State, in as
much as it is a Society, which in the profession of one and the same Religion,
includes a sufficiently great number of the Hypocrites and worldly, who do not
belong to the Mystical Body of Jesus Christ, nor are of the Church, but in
appearance only. That Distinction is evident enough of it self, not to need any
proof, and our Adversaries themselves will not oppose it. But although they do
not oppose that Distinction, yet they never fail of confounding both those
respects. For when they speak of the Promises that God has made concerning the
perpetual subsistence of his Church, where it would be just to refer them to
the Church only, as made up of the Truly Faithful: since to speak properly, God
looks upon them alone as his true Church, they refer them to the Church, in as
much as it is mixed with the worldly and hypocrites. And when the Contest is
about establishing the Duties to which a Religious Society engages us, where it
would be just to consider the Church as mingled with the good and the wicked,
the faithful and the worldly, such as it appears to us; they consider it, as it
is pure and without any mixture of Hypocrites, such as it is in the eyes of
God. We may say, that this confusion is the source of all their Errors, and the
foundation of all their Fallacies which they make on this matter.

We ought therefore, in order to our judging aright of a Separation, to
represent this Distinction to our selves, and to form within our selves a just
Idea of it. For in the first place, it is without all doubt, that we never
ought to separate our selves from the Communion of the truly Faithful, who
alone are the Spouse of Jesus Christ, and his Mystical Body. If such a
Separation should go so far as to break the Internal Bond of that Communion,
which consists in having the same Faith and Christian Holiness, we could not
make it without separating our selves at the same time from Jesus Christ
himself; and by consequence depriving our selves of all hopes of salvation,
since there is no Name under Heaven given by which men may be saved, but only
that of Jesus Christ. If it should not go so far as to break the bond of
Internal Communion, but only of the External, that is to say, no longer to
acknowledge others for our Brethren and Members of the same Body, nor to
frequent the same Assemblies with them, this is a True Schism, which offends
against the Laws of Charity, and which the Authors shall especially answer for
before the Judgment Seat of God. And such were the Schisms of the Novatians,
the Donatists, the Luciferians and many others, which were founded merely upon
personal interests, or at least upon light and frivolous pretenses.

It is further beyond doubt, that we ought not to break that External Communion
which it has with the worldly and profane that are mixed in a Religious Society,
while they make a profession of the true Faith, practicing a sincere Worship,
and submitting themselves to that Rule of Manners which the Gospel lays down
to us, although otherwise their Lives and Actions should very ill answer their
Profession. I confess, that every Church well ordered, ought to have its Laws
for the repressing of the Vicious, and leading them back to repentance; and
that when it cannot come to that end by the way of Exhortation and Censure, it
has a right absolutely to cut them off from the body of that Society. But
besides that those kinds of Excommunications ought never to fall upon a whole
people, or upon a whole multitude, for fear of involving the innocent with the
guilty; they never ought to be used, but in respect of impenitent sinners only,
obstinate in their crimes, and publicly maintaining them. For the rest we
ought to agree, that an exact discerning of the good and the wicked, will not
be made till the last day; and that till then, God would have us suffer that
mixture, without partaking with the sins of the wicked, and without approving
them; but yet without breaking under that pretense the bond of External
Communion. The Reason of this conduct is, that it would not be possible for one
to deprive ones self of the communion of the wicked, without depriving ones
self at the same Time of that of many righteous, as St. Augustine has very well
demonstrated against the Donatists. So that it would not be a sufficient reason
for forsaking the communion of a Church, only to allege a general depravation
of manners, even when it should be true, that it did reign therein.

But it is no less certain, that when it falls out, that one party of the
Church considered in the second respect, that is to say, in as much as it is a
mingled Body of good and bad, should confirm it self in Errors, and in
practices contrary to the service of God and the salvation of men; and that not
only it rejects the instructions given it upon that occasion, but would even
force all others to have the same sentiments, and to practice the same Worship,
the Separation of the other Party is just, necessary and indispensable. It is
just; for every where, where there can be nothing else but an unjust Communion,
there is Justice in a Separation from it. But there can be nothing else but an
unjust Communion with a Party, which essentially destroys the True Worship of
God, which shuts up it self in Errors directly contrary to men's salvation, and
which through an intolerable Tyranny would constrain all those who live in it,
to make a Profession of the same Errors. It is then just for a man to separate
himself from it.

But I say further, that that Separation is necessary and indispensable for
diverse Reasons.

The First of all is, because of the visible danger whereby a man would
insensibly expose himself to let his Faith be corrupted, and his Worship be
violated by the commerce which that same Communion would force him to. In
effect, when a man is in those Assemblies, and sees himself under one and the
same Ministry with persons infected with Errors, and engaged in a false
Worship, and who would force all others to be there too, what caution soever he
should use, it is impossible that he should preserve himself in Purity, or at
least, that he should not be in continual danger of corrupting himself, or
falling into hypocrisy in making a profession to believe that which he does
not. He ought therefore to separate himself.

Secondly, He ought to do so, by reason of the inevitable danger to which he
would expose his children. For if it should be true, that Adult persons might
live in communion with such a Party as I have supposed, without being infected
with its poison, or without being hypocrites, which it is no ways possible for
them to do, it would not be conceivable, that their children could be exempted
from that danger by ordinary ways, whatsoever care they should elsewhere take
of their education. It would be therefore to prostitute and destroy them, and
by consequence for a man to destroy himself; for every one ought to answer
before God for the salvation of his children as his own.

But besides these two interests, which impose an indispensable necessity on
him, it is (3.) further certain, that a man could not without a crime, nor even
without a manifest contradiction, own those for his brethren, whom he believes
God does not own for his children, and who are not in a condition to become
such. A Religious Society is a Mystical Family, into which, to judge of it
according to its natural appointment, one ought to admit those only, who may be
charitably and rationally judged to be in a state of Adoption toward God, and
at the farthest, such as are apparently in a state of Conversion, or of
Repentance: and in regard even of these latter, there ought to be some Time
suspended, before the giving them external pledges of that Communion, till
their Conversion, or their Repentance appear more fully. They suffer the wicked
to be there, when their birth or their hypocrisy have externally introduced
them, only by accident, to avoid troubles and scandals. And therefore it was
that the Ancient Church acknowledged but three sorts of persons only to be in
its Communion, the Faithful, the Catechumeni, and the Penitents; but as for
those who taught false Doctrine, or practiced a false Worship, it never had any
Union with them. Not only the Ancients had no Communion with them; but to show
how necessary and indispensable they judged a separation from them to be, they
went so far as to refuse their Communion with the Orthodox themselves, when
either by surprise or weakness, or some other interest, they had received
Heretics into their Communion, although as to themselves they had kept their
Faith in its Purity. We find in the Life of Gregory Nazianzen, that his Father,
who was also called Gregory, and who was Bishop of Nazianzen before him, having
been deceived by a fallacious Writing, and having given his Communion to the
Arians, all the Monks of his Diocese, with the greatest part of his Church
separated themselves from him, although they well knew, that he had not changed
his mind, nor embraced Heresy. And even the Orthodox of the Church of Rome
refused to hold Communion with Pope Felix, as Theodoret tells us, although he
entirely held the Creed of the Council of Nice, because he held Communion with
the Arians. This I mention not absolutely to approve of that carriage, but only
to show, how far their aversion went heretofore, which they had for holding
Communion with Heretics.

Those who are prepossessed against all sorts of Separation in the Matters of
Religion, ought to remember, that the obligation that lies upon them to hold
Communion with those with whom they are externally joined, is not without its
bounds and measures. We are joined together under certain conditions, which are
principally the profession of a pure faith, or at least such as is free from
all damnable Errors, a Worship freed from all that which is opposite to the
essence of Piety; in a word, a Public Ministry, under which we may work out
our own salvation. While these conditions remain, they make the Communion
subsist; but when they fail, the Communion fails also, and there is a just
ground for a Separation, provided we observe these necessary Cautions.

They cannot say, in this case, that we separate our selves from the Church,
nor that we forsake her Communion, or that we break her Unity. For the forsaken
party being truly such as we suppose it, ought not to be any more looked on as
the Church of Jesus Christ, but only as a party of the worldly who were before
mingled with the Truly Faithful, and who through their obstinacy in their
Errors and false Worship had discovered themselves, and had themselves torn off
the vail which as yet confounded them after a manner, with the others. The
Orthodox in the first Ages did not in the least break the Unity of the Church,
when they would not hold Communion with the Valentinians, the Marcionites, the
Montanists, the Manichees, and the other Heterodox of those times, as I have
noted already, no more than those, who with so much constancy and resolution
refused to hold Communion with the Arrians.

We ought not therefore presently to condemn all kind of Separation; and since
there are such kinds of it as are necessary, just and lawful, as there are such
as are unjust and rash, it would be the extremity of folly to judge of all
after the same manner without any difference or distinction. The Roman Church
her self, which has sometimes cut off whole Nations, as France and Germany from
her Communion, which may have been seen to have been so often divided into
diverse parties, whereof one has excommunicated the other, would not it may be
freely suffer, that we should treat of matters with this confusion. So that
disputing at present about our Separation with her, we shall demand no unjust
or unreasonable thing, when we tell them that we ought to examine of what
nature that Separation is, to consider the reasons, and wisely to weigh the
circumstances; for if our Fathers separated themselves upon light grounds, and
without having any sufficient cause, if they were even under circumstances
which ought to have bound them to have remained united with the other Party,
which was not for a Reformation, we shall agree with all our hearts to condemn
them: but if, on the contrary, the reasons which they had were just, sufficient
and necessary, if there was nothing in the circumstances of times, places,
persons that could hinder them from doing that which they did, it is certain,
that instead of condemning them, we should bless them, we should think our
selves happy in following their footsteps; and as for the reproaches and
venomous accusations of the Author of the Prejudices and such like, we should
bear them with patience, looking on them as the effect of a blind passion.

Let us therefore begin to make that Examination, by the Causes of our
Separation. Every one knows what the matters that divide us are; that they are
not either Points of mere Discipline, such as that for which Victor Bishop of
Rome separated his Church from those of Asia, who should keep the Feast of
Easter on the fourteenth day of the Moon, nor merely Questions of the School,
which consist in nothing but terms remote from the knowledge of the Vulgar, as
that which they call trium Capitulorum, which raised so many troubles in the
Times of the Emperor Justinian and Pope Vigilius; nor in mere personal
interests, such as we may see in the Schisms of Anti-Popes; nor purely in
personal Crimes or Accusations, as in the Schism of the Donatists; nor even in
a general corruption of Manners, although that was extremely great in the time of
our Fathers. The Articles that separate us, are points that according to us,
essentially disturb the Faith by which we are united to Jesus Christ, points
which essentially alter the Worship that we owe to God, which essentially
deprave the sources of our Justification, and which corrupt both the external
and internal means of our obtaining Grace and Glory. In a word, they are such
Points as we believe to be wholly incompatible with salvation, and which by
consequence hinder us from being able to give it the Title or the Quality of a
true Church of Jesus Christ to a Party which is obstinate in the profession and
practice of them, and which would force us to be so too. I confess, that we
cannot say, that our Controversies are all of that importance; there are some
undoubtedly, which are of lesser weight and force, which it was fitting for
them to reform themselves in, but which notwithstanding would not have given
alone a just cause of Separation. In this rank I place the Question of the
Limbus of the Ancient Fathers, that of the Local Descent of Jesus Christ into
Hell, that of the distinction of Priests and Bishops to be of Divine Right,
that of the keeping of Lent, and some others of that nature, where there might
have been seen Error and Superstition enough to be corrected; but which would
not have gone so far, as to have caused a rupture of Communion. So that, it is
not for these kinds of things, that our Fathers left the Church of Rome; they
had more sufficient, more urgent and indispensable reasons in the other
controversies, among which, that of Justification by Meritorious Works, and by
Indulgences, Transubstantiation, the Adoration of the Eucharist, the Sacrifice
of the Mass, Invocation of Saints and Angels, religious worshipping of Images,
Humane Satisfactions, the Lordship of the Pope and his Clergy over men's
Consciences, held the chiefest place. These are the true Points which caused a
Separation; and if the others contributed any thing to it, it was only by the
connection which they had with these here; or because they noted a general
Spirit of Superstition contrary to true Piety; or in fine, by reason of their
number: for sometimes diverse both less dangerous each to a part, all together
make a mortal and incurable disease. However it be, it appears that our Fathers
had besides but too just and necessary reasons of their Separation.

But to come to set out this matter in its full evidence, it will be requisite
to see what they can say in opposition to what I have said. It seems to me,
that they can take but one of these Three sides. 1. Either to deny, that the
Transubstantiation, Adoration of the Eucharist, the Sacrifice of the Mass, etc.
which we call Errors, are so in effect: Or, 2. To say, That even when they
should suppose that they were Errors, they would not nevertheless take away
from the Church of Rome the quality of a true Church. Neither would they be
incompatible with salvation, and by consequence they could not be a sufficient
cause of Separation. 3. Or in fine, to maintain, that even when these Points
should be a sufficient cause of Separation, they could not be so, at least in
regard of our Fathers, because our Fathers were by right subject to their
ordinary Pastors, dependent upon their Hierarchical Government, and chiefly
upon that of the Church of Rome, which they pretend, is the Mother and Mistress
of all others, and the Center of Christian Unity; from whence it follows, that
they could never separate themselves, but that on the contrary they were bound
to receive all the conditions it required to be in its Communion. These are the
only Three things in my judgment, which they can propose with any color. I
will examine the last in the following Chapter; let us here consider these two
others.

The First necessarily engages the man who will make use of it, to enter into
an Examination of the foundation of those matters, or which comes to the same
things, solidly to establish the Infallibility of the Church of Rome, and of
that Party that adheres to it; which is a general Controversy, that includes
all the others, as I have shown in the First Part of this Work: And by
consequence, he must renounce all that wrangling dispute which goes only upon
prejudices. The justice or injustice of our Separation will depend on the
Foundation. For how can they assure themselves, that those things which we call
Errors and a false Worship are on the contrary, Evangelical Truths, and a right
and lawful Worship, without going on to that Examination: which shows, as I
have already frequently observed, that all those indirect attacks which they
assault us with, are nothing else but vain amusings, and beatings of the Air,
which serve only to make a noise.

The second thing will not less engage them in the Examination of the
foundation of those matters, than the First. For in supposing that those things
which we call Errors, are such in effect, they must necessarily see, of what
nature they are, and what opposition they have to true Piety, to judge aright,
whether they are sufficient causes for a Separation, and whether our conscience
cannot accommodate it self to them. I confess, that this is no very hard matter
to be known; for how small a knowledge soever they may have of Religion and the
Worship of God, they may very easily perceive, that if Transubstantiation for
example, is an Error, they cannot but adore the substance of Bread in the room
of Jesus Christ; they may easily perceive, that if the worshipping of Images is
forbidden by the second Commandment of the Law, they draw upon themselves the
jealousy of God, as he himself declares there; they may easily perceive, that
if the Sacrifice of the Mass is not in effect a propitiatory Sacrifice, by
which they may apply to themselves the virtue of that on the Cross, they do an
injury to the only Sacrifice of Jesus Christ, and that they vainly seek the
virtue of it in an Act, where it is not applied: They may easily perceive, that
if the Lordship that the Church of Rome or its Councils, usurp over men's
Consciences, is ill-grounded; that they render unto men a kind of adoration
which is only due to God alone, which cannot but be an unpardonable crime in
regard of him who has said, Thou shall have no other Gods before me. But
whether it would be an easy or a difficult matter to be known, that is not the
business about which we dispute at present. It is sufficient to show, that the
Separation of our Fathers had just; sufficient, necessary and indisputable
causes; supposing that what they said of the Errors of the Church of Rome were
true, and that they could not be accused either of rashness or of Schism,
without contesting their supposition; nor that they could contest their
supposition, without coming to an inspection into the very things themselves.
Whence it follows, that all that dispute which they raise against us about
Forms, is but a mere vain wrangling, unworthy of any sound persons. If that
which our Fathers have laid down concerning the Errors which the Church of Rome
forces men to believe to be of her Communion, be not true, we do not any
further pretend to defend their Separation; but if it be true, God and men will
bear them witness, that it was justly done, and according to the dictates of an
upright conscience.

They will say it may be, That we ought not upon such light grounds to suppose,
that that which our Fathers said concerning the Errors of the Church of Rome,
is true: since they are the Points in dispute, wherein the Church of Rome
pretends that we are in an Error, as we pretend that she is. But there cannot
be any thing said more frivolous; for the supposition that we make, is in words
of good sense and right reason, because we make it to force our adversaries to
come to a discussion of the things themselves, upon which the judgment that
ought to be made of our Separation depends, and to make them acknowledge, that
all those Accusations which they form against our Fathers, that they have
broken the Christian Unity, that they have forsook the Church, that they have
made a criminal Schism, are rash accusations, unjust and precipitate, since
they cannot rightly judge of their Action, either to condemn or absolve it,
until first of all they have examined the Causes of their Separation, and the
Reasons which they have alleged, which can never be done, but by a discussion
of the Foundation. In effect, Every Accusation, which has no certain
Foundation, and which one must be compelled to retract, is precipitate and
rash. But that which they form against our Fathers, before their having
examined the foundation, is of that nature. It has no certain foundation; for
they cannot know, whether their action be just or unjust; and they may be
forced to retract it, when they shall have examined their reasons. It is
therefore a condemnable rashness in them who have a right to repel, till they
have made that examination; and it is to oblige them to do it, that we suppose,
that our Fathers had right at the Foundation.

CHAP. II.
That our Fathers were bound to separate themselves from the Body of those who
possessed the Ministry in the Church, and particularly in the Sea of Rome,
supposing that they had a right at the Foundation.

BUt they will say, Whatsoever we should pretend, we can never do otherwise
than condemn the Separation of your Fathers, not for not having just grounds of
Separation; but because the right of separating ones self, does not belong to
all sorts of persons, and the Church of Rome being, by a special privilege,
the Mother and Mistress of all others, we could never lawfully separate our
selves from her; and because it is on the contrary indispensably necessary to
the salvation of men to obey, and to remain in her Communion. So that your
Fathers being, on one side, subject to their ordinary Pastors, they ought never
to have divided themselves from their Body, for what cause soever there should
have been; and on the other side, there being no True Church, and by
consequence, no Salvation to be had, otherwise than in the Communion of the Sea
of Rome, it is a crime for any to separate themselves from it, whatsoever
pretense they can urge for that purpose.

This Objection is founded upon these two Propositions: the one, That we never
ought to separate our selves from the Body of her ordinary Pastors; and the
other, That we ought never to separate from the Church of Rome in particular.

As to the first of these Propositions, I confess as I have said elsewhere,
that the people owe a great respect and obedience to the Pastors that
administer to them the nourishment of their souls, the words of eternal life;
according to the Precept of St. Paul, Obey them that have the rule over you,
and submit your selves, for they watch for your souls. This obedience ought to
be Heb: 13.
accompanied with a real esteem, that should make us to presume well of them,
which should give us a readiness to be instructed by their word, and be very
remote from calumnies, murmurs and rash suspicions founded upon light
appearances; and that obedience, that esteem, that good opinion ought to be
without doubt greater for all the Body in general, than for particular men in
it; for there is a greater probability, that a whole body should contain more
light, and by consequence more authority, than each private man could have. I
say, that when even Vices are generally spread over the whole body of the
Pastors, the people ought to labor to bear them with patience, and cover them,
as much as they can, with charity, in praying to God, that it would please him
to cleanse his Sanctuary, and to send good Laborers into his harvest: and
howsoever it should be, while they can work out their salvation under their
Ministry, they ought not to separate themselves from them.

But we ought not also to imagine, that the Duty of a people toward their
ordinary Pastors, should be without all bounds, or that their dependence on
them, should have no measure. That which we have said in the first Chapter
touching the bonds of Church Communion, ought to be extended to the Pastors and
to the people, their duties are mutual, and there is none but Jesus Christ
alone, on whom they can depend without conditions. To flatter the Body of the
Pastors with that privilege, is to set up men upon the Throne of God; to
inspire them with pride, vanity, negligence, it is to set up a Lordship in the
Church, that Jesus Christ has forbid, and to give Pastors the boldness to do
and adventure upon all things. It is certain therefore, that the Tie which the
Faithful have to their ordinary Pastors, is limited; and that it ought to
endure, but as far as the glory of God, the Fidelity that we owe to Jesus
Christ, and the hope of our own salvation can subsist with their Government. If
it fall out so, that their Government cannot be any further compatible with
those things, in that case, they ought to separate; and it would be to set up
the most senseless, wicked and profane proposition in the world, to say the
contrary.

The Ministry of the Pastors is established in the Church only as a mere
external means, to preserve the True Faith and Worship there, and to lead men
to salvation. But the Light of Nature teaches us, that when mere external means
shall be remote from their end, and that instead of guiding us to their end,
they turn us away from, and deprive us of it; that then the love which we have
for the end, ought to prevail over that which we may have for the means;
because the means are only desirable, in reference to their end; and the regard
which we have for them, is but an effect, or a production of that which we have
for the end. So that when those who are wont to distribute to us aliments
necessary to our lives, give us on the contrary, poisonous meat instead of
aliments, and when they will force us to take them, we must no longer doubt,
that the interest of our life ought to take us off from that Tie which we might
have had to those persons. A Guide is a means to conduct us to the place
whither we desire to go; but when we know, that that Guide leads us in a false
way, and that instead of helping us to go to that place, he makes us wander
from it, it is no question, but that we ought to separate from him, and
renounce his conduct. The ordinary Pastors are Guides, men that ought to show
us the way to Heaven; if therefore instead of showing us, they make us go a
quite contrary way, who can doubt that we are bound to forsake them?

But they will say, How can they be forsaken, without resisting God himself,
who has subjected them to them? Is not their Ministry a Divine Institution, and
is it not Jesus Christ, who by the testimony of St. Paul, has given some to be
Apostles, Ephesians. 4.
some Pastors and Teachers, for the assembling of the Saints? I answer, That we
must distinguish that which there is of divine in a Ministry, from that which
there is of humane in it. That there should be Ministers in the Church, is Gods
Institution; but that the Ministry should be committed to such or such persons,
excepting the Apostles and Evangelists, who were the first Pastors of it, that
is in the disposal of men. The Order of the Ministry therefore is inviolable,
because it comes from God: it is not permitted to any Creature to abolish it.
But it is not the same cf persons raised to the Office of the Ministry; for as
it is by the means of men that they receive their Call, it frequently happens,
that their Call is corrupted by the Vices of those who give, and of those who
receive it, in that respect it is corruptible. Intrigues, Ambition,
Covetousness, and a Spirit of Pride and Dominion, Error, Superstition,
Ignorance, Negligence often mingle themselves with it, and sully the holiness
of the Ministry. When that corruption is only in some private men, the ordinary
ways of Discipline may be used against them; they may cut them off, depose,
excommunicate them according to the exigency of the case. But when it spreads
over all the body in such a manner, and to that degree, that the safety of the
Faithful can no longer subsist under the conduct of those persons; and that
there is no hope among them of any amendment, then the only remedy that
remains, is to separate from them: and it would be so far from either violating
the order of God, or opposing the Ministry that he had set up, that it would be
on the contrary to deliver it, as much as in us lay, out of the hands of those
who have invaded it; and to draw it out of that oppression to which they have
reduced it. This Separation therefore only regards those persons who were
unlawfully called to the Ministry, and who abused it against God and his
Church, and not that which it has of Divine, but that which it has in it of
Humane and Corruptible; or to say better, that which it had actually corrupted
in that Call.

The Choice of persons, and their Elevation to Ecclesiastical Functions, being
a Humane thing, and by consequence exposed to all the accidents of men's
weakness and corruption, we cannot imagine, without doing an injury to the
Wisdom of God, that he would have so strictly and so severely tied his faithful
to them, that they should not have had any power to separate in any case. For
if it were so, it might happen, that the Truth might be forced to yield to
Heresy, and Piety to Impiety; it might happen, that the Children of God might
be under the conduct of his declared enemies, without their being able to
withdraw themselves; it might happen, that the faithful might be engaged in an
evident danger, or even in a necessity of losing the purity of their faith,
through the contagion of their Guides, and have no means to draw themselves out
of it; all which is incompatible with the Divine Wisdom and Goodness.

But is it not a very amazing thing, to see a people separate from the Body of
those who possess the Offices of the Church? It is without doubt; and God will
not also permit his Children to be often reduced to so great a necessity:
Notwithstanding he permits it sometimes, to afflict his people, and to chastise
them for the contempt they have had of his Word and his Favors. He permits it,
to show, that the subsistence of his Church and the salvation of his faithful
does not absolutely depend upon humane means, since those means may be
perverted, and fall out contrary to their appointment. He permits it in fine,
by those sad examples, to keep the Pastors in humility, and in a care to acquit
themselves faithfully of their Charges, and to hinder the people from
neglecting to instruct themselves in the Mysteries of the Gospel, and that they
should not rely with too much confidence upon their Pastors. But when God
reduces the Faithful to that extraordinary necessity, besides that the scandal
of a Separation, and the other inconveniences that follow, cannot of right, but
be imputed to the Pastors who have degenerated from their Call, and abandoned
the saving Truth which was committed to them, and the due care of their Flocks,
to become oppressors of them. Besides that, I say, it is evident, that that
scandal and those inconveniences, whatsoever they are, would never balance
these two weighty interests, to wit, that of working out ones salvation, and
that of preserving the Gospel, which are so great, that nothing in the world
can overruled them. On the contrary side, the higher the place of those is
elevated, who bestow those Ecclesiastical Charges, and the more general the
Corruption of those is who hold them, the stronger and more indispensable
obligation lies on the Faithful, to separate themselves from them: for then the
evil is in public channels, and death runs in the same places from whence they
should receive their life. Just so as when the Air of a Town is infected, the
necessity of withdrawing from it suddenly, is so much the greater, because the
Air is of a more ordinary use, than any thing else.

They who would not have us in any case have a right to separate our selves
from the Body of those who possess the Ministry, have never considered well of
what nature that Communion is, which the Faithful have with Jesus Christ, and
of what nature that is, which they have with their Pastors. For if the people
had a mediate Communion with Jesus Christ, and an immediate one with their
Pastors; that is to say, if they were only united to Jesus Christ, because they
are so to their Pastors, and because the Pastors are so to Jesus Christ, as the
hand is united to the head, only because that is so to the arm, and because the
arm is so to the head, they would possibly have some reason to say, that there
could be no case, wherein the people ought to separate themselves from their
Pastors, because they could maintain, that the Pastors were a necessary medium
for the people to be joined to Jesus Christ, as the arm is a necessary medium
for the hand to be joined to the head. But it is quite otherwise. For the
Faithful are united to Jesus Christ immediately, and with their Pastors
mediately; that is to say, they are united to their Pastors, only because they
are united to Jesus Christ, and because Jesus Christ is united to the Pastors;
so far* are the Pastors from being a necessary medium to the faithful to their
being joined to Jesus Christ, that on the contrary, Jesus Christ is a necessary
medium for them to be joined to their Pastors. Both People and Pastors are
united immediately with Jesus Christ, and by Jesus Christ we are united
together; for Jesus Christ is the center and bond of our mutual Communion:
Therefore the Apostle sharply censures the Corinthians for this, that they were
divided among themselves, one saying, I am of Paul, and another, I am of
Apollos, and another I am of Cephas, and another, I am of Christ, is Christ,
says he, divided? Was Paul crucified for you, or were you baptized in the name
of Paul? Which implies this, that we are all immediately united to Jesus
Christ, because it is 1 Cor. 1.
he only who dyed for us, and in his name alone that we are baptized: and to
pretend that the faithful are joined to Jesus Christ by his Ministers, is to
divide him into as many Parties, or into as many Sects, as there are Ministers.
But it manifestly follows from thence, that the faithful ought to be no further
united with their Pastors, than as it shall appear to them that their Pastors
are to Jesus Christ; and that they ought to separate from them, when it shall
appear to them, that they themselves are separated from him, and that they
would separate the Flocks which they had committed to them. This is what the
light of common sense dictates without further reasoning; for to what good
would the Communion of those pretended Pastors tend, howsoever invested they
should be in Titles and Dignities, without that of Jesus Christ?

That which I have said of their Communion with them, I must also say of their
dependence on them. That which the Faithful have upon Jesus Christ is immediate
and absolute, and that which they have on their Pastors, is mediate and
conditional: our Souls and our Consciences do not belong to them to dispose of
at their will and pleasure. In this respect we belong to Jesus Christ alone,
who has purchased us at the price of his blood, and who governs us by his
Spirit and his Word. The Pastors are only Ministers, Interpreters, or the
Heralds who make us to understand his Voice, and all the dependence which we
have on them is founded upon that, which both they and we have upon Jesus
Christ our Sovereign Lord, of which it is both the cause, and the rule and
measure. We ought therefore to be subject to them, while they shall act as his
Ministers, and his Interpreters, while their Actions and their Government bear
the characters of his Authority. But as those Ministers are men who may abuse
their Offices, and act against their head, if it happen that the characters of
the Divine Authority which subjects us to them, do not appear in their word, if
there appear a contrary character there, if instead of leading us to Jesus
Christ, they turn us from him, if they would govern as Lords, and not as
Ministers, if they attribute that absolute obedience to themselves which we own
to none besides our Savior. In a word, if to depend on them we must violate
the dependence which we have on Jesus Christ, can they then say that we cannot,
and that we ought not to separate from them, and to renounce an unjust
Government?

If they would decide this Question by the Scripture, St. Paul tells us, That
if he himself or an Angel from Heaven should preach to Gal. 1.
us another Gospel than that which he has preached, he should be accursed. He
says, that upon the occasion of some false Teachers that troubled the Churches
of Galatia, and speaking only of them, one would think that he ought to have
been contented to have let his Anathema fall upon those particular Teachers
that might err, and who had not so great an Authority, but that one might very
well separate himself from them, when they should happen to prevaricate. But to
take away all pretense of distinction and wrangling disputes, he makes a most
express choice of two of the greatest Authorities that were among creatures, of
an Angel and an Apostle, the only two created Authorities to which God has
communicated the favor of Infallibility, and he has enjoined us to
anathematize them, if it should happen that they should preach another Gospel,
than that of Jesus Christ: we know very well, that the Angels of Heaven are
incapable of ever committing that sin; we know very well, that he himself would
never have committed it; and yet notwithstanding, he turns his discourse upon
himself and upon the Angels; and is not this to give us to understand, that
there is no created Authority either in the Heaven, or upon the Earth, upon
which we ought absolutely to depend, and from which we ought not to separate,
in case it should turn us from Jesus Christ? Let them tell us whether the
dependence that the people owe to the body of their ordinary Pastors, that is
to say, of those who possess the Offices of the Church, who may have been very
ill chosen, who may have intruded themselves by very bad ways, who may be
carried out therein to all the passions and disorders of humane nature:
whether, I say, the dependence which they owe to them, be stronger and more
inviolable, than that which they ought to have for an Apostle, and such an
Apostle as St. Paul; and even for an Angel from Heaven, if he should become a
Preacher? This latter dependence notwithstanding, is not absolute, it may be
lawfully broken upon a certain case: who will take the boldness to say, after
that, that it cannot and ought not to be done in a like case?

But if to the Scripture we would add experience, that would teach us, that
there have been sometimes those seasons, in which good men have been forced to
separate themselves from the Body of their Pastors: for not to speak of the
seven thousand which in Elias's time preserved their purity against the
Idolatry whereinto the Church of Israel had fallen, who according to all that
appears, lived separated from the Body of their Idolatrous Pastors, at least in
a negative Separation, we need but to turn our eyes to the Example of the
Orthodox in the time of the Arians. For there are two actions evident in that
History, one, that Arianism had invaded the body of the Ordinary Pastors; and
the other, that those among the Orthodox who were of any zeal and courage,
separated themselves from that infected body, and would not own them for True
Pastors, while they should remain in Heresy. The first of these Actions is
justified by almost an infinite number of proofs taken out either from History,
or the Testimony of the Ancients. For before the death of Constantine, the
Arians who had been condemned in the Council of Nice, fell upon the person of
St. Athanasius, and some time after they banished him as far as Treves. This
was their first Victory; but they did not stop there: they got over to their
side, the Spirit of Constance after the death of Constantine, who remaining
sole Emperor, employed all his Authority, and the Arians all their artifices
to establish Arianism every where. The greatest part of the Bishops fell either
under their violence, or seduction. Diverse Councils were assembled, and many
forms of faith laid down there, which all tended to set up the Dogm of Arius,
some more openly and others more covertly. Those among the Bishops who made any
opposition, were cruelly persecuted, deposed from their places, sent into
exile, and treated as Heretics, or the enemies of the Churches peace.
Therefore it was, that Constance reproached Liberius, that he was alone, and
that he opposed himself to all the world, in the defense of Athanasius. When so
great a part of the Dialog. inter Constant. and Liber. apud Baron. ad an. 355.
world, said he to him, resides in thy person, that thou alone should take
the part of a wicked man, and dare to break the peace of the whole world. I
would be alone, answered Liberius, the cause of the faith is nevertheless
weakened. For heretofore there were but three found who resisted the Command of
a King. Liberius himself was banished, from which he was not freed till after
he subscribed to Arianism. And as the West was then less infected with this
Heresy than the East, the Emperor caused a Council to assemble at Ariminum,
in which, after specious beginnings, the end was very unhappy. For the Bishops
renounced therein the Orthodox Doctrine, which made the Son of God of one and
the same Essence with his Father: To this effect, they rejected the word
consubstantial, which the Council of Nice had inserted into its Creed, as a
word that was scandalous, sacrilegious and unworthy of God; which was no where
to be found in the Scripture, and they banished it from the Church. This
appears by the Letter of that Synod it self to the Emperor Constance, set down
by S. Hilary, in which they gave the Emperor thanks, that he had shown Apud
Hilar. in fragment.
them what they ought to do, to wit, to decree, that no body should speak any
more either of substance or of consubstantial, which are names unknown to the
Church of God; and that they rejoiced, because they had acknowledged the very
same thing that they had held before. They add, That the Truth, which cannot be
overcome, has obtained the victory, so that that name unworthy of God which was
not to be found wrote in the Sacred Laws, should not be for the future
mentioned by any person; and they declare, That they entirely hold the same
Doctrine with the Oriental Churches, and that they have rendered unto them and
him a full obedience. It was that reason for which Auxentius Bishop of Millan,
Apud Hilar. Post. Epist. advers. Arian.
an Arian, said in his Letter to Valentinian and Valens Emperors, That he
ought not to endure, that the Unity of six hundred Bishops should be broken by
a small number of contentious persons. So that Vincentius Vincent. Lirinens.
Commonit. 1. chap. 6.
Lirinensis makes no scruple to acknowledge, That the poison of Arianism had
infected, not some small parts only, but almost all the world: and it was to
that sense, that Phaebadius a French Bishop, Phaebad. lib. contr Arian. p. 219.
who lived in those times, said, That the subtilty and fraud of the Devil had
almost wholly possessed men's minds, that it persuaded them to believe Heresy
as the right Faith, and condemned the true Faith as an Heresy. And a little
lower, having an eye to what had been done at the Council of Ariminum, The
Bishops, says he, made an Edict, that no one should mention one only
substance, that is to say, that no one should preach in the Church, that the
Father and the Son were but one only virtue.

I might add to these testimonies that of Gregory Nazianzen in the Oration that
he made in the praise of S. Athanasius: There, after having described the
furies of George Patriarch of Alexandria and an Arian, and the impieties of the
Council of Seleucia, he adds, We may see one sort unjustly banished from their
Sees, and other put Greg. Naz. Orat. 21.
into their places, after their having subscribed to the impiety, which was
required of them as a necessary condition. Plotting never ceased on one side,
nor the Calumniator on the other. This is that which has made many among us
fall into the snare, who were else invincible; for although their error did not
go so far, as to seduce their minds, yet they subscribed notwithstanding; and
by that means conspired with the most wicked men, and if they were not
partakers in their flames, they were at least blackned with their smoke. This
is that which has made me often pour forth rivers of tears, beholding
wickedness spread abroad so wide and so much every where, and that those
themselves that ought to have been the defenders of the Word there, have become
the persecutors of the Orthodox Doctrine. For it is certain, that the Pastors
have been carried away after an insensible manner, and to speak with the
Scripture, diverse Pastors have left my Vineyard desolate; they have abused and
loaded that desirable portion with shame; that is to say, the Church of God,
which the sweat and blood of so many Martyrs before and since the coming of
jesus Christ, had besprinkled, and which was consecrated, by the sufferings of
God himself, who dyed for our salvation. If you except some few, who have
either been despised, by reason of the obscurity of their names, or who have
resisted by their virtue (for it is very requisite, that there should yet have
some remained to be, as it were, a seed and a root to Israel, to make it
flourish and revive again) all were swayed by the Times. There was only this
difference among them, that some were fallen deeper into the snare, and others
more slowly; that some were the chief in wickedness, and others held the second
place. Cardinal Baronius could not avoid making this reflection in setting
Baron. ad ann. 359.
down this passage: So it was that Gregory deplored the ruin of the whole
Eastern Church. But if we would add the ruin that befell the Western Church,
which I have just before described, we shall easily judge, that there has not
been any time since, wherein the whole Christian World has been more disturbed,
than it was then, since almost all the Preachers of the Churches were fallen
into the precipice, and that the face of the Catholic Church was never so
dreadful.

But the second Action which we have propounded, is not less certain than the
former; to wit, that those among the Orthodox who had any zeal or courage,
separated themselves from the Body of their ordinary Pastors, and would not own
them for their Pastors, while they remained in Heresy. In effect, that was the
chief cause for which they suffered so many murders and banishments, the Arians
no ways tolerating those who refused their Communion. The perpetual Accusation
wherewith they charged them, was, That they were the Schismatics who had
violated the Peace and Unity of the Church. This is that which Auxentius
reproached S. Hilary with, and Eusebius of Verceille in the Letter which I have
before cited. They are, said he, men condemned and deposed, who think of
nothing but making of Schisms wheresoever they come; for so it was, that that
false Bishop called the just Separation to which S. Hilary exhorted the
faithful, by his Writings, as we have seen in the preceding Chapter.

Socrates the Ecclesiastical Historian, relates upon this subject, Socrat.
hist. Eccles. lib. 1* cap. 30.
that the cruelty of the Arians proceeded to that height, that they forced by
all sorts of unjust ways, men and women to receive the Sacrament at their
hands, even to the opening of their mouths by force; and that those, to whom
they offered that violence, looked upon it as the most cruel of all
punishments, that diverse made so great a resistance to it, that they could not
obtain their ends, and that in their rage, they tore their Breasts to revenge
themselves of their refusals. He himself testifies that the Horror Ibid.
which the Orthodox had to be found in the same Assemblies with the Arians was
so great, that having no Churches wherein they could publicly worship God,
they assembled with the Novatians who had three Churches in that City; because
these latter were indeed Schismatics, but not Heretics as the Arians; and
that if the Novatians had been willing, the Catholics would have made but one
only Church with them. Sozomen relates also, Sozominus hist* Eccles. lib. 6.
cap. 18.
that the Emperor Valens, who was an Arian, having gone to the City of Edessa,
and having learned there, that the Orthodox, that is to say, those who
persever'd in the faith of the Consubstantiality of the Son, made all their
Assemblies in a Field near the City, because all the Churches were in the hands
of the Arians; he punished the Governor of the Province, who suffered those
Assemblies, and commanded him to go thither the next day to hinder them with
all his force from assembling themselves, and to punish those who should oppose
themselves; that the people having heard that Order, did not fail to meet
there; and the Governor having gone thither, and finding in the way a Woman
who was running thither with her little Child, he asked her if she had not
heard what the Emperor had commanded? but that the Woman without being moved,
answered him, that she was not ignorant of it; and that it was for that very
reason that she ran thither, to be there with others; which made such an
impression upon the Spirit of the Governor, that he went back to the Emperor,
and acquainted him with that obstinate resolution, and caused him to revoke the
Orders he had given. I confess, that there were many of the Orthodox, who had
not courage enough to go so far as a Separation, and who contented themselves
with only groaning under the Arian Tyranny, in waiting for better Times. But it
is also certain, that those who had more zeal and courage withdrew themselves
from the Communion of those Heretics, and that they believed themselves bound
to do it for the making sure of their salvation. Therefore it was that
Faustinus in his Treatise against the Arians, said, That if any one did not
believe that the Society of the Arians could be rendered culpable, under a
pretense that he had the testimony of his own conscience, which did not accuse
him of having violated or renounced the faith there, it belonged to such a one
to take heed, and to examine himself. But as for me, adds he, the cause of God
being concerned, I judge my self bound to be more pre-cautioned, and to have a
greater fear than those persons have. For it is written, a man that is an
Heretic after the first and second admonition, reject; knowing that he who is
such, is perverted; and that he sins, being condemned in himself. And as to the
punishment of dissemblers, it is written, All flesh shall worship before my
face, says the Lord God, and the Saints shall come forth, and they shall see
those who have transgressed against me; for Isa 66. 23,24.
the worm of the Hypocrites shall not dye, and their fire shall not be
quenched. The Apostle forbids us also to enter into fellowship with
unbelievers. And elsewhere, after having given a description of sins, he
condemns not only those who commit such things; but those also who consent to
those who commit them. There are diverse other passages in the Scripture, which
forbid our companying with Heretics; but I would only note these here briefly,
to the end that you should not think, that it is out of a vain superstition,
that we avoid the Communion of those whom the Divine Justice has condemned.

Behold then two Actions that I have propounded, in my judgment sufficiently
justified; and by consequence, the right of separating our selves from the body
of our ordinary Pastors, when they teach Doctrines contrary to the true faith,
which they would constrain the faithful to profess, established by an example,
against which I do not see any thing which they can rationally oppose, or
hinder it from being like to that of our Fathers. For if they say, that there
were in that party of the Orthodox that separated themselves, diverse Bishops
that authorized that Action; besides that, we may say the same thing of the
Party of the Reformation, in which they know that there was a very considerable
number of Pious and Learned Prelates; and even some, who had the courage to
suffer death in the defense of that cause. Besides that, I say, it is certain,
that it is not the Episcopal Dignity that makes the Reformation lawful, it is
lawful as often as it has causes that are just, sufficient and necessary at the
foundation; and wheresoever those causes are to be found, the faithful people
have as much right to separate themselves as the Bishops. If the people had no
right to separate themselves from the Body of their Pastors, who should teach
them false Doctrine, it could not be, by reason of the Authority which the
Pastors have over the people, for the Body of the Pastors has at least as much
authority over particular Pastors, as it has over the people; so that if that
reason were not sufficiently valid in regard of particular Bishops, they may
very well see, that it would not be so in regard of the faithful people. In
effect a Separation founded upon the fear of dishonouring God, and prejudicing
ones own salvation, is a common right; and the Laity are not less bound to it
than the Bishops, since both the one and the other, ought, according to the
precept of the Apostle, to work out their own salvation with fear and
trembling. If they say, that the Separation which fell out in time of the
Arians was founded upon the Authority of the Nicene Council, wherein Arius and
his followers had been condemned; whereas that of our Fathers is not
established by the Authority of any Council, since there is not one that has
condemned the Doctrines and Customs of the Church of Rome: I answer, that this
difference is yet null and void. For not to mention, that the Arians of whom we
speak, called themselves the Catholics, and took it as a great injury when
they were called Arians, or Followers of Arius, and that their Councils had
pronounced nothing directly against that of Nice, their separation was founded
upon the things themselves, that is to say, upon the necessity of acknowledging
the Son of God to be consubstantial with the Father, in order to the
acknowledging him to be truly God, and not upon the bare Authority of the
Nicene Council, to which they might have opposed that of the Church then in her
Councils of Ariminum, and of Constantinople, which included all the East and
all the West; and if they had had no more but that, they ought not to have
separated from the body of their actually governing Pastors, that they might
have cleaved to a Synod which was past and gone. It was therefore the
importance of the Truth that was contested, and that of the Error that was
opposite to it, which made the Separation, and not the mere Authority of the
Nicene Fathers; and therefore it is that S. Augustine disputing against
Maximinus an Arian, would that they should set aside as well the Council of
Nice, as that of Ariminum; and that they should only contend about the things
themselves. Not but that sometimes the Orthodox did set before them the Council
of Nice, according to the manner of disputes, where one will neglect no
advantage, for its being ever so small; but it was as a little help, and not as
the essential reason of their Separation, which was always taken from the
thing it self, and from the testimonies of the Scripture; so that that
difference is very frivolous. If they say lastly, that the point that was
controverted then, was one of a far greater importance, than those upon which
our Fathers separated themselves: I answer, that indeed the Article of the
Consubstantiality of the Son, is one of the chief and most fundamental Articles
of the Christian Religion; but that does not hinder, that those that are
controverted between the Church of Rome and us, should not also be of the
greatest importance to salvation, and sufficient to cause a separation. And
when they would make the justice or injustice of ours to depend on that, they
must quit all that vain dispute of prejudices, and go on to the discussion of
the foundation it self.

The Author of the Prejudices must not take it ill, that in endeavoring to
decide the Question concerning the right of the Separation of our Fathers, I
make use here of his own proper testimony. For it is a matter surprising
enough, that writing in his Eighth and Ninth Chapters, in which he would, he
says, convince us of Schism, without entering upon a discussion either of our
Doctrine Chap. 8. p. 162.
or our Mission: that he should not have remembered what he himself had just
before said in the Seventh. First of all, he there proposes this difficulty as
on our side. If the visible Church were really fallen into Error, as we suppose
that it is possible for it to do, if it drive away the truly faithful from its
bosom, if it persecute Chap. 7. p. 153.
them, must those truly faithful needs be deprived of all external worship in
Religion, must they needs cleave to the Church to perish with them, since we
suppose that it resides in them alone? Is it not against the Divine Providence,
that the true worshippers of God, the true heirs of Heaven, cannot form a
Church in the World, and that God has not left any means to provide against so
strange an inconvenience? He answers plainly, That indeed, that inconvenience
is exceeding great; but that it is not necessary that God should have provided
against it by remedies; because he has resolved to hinder it from ever falling
out, in always preserving the True Ministry in his Church. So that it can
never be in a necessity of being re-established; and that very thing is a
certain mark, that that inconvenience can never happen, in that God has not
provided any remedy for it. He says, that so it is that our Ministers ought to
conclude, and not to conclude as they do, in supposing that the visible Church
may fall into ruin, that there is a necessity of having recourse to the
establishment of a new Ministry. Since immediately after, he adds, But if the
adhaesion which they have to their sentiments, hinders them from coming to
agree to this consequence, they ought rather to conclude, that those pretended
truly faithful must remain in that state, without Pastors, and without any
external worship; and that they should rather expect, that God should raise up
some extraordinarily, and with visible marks of their mission, than to usurp to
themselves a right of creating Ministers and Pastors, and giving them power to
govern the Churches, and administer the Sacraments.

We have already shown him, and we shall yet further show him in the end, that
it is not without reason, that we suppose, that the Ministry may be corrupted
in the Church. We shall show him also, that the consequence which we draw from
it concerning the re-establishing of the Ministry, is just and right; and that
a faithful people have a right in that case to create their Ministers and their
Pastors, and to give them power to govern their Churches, and to administer the
Sacraments. But as we are only disputing at present, about knowing whether we
may separate our selves from the body of the ordinary Pastors, when they are
fallen into errors incompatible with our salvation, and when they will force
the people to profess the same Errors; it shall suffice at present, to take
notice, that the Author of the Prejudices comes to agree, that when persons are
persuaded, that the body of those who possess the Ministry in the Church is
fallen into Error, and when it drives away from its bosom, and persecutes
those who maintain the Truth, they may remain separated, without acknowledging
that Body for their Pastors, and without assisting in their external worship;
provided that they do not make other Ministers. But who sees not, that this is
precisely to acknowledge the right of that Separation, about which the question
at present is? Who sees not, that it is, at least in that respect, a
discharging our Fathers from the Accusation of Schism, and to declare them
further innocent of that crime, which he would design to lay to their charge at
last? Our Fathers did not collect that consequence of the Author of the
Prejudices, they did not conclude, that the Ministry must be incorruptible in
the Church, in that which it had of humane in it. This is not a place to
dispute, whether they adhered too much to their own opinions; where because
that in effect they judged well, that manner of reasoning is pernicious.
Howsoever it were, they have concluded quite otherwise, they were persuaded,
that the body of those who possessed the Ordinary Ministry in the Latin Church,
were fallen not only into an Error, but into many, and into such as were
contrary to men's salvation, that it was guilty of opinionativeness in
maintaining them, that it did impose a necessity upon all to profess them, that
it drove away from its bosom those who refused that obedience. It was upon
this that they separated themselves from them, not acknowledging them any more
for their Pastors, and assisting no further in their external worship. Thus far
the Author of the Prejudices does not condemn them, he would only that they
should have remained throughout without Pastors, and without external worship.
We shall see in its place, whether there is reason for that or no; it is
sufficient, that he consents, that they should not any more have had those for
their Pastors, which were so before, and that they should have withdrawn
themselves from their communion and external worship; we demand no more at
present.

We ought now to pass on to the second Proposition, upon which the Objection is
grounded that I have propounded in the beginning of this Chapter, and to
examine, whether the Privilege of the Church of Rome is such, that one ought
not upon any pretense whatsoever, to separate ones self from her communion. All
the world knows, that this is the pretension of that Church; and that it is for
that, that she makes her self, the Mother, and the Mistress of all others, and
that she has also made it to be defined in her Council of Trent. It is upon
that account, that one of her Popes, Boniface the Eighth, formerly determined,
That it was necessary to the Salvation of every creature, to be subject to the
Bishop of Rome. But clearly to decide so weighty a Question, there seems to me
to be only these two ways: The first is, to enquire, whether that Church can,
or cannot fall into Error, and cease to be the True Church of Jesus Christ; for
if it be true, that she can never fall into Errors, nor lose the quality of a
true Church, we must conclude, that we ought always to remain in her
Communion. But if on the contrary, she may err, and cease to be a true Church,
we must also conclude, that we may and ought to separate our selves, when there
shall be a just occasion there. The second way is, that, laying aside the
Question, Whether she may err or not, we examine, whether it be true, that God
has made her the Mistress of all other Churches as she pretends, whether he has
established her to be the perpetual and inviolable Center of the Christian
Unity, with a command to all the faithful not to fly off from her. For if it be
an Order that God has made, we cannot resist it, without destroying our selves;
but if it be only an ill-grounded pretension of that Church, her communion is
neither more necessary, nor more inviolable, than that of other particular
Churches.

But as to the first of these ways, I have already shown, that it engages
those who will follow it in the examination of the foundation; and in effect,
the proofs that they set before us to establish the Infallibility of the Roman
See, are neither so clear, nor so concluding, that it should not be necessary
to see, whether the Doctrines that the Church of Rome teaches, answer that
pretension which she makes to be infallible, and unable to fall away; or to say
better, those proofs are so weak, and so trivial, that they themselves bind us
to have recourse to the examination of the Doctrines of that Church, to judge
of her pretension by them. These two Arguments are equally good as to their
form. The Church of Rome cannot err in the Faith; therefore the things which
she teaches us of Faith, are true. And the things which the Church of Rome
teaches us are not true; therefore the Church of Rome may err. I do not here
examine the question, which of these two ways of reasoning is the more
natural. I yield if they will, that they should choose the first; but when they
shall have chose it, good sense would also require, that if the things which
they shall set before us, to prove this Proposition, The Church of Rome cannot
err in the faith, do no ways satisfy the mind, if instead of assuring us,
they plunge us into the greatest uncertainties, we must pass over to the other
way; and by consequence we must enter into the examination of the foundation.
But to judge of what nature those proofs are which they give for the
infallibility of the Church of Rome, we need but a naked view of them. For they
are not the express declarations of the will of God, although it should be very
necessary that they should have such a one for the establishment of so great
and peculiar a privilege, the knowledge of which, is so very important to all
Christians. They are not evident consequences drawn from some passages of
Scripture, or some actions of the Apostles: they are neither clear and
convincing reasonings, nor even strong presumptions, and such as have much
likelihood. They are strained consequences, which they draw as they are able,
from two or three passages of the Scripture, and which a man that should have
never heard them speak of that Infallibility, with all his circumspection would
not have gathered.

They produce the Testimony that St. Paul gives to the Church of Rome in his
days, That her faith was spoken of through all the Romans 1.
world; and they consider not, that he gives the same testimony to the
Thessalonians, in far higher terms, than to the Romans; for he tells them, That
they were an example to the faithful, and that 1 Thessalonians. 1.
the word of the Lord sounded from them, not only in Macedonia and Achaia, but
in every place also. Although they do not conclude the infallibility of the
Church of Thessalonica from thence. They do not see that he renders well near
the same testimony to the Philippians, in adding a clause that seems much more
express; to wit, That he is assured of this very thing, that he which had begun
Phil. 1.
a good work in them, would perform it until the day of Jesus Christ. Although
they cannot notwithstanding conclude infallibility from thence in the behalf of
the Church of Philippi. In effect, these testimonies only regard the persons,
who at that time composed those Churches, and not those who should come after
them; and do not found any privilege on them.

They produce the passages of the Gospel, that relate to S. Peter, as this,
Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church, Matthew. 16.
and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it: and this, I will give unto
thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and whatsoever thou shall Luke 22.
bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven, etc. and this, I have prayed for
thee, that thy faith fail not; when therefore thou art converted, John 21.
strengthen thy brethren: and this, Feed my sheep. But to perceive the weakness
of the consequence which they draw from these passages, we need but to see that
which is between two things, of which it is necessary that we should be
assured, before we can conclude any thing. First of all, we must be assured,
that S. Peter was at Rome, that he preached and fixed his See there; for these
actions are not so evident as they imagine; they are inveloped with diverse
difficulties that appear unconquerable, and accompanied with many circumstances
that have no appearance of truth, and which make at least that whole History to
be doubted. I confess, that the Ancients did believe so; but they have
sometimes readily admitted Fables for truths; and after all, these are matters
of fact whereof we have not any Divine Revelation, about which, according to
the very principle of our Adversaries, all the whole Church may be deceived;
and which by consequence are not of faith, nor can serve as a foundation for an
Article so much concerning the faith as this is. That the Church of Rome cannot
err, and that it is always necessary to salvation to be in her communion.
Secondly, We must be assured that the Bishops of Rome are the True and ordinary
Successors of S. Peter in the Government of every Christian Church. For why
should not they be his Successors in the Government of the particular Church of
Rome, as well as the Bishops of Antioch in the particular Government of that of
Antioch? When the Apostles preached in those places, where they gathered
Churches and settled Pastors, they did not intend that those Pastors after them
should receive all the rights of their Apostleship, nor that they should be
Universal Bishops. They say, that there must have been one, and that that could
have been in no other Church, but that where S. Peter died: But all this is
said without any ground. The Church is a Kingdom that acknowledges none besides
Jesus Christ for its Monarch; he is our only Lord, and our Sovereign Teacher;
and after that the Apostles had formed Churches, and that the Christian
Religion had been laid down in the Books of the New Testament, the Pastors had
in those Divine Books, the exact Rule of their Preaching and their Government.
Those who have applied themselves only to that, have always well governed
their Flocks, without standing in need of that pretended Universal Episcopacy,
which is a Chimerical Office, more proper to ruin Religion, than to preserve
it. In the Third place, we must be assured, that S. Peter himself had received
in those passages some peculiar dignity, that had raised him above the other
Apostles, and some rights which were not common to all of them. But this is
what they cannot conclude from those forecited passages: for granting that
Jesus Christ has built his Church upon S. Peter, has he not also built it upon
the other Apostles? is it not elsewhere written, That we are built upon the
foundations of Ephesians. 2.
the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief cornerstone?
Is it not written, That the New Jerusalem has twelve foundations, Rev. 21. 14.
wherein the names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb are written? If Jesus
Christ has prayed for the perseverance of the faith of S. Peter, has he not
made the same Prayer for all the other, Keep them, says he, in thine own name,
that they may be one, as we are? John 17. 11.
If he said to him, Strengthen thy Brethren, is it not a common duty, not only
to the Apostles, but to all the Faithful? Let us consider one another, says S.
Paul, to provoke unto love, and to good works. If Heb. 10. 24.
he said to him, Feed my sheep, did he not say to all in common, Go, and teach
all Nations? If he said to him, I will give unto thee Matthew. 28 19.
the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and whatsoever thou shall bind on Earth,
shall be bound in Heaven; has he not said to all of them, I Luke 22. 29.
appcint unto you a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto me? Whatsoever ye
shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven, and Matthew. 18. 18.
whatsoever ye shall loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven. In the Fourth
place, we must be assured, that when there should be in all those passages some
peculiar privilege for S. Peter exclusive from the rest of the Apostles, that
it is a thing that could be transmitted down to his Successors, and not some
personal privilege that resided in him alone, and must have dyed with him. For
can we not say, that the twelve Apostles, being the twelve foundations of the
Church, the privilege of S. Peter is to be first in order, because he was the
first who labored in the conversion of the Jews at the day of Pentecost, and
in that of the Gentiles in the Sermon that he made to Cornelius? May we not
say, that Jesus Christ has particularly prayed for his perseverance in the
faith, because that he alone had been winnowed by the Temptation that happened to
him in the Court of the High Priest? That he said to him alone, When thou art
converted, strengthen thy brethren, because that he alone had given a sad
experience of humane weakness? That he said to him thrice, Feed my sheep or my
lambs, because that he only having thrice denied his Master by words full of
horror and ingratitude, our Lord would for his consolation and
re-establishment, thrice pronounce words full of love and goodness? In fine,
when those Texts should contain a peculiar privilege, that might be
communicated to the Successors of S. Peter, we must be assured, that that
privilege must be the perpetual infallibility of the Church of Rome, and a
certainty of never falling away from the quality of a True Church. And this is
that which they know not how to conclude from those passages. for in respect of
the first, The Church may have been built upon S. Peter and upon his first
Successors and remain firm and unshaken upon those foundations, that is to say,
upon their Doctrine and Example, although in the course of some Ages the
Bishops of Rome have degenerated, and changed the faith of their Predecessors,
and the words of Jesus Christ extended even to the Successors of S. Peter would
not be less true, when they should not extend themselves unto all those who
bear that name. S. Paul has called the Churches of Asia, in the midst of which,
Timothy his Disciple was, when he wrote his first Epistle to him; he has I say,
called them the pillar and ground of Truth. For 1 Timothy 5.
although those Titles belong in general to every Church, it is notwithstanding
certain, that they regard more directly and more particularly that part of the
Universal Church, I would say the Churches of Asia, where Timothy resided when
S. Paul wrote to him. But the word of this Apostle does not fail to be true,
although in the course of many Ages those Churches have degenerated from their
first purity, and though the Successors of Timothy lost it very quickly after.
And as to the Prayer that Jesus Christ made to God, that the faith of S. Peter
might not fail, when they would extend it down to his Successors, they cannot
conclude a greater Infallibility for them, than that of S. Peter himself, who
preserving his faith concealed at the bottom of his heart, outwardly denied his
Master three times; and who, according to the opinion of our Adversaries, lost
entirely his love, and had fallen from a state of Grace, being no more either
in the Communion of God, nor in that of the Mystical Body of Jesus Christ. Let
the Church of Rome therefore call her self infallible as much as she pleases,
in virtue of the Prayer of Jesus Christ, that Infallibility will not hinder,
but that she may externally deny the faith of Jesus Christ, but that she may
entirely lose her love, and the communion of our Savior, and the quality of
the True Church, and by consequence, that we should not be bound to separate
from her, while she should be in that state, and till it should please God to
re-establish her.

See here of what force those proofs are which they produce to ground this
special privilege of the Church of Rome upon. It is not hard to see, that a
man of good understanding, who would satisfy his mind and his conscience upon
so weighty a point, ought not to remain there; but that he ought to pass on to
the other way of clearing that doubt which I have noted, which is, to judge of
the pretension of the Church of Rome, by the examination of her Doctrines and
her Worship. For it is there principally that the characters of truth and
infallibility ought to be found, and by consequence he must come to the
foundation, and no further amuse himself with Prejudices.

As to the second Way, by which I have said we might clear this Question,
Whether it be necessary to the salvation of Christians, to be joined to the
Church of Rome? it consists in examining, whether it be true, that God has made
her the Mistress of all other Churches? whether there is any particular order
that binds us indispensably to her? For if that be so, the Separation of our
Fathers must be condemned; but if it be not so, we must judge of that Church as
of all other particular Churches, and say, that we cannot and ought not to
separate our selves from her, but when we have just and lawful causes so to do.
There is no person who does not judge, that we cannot pass over lightly a point
of so great importance, which ought to serve for a general and perpetual Rule
to all Christians; and that if the Church of Rome would so set her self beyond
a state of equality above other Churches, it is necessary that she should
produce some very express and indisputable Order of God for it. But instead of
that, she does nothing but reverberate the same passages which I have
mentioned. She boasts her self to be the Sea of S. Peter; and under that
pretense, she applies to her self all that she can find in the Scripture in
favor of that Apostle; and particularly the Order that Jesus Christ gave him
to feed his sheep, as if the Office of the Apostleship, in which Jesus Christ
re-established him by those words, could be communicated to his Successors; or
as if the foundation that Jesus Christ supposed, and upon which he
re-established him, in saying to him feed my sheep, to wit, that he should love
him more than the rest, was not a thing purely personal in S. Peter, and
whereof it was not in his power to transmit any part to his Successors, nor by
consequence, to invest them with his Office, which was restored to him only
upon a supposition of that love; or lastly, as if the office of feeding
Christ's sheep, included an absolute and indispensable necessity for the sheep
to receive their death, when they should give it them under the name of their
food.

It must be acknowledged, that there never was a higher pretension than this of
the Church of Rome: for what more could she pretend to, then to make Heaven it
self depend on her communion, and to leave no possibility of salvation to any
but those who should be in her communion, and under her dependence! But it must
also be acknowledged, that there never was any thing worse established than
that pretension. They allege in its favor, nothing that is clear and
distinct; and even the consequences which they draw for it, are made after a
very strange manner. This is, in my judgment, the Reason why our Adversaries
when they treat of this matter do not insist much upon Scripture, but fly off
presently to the Fathers, and the usage of the Ancient Church: For by this
means, they hope to prolong the dispute to eternity, and that notwithstanding,
the Church of Rome shall be always in possession of that Despotical Authority
which she exercises over the Churches that remain in her communion. In effect,
the life of a man would scarce suffice to read well and thoroughly examine all
the Volumes which have been composed on one side and on the other upon this
Question of the place that the Church of Rome and its Bishops have held among
the Christian Churches during the first six Centuries, and of the Authority
which they had then. But to say the truth, there is too much artifice in that
procedure; for that the Church of Rome should be the Mistress of all others,
and that no one could be saved but in her communion, that does not depend upon
the order of men, but only on that of God: and when they should find among the
Ancients a thousand times more complaisance for the Sea of Rome than they had,
that may very well establish an ancient possession, and make clear the fact;
but it can never establish the right of it. To establish a right of that
nature, a word of God, an express declaration of his will is necessary; for it
is a right not only above nature, but even above the ordinary and common favor
that God gives to other Churches, and which by consequence depends only upon
God. And so it is but a wandering from the way, to go to search for the grounds
of it in the Writings of Men. It is no hard matter to conceive, that those
Bishops which were raised to Dignities in the Metropolis of the World, and
engaged in the greatest affairs, might manage matters so, as to ascribe to
themselves those rights which no ways belonged to them, nor to imagine that
their flatterers and Courtiers might not have offered more incense to them than
they ought, nor that those persecuted ones who had recourse to their
protection, might not have helped the increase of their Authority, nor that the
Princes and Emperors who had need of them, might not have given them those
privileges which they ought not to have had, that which renders to a just
title, all that which they allege in their favor suspected and to no purpose
at all.

Notwithstanding there are moreover, evident matters of fact, that let us
clearly see, that the Ancient Church did not acknowledge that Universal
Episcopacy, that the Bishops of Rome pretend to, nor that absolute and
indispensable necessity to be joined to their See to be saved, nor that their
Church should be the Mistress of all the rest. 1. Every one knows, that the
Bishops of Rome were anciently chosen by the suffrages of the people and of the
Clergy of that Church, without any other Churches taking part in those
Elections, which is a mark manifest enough, that they did not mean, that those
Bishops should be Universal Bishops, nor that they should have a more peculiar
interest in their creation, than in that of other Bishops. Since the Popes were
raised to that high Dignity wherein we behold them at this day, each Nation has
thought, that it ought in some manner to participate in their Nomination,
because the business was about one common interest, they would have the
Protectors of their Interests in the College of Cardinals, and Princes
themselves have interposed; but they can see nothing like that in the Primitive
Church. Rome alone made her Bishops without the participation of other
Churches. 2. Victor Bishop of Rome having excommunicated the Churches of Asia,
who celebrated the Feast of Easter after the manner of the Jews, S. Irenaeus
with the Bishops of France opposed themselves to that Excommunication, and
wrote as well to Victor as to the other Bishops, and in effect those Eusebius.
lib. 5. cap. 24.
Churches of Asia did not cease to remain in the Communion of the Catholic
Church, notwithstanding that action of Victor, as it appears from the Testimony
of Socrates, who formally says, Socrat. hist. Eccl. lib. 1. cap. 5.
that those who contended about the business of Easter, did not nevertheless
refuse communion with one another. So that their Bishops were called and
received in the Council of Nice, without any difficulty; for Eusebius notes
expressly, among those who Eusebius. de vita Constable. lib. 1. cap. 7. and lib. 3.
cap. 13.
were called by Constantine, the Syrians, the Cilicians, and the Mesopotamians,
who were Quartodecumani, he says, that Constantine would conferr pleasantly
and familiarly with the Bishops, about matters that were in question; and that
he would bring them all by that means to the same opinion, even about the
matter of Easter: and S. Athanasius testifies, that it was to accord that
difference, Athan. Epist. de Synod. Arim. and Sell.
that all the World was assembled at the Council of Nice, and that the Syrians
came to the same opinion with the rest, and that they earnestly contended
against the Heresy of Arius, which shows us, that they assisted at the
Council, without any notice being taken of Victor's Excommunication. From
whence it is no very hard matter to conclude, what Aeneas Sylvius Cardinal
Epist. lib. 1. Epist. 288.
of Sienna, and afterward Pope, has acknowledged in one of his Letters, That
before the Council of Nice every one lived according to his own ways, and that
men had but a very small regard to the Church of Rome. 3. In the sixth Century,
a great trouble being raised in the Church, upon the occasion of three
Writings; the one of Theodoret Bishop of Cyrus, the other of Ibas Bishop of
Edessa, and the third of Theodoret of Mopsuesta, which had been read and
approved in the Council of Chalcedon, but whom the most judged to be Heretical,
Pope Vigilius openly took up the desence of those three Writings, and
vigorously opposed himself to the condemnation that the Emperor Justinian and
the Eastern Patriarchs had made of them. But, in the end, being drawn to
Constantinople, he changed his opinion, and consented to that condemnation,
whither he was carried out to it by the complaisance which he had for the
Emperor, who had a great affection for that business, or whether out of some
other principle. Howsoever it were, that action appeared so criminal in the
eyes of a great number of Orthodox Bishops, that they separated themselves and
their Churches from the Communion of Vigilius and his Party, and even the
Church of Africa assembled in Council, as Victor of Tunis an African Bishop
witnesses, who lived in those Victor. Tunun. in Chron.
times, Synodically excommunicated that Pope, leaving him notwithstanding means
to re-establish himself by repentance. These Actions prove in my judgment,
very sufficiently, that the faithful then did not look upon the Church of Rome
as the Mistress of all others, nor on the communion or dependence on its See,
as a thing absolutely necessary to the salvation of Christians.

There can nothing be said in effect more opposite to the Spirit of the
Christian Religion, than that Imagination. God had heretofore fixed his
Communion with that of the Israelites, and established in Jerusalem and in its
High Priests, the center of Ecclesiastical Unity. But when Jesus Christ brought
his Gospel into the world, he changed that order, not by transporting the
rights of Jerusalem to Rome, nor those of the High Priests to the Popes; but by
abolishing wholly that necessity of Communion to a certain place, and that
particular dependence on a certain See. This is what S. Paul clearly enough
teaches in his third Chapter of the Epistle to the Colossians. In the new man,
says he, there is neither Greek nor Jew, neither Circumcision nor
Uncircumcision, neither Barbarian or Scythian, bond or free, but Jesus Christ
is all, and in all. He had had no reason to express himself after that manner,
if that new man whereof he spoke, had necessarily been a Roman, and depending
on the Communion of the Bishop of Rome. So also the same Apostle setting that
Evangelical Church that Jesus Christ had assembled in opposition to the ancient
and earthly Jerusalem, makes not that opposition to consist in this, that the
one is Jerusalem, and the other Rome; the one the head City of Judaea, and the
other, that of the Empire; but he makes it to consist in this, that one is
earthly, and the other heavenly; the one below, and the other on high; the one
tied to a certain place, from whence it cannot go; and the other independent on
all manner of particular places in the world, and having no necessary
dependence on any but Heaven. For it is to this purpose that he calls, the
Jerusalem that is above, the heavenly Jerusalem, the City of the living God,
the Church of the firstborn, whose names are written in heaven. It is in Gal.
4. Heb. 12.
the view of that, that Jesus Christ said to the Samaritan Woman, believe me,
the hour comes, when ye shall neither in this mountain, nor John 4. 1. 21, 23.
yet at Jerusalem worship the Father: But the hour comes, and now is, when the
true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth. The
Samaritans would establish the center of Religion on the Mountain where Jacob
and the twelve Patriarchs had built an Altar to God; the Jews, on the contrary
established it in the City of Jerusalem. To all that Jesus Christ opposes not
the Capital City, as the new Mountain which he had chosen; nor Rome as another
Jerusalem, but the Spirit and the Truth; that is to say, Faith and Piety alone,
abstracted from all those relations to particular places, and independent on
all Cities and Mountains.

The same thing is justified by the censure that S. Paul passed on the
Corinthians, in that one said, I am of Paul, another I am of Apollos, and
another I am of Cephas, that is to say, of Peter. For we ought not to imagine,
that those men meant, that they were so of Paul, or of Apollos, or of Peter, as
to be no more of 1 Cor. 1.
Jesus Christ; or that they would take Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas for heads
equal to Jesus Christ. They were Christians, and they were not ignorant of the
difference they were to make between Jesus Christ and his Apostles. No, without
doubt, they were not ignorant of it, but they would have subordinate heads,
humane heads, on whom they might depend by an external dependence, and that was
necessary for them to be, by that means linked to Jesus Christ, after the same
manner that they would have us at this day to depend on the Sea of Rome.
Wherefore did S. Paul say to them; Is Christ divided? Why did he not say to
them, that as for Paul and Apollos, they had no reason to take them for their
heads, but that it was far otherwise as to Peter, since God had set up him and
his Successors for ever to be the heads of the Universal Church? Why in stead
of that, did he conclude after this manner, That no one should glory in men:
for 1 Cor. 3. v. 21, 22, 23.
all things are yours, whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world; or
life or death; or things present; or things to come; all are yours; and ye are
Christ's, and Christ is Gods? Is it not to let them understand, that Jesus
Christ is the only head of the Church, that there is only his communion that is
absolutely necessary; and that as for other Ministers, whosoever they were,
they were appointed for our use, as all other things, to serve us, in as much
as they lead us to Jesus Christ?

If the Church under the New Testament, ought to be inviolably tied to the Sea
of Rome, how should the Scripture have been silent in so weighty a truth, which
could not be ignor'd without extreme danger, nor contested without evident
damnation? Notwithstanding, we do not find any other head of the Church in
those Sacred Books but Jesus Christ, nor any other High Priest but him. We do
not find in the Scripture any Universal Bishop, nor Ministerial head, or
subordinate, or any particular Church the Mistress of all others. We find there
indeed that Jesus Christ being ascended up on high, gave some to be Apostles,
others to be Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors Ephesians. 4.
and Teachers, for the assembling of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry,
for the edifying of the body of Christ. How came the Apostle to forget in that
Enumeration, the chief of all Offices, to wit, that of the Ministerial Head of
the whole Church, and the Universal Vicar of Jesus Christ, in the Government
and conduct of his flock? If the Christian Church ought in that to resemble the
Synagogue, and to have as that, a Sovereign High Priest upon earth, who should
be the head of that Religion, and who should have his Successors as the ancient
High Priest had: whence comes it, that the Scripture has always regarded that
Ancient High Priest as a Figure of Jesus Christ, that it always referred it to
him, and never to the Roman Bishops, nor even to S. Peter who was then alive,
and who should by consequence have exercised that pretended charge which they
would make to descend from him?

There is therefore no lawful foundation in all that pretension of Rome and her
See. We ought to pass the same judgment on all other Sees and other particular
Churches, with which it is just we should hold communion, while they teach good
and sound Doctrine, and that we should even bear with them, when they should
fall into some errors, provided they constrain no body to believe them: but
from which it is also just to separate our selves, when they shall fall into
errors contrary to the communion of Jesus Christ our only Savior, and when
they would violently force all others to believe the same. If in a long course
of Ages, Rome has usurped by little and little the rights that do not belong to
her, if she has found it very easy, through the ignorance, or complaisance of
men, in the diverse intrigues of the World, to raise her Throne as high as our
Fathers beheld it, and as we do yet at this day: If her flatterers have not
failed always to raise her pretensions as high as Heaven, and if she has been
lulled asleep with the sound of those sweet charms that enchant her, we do not
believe, that that ought to prejudice our separation. We have no other aversion
for her communion, than that which our conscience gives us; and if it shall
please God to re-establish her in her ancient purity, she would not have so
great a joy to spread forth her arms to us, as we should have an impatience to
demand her peace of her. But as long as we shall see her in that bad state
wherein we are persuaded she is, we cannot but bewail and pray for her, and yet
notwithstanding no body can blame us, for preferring our own salvation to her
communion.

CHAP. III.
That the Conduct of the Court of Rome, and those of her party, in respect of
the Protestants, has given them a just cause to separate themselves from them,
supposing that they had had right at the foundation.

BEfore we leave this matter of our Separation from the Church of Rome, there
yet remains two Questions for us to examine; the one, Whether our Fathers were
not too precipitate in so great an affair, whether they did not act with too
much haste, or Whether they had sufficient motives from the conduct of those
from whom they separated, to forsake in the end their communion: The other,
Whether with all that, they can say, that they separated themselves from the
communion of the Catholic Church spread over the whole World, as the Donatists
did heretofore, and whether they did not fall into the same crime with those
ancient Schismatics, against whom Optatus and S. Augustine so strongly
disputed. I will treat of this second Question in the following Chapter, and
this here shall be designed to the clearing of the former.

To effect this, methinks, we need but freely to set before their eyes all that
I have said in the second Part, touching the necessity that lay upon our
Fathers to reform themselves. For since it clearly results from those matters
of fact which I have set down, that the Popes and those of their party were so
far from applying themselves seriously to a Reformation, that they studied on
the contrary, only how to stifle the truth from the very first moment they
beheld it appear, and to defend their Errors and Superstitions by all manner of
ways, who sees not that that inflexible resolution which had not yielded
either to the first or second admonition, rendered from that time the separation
of our Fathers just, and exempted them from all reproach? For when there are
Errors capable of giving ground for a separation, it ought to be deferred only
upon a hope of amendment, and that hope seemed to be sufficiently destroyed, by
those Historical actions which I have already set down.

Notwithstanding, to show them more and more, how the conduct of our Fathers
was very prudent in that respect, and full of circumspection, it will not be
besides our purpose, to resume here the close of their story, from the unjust
condemnation of Luther and his Doctrine made by Pope Leo the Tenth, down to the
Council of Trent, after which we may say, that their separation was full and
entire.

Luther therefore having been excommunicated by the Popes Bull, with all those
who should follow his Doctrine, after the manner that we have seen, he appealed
to a free Council, and proposed the Causes of his appeal in a public
Declaration that he caused afterward to be Printed, wherein with great
humility he demanded of the Emperor, the Electors, the Princes of the Empire,
and in general of all the Powers of Germany, that they would join themselves
with him in his appeal; or at least, that they would defer the Execution of the
Bull, until having been lawfully called, and heard by equitable Judges, he
should be condemned. He protested, that in case his so just a demand All that
History contained in this Chapter, has been faithfully taken out of four
Authors, to wit, Sleidan, The History of the Council of Trent, of Father Paul,
Th^anus and Raynaldus.
should be refused, and that they should continue to obey the Pope rather than
God, the consciences of his persecutors would remain chargeable before God's
Tribunal.

But those who had already condemned him for a like appeal to a Council, did
not leave off their prosecuting him for all that. The Pope did not fail to
cause his Bull to be published with great Solemnity, he added even in that
which they call Coena Domini, which is published every year, a new clause
bearing excommunication against Luther, and those of his Sect. And because in
his first condemnation, he had given him threescore days time to recant, that
term being expired, he pronounced a new and peremptory Excommunication against
him, by which he cursed him and his followers eternally, and declared them
guilty of Treason and Heresy; he spoiled them of all their Honors and Goods,
and enjoined all Archbishops, Bishops, Prelates, Preachers, etc. to preach, or
to stir up others to preach against them in all places. Notwithstanding, he
earnestly solicited as well by his Letters as his Nuntio's, the Emperor
Charles the Fifth and all the Princes of Germany, to employ all their Power and
Authority against Luther and his followers. Those solicitations produced them
the Citation of Luther to the Assembly of Worms, of which I have spoke in the
second Part and in the end, the Imperial Edict, called the Edict of Worms,
which banished him from all the Lands of the Empire as a madman, possessed
with the Devil, a Devil clothed in humane shape, an Heretic, a Schismatic:
This Edict forbad him Fire and Water, and the commerce of all the World; and
ordained that after the term of twenty days, he should be taken and put into a
strong Prison in order to be severely punished. But besides all this, it
carried this further in it, that it extended to all his favorers, followers
and accomplices, and that his Books should be publicly burned. Luther giving way
to this furious storm, withdrew himself for some time into a safe place, under
the protection of John Frederick Elector of Saxony; and Leo after having
excited all that Tragedy, dyed in the flower of his age, the first day of
December in the year 1521. But the hatred of the Reformation did not dye with
him, he had for his Successor as well in that hatred, as in his See, Adrian the
Sixth, who was chosen the eighth of January 1522.

After this new Pope had taken possession of his Papacy, he sent a Nuntio into
Germany, and though as we have seen, in his instructions, he charged him in an
express Article, seriously to acknowledge, before the Assembly of Nuremberg the
disorders both in the Court of Rome and in the whole Body of the Prelates, and
the rest of the Clergy; he did not fail nevertheless to charge him also at the
same time, to denounce terrible threatenings against Luther's followers: for so
it was, that he called those who then embraced the Reformation. He wrote with
the same Spirit, public and private Letters to the Princes and other States of
the Empire who were assembled together; and he omitted nothing to stir them up
to make use of Fire and Sword and the uttermost violence on that occasion. We
may see those Letters in Bzovius and Raynaldus, and find in them all the
characters of an extreme passion. He uses there diverse reasons to animate them,
taken from their honor and their own interests. He sets before their eyes the
example of the Council of Constance, wherein John Husse and Hierom of Prague
were burned, that of S. Peter in inflicting death on Ananias and Sapphira, and
that of God himself, who made the Earth swallow up Dathan and Abiram. He
complains of them, and sharply censures them, in that they had not severely put
the Edict of Worms in Execution; and to stir them up the more, he assures
them, that the design of the Lutherans was to overthrow every Humane Order, to
dethrone all the Princes, and to pillage all Germany, under a pretense of the
Gospel. He repeated the same things in his instructions to his Nuntio; and
after having enjoined him to represent to the Princes all that might move him
to extirpate those pretended Heretics, so far as to tell them, that they ought
to imitate the generosity of their Ancestors, some of which had carried with
their own hands John Husse to the Stake: he concludes with the words of
Jeremiah when he prophesied the ruin of the Moabitish Infidels, and which this
Pope applied against those Christians, Cursed is he that Jer. 48. v. 10.
does the work of the Lord negligently, and who keeps back his sword from
blood. He wrote also to John Frederick Elector of Saxony, Letters full of heat,
wherein after having made a bloody invective against Luther and his Doctrine,
and having exhorted that Prince to abandon him, he fiercely threatens him, that
if he do not do it, he should feel the effects of his anger and that of the
Emperors. I declare to thee, says he, in the authority of God Almighty, and
our Lord Jesus Christ, whose Vicar I am upon Earth, that thou shall not go away
unpunished in this present world, and that everlasting fire shall attend thee
in the world to come. For we live at the same time together, both I Adrian
Pope, and the Emperor Charles, whose truly Christian Edict thou have
contemned, which he made against the Lutheran Perfidiousness.

These Letters wrought but a small effect in the mind of Frederick, who was a
pious Prince, and one that loved the Truth; but they did not also work much
upon those of the rest of the Princes assembled at Nurenberg; and the answer
which they made, deserves to be set down. It contained well near these
Articles, That they could not execute the Sentence of the Apostolic See
against Luther, nor the Edict of Worms, without incurring themselves very
great dangers. That the far greater part of the people had been for a long time
persuaded, that Germany suffered a great many troubles on the side of the Court
of Rome, by reason of its abuses, and that all the world was then fully
instructed in it, by the Writings and Tenets of the Lutherans. That if they had
rigorously executed the Popes Sentence and the Imperial Edict, the people would
have believed, that it had been only made to overthrow the Truth of the Gospel,
and to maintain and defend their evils, abuses and impieties. That it was very
well done of Adrian, to acknowledge the disorders of the Court of Rome, and
that they earnestly entreated him, for the glory of God, for the salvation of
souls, and for the peace and tranquillity of the public, seriously to put his
hand to reform them. That they entreated him also to allow that the first
fruits of Benefices which they had given to the Popes for them to employ
against the Turks, and which his Predecessors had turned aside to other uses,
should for the time to come be remitted into the public Treasure of the
Empire, to be made use of according to their natural appointment. And as for
the remedies which he required of them to put a stop to the course of the
Lutheran error, that they saw none more proper, than spedily to call a free and
Christian Council in some Town of Germany, wherein it might be allowed to every
one, as well of the Clergy as of the Laity, to speak freely, notwithstanding
all Oaths and contrary Obligations, and to take counsel together for that which
they should judge to be good for the glory of God, for the salvation of Souls,
and the advantage of the Christian Commonwealth. That notwithstanding, they
would hinder Luther and his followers from writing any more, and they would
give order that the Preachers should teach nothing but the true, pure and
sincere Gospel, according to the Doctrine and explication, received and
approved in the Christian Church.

This Answer extremely displeased the Popes Nuntio, he would not that they
should speak of a free Council; for it seemed to him, he said, That by that
proposition they would give Laws to the Pope. He approved yet less, that they
should touch upon the troubles of Germany, and the abuses of the Court of Rome;
he required nothing but fire and sword against the Lutherans. Therefore he gave
them his reply in writing, in which he insisted, that the Sentence of Pope Leo
and the Imperial Edict of Worms, which Ordained, that they should overthrow
all the followers of Luther, should be executed according to their form and
tenor, without any diminution. And as to the demand of a Council, he said,
that they should have made it in terms more respectful, which should have given
no grounds of jealousy to the Pope, and that by those clauses, that the
Council should be free, and that men should be absolved from their Oaths, they
seemed to go about to bind the hands of his Holiness. The Princes would
notwithstanding have nothing changed in their deliberation, which they caused
to be drawn up in the form of an Imperial Edict, and sent their Grievances to
the Pope, to the number of a hundred Articles, which they called Centum
gravamina. Raynaldus reckons up only seventy seven upon the testimony of
Dolgastus. However it were, those Griefs explained one part of the disorders
that reigned then in the Government of the Church, and under which, not only
Germany, but all the rest of the West groaned.

Thus it came to pass, that the endeavors of the Court of Rome and its
Partisans to raise a persecution against those who demanded a Reformation were
to no purpose for that time But what they could not obtain at Nuremberg, they
obtained elsewhere; for in that same year, they caused two Augustine 1523.
Monks accused of Lutheranism to be burned alive, who suffered that punishment
with an admirable constancy; and at Anvers they made a Covent of the Augustine
Friars be pulled down to the ground, the Prior of which, named Henry Suphanus
had before suffered death in the preceding year for the same cause.

Adrian enjoyed the Papacy but one year and eight months or thereabouts; for he
was raised to it, as I have said, the eighth of January 1522. and he dyed the
thirteenth of September 1523. his Successor was Clement the Seventh: This man
marching after the steps of his Predecessors, was not well settled in the
Pontifical Chair, before he turned all his thoughts against those whom they
called Lutherans; and to that effect, having been advertised, that the Princes
of Germany had bound themselves to meet again at Nuremberg, he sent thither
Cardinal Campeius in the quality of his Legate. Notwithstanding he wrote to the
Emperor, who was then in Spain, earnestly soliciting him to employ his
Authority, to make the Edict of Worms to be put in Execution in his Empire,
and to dispose the Princes to it. His Legate being arrived at Nuremberg,
vehemently insisted upon the Extirpation of the Lutherans; and he made for that
purpose, diverse Orations in the Assembly. But the Princes would not follow his
violent courses; they on the contrary, obstinately demanded a free Council in
Germany, and ordained, that each Prince and each State should, while they
waited for that Council, call together within their Jurisdictions, their
Learned, Wise and Pious men, to examine the new Tenets of the Lutherans, and to
separate the good from the bad in them; and to examine also the complaints of
their Nation against the Court of Rome and its Clergy. They added nevertheless,
that each one on his part, should do what he could to make the Edict of Worms
to be executed; and that in fine, that to conclude something firm, the States
of the Empire should meet together within a certain time at Spire. This
Declaration which was afterward drawn up and published in the form of an
Imperial Edict, extremely provoked the Pope and all his creatures. They
complained of this, that in expectation of a Council, they would submit the
matters of Religion to the judgment of a few Wise, Learned and Pious persons,
saying, that it was the means to spread abroad every where the poison of
Heresy; for thus Raynaldus relates it. They could not endure the proposition
of a free Council; but above all things, they loudly cried out of this, that
under that pretense, they would defer the execution of the Popes Sentence and
the Edict of Worms against the Lutherans, whose blood and destruction they
only demanded. Clement made great complaints to the Emperor, by the Letters
which he sent him into Spain, wherein to animate him the more, he persuaded
him, that that was a manifest breach of his Authority, and a formed design to
withdraw themselves entirely from his obedience; and as these solicitations
were extremely vehement and urgent; they forced the Emperor to write into
Germany to the Princes, and to all the States of the Empire, that it was his
intention that they should punctually execute his Edict of Worms, that they
should make that of Nuremberg void, and forbad them to hold the Diet of Spire.
But before his Letters came to Germany, the Legate Campeius had drawn off one
part of the Roman Catholic Princes, for the most part Ecclesiastics, and
having made them to meet at Ratisbon, under a pretense of a shadow of
Reformation that he had propounded, which consisted only in most trivial
matters, he caused them to make a League among them for the defense of the
Roman Religion, and the destruction of the Lutherans. Soon after, they saw the
effects of this League appear; for Ferdinand and the Legate being gone into
Austria, they condemned to death some persons upon the account of Religion.

Clement elsewhere took the same cares for all places, which they took in
Germany, to hinder the progress of the Reformation. He wrote upon that subject
into Switzerland, into Bohemia, France, Poland, Swedeland, Denmark; and he
stirred up every where the Princes, Magistrates and Prelates, to overthrow the
Reformed. Wherefore they beheld soon after under his Pontificate, the
Inquisitions taken up in that pursuit, the Prisons filled with Prisoners, and
the Scaffolds and the Stakes filled almost generally in all places that owned
his Authority. It was at this time that Antonius Pratensis Cardinal and
Archbishop of Sens, held a Provincial Synod at Paris, the ninety second
Article of which was framed in these terms: We entreat the Most Christian King
our Prince and Sovereign Lord, by the bowels of the mercies of God, that
according to his singular zeal and incredible devotion for the Christian
Religion, that he would suddenly banish from the Lands of his Jurisdiction all
Heretics, and that he would extirpate that deadly and horrible plague, which
increases every day more and more. The ninety third was framed after this
manner; Therefore it is, that the Orthodox Princes, if they would have any care
for the Christian Name, and would hinder the ruin of Religion, ought
necessarily to use all their endeavors to extirpate and destroy Heretics.
That Archbishop was very much interessed in the preservation of the ancient
abuses: for we find in the Dialogue of the Two Parishioners of Dial. 1.
S. Hilary Montanus, that he was Cardinal, Archbishop of Sens, Bishop of Alby,
Bishop of Valence, Bishop of Gap, and Abbot of Fleury. We ought not to be
astonished if he declaimed so much against the Reformation: He was in effect
one of those who opposed themselves to it in France, with the greatest heat;
and if any would know his character, they need but look to that which the
Authors of that same Dialogue say of him. This Du Prat, was he not as great a
Prelate, as a S. Hilary of Poictiers, a S. Martin of Tours, a S. German of
Auxerre, and as a S. Lupus of Troy? He had alone full as many Bishoprics as
all those admirable Saints had together, and moreover the Abbey in which is the
Body of S. Benorist; but he has not done so many Miracles as all those Saints;
and he never resided in any of those Diocesses, nor ever performed any other
office of a Bishop, than that only Ordinance against Martin Luther, Philip
Melancthon, Oecolampadins, Zuinghus; for as yet Calvin and Beza were not talked
of. It is this good Prelate to whom they attribute the taking away of the
Pragmatick Sanction, that is to say, the pure observation of the Ancient Canons
of the Church of France, and the having made the agreement between King Francis
the First and Leo the Tenth, which has destroyed all the Apostolical Discipline
in France, and abolished the Canonical Elections, and subjected France to a
deplorable servitude. The same Spirit that the Cardinal Du Prat had brought
into France, reigned then in England, Scotland, Flanders, Austria, Poland, and
universally in all places where the Power of the Pope extended it self; for
there was nothing talked of there, but the extreme punishments, which they
inflicted on those pretended Heretics; and their very Judges who touched with
some compassion, did not readily do their duty, according to the humor of the
Court of Rome, did not remain unpunished. For it was for this reason, that Pope
Clement charged Cardinal Campeius his Legate, to remove those Inquisitors, who
were in the Low Countries, and to put others in their places, who should better
acquit themselves of so detestable a service as Raynaldus relates.

But while they acted after this manner, the Light of the Reformation did yet
spread it self abroad in diverse places through an admirable blessing of God,
who has always made the ashes of his Martyrs, the seed of his Church. For not
only Saxony had received it, but also a great part of Germany, a great part of
Switzerland, Swedeland, Denmark, Prussia and Livonia also. In the month of
April in the year 1529. an Assembly of the Princes and other States of Germany
was held at Spire, whither Clement did not fail to send a Nuntio: The first
thing they did there, was to reject the Assembly at the City of Strasburgh,
under a pretense, that it had abolished the use of the Mass, without waiting
for the Imperial Diet. This violent procedure was quickly after followed by a
Decree, that Ferdinand Archduke of Austria and some other Princes who took
part with the Court of Rome made, and whom the Emperor had expressly chosen for
his Deputy Commissioners. They ordained therefore in the first place, that
those who till then had observed the Edict of Worms, that is to say, who not
only had not received the Reformation, but who had persecuted it with all their
might, should for the future do the like, and force their Subjects to do the
same; and that as for those in whose Countries that new Doctrine had been
spread abroad, provided they could not extirpate it, without putting themselves
into a manifest danger of stirring up troubles, it should be their part at
least, to hinder any thing more from being innovated, till the calling of a
Council. Secondly, They ordained, That above all things, the Doctrine which
opposed the substantial presence of the body of Jesus Christ in the Eucharist,
should neither be received, nor propounded by any in all the compass of
Germany, and that the Mass should not be abrogated. In the third place, they
decreed, That they should not allow Preachers in any place to explain the
Gospel, otherwise than by the interpretations of the Fathers. In fine, they
ordained grievous penalties against the Printers and Booksellers who should
Print or Vend for the future the Books that contained that new Doctrine. The
other Princes and States of the Empire, beholding this manifest oppression,
thought themselves bound to make an Act of Protestation to the contrary. They
remonstrated therefore, That that new Decree contradicted that that had been
passed in the preceding Assembly, where every one was to be free in respect of
his Religion: That they did not pretend to hinder the other Princes and States
from enjoying that liberty; but that on the contrary, they prayed God, that he
would give them the knowledge of his Truth: That they could not with a good
conscience approve of the reason for which they would allow them to retain the
Evangelical Doctrine, to wit, lest they should fall into new troubles, for that
would be to confess, that it would be good to renounce that Doctrine, if it
could be done without Tumult, which would be a criminal and wicked confession,
and a tacit denial of the Word of God. That as to the Mass, those who had
abolished it, and who had re-established in its place the lawful use of the
Supper of our Lord, were led by the institution of our Lord Jesus Christ: That
as for the Doctrine that opposed the real presence, they did not believe, that
they ought lightly to condemn those who held it without hearing them; and that
that proceeding was against natural equity, especially in a matter of so great
consequence. In fine, that they could not consent to that Decree, offering the
reason of their carriage to the Emperor and all the world: That they did
appeal to a free Council, and that in waiting for it, they would do nothing for
which they should justly deserve any blame. The Princes who made this Act of
Protestation, were John Elector of Saxony, George Marquess of Brandenburgh,
Ernest and Francis Dukes of Lunenburg, Philip Lantgrave of Hesse, Wolfangus
Prince of Anhalt, to whom the Cities of Strasburg, Nuremburg, Vlm, Constance,
Rutelin, Vinsseme, Meminghen, Lindau, Campdun, Hailbrun, Issne, Wisleburg,
Nodingue and St. Gall joined themselves with a common consent. This Act of
Protestation was made at Spire the nineteenth of April 1529. and from thence
came the name of Protestants, which has been since given to all those who have
embraced the Reformation.

Those Princes and those Cities sent in the end their Ambassadors to the
Emperor, to give him an account of what they had done; but after diverse
delays, the answer was, that he would that they should obey the Decree of
Spire, or else that they should undergo the utmost punishments, that their
Emperor and the other Princes had not less care of the salvation of their
souls, and peace of their consciences than they; and that as for his own part,
he desired a Council* although it did not appear to him to be
extreamly-necessary. This answer-oblig'd the Protestants to meet at Smalcalde,
and some time after at Nuremberg, to provide for their own affairs; but they
took no other resolutions, than very general ones.

About the end of that same year 1529. the Emperor came into Italy, to be
crowned there by the hands of the Pope, which was done at Bologne, with a great
deal of Magnificence and Ceremony. They had there diverse Conferences together
upon the matter of Religion. The sentiment of the Emperor was, that he ought
to call a Council; that of the Pope was on the contrary, that he ought not to
call one; but that the adversaries ought to be oppressed by force of Arms. He
offered for that purpose, to furnish the Emperor with money, and strongly to
solicit all Christian Princes to this War. Andreo Mauroceno the Venetian
Historian relates, that he explained himself particularly not only to the
Emperor, but even to the Venetian Ambassador. The Senate answered after a
manner very opposite to the desires of that Pope; and dissuaded him from that
War, by diverse reasons: but all those reasons did not change the Popes mind, he
had too much horror for that free Council that Germany required, and therefore
it was, that he persuaded the Emperor, that it would be much better for him to
make use of his Authority in that occasion, and that if his Authority would not
be sufficient, he must proceed to open force.

The Emperor therefore after this convened the Imperial Assembly at Ausburg,
for the month of April in the year 1530. whither he went himself in person. The
Pope also sent thither on his part his Legate Cardinal Campeius with Vincentius
Pimpinella, and Paul Vergerius his Nuntio's. There, the Protestants presented
their Confession of Faith to the Emperor, which was afterward called The
Confession of Ausburg, in which they set down in the first place, the chief
heads of the Christian Doctrine which they believed; and afterward went on to
the points of the Roman belief which they rejected. They opposed, through the
advice of the Legate, to that Confession, a Refutation composed by Eccius and
John Faber, who notwithstanding would not hold any discourse by writing with
the Protestants, whatsoever entreaties they should make, to have liberty to
defend themselves publicly, and to justify their Doctrine. They made it to be
only read in their presence; but they refused to give them a copy of it, unless
upon condition that it should be kept secret in their hands, which would render
it wholly unuseful to them, and which was a very unjust condition, in treating
of a business of that nature, in which all the world had an interest. The
Author of the History of the Council of Trent relates, that Cardinal Matthew
Lang, Archbishop of Saltsburg, who was in that Assembly* said publicly upon
the occasion of that Confession* That indeed, the Reformation of the Mass was
reasonable, the liberty of meats fit to be granted, and that the demand to be
discharged from so many commandments of men, was most just; but that it was a
thing not to be endured, that one paultry Monk should go about to reform all
the world. He adds, that one of the Emperor's Secretaries said also, That if
the Protestant Preachers had good store of money, they had easily purchased of
the Italians the Religion that agreed most with them; but that without Gold,
they could never hope, that their Religion should ever shine forth in the world.

There were many open Conferences between the two Parties, and they came so
far, as to agree upon some matters of less importance, but they could not agree
upon any of the principal ones; and the Protestants saw soon after, to what
those Conferences tended: to wit, to give ground to some secret practices, by
which the Emperor and the Legate labored to gain the Princes each one in
particular, sometimes by promises, and sometimes by threatings, by which
nevertheless they could not be turned. In fine, after many negotiations to no
purpose, the Protestants seeing that there was no hope of obtaining peace, but
upon conditions very destructive to the Reformation which they had embraced,
were forced to withdraw themselves, after having declared, That they persisted
in their appeal to a free and Christian Council. And the Emperor who had made
all those steps, only to have a pretense of gratifying the Pope, by his
carrying of things to extremities, made in the end his Decree, with the other
Princes and States that remained, by which he established the Roman Religion in
all the extent of his Empire, in respect of the controverted Articles, under
pain of the Imperial Ban to all opposers, and to be pursued by Arms as Rebels
and Criminals, promising notwithstanding, to solicit the Pope to the calling
of a Council precisely within the space of a year. The rigor of this Decree,
obliged the Princes and the other Protestant States to assemble yet again at
Smalcalde, and to make there a kind of League among themselves for their common
defense; and yet notwithstanding they wrote to the Emperor with great
submission, praying him to mitigate his Decree, and not to expose them as he
had done, to the violence of their Enemies: They wrote also to the other
Christian Princes, as well to inform them of what had passed at Ausburg, as to
justify themselves against the many false accusations wherewith they were
charged, and to have them demand a General and free Council that should be held
in Germany for the Reformation of the Church. The Execution of this Decree of
Ausburg, filled for some time Germany with a thousand Persecutions against the
Protestants, by the Authority of the Imperial Chamber.

Behold here, what the Emperor did to satisfy the desires of the Court of
Rome: it seems that he could have done nothing more vehemently; and yet
notwithstanding the Pope was not thoroughly contented. He very much rejoiced to
see the Protestants subjected to the most rigorous punishments. But that
Authority that Charles had taken upon him to appoint those Conferences, to
labor to bring those differences to an agreement, the consent that he had
given to the abolition of some Ceremonies, and above all, the promise of a
Council within the prefixed term of a year, were things that he could not
digest; judging them to be too contrary to the Sovereignty of his See. And
because the Emperor had pressed him about this last Article of a Council, and
even his Legate wrote to him, that it was the general desire of all Germany, he
returned this Answer: That having consulted the Cardinals about it, diverse of
them had not found, that a Council was a very fit means for the rooting out of
the present Heresies, because that those things that had been decided by former
Councils, or already established by the practice of many Ages, ought not to be
again called in question. That this was a very bad precedent, and could not be
done without very great scandal and a manifest violation of the Apostolic See.
That nevertheless, if the Emperor judged a Council to be absolutely necessary,
he might promise the Lutherans one, but with this condition, that they should
presently depart from all their Errors, and be obedient to their Holy Mother
Church; that they should hold her Doctrines and her Rites, until it should be
otherwise ordained by the Council, to the Decrees of which, they should wholly
submit themselves. That besides that, the calling of a Council would be very
scandalous, and of exceeding bad example to all posterity. That as to the place
where it should be held, he judged it absolutely necessary, that it should be
in Italy, and that he did not see any City more fit for it, than Rome it self,
which was the Seat of the Christian Faith; that if, notwithstanding Rome did
not please him, he might choose one either in Bolognia, or Placentia, or Mantua.
The Pope went even so far, as to write to the Christian Princes a Circulary
Letter, by which he advised them in the general, of that which had passed at
Ausburg, and that for the entire rooting out of Heresy, he was resolved to
call a Council.

Notwithstanding, all these Declarations consisted only in words; for at the
bottom his mind was wholly remote from the holding of a Council; in which, as
Guicciardine says, he apprehended, that they might contest his Papacy with
him, which he had purchased by canvasings and money, and that they would take
cognizance of the affairs of the Florentines, whom he had subdued and subjected
to the Family of the Medici by force of Arms; or as the Author of the History
of the Council of Trent says, he feared lest they should beat down that
excessive Authority which the Sea of Rome had usurped over all other Bishops,
and over all Churches. However it were, he would not have one; but he would
that they should make use of Fire and Sword. And it was for this, that he wrote
about that same time to Ferdinand the Emperor's Brother, exhorting him to go
himself in person to Bohemia, to root out Heresy there. He solicited also the
Emperor and the Christian Kings to join their Arms with those of the Duke of
Savoy, against the Switz Cantons who had embraced the Reformation; and his
Intrigues, or those of his creatures, were so powerful, that they enflamed a
bloody War between the Reformed Cantons and the others, wherein the Reformed
were beaten many times, which afforded great matter of joy to the Court of Rome.

In the year 1532. the Emperor having called the Imperial Diet to Ratisbon,
for the affairs of Hungary and Germany, threatened by the Arms of the Turks, the
Princes and the other States assembled, seeing clearly already, that the Pope
and his Court sought only to elude the Council, by diverse pretenses, solicited
the Emperor, that he would be pleased to call one himself by his Authority;
and they represented to him, that it was his right in the quality of Roman
Emperor; that other Emperors had so used it, and that he was the Head and
Protector of all Christianity, especially in case of the negligence and refusal
of the Pope. The Emperor would not hearken to this Proposition, and yet
nevertheless, being urged by the necessity of his affairs, and having a War to
maintain with the Turk, he granted a Peace to the Protestants, who were already
seven Princes, and four and twenty Imperial Cities. This Peace was made at the
Mediation of Albert Cardinal and Archbishop of Mayence, and Lewis Prince
Palatine of the Rhine; and the Emperor made his Decree public, bearing in it
express prohibitions to trouble or disquiet any person for matters of Religion
only, till the holding of a General, Free and Christian Council, which he
endeavored to have called within the term of a year; or in case that a Council
could not be held, till a General Assembly of the States of the Empire, wherein
they might provide for the affairs of Religion. This Decree displeased the Pope
and all his Court extremely, who would neither have a Peace, nor a Council, nor
any Assembly of the States to treat of Religion, as it evidently appeared
afterward. For after that the Emperor had set the affairs of Hungary and
Austria in order, and had been freed from the force of Solomon, he went into
Italy; and having urged the Pope many times upon that subject, the Pope always
eluded the Proposition, as well by the conditions which he required that the
Protestants should submit themselves to, well knowing that they would not agree
to them, as by the default of the consent of the Kings of France and England,
without whom, he said, it was to be feared, that the calling of a Council would
create a new Schism in the Church. Thus the Papacy of Clement passed away, who
dyed the twenty fifth of September 1534.

His Successor who was Paul III. followed the same path of Clement in regard of
the Protestants. The first step that he made was to let his Nuntio Paulus
Vergerius delcare, that he was resolved to call a Council; but at the same
time, he made these three things to be added, that he intended, it should be
held at Mantua and not in Germany, that he did not pretend to have any of his
rights released, and that he would not endure, that a National Council should
be held in Germany; upon which, he demanded the answer of the Protestants. A
little after the Protestants answered to this substance, That having already
appealed to a Council, they ardently wished for it; but that as they had often
declared, they demanded a free Council, that should provide against the
disorders of the Church, and make a good Reformation according to the Word of
God, and in the terms of Christian Equity, and it was a Council so qualified
which they had appealed to. That the dispute being about matters wherein the Sea of Rome was visibly interested, and about others which the Pope defended,
not in word only, but by those bloody Edicts and extreme Cruelties which they
exercised against those who did not agree with them, there was no color of
reason that the judgment ought to be in their hands, nor that the Council
could be free, if the choice of the place and the persons who should compose
it, and the form of procedure which they held, should depend upon their choice.
That the Pope having already condemned them and their Doctrine, it was against
all manner of reason, for him to pretend to be the Master of an Assembly who
should judge both them and the Sea of Rome. In fine, that the business being a
common cause, it was the right of the Emperor and the Princes in so important
an affair, to make choice of the most fit persons, and those who were most
capable of giving glory to God, and doing good to the Christian Commonwealth:
and that as for themselves, as they could not abandon the interests of the
Truth, they should do also all that should lie in their power for the
re-establishing of peace and union. We may guess that this answer was not very
agreeable to the Court of Rome, and yet notwithstanding the Pope did not fail
to speak always of a Council, and to exhort his Cardinals to begin the
Reformation by themselves. He made diverse Orations to them for that purpose;
and he went so far, as to give charge to some of them, to examine that which
was most necessary to be reformed in their Court, which had already alarmed
them all. But at the same time, he assured them by one of his actions by which
they might very well judge of the little sincerity of his words, for he created
two young men, his Base Sons, Cardinals, the one of fourteen years of age, and
the other of sixteen: and when they represented to him their small age, he
answered merrily, That he would supply that defect, by the number of his own,
having years enough to spare them, if it was necessary.

The Pope's Nuntio having received the Answer of the Protestants, departed from
Germany, and returned to Rome; where, after having made his relation, he
concluded, that nothing more was to be thought on, than to oppress the
Protestants by force of Arms. This Nuntio, who was Vergerius, had had diverse
private Conferences with them, and even with Luther himself, whom he had
labored to gain by threats and promises, but he could not obtain his design.
This forced the Pope powerfully to solicit the Emperor, who at that time came
to Rome, openly to declare War against the Protestants, and he had in this, two
great interests, the one to busy the Emperor, whose power he feared in Italy;
and the other, to confound the Protestants with his greatest force, without the
confusion of holding a Council. The Emperor consented to the desires of the
Pope, and he was resolved only to give a greater color to the War, that a
Council should be first called, to let them see, that he had tried fair means,
before he came to violence: but that he should call it under such conditions,
as that the Authority of the Sea of Rome should incurr any danger. A Bull
therefore was drawn up dated June 12. 1536. the Convocation of it was at Mantua
on the three and twentieth of May of the year following; and the Emperor
having solicited the Protestants to go thither, they made well near the same
answers that they had already done: They remonstrated therefore in the first
place, That the calling of a Council could not of right belong to the Pope
alone, as well by reason that the disorders and corruptions of which they
complained and desired a reformation, came for the most part from the Sea of
Rome and its creatures, which for some Ages since had infected Religion with
diverse errors and superstitions, and which moreover had been wholly overthrown
in the Government of the Church; as because also, that that See was already the
openly declared Enemy to the Reformation, and those who demanded it, having
condemned them for Heretics, and persecuted them in all places by Fire and
Sword. So that being to give an account of all that to a Council, it was
against all reason, to leave the calling of a Council to the Pope alone, which
of right ought to belong to the Emperor and the Princes. Secondly, They noted,
That the Pope by his Bull pretended to frame the Council out of his creatures,
who were bound to him by an Oath, and to remain also himself the Judge and
Master of all the difference, which was a manifest fallacy and injustice, the
firmer to establish his Authority under the pretense of a Council, and those
abuses, the defense of which he had undertaken. In the third place, they took
notice, That the Pope in his Bull had said nothing of the manner of proceeding
which they ought to use in the Council, from whence they concluded, that his
intent was, to make those things which they should treat of there, to depend
upon the determinations of his See, humane Traditions, and the Decrees of some
later Councils, and not upon the Word of God alone. That by this means, that
would be no more a free and Christian Council, but a Roman Conventicle; which
instead of tending to a holy Reformation, could on the contrary tend to nothing
but the confirmation of those evils which had for so long a time infested the
Church. As to the place where this pretended Council was called, they
represented, That it was not just that it should be in Italy, where they could
have no security for themselves, nor any liberty of opinion in a good
conscience, and that the Imperial Assemblies who had demanded it, had always
demanded that it should be in Germany: That they therefore besought the
Emperor, that he would be pleased to consider their reasons, and to endeavor
that the Council should be lawful, to the end they might happily unite to the
glory of God and the peace of Christendom, not forgetting what had happened at
the Council of Constance to the Emperor Sigismund, who saw his Authority
trampled under their feet, and his Letters of Safe Conduct violated, in the
person of John Husse and Jerome of Prague. They caused in the end a Writing to
be Printed, containing all these reasons, and diverse others too long to
transcribe, to justify themselves against the calumnies of their adversaries;
and they published it, not only in Germany, but in other foreign Countries
also. Some time after, the Pope published another Bull, by which he prolonged
the holding of the Council, under a pretense, that he could not agree with the
Duke of Mantua, and a little after he assigned it at Vicenza. Notwithstanding
the prosecutions continued always against the Protestants every where, where
the Pope had any Authority. In Germany the Imperial Chamber committed a
thousand injustices and outrages against them. In France, the flames were
kindled in all the Provinces; and although Henry the Eighth King of England had
thrown off the Yoke of Rome, yet he did not fail (to appear a good Catholic)
to put to death without mercy all those who had learned the New Religion. The
same was done in Scotland, in Flanders, and in all the Countries of the Duke of
Savoy.

In the year 1539. the Pope published a Bull, by which he suspended the
Convocation of a Council indefinitely, until it should be his good pleasure to
have one held. And moreover, there was held in this same year an Imperial Diet
at Franckfort, whither the Emperor sent the Archbishop of London li 247.
as his Commissioner, and decreed with him, that to labor to put an end to the
differences about Religion, he should make a friendly Conference between the
most Learned and well meaning persons both on the one side and on the other,
who without the intervention of the Pope, should have nothing before their eyes
but the glory of God, and the good of the Church; and that notwithstanding they
should let the Protestants have peace for fifteen months, under conditions that
were yet harsh enough to them. But this Resolution so highly offended the Pope,
that as soon as he had received the news of it, he dispatched away a Nuntio to
the Emperor, who was then in Spain, with orders to complain, and to hinder by
all sorts of ways, that he should not authorize it by his consent. The
Protestants having sent thither on their parts, the Emperor would not for that
time declare himself; but dismissed that business to another season. After
which, he went into the Low Countries to appease some popular Sedition there;
and having there put the matter into debate, because he was to give some
answer, Cardinal Farnese who was Legate there before him, opposed him with all
his might, remonstrating the inconveniences that might arise from such a
Conference, and that he had far better referr the cause of Religion to a
Council, and notwithstanding, to sortifie the Catholic League, to make the
Protestants submit by fair means or foul; against whom he made a very long
Invective. This counsel notwithstanding did not then please the Emperor, he
appointed a Diet to be held in Germany for the Conference; and he invited all
the Princes to come in person thither, promising public safety to all; which
obliged the Cardinal Legate to retire in great discontent. This Cardinal in his
return, went into France, and obtained of Francis the First an Edict against
those whom he called Heretics and Lutherans, which was afterward published
and executed through his whole Kingdom with extreme rigor.

The Conference was first assigned at Haguenaw, a little after at Worms; and
the Pope who feared the success, thought good to send thither his Nuntio,
Thomas Campeius with Paulus Vergerius, in whom he reposed a great deal of
confidence. But the Policy of the Court of Rome was too averse to an
accommodation, to suffer that Conference to proceed far: the Emperor
therefore, at the urgent solicitation of the Pope, broke it off by express
Letters, and referred it to a Diet, which he would have held some time after at
Ratisbon.

The Protestants saw clearly to what all these delays tended, and yet
nevertheless they did not fail to appear at Ratisbon, whither the Emperor came
in person, and whither the Pope had also sent Cardinal Contarenus in the
quality of his Legate. This was in the year 1541. Moreover, the Emperor caused
a Book to be presented on his part to the Assembly, which chiefly treated of
the Articles of Religion, and particularly of those which were in controversy;
and he declared, that it was his Will, that that Book should be examined, and
that it should serve as the Theme or Subject of the Conference; for which he
himself named the Collocutors, by the consent of both parties, who deferred
that nomination to him. In this Conference the Collocutors agreed upon some
Articles, and could not agree upon some others; as upon those of
Transubstantiation, of the Adoration of the Eucharist, the Sacrifice of the
Mass, the Celibacy of Priests, the Communion under one kind, the Sacrament of
Penance. And the Emperor having consulted the Legate about this, to know of
him what he should do on this occasion, the Legate gave him his answer in
writing, That after having seen as well the Articles agreed upon between the
Collocutors, as the others which they could not come to agree about, it was his
judgment, that he ought to ordain nothing about the rest, but that he ought to
refer all to the Holy See, which could in a General Council, or otherwise do
that which it should judge necessary for the good of the Church, and in
particular for that of Germany. The Emperor took this answer, as if the Legate
had consented, that the Articles agreed upon between the Collocutors, should
immediately be received by both the Parties; and he related it to the Assembly
after that manner. But there sprung up a kind of division between the Bishops
of one side, and the Roman Catholic Princes on the other. For the Princes
would that the Articles agreed upon, should be received, and that the rest
should be referred either to a General or National Council, or at least, to a
General Assembly of the States of the Empire; and the Bishops on the contrary,
who saw that this was the beginning of a Reformation, were of opinion, that
they should reject those Articles agreed upon, wherein they said that the
Catholic Collocutors had too much given way to the Protestants, and that they
should change nothing either in Religion, or its Ceremonies, but that they
should refer all to a General or a National Council. This dispute therefore
having so happened, the Legate feared, lest they should upon this meddle with the
affairs of the Court of Rome, so that he openly declared, by another public
Writing, that he did not mean, that they should receive any Articles, but that
they should absolutely refer all, as well the agreed on as the others, to his
Holiness, for him to determine what he should think fit. He published yet
farther another Writing, by which he very much condemned as well the Catholic
Princes as the Bishops, for that they had referred that business to a National
Council, in defect of a General one: and he maintained that the Authority of
the Sea of Rome was very much wounded in that reference, and that a National
Council could not deliberate about matters of Religion. In fine, after a great
many disputes, which only served more and more to discover the obstinate
resolution that the Roman party had taken up not to suffer a Reformation: this
Diet ended with a Decree of the Emperor, which referred the whole affair to a
General Council, or a National one in Germany, or to an Imperial Assembly, if
they could not obtain a Council, and that nevertheless the Execution of the
Decree of Ausburg should remain suspended. All this passed in the year 1541.

See here what the success of the Conference of Ratisbon was. The year
following, which was 1542. the Pope assigned the Council to be held at Trent in
the Month of November, he sent a Bull to the Emperor in Spain, and after to
the Kings, exhorting them to send their Ambassadors thither, and he himself
deputed thither three Cardinals in quality of Legates; he sent thither some
Bishops also. But this Convocation had not then any effect, by reason of the
War that was carried on about the same time between King Francis the First and
the Emperor. And this latter seeing himself to have two Wars upon his hands,
that with France, and the other with the Turks, made a new Decree at Spire, by
which he gave peace to the Protestants: but more than that, he ordained, that
they should make choice of some Learned and well-meaning persons to draw up a
Formulary of the Reformation; that the Princes should do the same; and that all
those pieces being referred to the next Diet, they should there resolve with a
common consent, that which they should judge fit to be kept about the matters
of Religion, till the meeting of a Council. This Decree was made in the year
1544. But the Pope was so netled at this, that he wrote to the Emperor in a
very threatening style, complaining above all things of this, that he had not
referred that which concerned Religion, to the decision of the Church of Rome,
and that he had favored those who were Rebels to the Apostolic See.

Some time after King Francis the First and the Emperor made a Peace; and one
of the Articles of their Agreement was, that they should defend the Ancient
Religion, that they should employ their endeavors for the Union of the Church,
and the Reformation of the Court of Rome, that they should jointly demand of
the Pope the calling of a Council, and that they should labor to subdue the
Protestants. This obliged the Pope to prevent them. He therefore again assigned
the Council to be held at Trent the fifteenth day of March 1545. and dispatched
away his Legates thither; but at the same time he resolved to use all his
endeavors to oblige the Emperor to turn his Arms against the Protestants, to
oppose them at the same time with the Spiritual and Temporal Sword; or to say
better, to the end that the War might serve him for a pretense to elude the
Council. For that purpose he made use of the Ministry of his Nuntio, and
afterward of that Cardinal Farnese whom he sent to the Emperor as his Legate,
whose chief pretense was, the refusals which the Protestants had propounded
anew against his pretended Council. He made therefore very powerful
solicitations to the Emperor by his Legate, with offers to aid him with men
and money, and even to cause him to be assisted by the Princes of Italy; and
the Emperor, who on his side was very glad to take this occasion to subdue
Germany to himself, readily accepted of this proposition; so that a War was
concluded between them; but the conclusion was kept very secret, till the time
of Execution. Notwithstanding, the better to cover this design, the Emperor
appointed a Conference of Learned Men to be held at Ratisbon, upon the subject
of Religion, according to his last Decree, but he did not fail to cite the
Archbishop of Cologne to appear before him, who had embraced the Reformation,
and afterward excommunicated him, and deprived him of his Archbishopric. And
as for the Conference at Ratisbon, which gave some jealousy to the Bishops who
were already assembled at Trent, it was quickly after broken by the unjust
conditions that some Monks, who were there as the Commissioners of the
Emperor, would impose on the Protestant Divines. The Council was opened the
thirteenth of December of the same year 1545.

But, in fine, after a great many artifices and dissimulations, able to have
lulled asleep the most vigilant, after a great many contrary assurances given
to the Protestants, the Emperor sent the Cardinal of Trent in Post to Rome, to
give the Pope notice, that he should make his Troops march with all diligence.
The Treaty which they had made together was published the eight and twentieth
of July 1546. bearing this among other things, That the Emperor should employ
his Arms and open force to make those Germans who should reject the Council,
return to the ancient Religion and to the obedience of the holy See: and the
Emperor soon after, openly declared himself as well by the Letters which he
wrote to diverse Cities in Germany, to the Elector of Cologne and the Prince of
Wirtemburg, as by the answers that his Ministers gave to the Ambassadors of
those Towns who were with him. The Pope on his side, presently published a Bull
dated the fifteenth of July, by which he commanded, that they should make
solemn Processions, exhorting all Christians to put up prayers to God for the
happy success of the War, which the Emperor and himself had undertaken at
their common charges, against the Germans who should either profess Heresy, or
protect it. Before this, he had wrote to the Switzers Letters dated the third
of June, by which he gave them notice of the Emperors design, praying them to
send all the succors they could possibly. The Emperor would at the beginning
cover this War with another pretense than that of Religion; but the Pope would
never suffer him to do it. So that the Emperor having no further way left to
disguise himself, began with the proscribing of the Duke of Saxony and the
Lantgrave of Hessia; and moreover, he sent his Army into the field. The
Protestant Princes, on their parts, took up Arms also for their just defense.

The success of this War was not so happy for the Protestants; all Germany saw
it self soon enslaved under the Arms of the Emperor; and according to all
humane appearance, the Reformation also had been presently destroyed, if God
who never utterly forsakes his Church, had not provided for it by his
Providence. It happened that the Pope and the Emperor quarreled about those
temporal interests, which were far more prevalent in their minds than that of
Religion, which fell out because the Emperor would not readily subject Germany
to the Council of the Pope, and because the Pope used also all his endeavors
to stir up new affairs for the Emperor on the side of Italy. Moreover, a
division fell out in the Council; for the Pope having transferred it from Trent
to Bolognia, to have it more at his ordering, the greatest part of the Bishops
yielded to that transferring; but many also held themselves firm to Trent, and
would not obey it; which made a great difficulty to arise, when the Emperor
and the Princes of Germany came to demand, as they afterward did, that the
Council should be re-established at Trent; because those of Bolognia stood upon
it as a point of honor, not to go back to find those of Trent there. King
Francis the First dyed in this time, and Henry the Eighth King of England being
dead also, the Reformation was quickly after received in England, under the
Reign of Edward the Sixth, which a little disturbed the joys of the Court of
Rome. They were yet more disturbed by the Acts of Protestation which the
Emperor had made against the Assembly at Bolognia, that he had treated it as
an unlawful Assembly and a Conventicle, insisting, that they should return to
Trent, with threats, that if the Pope continued to neglect his duty, he would
himself out of his own Authority provide for the disorders of the Church. They
were troubled also at the Interim which the same Emperor published afterward
throughout all Germany.

This Interim was a certain Formulary of Religion that the Emperor had made to
be drawn up to be observed until the holding of a Lawful Council. He
established therein the whole Body of the Roman Doctrine, and allowed only the
Marriage of Priests and Communion under both kinds. But although this Formulary
was neither approved by the one sort, nor the other, that at Rome the Pope had
censured it, and the Protestants looked upon it as the greatest of all their
oppressions, the Emperor did not fail to use violence to the Protestants to
make them receive it. And this filled Germany with an infinite number of
persecutions, such as those that Conquerours when they cruelly abuse their
prosperity (as Charles the Fifth did) are wont to make the vanquished suffer.
But while he thus satiated himself with these violences and indignities, Paul
the Third dyed at Rome the tenth of November 1549. The Death of this Pope was
followed with diverse Writings which wounded his Memory in the most bloody
manner in the world. But letting pass his Manners, and the rest of his
Government, wherein we are not concerned, I shall only say, that the evils
which our Fathers suffered in all places for the Cause of the Reformation
during the fifteen years of his Papacy, cannot be expressed. For under the name
of Heretics or Lutherans, they imprisoned them, they banished them, they
deprived them of their Estates, they massacred them, they burned them; and not
to speak of our France, England, Scotland, Flanders, Holland, Brabant, Haynalt,
Artois, Spain, Savoy, Lorrain, Poland, were as so many Theaters, wherein there
might be every day seen some of those Tragical Executions, and where they spoke
of nothing but the extirpation and rooting out of these Heretics.

Julius the third succeeded Paul. This man freely transferred his Council back
to Trent, to make all opposition between the Emperor and himself cease; but in
the Bull which he published, he declared, that it belonged to him to rule and
guide the Council: that he remitted it to be followed and continued, in the
same state in which it was when it was broken off; and that he would send his
Legates thither to preside in his place, in case he could not come thither
himself in person. These clauses netled the Protestants, so that seeing
themselves pressed by the Emperor, to submit themselves to the Council, they
freely declared to him, that they could not do it, otherwise than upon these
conditions, to wit, That they should begin to treat of matters all anew,
without having regard to that which had been already done. That their Divines
should be received, and have a deliberative voice: That the Pope should not
pretend to preside, but that he should submit himself to it; and in fine, that
he should absolve the Bishops from the Oath by which they were tied to him; and
that without that, they could not hold that to be a free Council.
Notwithstanding this Declaration, the Emperor made his Decree, by which he
ordained, that they should submit themselves to the Council, promising on his
part, that he would give Safe Conduct to all the World to come thither, and to
propose there all that they should judge necessary for the good of the Church,
and salvation of Souls; and that he would give order, that all things should be
treated and determined holily and Christianly, according to the holy Scripture,
and the Doctrine of the Fathers; and that the state of the Church should be
reformed there, and false Doctrines and Errors taken away.

Thus the Council of Trent was continued, whither the Pope sent his Legate and
two Nuntio's, to preside there in his Name, with orders to begin the first
Session the first day of May 1555. which was yet nevertheless prorogued to the
first of September following. The Elector of Saxony and the Duke of Wirtemberg
both Protestants, with some Imperial Cities resolved to send their Deputies
thither, and made them demand of the Emperors Ambassador a Letter of
Safe Conduct in the same form that the Council of Basil had given it to the
Bohemians, with an intermission till their Divines should be arrived. This
demand was not without some difficulty, but the Question having been agitated
at Rome, they thought good to agree, that they should have a Safe Conduct in
general terms, without delaying upon that account the decision of the chief
matters: and before the expediting of this Safe Conduct, they had determined
the principal Points touching the Eucharist, to wit, Transubstantiation, the
Real Presence, the Adoration of the Host, the Concomitance, the Custom of the
Feste Dieu When they solemnly (...).
, the reservation of the Sacrament, and the necessity of Auricular Confession
before the Communion. They agreed only with the Ambassador of the Emperor,
that they should delay the decision of these four Questions, Whether it was
necessary to salvation, that all should receive the Sacrament in both kinds.
Whether he that received in one, took less than he that received in both.
Whether the Church was in an Error, when she ordained that the Priests only
should receive in both. Whether the Eucharist ought also to be given to little
children. Which was already a mere Fallacy, as if the Protestants had nothing
to propose, but only about those four Questions.

When the Protestant Deputies were arrived, they openly complained of the form
of their Safe Conduct, and they demanded one in the form of that of Basil to
the Bohemians, but they refused it. They demanded that they might be heard in
full Council, but they would not; and they obtained with great difficulty, to
be heard in a Congregation in the house of the Legate. In this Congregation
they demanded on the behalf of their Masters, 1. That the Article of the
Superiority of the Council above the Pope, decided in the Councils of Constance
and Basil might be laid down for a foundation. 2. That the Pope, since he was a
party in this affair, should not preside in the Council, but that he should
submit to it both himself and his See, to be judged there. 3. That he should
for this effect absolve the Bishops of the Oaths that he had given them. 4.
That the matters which had been already decided, should be judged of again
after their Divines had been heard, since they could not till then have come to
the Council, not having had Safe Conduct. 5. That they should deferr all
judgment till they came. 6. That they should judge according to the Word of
God, and the common belief of all Christian Nations. But the Prelates would not
hear these Propositions, and the Legate, who consulted the Pope upon all
matters, and more especially upon these, had already thus vehemently explained
himself, That they had much rather lose their lives, than release any thing of
the Authority of the Holy See. Some days after, the Divines of Wirtemberg, and
those of Strasburg arrived at Trent, and presented their Confession, demanding
that it should be examined, and offering themselves to explain and defend it;
but this was to no purpose: for the Pope had expressly forbad his Legate to
permit, that they should enter upon any public conference, neither viva voce,
or by Writing in the matters of Religion. Thus things were carried on in this
Council,

But while affairs were managed after this manner, the Pope, who for some time
before had been discontented at the Emperor, had made his Treaty with King
Henry the Second; and the King on his side had also very secretly treated with
Maurice the Elector of Saxony for the Liberty of Germany; so that matters were
all on a sudden ready for a War; and the news being come to Trent, the Pope
presently separated the Assembly, giving order to his Nuntio's to give notice
of it every where, and to suspend the Council till another time. This War freed
Germany from its slavery under Charles; he was forced to set all the Princes at
liberty whom he kept Prisoners: and in fine, to make the Peace which was
concluded at Passaw the last day of July 1552. By this Peace it was concluded,
that the Emperor should call within six Months the General Assembly of the
Empire, there to provide means for the accommodating of the differences of
Religion, and that notwithstanding no person should be disquieted upon that
occasion: and thus the Interim of the Emperor was abolished.

But if Germany had then any Quiet, the Persecutions were enflamed elsewhere
against the Reformed. Edward the Sixth being dead in England, and Mary having
succeeded him, the Pope sent Cardinal Pool thither in quality of his Legate,
who negotiated there the re-establishing of the Authority and Religion of the
Pope. This made the flames to be kindled, and their punishments to be renewed
after the most cruel manner in the world; for in one only year they made an
infinite number of the people to be burned for the sake of Religion, and one
hundred seventy and six persons of great quality. Elizabeth the Daughter of
Henry the Eighth, and Sister to Mary, was confined to a strait Prison. On the
other side, Ferdinand King of Hungary and Bohemia and Archduke of Austria,
made a rigorous Edict upon the same occasion, for all the Lands of his
obedience, and drove away from Bahemia alone, more than two hundred Ministers.
The Emperor on his part, always caused the Laws of the Inquisition to be most
rigorously observed in the Low Countries. The Duke of Savoy did the same thing
in his Countries. France every day beheld nothing but these sad Executions; and
yet nevertheless, all these bloody pursuits did but increase in all places, the
number of those who embraced the Reformation. Pope Julius the Third dyed the
three and twentieth of March 1555. and Marcellus the Second was chosen in his
place; who not having held the Sea more than-two and twenty days, had for his
Successor Paul the Fourth.

In this same year, there was an Imperial Assembly held at Ausburg, where the
Treaty of Peace made at Passaw was confirmed, and the freedom of Religion
granted by the Emperor and the King of the Romans in Germany. The Decree was
presently published. But notwithstanding, the people of Austria and Bavaria
having demanded with very great urgency a Reformation of their Princes, it was
refused them; and they agreed only, that they should receive the Communion
under both kinds, in waiting for a Council. This did not fail to give great
displeasure to the Pope, beholding on one side, that all parts of the World
were swallowed up by the Superstitions and Errors of his Church; and on the
other, that even the Roman Catholic Princes, of whom he expected an entire
obedience, undertook without his consent to change something in Religion. In
this same time Charles the Fifth, weary of affairs, and having but a weak
constitution, resolved to quit the World; and for this effect, having made
Philip his Son to come to Brussells, he demis'd to him the Sovereignty of the
Low Countries in his favor; and a Month after he yielded to him the Crown of
Spain. He resigned the Empire to Ferdinand his Brother, and reserving to
himself the Pension of an hundred thousand Crowns, he retired into a Monastery.
This happened in the year 1556. and he dyed two years after the one and twentieth
of September 1558.

Pope Paul the Fourth from the first beginning of his Papacy turned all his
thoughts to avoid the Council, and to make the rigors of the Inquisition to
rule in all places, saying, That this was the only means to destroy Heresy,
and the only fort of the Apostolic See. For this effect he made an Ordinance
which he caused all the Cardinals to sign, by which he renewed all the censures
and punishments denounced by his Predecessors against the Heretics, and
declared, that all the Prelates, Princes, Kings and Emperors fallen into
Herefie, ought to be held fallen from and deprived of all their Benefices,
Estates, Kingdoms or Empires, without any other declaration, that they could
not be re-established by any authority, not even by that of the Apostolic See,
and that their goods should be given to the first possessor. He quarreled at
the same time with Ferdinand, maintaining that the Resignation of Charles in
his favor, could not be done but by his hands; and that in that case it
belonged to him to make whom he should please, Emperor. Notwithstanding, two
things fell out, that gave him a great deal of grief; the one, that Mary Queen
of England being dead, Elizabeth succeeded her; and that the Emperor Ferdinand
having propounded to the Protestants in the Diet of Ausburg, which was held in
the Month of February 1559. to (...) to put an end to the differences of
Religion by the way (...) Council, the Protestants had declared to him, as they
had (...), that they could have no hopes of any accommodation (...) of a
Council of the Popes. That they would submit (...) a free General and Christian
Council, not called by (...) the Emperor, and Christian Kings, where the (...)
his place not as President and Master, but as a Party, and submit himself to
the judgment of the Council. That for that effect, it was necessary that the
Pope should release them of the Oath by which he held all the Prelates bound to
his See, to the end that the Prelates and Divines there might give their
opinion freely, and that all should be judged there by the Word of God alone,
and not by the Roman Constitutions and their pretended Traditions. That it was
just, that their Divines should be heard, and that they might declare their
opinion in the decision of those differences, and by consequence, all the Acts
and all the Decrees made at Trent, remaining as not made, that they should
treat the things anew. That with these conditions they consented with all their
hearts, and submitted themselves to a Council; but not otherwise. So that the
Emperor seeing well that the Pope and his Court would never agree to those
conditions, nor consent to any Council, at least, unless they should be Masters
of it, further confirmed the Treaty of Passaw, and settled the peace of Germany
about the matter of Religion, leaving to every one the liberty of his
conscience. This mortally wounded the Pope; but elsewhere, he comforted himself
with hearing that his solicitations with the other Princes to continue the
rooting out of the Heretics by Fire and Sword, and every where all the rigours
of punishments had a very great effect in France, in Spain and in the
Low Countries. Henry the Second dyed the third of June of the same year 1559.
The Pope dyed also quickly after, to wit, the eighteenth of August of the same
year. His last words were to recommend to the Cardinals the holy Office of the
Inquisition; for so he called it: assuring them, that it was the only Pillar of
the Sea of Rome. His Memory was very much detested by all the people, who
immediately after his death burned the new Prison of the Inquisition which he
had caused to be built, broke his Statues, and overthrew his Coat of Arms
throughout all the City of Rome.

Pius the Fourth succeeded him; and it was under him that the Council of Trent
was consummated. He followed entirely the Spirit of his Predecessor; for he
presently moved the Duke of Savoy to turn his Arms against his Subjects of the
Valleys of Piedmont, to reduce them by force to the obedience of his See; and
because that in France, they had resolved to call a National Council, to labor
by this means to put a stop to the course of the Reformation, against which the
fires and punishments practiced till that time had done nothing, he opposed
himself vehemently to it, and sent to King Francis the Second an express
Nuntio, to dissuade him from that National Council, and to exhort him to follow
the way of the punishments that he had before practiced: and that of his Arms,
if it were necessary, till it should be provided for by a General Council,
offering him for that purpose to assist him with all his power, and to cause
the King of Spain and the Princes of Italy, to assist him also. The Nuntio
faithfully acquitted himself of his charge; but the King did yet persist in the
design of a National Council, and it was resolved in his Council, that they
should seek for the means to call it, in case the Pope should not speedily call
a General one. This was the resolution of an Assembly held at Fountainbleau, in
the Month of August 1560. which no ways pleased the Pope; for he saw well,
that this National Council was a very bad example for Germany, where till then
his Predecessors had hindered it. So that seeing no very good means to ward off
that blow, and apprehending that other Nations would do the same things, he
suddenly took up a resolution to assemble his Council at Trent. But besides
that reason of National Councils which he apprehended, he was further carried
out to it by diverse other motives; for he saw that the Reformed Religion had
spread it self abroad every where. In Spain the Inquisitions were taken up only
with condemning and burning them; and they had always some new matter for the
exercise of their cruelties. It was the same in the Low Countries. England had
wholly thrown off the yoke of Rome, and embraced the Reformation: Scotland had
done it as much. All Prussia and Livonia had done the same. In France the
number of the Protestants was very much increased, and they had the liberty of
their consciences granted them. The Duke of Savoy, could not compass his design
with all his Forces, in the sole Valleys of Piedmont. Besides, that which
remained fixed to the interests of the Pope, was very much discontented with
the conduct of his Court, the greatest part of his Catholics had acknowledged
the necessity of a Reformation, and they made Harangues about it in the public
assemblies. The Princes themselves, who the most supported the Sea of Rome,
every day encroached upon his Authority, and gave him trouble enough. He
resolved with himself therefore to assemble his Council; but at the same time,
also he made it his design to manage it so well, that the success should be
advantageous for himself. To this effect, he published his Bull, bearing this
with it, that he took off the suspension that had been made, and called it to
Trent: on Easter day in the year 1563. He sent thither five Legates to preside
in his place; and after diverse delays, in fine, the Council was opened by his
Order the eighteenth of January 1562. and matters were treated there afterward
after the same manner which they had been treated in before under Paul the
Third, and under Julius; that is to say, that the Pope reigned there
absolutely, and nothing was done there but according to his will. His See was
exalted there more than before, the disorders of the Government of the Church
were rather confirmed than corrected there, and the Errors, and Superstitions,
and Worship set up by men, instead of being reformed, were on the contrary
established there, and passed in the force of a perpetual and indispensable
Law. Such was the success of this Assembly.

It would be too long here to relate exactly that which passed there. Any may
read with pleasure and with profit all the particularities in some of the
famous Historians of those times. It shall suffice me for the present to say,
that after the manner that the Popes took there for the governing that Council,
we ought not to think it strange if they obtained their ends, and if they
always turned things to which side they pleased. First of all, they took a
particular care to fill it with Italian Prelates; so that they alone almost
always were above half the number of all the other Nations joined together. By
this means the Court of Rome might very well assure it self of the Council; for
although all the Prelates that composed it, should not have been bound to the
Popes by an Oath, yet the Italians were more particularly of their dependence,
and they would not fail thoroughly to represent to them the interest that Italy
had to preserve to it self the Ecclesiastical Government over other Nations;
and to maintain by consequence, the Authority of Rome. Secondly, They kept up a
stock of money in the hands of the Legates, to help the poor Bishops, and to
gain them more and more to them, and to make also Presents and Gratifications
to persons who could render them most service. For they judged it to be the
best means to draw the most to them, either by the acknowledgement of the good
offices received from them, or by the hopes of receiving them for the time to
come. In the Third place, the Pope was not contented with presiding in the
Council by his Legates, he would farther, that the propositions should be made
and carried by them only. And it was for this that the Legates of Pius the
Fourth unjustly insinuated it into the Decree of the opening it on the
eighteenth of January 1562. that they should treat of matters proponentibus
Legatis; and when some Spanish Prelates would have opposed that Clause, saying,
that it was unusual in Councils, and that it wholly took away all liberty from
the Assembly, where every one ought to have a right to propound, they derided
them and let them alone without giving them any answer. The Pope himself having
heard of that opposition, commanded his Legates, that they should remain
obstinate in that Decree, and that they should not remit so much as one point:
and the King of Spain having made some complaints, upon the advice that his
Ambassador gave him, the Pope eluded them, and would change nothing.

Behold therefore the Court of Rome well nigh already assured of two great
points; to wit, on the one side, of the greatest number of persons; and on the
other, of the propositions that should be made in the Council. There remained
nothing but to make sure of their deliberations; and for this they practiced
diverse means. The two more General, were that of the Congregations at Trent it
self in the house of the chief Legate, and that of the Congregations at Rome.
The former consisted in this, that from the beginning of the Council under Paul
the Third, they unjustly made this order to be established, that in imitation
of that which had been made in the last Council of Lateran, that there should
be made diverse particular Congregations to examine the matters there that the
Legates should propound to them, that afterward the same matters so digested,
be brought to a General Congregation which should be held in the house of the
Legate, where every one should tell his opinion; and that after this, they
should frame the Decrees to contain them, and make them to pass in Council. The
second consisted in this, in that from the first beginning, the Pope had
deputed some Cardinals at Rome to consult about the affairs of the Council, and
to have as it were the overlooking of all that should pass there; so that,
before they came to make any Decree, the Legates at Trent had discovered the
bottom of the sentiments of the Prelates, and the reasons of every one, since
before they concluded any thing, they sent all to Rome, from whence they
received their orders and the deliberations of the Council wholly made to their
hands; and this is that which they called the Holy Ghost coming in a Cloak-bag.
But besides these two ways, they had yet others, which although they were not
of that importance, did not fail to have their profit. We must place in this
rank, the Order that they took to examine all the speeches and all the other
actions that should be done before the Prelates, of the Council, before they
should recite them, to the end that nothing should be advanced, which was not
agreeable to the Time and Place, that is to say, to the designs and interests
of Rome; for by this means the Council thought to make the Pulpits ring with
nothing but the praises of the Holy See, and imprecations against the
Heretics; and that none should be so stupid, as to bring in any thing free or
bold into his discourse, well knowing that the Censors would not suffer it, and
that it would be to meddle with affairs to no purpose. We must here also place
the Order that the Legates openly took, and which they always observed
afterward, to reckon every head to an opinion; whereas in the Councils of
Constance and Basil they had counted their opinions by Nations, which diverse
would fain have had done yet at Trent; but the Legates opposed themselves to it
with all their might. But they drew this advantage from that Order, that Italy
alone had twice as many Voices, as all the other Nations together; and we may
say, that they only made the decisions. We must further rank here another Order
which they took to make in the first place the points of Doctrine to be
agitated by particular Congregations of Monks and other Scholastic Divines,
which treated of them after their usual manner; and afterward to carry some
extracts or abridgements of their Disputes to the Congregations of the
Prelates, who for the most part understood nothing of that Gibbrish of the
School; so that almost always they made their Decrees without having examined
the matters of them, or hearing the reasons of one side and of the other,
without reading, without meditation, without study, and sometimes even without
any understanding of the terms; which having obliged Bruce Martel Bishop of
Fesola to represent of what importance it was, that the General Congregation
should be thoroughly informed of what they did, and that it should take
cognizance of matters it self; the Legates netled at this boldness, made a
large field of a sharp censure upon it, and wrote to the Court of Rome to have
him taken notice of. We ought also to place here, the recourse that the Pope
had to the Ambassadors of the Princes, to render the Bishops of their Nation
favorable to the interests of the Court of Rome. This is what Pius the Fourth
knew very well how to practice on the subject of the residence of the Bishops,
when he heard that the greatest part of Voices went about to declare it of
Divine Right; for he spoke earnestly of it to the Ambassadors of Venice and
Florence; and he engaged them to make diverse remonstrances of it to their
Bishops. The same things were done diverse times. We must add here yet farther,
the ordinary direction of the Legates to put off to another time the decision
of the points that they could not carry on their side at one time, and to pass
over to other matters, to busy the Prelates with, and to have time
notwithstanding, to advertise the Court of Rome, and to gain the chief to the
contrary party. We ought to place here also the ordinary artifice of the same
Legates to put off the Sessions, to make many difficulties arise about matters,
and after diverse circuits, to cause in the end the Articles to be sent to the
Pope which they could not make an end of, by reason of the great insisting of
the Nations. In one word, they used in the management of this Assembly all that
was most refined, most forcible and profound in humane policy, promises,
threats, secret negotiations, canvasings, diversions, delays, Authority, and
in General, nothing was forborne that could turn and corrupt men's minds there.
The Pope and his Court had a great many difficulties to overcome, and
oppositions to surmount, which often put them into great troubles, and
inquietudes, and fears; but in the end, they were so well served, and they
remained Masters, and saw all things succeed according to their desires.

See here after what manner things went at Trent, and by what degrees they
tended to make an entire breach of Communion between the Roman and Reformed
party. Let any now judge, if in all this conduct, our Fathers had not just and
lawful causes for a Separation. 1. They saw in the contrary party an invincible
resolution to defend and preserve the Errors and Superstitions, whose amendment
they demanded. 2. They saw that resolution go so high, as to constrain them to
fall back again into those errors against all their knowledge, and the motions
of their own consciences. 3. They saw that this violence which they offered to
them had no bounds; for it went not only as far as disputes, not only so far as
the Ordinances and Decrees, but even to Excommunications and Anathema's, that
is to say, to a Separation, and Schism with a curse. 4. They saw, that they
joined to all this punishments, not in one or two places, but in all; not by
popular heat, but in cold blood, and in the usual ways designed for the
punishment of the greatest Villains. 5. They saw that those punishments came
from the perpetual and general inspiration of the Court of Rome, which did not
cease persecuting of them in all places; and which proceeded so far, as to
search for them in their most hidden retreats. 6. They saw that they refused
the most equitable and necessary conditions, without which they could not
proceed to a just examination of Religion, nor to a holy and Christian
Reformation, and that in stead of that, the Court of Rome would always remain
sole Mistress and Arbitress. 7. They saw, lastly, that instead of returning to
the purity of Christianity, by taking away out of the field of the Church so
many corruptions that defaced it, so many false opinions that destroyed it, so
many kinds of Worship contrary to true Piety that dishonored it, and destroyed
the salvation of souls, these Prelates on the contrary, would establish things
that custom only, and the tradition of some Ages had for the most part
introduced; that they would establish them I say, for the future in force of a
Law, to be incorporated into their Religion, as essential and indispensable
parts of it, to which they would subject the minds and consciences of men,
which they ordained the practice and belief of, under penalties of Anathema,
cutting off and separating from the body of their Society all those who should
hold a contrary opinion and practice. Let any judge, whether our Fathers could
yet after that, preserve Church Communion with a Party in which they could see
nothing either of the Spirit of Truth, and Christian Purity and Charity,
resplendent, and whether all hope being taken away, of ever reducing them to
the right way of the Gospel, or even of being able to live with them, without
wounding their consciences by a detestable hypocrisy, in pretending to believe
that which they did not believe, and to practicing a worship which they held
unlawful, there not remaining any further means for them to remain in that
Communion, without partaking of their Errors, without exposing their Children,
and without rendering themselves culpable before God; let any I say judge,
whether they did not do well to separate themselves. I confess, that when a man
is joined with others in one and the same Body, he ought not lightly to proceed
to a rupture; there are measures and behavior to be observed, that Prudence
and Christian Charity require of us, and as long as we have any hope of
procuring the amendment and healing of our Brethren, or where there is at least
any way for us to bewail, and to mourn for their sins, without losing our own
innocence, and their constraining us to partake in their crimes, we ought not
to forsake them. But when that hope is lost, and when that means of preserving
our own purity is taken from us, when instead of being able to reduce them, we
see, on the contrary, that their Communion does but make us to cast our selves
into an unavoidable necessity of corrupting our selves, it is certain that we
ought to withdraw our selves from them, lest in partaking with their sins, we
should draw the just condemnation of God upon our selves. Be not partaker with
other men's sins, says S. Paul, but keep thy self pure.

CHAP. IV.
An Examination of the Objection of the Author of the Prejudices, taken out of
the Dispute of S. Augustine against the Schism of the Donatists.

IT seems to me, that what I have laid down hitherto, lets us clearly enough
see, that the only way to decide the Question of our Separation, to know
whether it is just or unjust; is to enter into the discussion of the foundation
of our Controversies, and that it would be the highest injustice to go about to
condemn us without ever hearing us. Notwithstanding, whatsoever we may have to
say, and how strong soever our Reasons should be, the Author of the Prejudices
pretends to have found out a certain way to convince us of Schism, without
entering upon any other examination; and for this he employes the Eighth and
Ninth Chapters of his Treatise. I would, says he, Prejug. chapter 8. p. 161.
go farther, and convince them of Schism, without entering upon any discussion
of either their Doctrine or their Mission, by their separation alone.

All that he says upon that subject, may be well near reduced to this; That
there is a Church, from which one ought never to separate, under any pretense
whatsoever, and from which all those who separate themselves are Schismatics,
and out of the state of salvation. That the infallible and perpetual mark to
know this Church, according to S. Augustine and the other African Fathers is,
visible extension throughout all Nations, because that visible extension
according to them contains the Church at all times, and that it is a Negative
mark, that is to say, that every Society which has not that extension, is not
the Church; so that this reasoning is always sound, your Society is shut up in
a little part of the world. Therefore it is not the Church; and that it is by
this Principle, that S. Augustine has disputed against the Donatists, and
convinced them of Schism. This is the sum of his eighth Chapter. In the ninth,
he labors to apply these general Maxims to our Separation: and 1. He says,
That our Communion is not spread over all the world, any more than that of the
Donatists; and that not having that visible extension, which is the perpetual
mark of the True Church, it follows, that it is not so, and by consequence,
that we are all Schismatics.2. He says, We carry the principle of the
Donatists much higher than those Schismatics stretched it; for as for them,
they did not say, that there ever was a time in which the Church had wholly
fell into Apostasic, and that they excepted the Communion of Donatus; but as
for us, we will have it, that there has been whole Ages in which all the world
had generally apostatized, and lost the faith and treasure of salvation. 3. He
labors to show, that the Societies of the Berengarians, of the Waldenses and
Albigenses, etc. in whom he says, we shut up the Church, could not be this
Catholic Church of which S. Augustine speaks. And lastly, He concludes from
thence, that we are Schismatics, and by consequence, out of a state of
salvation.

Before we enter upon the particular Examination of the Propositions whereof
this Objection is made up, it will be good to note, that there is nothing new
in all that, and that it is nothing but that some mark of visible extension
that the greatest part of the Controversial Writers of the Roman Communion have
been wont to propound, when they would give the marks of the True Church. There
is this only difference to be found in it, that the others labor to ground
this upon what they produce out of the passages of the Scripture, whereas the
Author of the Prejudices grounds his argument upon the sole Authority of S.
Augustine and some Fathers. But when it should be true, that S. Augustine and
the African Fathers disputing against the Donatists, should have pressed this
visible extension of the Church too much, and urged it further than they ought,
will the Author of the Prejudices believe, that he ought to hold all those
things that the Fathers have advanced in their disputes for infallible, and all
their reasonings and hypotheses to have been so? Does he not know what
Theodoret himself who was a Father, has noted concerning some of Theod. Dial. 3.
those who were before him, That the vehemence of Disputation had made them
fall into excesses, just as those who would rectify a crooked Tree, turn it
too much on the other side from that straightness which it ought to have? And
is he ignorant of what S. Athanasius said concerning Dionysius of Alexandria,
whose Authority the Arians objected (...). Epist. (...) Dion. Alex.
to him, That Dionysius had said so, not with design to make a simple
exposition of his faith, but occasionally having a respect to the times, and
persons. That a Gardener is not to be found fault with, if he cultivate his
Trees according to the quality of the soil, sowing one, planting another,
pruning this, and plucking up that. We must, says S. Jerome, distinguish
between the different kinds of writing, and especially (...). Epist. (...)
Pammach.
of Polemical and Dogmatical. For in the Polemical, the dispute is vagous, and
when they answer to an adversary, they propound sometimes one thing, and
sometimes another; they argue as they think fit; they say one thing and do
another: or as the Proverb says, they offer bread, and give one a stone. But
in the Dogmatical, on the contrary, they speak openly and ingenuously. We may
easily apprehend by that, that we ought not to hold for Canonical all that the
Fathers may have wrote in the heat of their disputes, or to take what they have
said according to the rigor of the Letter, since they themselves acknowledge,
that having the Pen in their hands, they often advance things, that on other
occasions ought not to be pressed. So that though it should be true, that S.
Augustine and the African Fathers had made that visible extension an
inseparable and perpetual mark of the True Church, yet we should not fear to
say, in respect of them, what S. Augustine himself has said concerning S.
Cyprian whom the Donatists objected to him. I do not Aug. contr. Crescon. lib.
2. cap. 32.
hold the Writings of Cyprian for Canonical; but I examine them by the
Canonical Scriptures. That which I find in them conformable to the holy
Scriptures, I receive with praising him, and I reject with the respect that I
owe to his person, what I find in them disagreeing thereto. We should make no
scruple to apply to them, what the same S. Augustine Aug. Epist. 48.
has said, on the subject of S. Hilary and some other Fathers whom they
alleged to him. We must thoroughly distinguish these sorts of writings, from
the Authority of the Canonical Books. For however we should read them, yet we
cannot draw convincing testimonies from them, and it is allowed us to depart
from them, when we see that they themselves have departed from the truth. It is
therefore certain, that the Author of the Prejudices has but weakened his proof,
when instead of laboring to establish it on the Scripture, as the rest have
done, he restrains it to the mere Authority of S. Augustine and some Fathers.

We have thought that we ought to have freely represented this to the Author of
the Prejudices, to oblige him a little to moderate his pretensions; for he
imagined that the sole Authority of S. Augustine and some Fathers was enough to
convince us. I will, says he, convince them, we have frequently told him
already, and shall tell him here again, That the Scripture is the only rule of
our Faith, that, we do not acknowledge any other authority able to decide the
disputed Points in Religion, than that of the Word of God; and that if we
sometimes dispute by the Fathers, it is but by way of condescension to those of
the Church of Rome, to act upon their own principle, and not to submit our
consciences to the word of men. But because that he may also imagine, under a
pretense of this declaration, that we have no other way to answer his argument,
I shall undertake to answer here, and show him, if I can, that he has abused
the Authority of S. Augustine, and that he has neither comprised, or had a mind
to comprehend, either the true sentiments of that Father, or ours. This is that
which I design to show him in this Chapter and in the following. But before we
enter upon this matter, it will be necessary to clear in a few words the
History of the Donatists, and to represent what was the beginning of their
quarrel, and what their Separation was. The Author of the Prejudices had some
interest to leave his Readers in the ignorance of those particular matters of
fact; but since he and I have not the same view of things, he ought not to take
it ill, that I supply his defect, and that I lay down that which he would not.

In the year 306. God having given peace to the Church, after the cruel
persecutions of Dioclesian, the people of Carthage being assembled by the
direction of some neighboring Bishops, chose Cecilianus for their Bishop in
the place of Mensurius who had been dead some time before, and Cecilianus
afterward received his Ordination at the hands of Felix Bishop of Aprungis.
This Election had displeased some of that Church through their private
interests; so that they formed a party against him; and this party having
called Secundus Primate of Numidia with a great many other Bishops to the
number of Seventy, they made his Ordination void, and ordained one Majorinus in
his place. Cecilianus was upheld by a great part of the Church, and kept
himself in his Bishopric. Majorinus was upheld also by those of his party, and
the Bishops of Numidia; which made them set up at Carthage Altar against Altar;
that is to say, that each Bishop set up his Assemblies apart; and so the Church
of Carthage was rent. But this Division did not stop at Carthage; for the
Bishops of Africa took part, some with Cecilianus, and the others with
Majorinus; one of these was called Donatus, from whose name all that Sect came
in the end to be called Donatists.

Each party labored to fortify themselves by reasons; the Donatists, on their
side, at first accused Felix the Ordainer of Cecilianus, and afterward
Cecilianus himself, of having been Traditors, that is to say, of having
delivered their Bibles to the Pagans for them to burn them, during the
persecutions. The others, on the contrary, maintained, that it was a false
accusation, of which they had neither conviction nor proof, because that
Cecilianus had not been heard before his condemnation; and they also accused
some of those who had condemned him, of having been themselves Traditors, and
to have mutually absolved one another of that crime in a Synod which they had
held. The quarrel growing high, the Donatists presented a Petition to the
Emperor Constantine, to entreat of him some Judges; because that in Africa
they were all divided and parties; and the Emperor commissioned for that
purpose, Milciades Bishop of Rome, Merodes Bishop of Milan, Maternus Bishop of
Cologne, Reticus Bishop of Autun, and Marinus Bishop of Arles. These Judges met
together with some other Bishops of Italy, all in number to nineteen, and
having taken an exact knowledge of that business, they justified Cecilianus,
and confirmed him in his Bishopric: nevertheless, without making void either
the Ordination of Majorinus, or that of his Successors: but the Donatists would
not acquiesce in this judgment. They said, that Milciades had himself been a
Traditor, and that he defended the Traditors. They had recourse again to the
Emperor, who ordained, that the cause should be searched again, and determined
in a Council at Arles, where the Donatists having been again condemned, they
appealed to the Emperors own person; and the Emperor having taken cognizance
of it himself, condemned them.

After all this, the Opinionativeness of the Donatists was so great, that
instead of submitting themselves to so many judgments, they chose rather to
separate themselves from the whole Church. They made therefore a General Schism
with the whole Christian World; and to color it with some appearance of
reason, they maintained, that all the world had fallen into Apostasy through
the mere Communion which it had with the Traditor Cecilianus. They would no
more own either any Church or Christianity in the world, but what was in their
party; and they rebaptized all those, who had been baptized in the Church since
the business of Cecilianus. S. Augustine and the other Fathers of Africa, had
fairly told them, that Cecilianus was innocent, that though he should not have
been innocent, the Judges could have done no less, than to have absolved him,
there having been no proofs against him, and that though even the Judges should
have judged wrong, yet all the world could not have been guilty of that crime,
since the greater part of the Churches, and of the persons that composed them,
had had no knowledge of that affair, that though they should have had knowledge
of it, they could have done no otherwise than referred it to Judges; or lastly,
not being willing to refer it to Judges, prudence and charity would have
obliged them to have bore with the wicked in the external communion of the
Church, rather than to have broken Peace and Christian Unity for personal
crimes, which were not communicated to them who had no part in them. All these
reasons did not hinder the Donatists from remaining obstinate in their
conclusion, which was that, all the Church had lost its righteousness by the
Communion which it had with Cecilianus; and that there was no more any
Christianity in the World, except in the party of Donatus. From hence it was,
that the Question arose between them, which of the two Parties was the Church.

Upon this History, we must make four Observations, which it may be, will not
be impertinent in the end. The first is, That the Donatists would not own that
Party for Orthodox which was contrary to them, whom they accused neither of any
Error in the Faith, nor any depravation of Worship, and that the Church on its
side did not accuse the Donatists of any Heresy in the Faith. For as for the
Question of the Validity or Invalidity of the Baptism of Heretics, neither the
one nor the other, made that the occasion of their breach, and it was not upon
that that the Donatists founded their Separation. We confess both one sort and
the other, said Cresconius, one and the same Jesus Christ, born, dead and Aug.
cont. Crescon. lib. 2. cap. 3.
risen again. We have one and the same Religion, and the same Sacraments, and
there is no difference between us about the practice of Christianity. S.
Augustine said also, That their difference was not about Aug. lib. de unit.
Eccles. cap. 4.
the head, but about the body; that is to say, that their dispute was not about
Jesus Christ our Savior, but about his Church, And elsewhere, That they agreed
in Baptism, in the Creed, and in the other Sacraments Aug. Ep. 48.
of our Lord. All the pretense of this Rupture, was the personal faults of two
or three Bishops, which were not proved on one side, nor owned on the other,
and whereof the greatest part of the world had no knowledge. So that the
Dispute concerning the Church, was not between two Communions that contested
one with the other about the purity of Doctrine, but between two Communions,
which mutually acknowledged one another to be Orthodox, yet disputed one with
the other, the title of the quality of the Church of Jesus Christ.

The second Observation that I shall make is, that the opposite Party to the
Donatists, and which the Donatists acknowledged to be Orthodox, was then
actually and in effect, spread over the whole Earth; that is to say, that it
had a great extent among the Nations of it: whereas that of the Donatists, was
shut up within one small part of Africa. It was upon this, that they abused a
passage of the Canticles, which they read after this manner, Tell Cant. 1. v. 7.
me (O thou whom my soul loves) where thou feedest, where thou make thy
flocks to rest in the South: explaining this in the South, as if he would have
noted the place, and said in Africa, whereas it should be read at noonday,
merely to note the hour of the day, Aug. lib. de unitat. Eccles. cap. 14.
when the Shepherd led his flock under some shade for their rest. This is that
which makes S. Augustine also speak to them sometimes of the Apostolical
Churches, and those to whom S. John wrote his Apocalypse, with whom they had no
communion, and to reproach them so often for being separated from all the World.

The third Observation is, That that Society which the Donatists acknowledged
to be Orthodox, and which was in effect spread over many Nations, had not cut
off the Donatists from its communion, nor had separated the former from it; if
they had not excommunicated them, nor pronounced Anathema's against those who
should not hold Cecilianus to be innocent, or the Traditors to have been good
men. When any one of them returned to the Church, they did not seek to make
them renounce any other thing than their Schism, nor to embrace any thing
besides peace. And even in the judgment of the Synod of Rome, Milciades Aug.
Epist. 162
and his brethren, offered to hold communion with the Bishops that Majorinus
had ordained; and in the Conference at Carthage, they offered to the Donatist
Bishops, to own them for Collat. Cart. 1. art. 16.
Bishops, and to preserve their Sees to them, without requiring any other
condition of them, than that of brotherly Unity. It was therefore the
Donatists, who separated themselves wilfully out of a mere spirit of division,
and the Church was in respect of them, in a passive Separation.

Lastly, The fourth Observation is, That although the Donatists should have had
any just occasion to separate, yet they had urged their Separation
notwithstanding as far as it could go; for they had carried it so far, as even
to break that general bond which yet in some manner united all those who make
an external profession of Christianity good and bad, Orthodox and Heretics,
which yet in some manner make but one body, in opposition to Pagans and other
people absolutely Infidels. Their Principle was, That all the Christians in the
World, except the party of Donatus, being sullied with the contagion of the
Traditor Cecilianus, all that they had also done became sullied, by the
uncleanness of their persons; and upon this Principle, they condemned the
Christianity of the Universal Church, they rejected her Baptism, and her
Sacraments, although at the bottom, they had the same with hers, and they
looked upon that Society to be no otherwise than an Assembly of Pagans and
Infidels, with whom they would have nothing common. This is what St. Augustine
reproaches Aug. contr. Epistol. Parmen l. 1. ^. 2. Ibid. lib. 2. cap 2. and
ali^i passim. Aug. lib. de Eccl. unit. cap. 16. Aug. contr. Gaud. lib. 3.
them with in diverse places in his Writings. They say, says he, that they are
Christians; but they say also that they only are so. They make no scruple to
say, that they know that out of their Sect there are no Christians. You hold,
says he to them elsewhere, that all Christian Holiness has been abolished
among the Nations where the Apostles had established it, because they have
communicated with those whom your Fathers condemned in their Council of
Carthage. Therefore it was that they thought themselves grievously affronted,
when the Catholics called them their Brethren, they fled from their Communion,
they would not so much as sit together with them, and they re-baptiz'd all
those who had been baptized in the Church, when they came over to their
Communion, neither more or less than if they had come out of Paganism, because
they maintained, that in effect the Church was absolutely perished, throughout
all the Earth, except in their Party.

These are the matters of fact that I have thought my self bound to explain. We
must now return to the Objection of the Author of the Prejudices, and examine
it in the meaning of S. Augustine and the African Fathers: the proposition of
which it is composed. The first is, That there is a Church from which it is
never Prejug. chapter 2. page 102.
allowed any man to separate himself, under what pretense soever, and from
which all those who do so separate themselves, are Schismatics. This first
Proposition is ambiguous, and so confused, that we can very hardly comprehend
in what sense the Author of the Prejudices has meant it. Every one knows that
there is in the World a Body of people, or of Nations, who profess themselves
to be Christians, and to whom one may yet, in some manner, give the name of the
Church, because that all such Christians are yet in some respect within the
General Call of the Gospel. It is therefore this Church of which he means to
speak? But what likelihood is there, that to accuse us of Schism, he should
have formed so vagous an Idea of the Church, since he knows very well, that we
are no more separated from this body, than the other communions that compose it
are, or than the Church of Rome her self in particular is? Every one knows that
this body of Christians is divided into diverse communions, or particular
Societies, that bear the name of Churches, as the Greek, the Roman, the
Protestant, the Coptick, the Jacobite, the Nestorian, the Armenian: Does he
mean any one of these Churches? But if that be so, why does he not distinctly
and without any hesitation, tell us which it is, and if he would that it should
be that of Rome, what ground is there to believe that he would have it so? why
did he not explain himself, why did he make an end, even to say, That Chap. 3.
p. 177.
it should be in our choice, whether that Church should be the Greek, or the
Nestorian, or the Jacobites, and that he did not pretend to determine it? To
what purpose are all these goings about? Every one knows yet that God always
preserves in the world his truly faithful and his Children, who are the true
Church, which he has predestined to eternal Salvation. But the Author of the
Prejudices has formerly declared himself against this notion of the Church, and
he is so very earnest to reject it, that we cannot impute it to him, without
doing him wrong. We cannot even believe that he means, That we ought not to
separate our selves from a Communion, when it is Orthodox, and when those who
separate themselves from it are Schismatics. For he has also declared himself
against this Notion of the Church, because, says he, Page 174.
in taking this way, the examination of Schism would be remitted to that of the
Opinions, and that we must always know, whether the Communion that they
forsake, is Orthodox, which is that which he would avoid. What therefore is
this Church? It is, says he, the Catholic Church Page 177.
wheresoever it be. We are now as wise as we were before; for it always
remains to be inquired into, What is that Catholic Church. I freely confess,
that it seems to me, that he would point it out to us, by a certain mark, which
is the visible extension throughout all Nations; but in effect, he does it not:
for he says, in the end, that this is but a Negative mark, that is to Page 184.
say, that every Society which has not that mark, is not the Church: So that
according to him, this is a mark only proper to show what it is not, and not to
show what it is. Whence therefore shall we know what this Church is? Moreover,
his Proposition is not only ambiguous through the word Church, but it is
further so, through that of Separation, for there is more than one sort of
Separation. There are such as are unjust and criminal in their own nature, and
there are others which are only so in causes and circumstances; there are also
such as are permitted, and those that deserve to be condemned; there are
necessary ones, and such as are rash; so that one cannot make any general
proposition upon this matter, which would not be captious, and proper to make a
Fallacy. It is necessary therefore, in order to his acting with sincerity, that
the Author of the Prejudices should openly explain his meaning, which he
labors to establish by the Authority of S. Augustine and the other Fathers;
and after having so cleared and established it, he should propound his
conclusion, that he would pretend to draw from it; for then, we should see
whether we ought to yield or deny it. But to begin a convincing argument by a
principle so vagous and so confused as this that we have seen, and even to
affect that confusion, without being willing to explain himself, is in my
judgment, a procedure very fit to be suspected, and which may justly make us
doubt, that instead of a convincing argument, he gives us nothing but a Fallacy.

To clear this doubt, it will be here necessary to give a clear and distinct
Idea of the Doctrine of S. Augustine upon this subject about which we are
disputing. First, Then we must know, that this Father acknowledged, that the
truly Faithful only, and the truly Just, in opposition to the Wicked, the
Wordly, Infidels and Heretics, were the true Church properly so called; and
this is what may be proved by an infinite number of passages. It must not be
imagined, says he, in his answer to Petilianus, that the Aug. advers. litt.
Petil. l. 2. cap. 8.
wicked belong to the Body of Jesus Christ, which is the Church, under a
pretense that they corporally partake of the Sacraments. The Sacraments are
holy even in such persons; but they serve only to increase their condemnation,
because they give and receive them unworthily. And as for them, they are not in
that assembly of the Church of Jesus Christ, which consisting in his members,
increases by being compacted and fitly joined with the increase of God. For
this Church is built upon a Rock, according to what our Savior said, Upon this
Rock I will build my Church, and the others are only built upon the sand, as
the same Lord said, I will liken him who hears my words, and does not what
they teach, to a foolish man who built his house upon the sand. And elsewhere,
Both the good and the wicked may baptize; but there is but one Aug. contr.
Crescon. lib. 2. cap. 2.
only God, always good, who can wash the conscience. The wicked are therefore
at present condemned by Jesus Christ, because they have a wicked and defiled
conscience, and at present, they are not of his Body which is the Church,
although the Church her self is ignorant that they are not; for Jesus Christ
cannot have any of his members condemned. So that they baptize, being
themselves out of the Church. For God is not pleased that all these Monsters
should be reckoned among the members of that only Dove, nor that they should
enter into his enclosed Garden, the keeper whereof can never be deceived. And
elsewhere, Whether they Aug. de Bapt. contr. Donat. l. 2. c. 17.
seem to be in the Church, or whether they be openly discovered to be out of
it, that which is flesh is always flesh. That the chaff, as it is unfruitful,
flies in the air, whether it be blown thither by the occasion of some
temptation, as by the wind, or no, it is always chaff. Those who being hardened
by carnality, are mingled in the Assembly of the Saints, cease not to be
separated from the Unity of that Church which is without spot or wrinkle.

It is therefore certain, that S. Augustine acknowledged none to be properly
the Church, but the truly Faithful and truly Righteous. But because that these
faithful and these righteous are mixed with the wicked, the worldly, and
Heretics, in the circle of the same External Call, as the chaff is with the
good seed in the same Floor, or as the Tares are mingled with the good Wheat in
the same Field: We must note, in the second place, that S. Augustine gives
another notion of the Church, which he calls the mixed Church, and it is to
explain this notion, that he sets before Aug. passim.
us all the comparisons that the Scripture makes use of to represent the
mixture of the good with the bad in the same Call; that of the field, where the
Son of Man cast his seed, and where the Enemy arose in the night and sowed his
Tares also, so that the Wheat and the Tares must grow there together till the
time of harvest; that of the Net that the Fisherman cast into the Sea, and
which enclosed equally the good and bad Fish; that of the Floor, where the good
Grain is mixed with the Chaff; and that of the House, in which there are
Vessels of Gold and Silver, and others of Wood and Earth. It is for the same
thing that he makes use of the distinction of the true body of Jesus Christ,
and the mixed body of Jesus Christ; meaning by true, the truly faithful and
righteous Aug. de Doctr. Chr. l. 3. c. 32.
only, and by mixed, the faithful and righteous joined with those who are not
so; and that both together by reason of their mixture in one and the same
external call, make in a manner but one and the same body. He makes use for the
same purpose of Aug. de Bapt. contr. Donat. l. 7. c. 51.
the distinction, of being of the Church, and being in the Church, and he would
that none but the truly faithful and righteous are of the Church; but that the
others are in the Church; and by this means he forms two Idea's of the Church,
the one distinct, and the other confused; the distinct restrains the Church
precisely to those in whom she properly consists, and who are her true members,
and these are the truly righteous and faithful; but the confused, includes all
those who externally profess themselves to be Christians, the good Wheat and
the Tares, the Chaff and the good Seed, the good and the bad Fish, the Vessels
of Gold and Silver, and those of Wood and Earth; and in this confused notion,
the Church is the Field, the Floor, the Net, and the House that the holy
Scripture speaks of.

But as this mixture which I have spoken of, may be understood two ways;
either in respect of Manners, or in regard of Doctrines; we must note in the
Third place, that this notion of the Mixed Church according to S. Augustine, is
divided into two, for he would have us sometimes conceive of it, as a Body
wherein the righteous are only mingled with the unrighteous, that is to say,
with the wicked, whose manners are vicious and corrupted, and sometimes also,
he would have us conceive it, as a Body where the Heretics are mixed with the
truly faithful, as well as the righteous with the unrighteous. In the former
case the mixed Church is a pure communion in respect of Doctrine; but corrupted
in regard of manners: and in the second, it is a communion not only corrupted,
in regard of manners; but impure also and corrupted, in regard of its Tenets.
These two sorts of mixture are without doubt in the Hypothesis of S. Augustine;
the first made all the ground of his dispute against the Donatists; and as for
the second, he often explains himself in his Books, and particularly in the
Psalms against the Donatists, where Aug. Ps. contr. Donat.
he says, That after Jesus Christ had purged his floor by the preaching of the
Cross, the righteous were as the new seed which he spread abroad over all the
Earth, to the end they should make another harvest at the end of the world. But
that this harvest grew up amidst the Tares, because there are Heresies every
where. Haec messis crescit inter zizania quia sunt haereses ubique. In that
same Psalm and elsewhere in diverse places, he quotes the Example of the Jewish
Church, in which he says, that the Saints, the Prophets and the righteous were
mixed not only with the wicked, whose manners were debauched and criminal, but
also with the superstitious and Idolaters; that which leaves no difficulty
about it; for Idolatry is the greatest of all Heresies.

We must note in the Fourth place, that S. Augustine would have us consider the
mixed Church in two different States. For as for that which respects men's
manners, he says, that sometimes the wicked do not prevail over the righteous,
either in number, or Authority; but that sometimes also, they prevail in such a
manner, that the good are often oppressed under their multitude, and this is
that which he treats particularly of in his Third Book against Parmenianus. And
so in regard of Heresies, he means, that sometimes they grow so powerful, as to
infect almost all the Body: and this is what he expressly shows in a Letter to
Vincentius Aug. Ep. 48. and Ep. 80.
a Donatist Bishop, and in that which he wrote to Hesychius.

Thus it is that S. Augustine has conceived of the Church, and according to
these different notions, and these different states, he has spoken differently
of separations from it. As for that which regards the truly righteous and
faithful, there is no question, but that he thought that we ought to have not
only an internal communion of charity with them founded upon the Unity that is
between all the members of the Mystical Body of Jesus Christ, who have all but
one and the same faith, one and the same piety and the same righteousness; but
an external communion also, which consists in joining with them in the same
Assemblies, in partaking of the same Sacraments, in approving their faith,
piety, good works; and in one word, in accounting them their brethren, as far
as it is possible for them to know them. But this is not that which makes the
difficulty, all the Question is concerning the mixed Church, and all the
dispute is to know how, according to S. Augustine, the Corn and the Tares, that
is to say, the truly faithful and the Heretics, ought to remain together in
the same communion, and in what case they might separate themselves. We must
therefore note in the Fifth place, that in the Doctrine of that Father, there
is a certain separation that a man can never make, under any pretense
whatsoever, without being a Schismatic; and that there is another that he may
lawfully make, and which it is sometimes necessary that he should. He has
distinguished between two external bonds that should unite us to one another;
the first is, that of the External and General Call to Christianity, the second
is that of the participation of the same Sacraments, and the same Assemblies.
It is the first bond that S. Augustine would have to be inviolable, not only in
regard of the faithful between themselves; but also in regard of the wicked and
Heretics, and not only while we suffer them to be in the public Assemblies;
but even then when we excommunicate them, and deprive them of the communion of
the Sacraments. And thus it is that he understands that which Jesus Christ said
in his Parable, That the Tares ought not to be plucked up which the Enemy had
Matthew. 13. v. 29, 30.
sown among the good Wheat in the same field; but that he would leave both to
grow together until the harvest: and it is this kind of Unity whereof he says,
that there is no just necessity of ever breaking: praecidendae unitatis nulla
est justa necessitas, it is the Unity of the Aug. contr. Ep. Parmen. lib. 2.
cap. 11.
same Net that enclosed both good and bad Fish, the Unity of the same Floor
that contained both the good Seed and the Chaff; the Unity of the same Field
where the Tares grew up with the Wheat, the Unity of the same House where there
are Vessels of Wood and Earth, with those of Gold and Silver: and in a word,
this Unity that we call the external and general call to Christianity. It is
therefore first of all, in this sense that he means, that there is a Church
from which we ought never to separate our selves, under any pretense
whatsoever, and from which all those who separate themselves are Schismatics;
for he understands it of that mixed Church, that Field, that Floor, that Net,
that common House, out of which we must never go forth, nor drive out others,
howsoever wicked and Heretical they may be, there being none but God who can
make this separation, and who will in effect make it at the end of the world.
And as it was thus that the Donatists had separated themselves, so it was
chiefly upon this, that he convinced them of Schism; for they owned none for
Christians, but those of their own Party; they rejected the Baptism of all the
rest; they looked upon them as Pagans, who had no more any shadow of
Christianity; and when Proselytes came over to them, they made them pass
through all the degrees of the Catechumeni, before they would receive them; and
they began to make them Christians anew, as if they had come out of a Society
of absolute Infidels, as I have noted in my Fourth Observation on their Story.
This Distinction that I have of these two sorts of separation, is clearly to be
found in the Doctrine of S. Augustine. Aug. contr. Ep. Parmen. l. 3. cap. 2.
He notes both the one and the other in his third Book against Parmenio, where
he treats of this matter very largely. When any brother, says he, that is to
say, any Christian among those who are in the Society of the Church, falls into
so great sins, that they judge worthy of an Anathema, I would have them proceed
to his Excommunication, if that may be done without any danger of Schism; but
yet it ought to be done with that charity that S. Paul recommends to us, to
wit, that we should not treat him as an Enemy, but as a Brother; for you are
not called to pluck up, but to correct. If he does not acknowledge nor correct
his fault by repentance, he wilfully goes out of himself from the Church, and
it will be his own will that separates him from the Christian Unity. Our Lord
himself said to his servants, when they would pluck up the Tares mixed with the
Wheat, leave them to grow up together until harvest; and he gives the reason,
to wit, lest, says he, that in plucking up the Tares, you pluck up the Wheat
also. See here precisely these two separations whereof I speak, the one that
deprives one of the communion of the Sacraments, and the other which breaks of
Christian Unity; one which is but to correct, and the other which goes as far
as to pluck up. This Father alleges, Ibid. cap. 1.
for the same thing, the Example of S. Paul, who in the Excommunication of the
Incestuous person in Corinth, did indeed deliver that miserable person to
Satan; but only for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit might be
saved in the day of the Lord Jesus; that is to say, that he deprived him of the
communion of the Sacraments; but that he did not wholly pluck him up out of the
field Ibid.
of the Church. He alleges yet further, what the same Apostle wrote to the
Thessalonians, If any man obey not our word by this 2 Thessalonians. 3. v. 14, 15.
Epistle, note that man, and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed,
yet count him not as an enemy; but admonish him as a brother. He alleges
lastly, that which S. Paul wrote to the Corinthians Ibid.
touching the same incestuous penitent, that they ought to pardon him; Lest
Satan should get an advantage over us; for we are not ignorant of his devices.
What means the Apostle, says he, by these words, lest Satan should get an
advantage over us, for we are not ignorant of his devices? It is that under the
appearance of a just severity, he sometimes persuades to a violent cruelty,
desiring nothing more than to break the bond of peace and charity, well knowing
that while that bond shall be preserved among Christians, he cannot hurt them,
and that his devices and designs would vanish. There cannot be a more perfect
example of that first separation given, than that of the Donatists in respect
of the Church; for as I have said already, they so absolutely separated
themselves from it, that they did not own it to be any longer Christian in any
manner, and therefore it was that they re-baptiz'd all those, who came over to
their party. But we cannot also give a better example of the second, than that
of the Church it self, in regard of the Donatists; for although they would
separate themselves from the Church, yet the Church did not fail to look upon
them as Christians, and in some manner, as Brethren. The Donatists, says S.
Augustine, are impious in Aug. de Bapt. contr. Donat. l. 1. c. 1.
going about to re-baptize all the world; but as for us who have better
sentiments, we dare not even disapprove of the Sacraments of God in a
Schismatical Communion. In respect of the things about which we agree, they are
yet with us; and in respect of the things about which we differ, they are
separated from us. This approach to us, and this separation, are not ordered by
the motions of the body, but by those of the mind; and as the union of bodies
is made by the continuity of the places they fill up, so the union of spirits
also is made by the consent of wills. If those who have forsaken the Unity of
the Church, do other things than those that are done in the Church, they are in
that regard separated from her, but if they do that which is done in the Church
they remain as yet in that regard in a common union. The Donatists are
therefore with us in some things, and they are separated from us in some others.

I cannot here avoid taking notice of the Error into which the Author of the
Prejudices seems to have fallen, about the meaning of these words of S.
Augustine in the second Book against Parmenianus, praecidendae unitatis nulla
est justa necessitas. There is no just necessity to break off Union. For it
seems that he thought that this Maxim regarded all manner of separation, not
considering, that it only respects that of the Donatists, which consisted in
the breaking the general bond of Christianity, and not that which consists in
refusing our communion to those who corrupt Religion by their pernicious
Superstitions and Errors. If he had taken the pains to have read ten or twelve
lines higher, he had found that S. Augustine had strongly established the
necessity of separating our selves from Heretics. S. Paul, says that Father,
writing to the Galatians, Aug. contr Ep. Parmen. lib 2. cap. 11.
manifestly forbids them to hear those who did not preach Jesus Christ, but a
falsehood and a lie. If any one should preach another Gospel to you than what
you have received, let him be Anathema. He would that we should pronounce an
Anathema against those who preach to us any thing beyond what we have received.
He would elsewhere, that there can be no just necessity of breaking of unity:
Who sees not that he must make a distinction, and that according to him, there
is a separation that is good, just and necessary; and another unjust, unlawful
and schismatical?

Although this Distinction is unquestionable, yet I shall not fail to produce
here a Canon that establishes it, out of the very Doctrine of S. Augustine, as
clearly as we can desire it. It is in the Decree of Gratian under the name of
Pope Urban in these terms, Some men say, that when we excommunicate persons who
have deserved to be excommunicated, we go against the Parable of the Gospel,
where our Lord forbids us to pluck up the tares out of his field. They say
also, that this contrary to S. Augustine, who assures us, that we ought not to
divide its unity, and that we must tolerate the wicked and not reject them.
But, first of all, we answer, that if we ought not to excommunicate the
Heretics and the wicked, S. Augustine would have done ill to have joined
himself to the Legates of the Holy Church of Rome, and to the other Holy
Bishops to excommunicate Pelagius and Celestinus, and to separate them from the
Church, because they brought in a new Heresy into it. But why also did the
same S. Augustine, with the whole Church of God, hold the Donatists to be
justly excommunicated, against whom these things are written; and why did not
they receive them into their communion, but only after signs of repentance, and
the imposition of hands? Jesus Christ who propounded the Parable of the Tares,
did not he clearly ordain excommunication, elsewhere, saying, that if our
brother would not obey the Church correcting him, we ought to reckon him as a
Heathen and a Publican? That which manifestly shows us, that it is one thing to
excommunicate, and another to pluck up; the Discipline of the Church
excommunicates, but it does not pluck up. See here precisely that which S.
Augustine himself said, non estis ad eradicandum, sed ad corrigendum. From
whence the truth of that which I have said appears, that according to this
Father, there is a bad separation, and that is schismatical in its own nature,
and another that is not so; and that although it is never permitted us to make
the former; yet it does not follow, that we may not make the latter, provided
we do it upon just causes, and observe the rules of Prudence and Charity in it.

We must therefore lay it down as a certain truth, that S. Augustine thought,
that we might sometimes break the communion of the Sacraments and Assemblies,
we are only concerned to know in what case he thought that that separation
should be made.

To make this point clear, I shall say, in the Sixth place, that when S.
Augustine considered the Church in the mere mixture with the wicked; that is to
say, in the mixture with those whose manners are vicious and criminal, he
taught, that those who are in office in the Church, may proceed to the
excommunication of impenitent sinners, when those sinners are few in number,
and when there is ground to believe, that they may disturb the peace of the
Church; but if the crime includes a whole multitude, and that the Body in
general is infected, then he would that the good should content themselves to
preserve their own righteousness, without partaking of the sins of the wicked,
he would that they should groan under it, and pray to God; but he would not
that they should separate themselves. When the evil, says he, has seized the
greater number, nothing remains for the good to do, but to groan and lament.
And a little lower, If the contagion of sin has Aug. contr. Fp. Parmen. lib. 3.
cap. 2.
invaded the multitude, then it is necessary that Discipline should be used
with mercy, for the counsels of Separation are vain, pernicious and
sacrilegious. But when he considers the Church, not only as a mixture of good
and wicked; but also as a mixture of the truly faithful and Heretics, I
maintain that he has formally acknowledged the justice and necessity of a
separation, not only in regard of some particular persons; but in regard even
of entire Societies, provided they go not so far as that which he calls
Eradication. We have already noted that he would that we should according to S.
Paul, pronounce an Anathema against those who preach another Gospel, than that
which he has preached. But this very thing gives the faithful a right to reject
the communion of Heretical Societies, and to separate themselves from their
Assemblies. In his Book of the True Religion, he aggravates it as a very
strange thing, and very much deserving to be condemned, that the Heathen
Philosophers who had other sentiments concerning Divinity, than the people,
should partake in the worship of the people. In their Schools, says he, they
had sentiments differing from Aug. de ver. Relig. cap. 1.
those of the people, and yet notwithstanding they had Temples common with the
people. The people and their Priests were not ignorant that these Philosophers
had opinions contrary to theirs touching the nature of the Gods, since every
Philosopher was not afraid of publishing his opinions, and of laboring at the
same time to persuade them and others, and yet nevertheless with that diversity
of sentiments, they did not fail to assist at the public worship without being
hindered by any body. A man that speaks after this manner, would not think it
ill, that any should separate themselves from Heretical communions. But he yet
further explains himself more clearly afterward. For he says, That if the
Christian Religion should do nothing else but correct Ibid. cap. 5.
that vice, it would deserve infinite praises. And he adds immediately after,
That it appears by the example of so many Heresies that have deviated from the
rule of Christianity, that they would not admit to the communion of the
Sacraments those who taught concerning God the Father, his Wisdom and his
Grace, otherwise than the truth would allow them, and who would persuade men to
receive their false Doctrine. -- But that is not only to be found true in
regard of the Manichees, and of some others who have other Sacraments than we,
but also in regard of those who having the same Sacraments, have sentiments
differing from us in other things, and errors which they obstinately defend;
for they are shut out from the Catholic communion, and the participation of
those same Sacraments which they have common with us.

From whence comes it to pass therefore, you will say, that S. Augustine seems
sometimes to ascribe to the Orthodox the right only of a passive separation, in
regard of Heretical Societies? that is to say, that he would not that we should
separate from them even then when they separate themselves. For he says in
some place, that though the Traditors should have openly maintained in the
Church, that their Action was good and holy, that is to say, that they ought to
have delivered up their Bibles to the Pagans for them to burn them, and that
though they should even have wrote on that subject, provided they had not set
up their Assemblies Contr. Crescor. lib. 3. cap. 38*
apart, nor separated themselves, yet we ought not to have abandoned, for them,
the good wheat: which signifies this to us, that we ought not to separate our
selves from those, though their Doctrine whereof he had spoken was detestable,
contrary to the faith, conscience and good manners. In effect, he speaks almost
always of the Heretical Societies of his time, as of those who were themselves
cut off from the communion of the Church, and whom the Church had not rejected.
I answer, that S. Augustine would have us suffer the communion of Heretics in
certain cases, but that he would have us also in other cases to separate our
selves from them. While we are in no danger of partaking with their errors,
neither in effect, nor in appearance; but that we may preserve the profession
of our faith pure, without consenting to impiety, or seeming to consent to it,
and that there should not be on the part of the Heretics that obstinacy of
opinion, he would have us suffer their communion. For it is the manifest
Doctrine of this Father, that in the Society of the Church, no one is
responsible but for his own crimes, and not for those of others, at least if he
take no part with them, or do not approve them, or consent to them. So that,
while there is no obstinateness to maintain error, while there is no danger of
being seduced, and while one is not bound to take any part in the evil, nor to
hide ones faith and piety under the vail of hypocrisy, this Father yields,
that we should have communion with Heretics, as the ancient Prophets had
communion with the Idolaters of their times, and as Jesus Christ and his
Disciples had communion with the Pharisees and Sadducees, and were found among
them in the same Assemblies. But when there is an invincible opinionativeness,
and error is so deeply rooted, that there is no more hope of its being healed,
S. Augustine would, in this case, that a man should separate himself from their
communion. This is that which he teaches in the same Book of the True Religion,
The Church, says he, suffers their error, while they Aug. de ver. Relig. cap.
6.
have no accusers, or do not defend their false opinions with obstinacy; but
when they are accused, and defend themselves obstinately in their opinions, she
separates them from her communion, which is formally to acknowledge the right
of active separation in an Orthodox Church. And from the same we may evidently
conclude, that this Father does not approve that we should remain in an
Heretical Communion, when there is the least necessity of partaking in error,
wickedness, or superstition, whether in effect or appearance; and that he would
on the contrary conclude, that in this case the good should separate themselves
for the conservation of their own righteousness. But to give a yet greater
light to this matter, we must note, that according to the Doctrine of this
Father, every Society whatsoever it be, that determines a false Doctrine, and
publishes Books of it, to teach it posterity, and who will have none receive
its communion, but those who approve that Doctrine, in giving the Orthodox a
just occasion to separate themselves, she her self first of all breaks the bond
of Unity, and it is she that makes the active separation, and becomes
schismatical. This is that which he teaches in his Treatise against Cresconius.
This Donatist had said to him, that if he did not approve of the crime of the
Traditors, if on the contrary it displeased him, he ought to fly from and
abandon the Church of the Traditors. To answer to this, S. Augustine says,
first of all, that though there should have been Traditors in his Church, yet
he ought not to forsake it, while he did not communicate with their crime; and
that on the contrary, he condemned it, and labored to correct it by preaching
and discipline. He proves it by the example of S. Cyprian, who declaimed
against the vices of the Church; but who did not separate himself from it: and
by that of David, of Samuel, of Isaiah, of Jeremiah, of Zachary, and other
Saints, who cried out against the Transgressors of the Law, yet without
separating themselves notwithstanding. Since immediately after he adds, Is it
that the Traditors have instituted Contr. Crescon. lib. 3. cap. 38.
some new Sacraments, or some new Baptism? Is it that they have composed Books
to teach others to do or imitate the action of the Traditors, or that they have
recommended those Books to posterity, or that we hold and follow that Doctrine?
If they had done so, and suffered no person to have been in their communion,
but those who would read their Books, and approve that Doctrine, I say, that
they would have separated themselves from the Unity of the Church, and if you
saw me in their Schism, you would then have reason to say, that I were in the
Church of the Traditors. These words note clearly what I have said, that when a
Church teaches a false Doctrine, which it makes to enter into the use of the
Sacraments, and that it would receive into its communion, none but those who
approve it, it is not only just to separate from her, but it is she her self
that breaks the bond of the Unity of the Church, and casts her self into
Schism. But this is precisely that which the Church of Rome does in respect of
us; for she has not only decided as of faith, the Doctrines that we do not
believe to be true; she has not only set forth Books to teach those Tenets to
Posterity, but she has cut off all those from her communion, who will not
believe them after the manner that she teaches them. So that we have in this
regard a just reason to say, that it is she that has made the active
separation; and if it be true, that we have reason in the foundation, it is she
that has broken the Christian Unity, and to which the Schism ought to be
imputed, and not to us, who are in a mere passive separation. From whence by
the way, it further follows, that to the deciding the Question of the Schism
that is between us, and to know which of the two parties is to blame, we must
necessarily come to the discussion of the controverted Articles. For if the
Church of Rome has decided nothing, that is not conformable to the Gospel, she
has a right to reject all those from her communion, who refuse to believe her
Doctrine; we will grant this: But if she has decided Errors, it is certain
also, that the necessity which she has imposed on others to believe and
practice them in order to their being in her communion, renders her guilty of
Schism. All depends therefore on the discussion of the foundation. For there is
no ground left of doubting that according to the Doctrine of S. Augustine, it
is not only permitted, but even necessary to the Orthodox in some certain
cases, to be no longer joined in the assemblies of those who teach those
errors, and to live separated from their communion. We shall see in the close,
whether that multitude and visible extension can take away that right from a
small party restrained to a few persons and places; for there remains nothing
but this doubt to be taken away; but to effect this, we must go on to the
examination of the second Proposition of the Author of the Prejudices.

The infallible and perpetual mark, says he, to know the Church by, according
to S. Augustine and the other African Fathers, is a visible extension
throughout all Nations; because that visible extension according to them,
agreed with the Church in all Ages, and that it is a negative mark; that is to
say, that every Society which has not that extension, is not the Church; so
that this arguing is always just; your Society is shut up in a small part of
the world: therefore it is not the Church. It is, adds he, by this principle,
that S. Augustine has disputed against the Donatists, and convinced them to be
schismatics.

This Proposition is not less captious, nor less ambiguous than the former. For
if the Author of the Prejudices means, that that visible extension is a
perpetual mark of the Orthodox communion, that always distinguishes it from
impure or heretical communions, so that this Orthodox communion, as far as it
is visible, can never be restrained to a few persons and places, it is certain
that this was not the opinion of S. Augustine, nor that of the other Fathers;
and it is certain also, that the celebrated Authors of the Church of Rome
reject the Proposition in this sense, as false and absurd; and that in effect,
it is manifestly contrary to experience. To set forth the truth of what I
propound, I will begin with experience, and as that of our Age presents it self
first to our view; I say, that if we must act at this day according to the
principle, That the true Orthodox Church ought to be visibly extended over all
Nations, we must conclude, that there is no true Orthodox Church in the world.
For it is most true, that of all the communions which at this day divide
Christianity, there is not any one to whom this mark can agree. I will not say,
that there are diverse parties in the known world which have not so much as yet
heard of Christianity, nor that there are others who after having received it,
have absolutely rejected it to embrace the Mohammedan Religion. I will not here
speak of the Greek communion separated from the Roman, nor of the Coptick or
Nestorian, or of the Jacobites, or Armenian, which evidently have not that
visible extension throughout all Nations. I will only speak of the Roman and
the Protestant as they are at present. He must, Chap. 2. p. 198.
says the Author of the Prejudices, be wholly blind, that can dare to
maintain, that the society of Calvinists, which is wholly shut out of Italy,
Spain, Flanders, a great part of Germany, Swedeland, Denmark, Muscovy, Asia,
Africa, of almost all America, is that which Jesus Christ has spread over all
the world. But before he argues after this manner, he ought to take heed, that
we cannot say the same thing of the Roman communion. For is it not true, that
it is at this day excluded from Swedeland, Denmark, a great part of Germany, a
part of Switzerland, a part of Greece, Muscovy, Africa, Aethiopia, Persia,
Tartary, China, Japan, of the Indies, and from the greatest part of America?
And the Author of the Prejudices ought not to pretend the prevailing of some
Colonies of Missionaries whom the Pope sends here and there to gain Proselytes.
For since he will not have it, that we should gain any thing by the Colonies of
English and Dutch, who have established themselves in all the parts of the
world, why would he help himself by the Missionaries and Pensionaries that the
Congregations de fide propaganda maintain in foreign Countries? Why should they
be more reckoned for any thing, than those Colonies of English and Dutch, who
have the exercises of their Religion, as free as those of the Roman Communion?
They are, says he, such Merchants as are in Page 199.
those Countries, only for the sake of Trade. But do not those Merchants pray
to God in the form of their Religion, in what Countries, and with what design
soever they are? Is it that those Merchants being so much tied as they are to
their Trading, make no open profession of their Religion, or that they have not
in the greatest part of those places where they are, their ordinary Assemblies,
with their Ministers, as well as the Missionaries? He must yield in good
earnest, that the Christians are now divided and separated from one another,
about matters of faith and worship, in their different Societies, or
communions, of which each one has its seat and bounds apart, beyond which we
cannot say they are visibly extended, if we would speak with any reason; and
that there is no one that is throughout all Nations in the form of a communion
of visible Society. From whence it follows, that all this dispute of the Author
of the Prejudices, is but a beating the air, and which he can never apply to
any real subject.

The Experience of former Ages is not less contrary to the Proposition of the
Author of the Prejudices, than that of our Age. For if we consult History, we
shall find, that it has fallen out often, that an Heretical communion has
spread it self every where, while the Orthodox communion was so limited, that
it did not seem to take up any space. If in the time of the Arians, they had
disputed by this principle, by which the Author of the Prejudices would decide
our differences; I mean if they would have treated that communion as Heretical,
that was not visibly spread over all the Nations, and that as Orthodox which
was, the Arians had easily overcome. The Heresy of the Arians and Eunomians,
says S. Jerome, possessed all the East, except Athanasius and Paulinus. Hieron.
contr. error. Joan. (...). Hi^ar. de Syn. In vita Greg. Naz.
S. Hilary says the same thing: The greatest part of the Ten Provinces of
Asia, excepting Eleusius and some others, do not truly know God. In those time,
says the Author of the Life of S. Gregory Nazianzen, the Church was oppressed
by the Arian Heresy, many Bishops were banished and vexed by torments and
calumnies a thousand ways, many Presbyters, and many numerous Flocks were
brought down to the utmost misery, exposed to the injuries of the weather, as
no more having any house of prayer where they might meet. That Heresy had
almost filled all the Earth, and it triumphed, being upheld by the power of the
Emperor; so that good men had not so much as the justice of the Laws against
the wicked. And because the Pastors, or to say better, the concealed Wolves,
under the appearance of Pastors, had the liberty to drive the Orthodox Bishops
out of the Churches, who alone were worthy to serve Jesus Christ the Sovereign
Bishop, it happened, that some overcome with fear, others deceived by fair words,
others gained by money, others surprised through their own simplicity, embraced
that Heresy, and opened their bosoms and gave their communion to their
adversaries. This was that that obliged the Fathers to elevate the little
number, and the little flock above extension and multitude. Where are those
men, says Gregory Nazianzen, who reproach us with our poverty, and insolently
boast themselves of their riches, who would define the Church by Greg. Naz.
Great. 25.
multitude, and contemn the little flock? They measure Divinity, they weigh the
people in the balance, they esteem the illiterate, and cover with injuries the
lights of the world, they heap together the common stones, and despise the
precious, not remembering, that the more the thick darkness surpasses in number
the Stars, the more the ordinary stones surpass the precious in quantity, the
more those Stars and precious stones surpass the ordinary stones in purity and
excellency. This Father, who had seen in his time the Heretics masters of the
whole Church, and their communion spread very wide and far in the East and in
the West, while the Orthodox durst not appear, was so far from having the Faith
and the True Orthodox Church to be regulated by that extension, that he made on
the contrary, this extension a ground of reproach to the Arians, taking that
for a mark of Heresy, which the Author of the Prejudices would have us take
for a mark of Orthodoxy. Are you ignorant, says he, that the faith as
miserable and forsaken as it is, is a thousand Gregor. Nazianzen. Orat. 32.
times more precious, than impiety in splendour and abundance? Is it so, that
you prefer the multitude of the Canaanites, before one only Abraham, or all the
inhabitants of Sodom, before one only Lot, or all the Midianites to one only
Moses? Notwithstanding you know, that these Saints were but strangers and
foreigners among those people. I pray tell me, whether the three hundred that
lapped the water with Gideon, were not more to be esteemed, than all those
thousands, who cowardly forsook him; whether the servants of Abraham who were
few in number, were not to be preferred to all those Kings who with their
innumerable Armies, were overcome? But I pray yet farther tell me, how you
understand that which is said, when the number of the children of Israel shall
be as the sand of the sea, a remnant only shall be saved; and this other
passage, I have reserved to my self seven thousand who have not bowed the knee
to Baal? The matter will not go as you imagine; no without doubt; for God takes
no pleasure in a multitude. As for you, you reckon your thousands; but God
reckons those who work out their salvation; you heap up a great pile of dust;
but I assemble the vessels of election. There is nothing so great before God,
as the pure Doctrine, and a soul that is filled and adorned with the Tenets of
the Truth.

S. Athanasius, or if you will Theodoret, is not less express about the subject
of a small number, in opposition to that extension and multitude than S.
Gregory Nazianzen. Shall we not, says he, Athanas. tom. 2. tract. Quod veritas
non multitud. Judic.
hearken to Jesus Christ, who says, That many are called, and few chosen; that
straight is the gate, and narrow is the way that leads unto life, and few
there be that find that gate, or this way? What man of good understanding, will
not rather choose to be among this small number that enters into life, than to
be joined to this multitude that goes to perdition? If we had lived in the age
of S. Stephen, should we not have rather chose his party, though it should have
been forsaken by all else, buried under stones, and exposed to all manner of
reproaches, than the party of that multitude which thought that the faith ought
to follow the greatest number? One man alone who has the Truth on his side, is
more to be esteemed, than ten thousand rash men, and this is what the
Scriptures of the Old Testament confirm; for when millions of men fell under
Gods sword, one Phineas alone opposed himself in the breach, and put a stop to
the anger of the Lord. If he had not resisted that torrent which bore down all
the others; if he had approved that which the multitude did, he had never
himself been commended above all, he had never put a stop to the flood of
divine vengeance, nor had saved that remnant, which was after that, the object
of Gods mercy. It was therefore a thing worthy of praise, that one man alone
should boldly maintain right and justice against the opinion of the multitude.
Go if you will, and be drowned with the multitude that perished in the deluge,
but give me leave to save my self in the Ark with that small number. Be
consumed if you please with the inhabitants of Sodom, I shall not fail to go
out of it with Lot alone. Thus these Fathers spoke concerning the state whereto
the Orthodox communion might be sometimes reduced, and into which it had been
in effect reduced; which evidently shows us, that this visible extension is not
a perpetual mark of the True Church, and that it is not so very necessary, that
this arguing should be always just: Your society is not spread every where over
the world; therefore it is not the Church. This Vincentius Lirinensis has also
acknowledged in his Admonition against Heresies; for he acknowledges, that it
may sometimes fall out, that Heresy invades the whole Church, and he makes a
question what he ought to do in that case. What ought we to do, says Vinc.
Lirin. Common. 1. cap. 4.
he, when some new contagion endeavors to infect not one part only, but the
whole Body of the Church in general? Quid si novella aliqua contagio non jam
portiunculam, sed totam pariter Ecclesiam commaculare conetur? What visible
extension could the Orthodox communion have throughout all Nations, in those
unhappy times, in which the same Vincentius Lirinensis says, that the greatest
part of the good were put to death, or imprisoned, or banished, or condemned to
the Mines, or hid in Deserts and Caves, exposed to savage Beasts, to hunger,
thirst and nakedness? Horum pars maxima interdictis urbibus protrusi, atque
extorres, inter deserta, speluncas, feras, Ibid. cap. 6.
saxa, nuditate, fame, siti, affecti, attriti, and tabefacti sunt. What visible
extension could that same Orthodox communion have in the time wherein S.
Athanasius cried out after this manner, Who is there among the servants of
Jesus Christ, that these rebels Athanas. Ep. ad vitan solitar. ag.
have not calumniated, or whom they have not lain snares for? Who is there that
the Emperor has not banished upon their false accusations, he who has always
so readily hearkened to them, who has always so constantly refused to hear
whatsoever should be said against them, and who never refused to believe all
that they have said against others? Where now a days shall we find a Church
that worships Jesus Christ with liberty? If Churches have any piety, they are
in danger; if they dissemble, they are always in fear. The Emperor has filled
all with wickedness and hypocrisy, as far as things depend on him. I know that
there are every where many persons who have piety and a love of Jesus Christ;
but in what place so ever they are, they are forced either to conceal
themselves, as the Prophets, and as the great Elias, till they find some
faithful Abdias, who should hide them in a Cave, or to to go dwell in the
Deserts. For it is most true, that these wicked men, make use of the same
calumnies against the good, that Jezebell made use of against Naboth, and the
Jews against Jesus Christ. And the Emperor, who stirs up himself to defend
Heresy, and to overthrow the Truth, as Ahab overthrew Naboth 's Vineyard,
refused nothing to the desires of these Heretics, because these Heretics also
spoke to him only according to his desires. The Fathers had then no regard to
seek for the true Church either in that visible extension, or in that temporal
glory or splendour; or in a word, any where else, than in the True Faith, and
there it is that they seek for it in effect. The Church, says the Author of
the Commentary on the Psalms Hierom. Comment. in Psalm. 133.
attributed to S. Jerome, does not consist in her Walls, but in the truth of her
Tenets. She is where the true Faith is. For, as to the other, it is but fifteen
or twenty years since the walls of these Churches were in the power of
Heretics. They possessed all these Churches which you see. But the Church was,
where the True Faith was.

As the Author of the Prejudices has not scrupled sometimes to make use of the
Testimonies of our own Authors, when he thought he could draw any advantage
from them, he will not, it may be, take it ill, if I oppose to him also upon
the subject about which we now dispute, the Testimony of two men famous in the
Roman communion, and who well deserve to be heard; the one is Driedo, whom
Bellarmine calls a most learned man, and the other is Bellarmine himself, both
very great defenders of the Church of Rome. See here therefore what Cardinal
Bellarmine has wrote in the name of both, in his Controversies of the Church.
We must note, says he, according to the Doctrine of Driedo, that it is not
necessary Bellarm. de notis Eccl. l. 4* cap. 7.
that the Catholic Church should have that extension in all places, all at
once, or in the same time, that is to say, that there should be the faithful in
all Provinces, and that it is enough if that be successively done. From whence
it follows, that when there should remain but one Province alone that should
retain the true Faith, this Province would not fail to be truly and properly
called the Catholic Church, provided that we see clearly that it is the same
Church, which sometimes or at diverse times, is found spread over all the world.
Could any one have more clearly contradicted the Author of the Prejudices? He
would that this visible extension through all Nations should be a perpetual
mark of the True Church; and these here say, that it is sufficient that it is
sometimes, and even in diverse times successively, he would that this extension
should be the mark of the Church for all following Ages; and these here
maintain, that it is not necessary. He would that this reasoning should be
always just, your society is shut up in a small part of the world. Therefore
it is not the Church; and these here say, that when there should remain but one
only Province that should retain the true faith, this Province would not cease
to be properly and truly called the Catholic Church.

But it may be that Bellarmine had not observed, that his opinion and Driedo's
favored the Donatists, and that it was contrary to the doctrine of S.
Augustine. This may be so in effect; not only because a man in writing may not
have all things in view, but because also, at the bottom, the sentiment of
these Doctors is very remote from that of the Donatists, and that it does not
encounter that of S. Augustine. It is yet true, that Bellarmine saw that they
could make that Objection, which he has prevented and answered; this I say, to
the end the Author of the Prejudices may see, that this which he has treated of
as an Argument, and as a convincing Argument for which he has made two
Chapters, Bellarmine has looked on as a very trivial objection, which he
proposes and resolves in a few words. They will say, says he, that this is to
fall into the Error of Petilianus and the Donatists, who maintained that in
truth the Church had been spread over all the world, but that it was afterward
lost in all the Provinces, and remained no where but in Africa, which S.
Augustine disputes against. I answer, that the Error of the Donatists consisted
in two things; the first, that they would have it that the Church should be in
Africa only in a time wherein it manifestly increased throughout all the world:
the second, in that they could not connect their Church of Africa with that
which had before been spread through all the world; for in that Church there,
they had always good and bad, as S. Augustine proves, whereas they would
compose theirs of the righteous only.

This Answer of Bellarmine overthrows all the pretensions of the Author of the
Prejudices; for it establishes these following Propositions. 1. That Visible
Extension is not a mark of the true Church, but in a certain time, that is to
say, when we see it manifestly increase throughout all the world; from whence
it follows, that this mark is vain at other times. 2. That the Argument of S.
Augustine concludes only for the time then being, by reason of that manifest
fruitfulness; from whence it follows, that it is very impertinent, that the
Author of the Prejudices goes to apply it to these last Ages, wherein we
maintain the field of the Church has been fruitful only in Errors and
Superstitions. 3. That if the Donatists had accused all the world to have
fallen into Heresy, and if they had said, by consequence, that it was not the
time of fruitfulness for the Church, it had been in vain for S. Augustine to
allege to them the visible extension of his Church, to exempt himself from
entering into the discussion of that accusation; from whence it follows, that it
is also in vain that the Author of the Prejudices propounds the visible
extension of his, since we say that it is fallen into fundamental errors. 4.
That the Argument of S. Augustine concluded, because the Donatists agreed, that
his communion was Orthodox; from whence it follows, that that of the Author of
the Prejudices concludes nothing, since we question that Orthodoxy of his
Church. 5. That by consequence visible extension is not a mark, that can make
us know which is the True Church, when the dispute is between two Societies
contesting that Orthodoxy between themselves, but at farthest only when the
dispute is between two Societies that mutually own one another to be Orthodox;
from whence it follows, that the Author of the Prejudices makes use of this
mark to no purpose, since our chief question is to know, whether the Church of
Rome is Orthodox or no. All these consequences, which flow naturally from the
answer of Bellarmine, contradict the Argument of the Author of the Prejudices;
and it concerns him to see after what manner he can decline the Authority of
this Cardinal.

But some will say, lastly, It may be Bellarmine was deceived, and that he had
not well understood the state of the question, which was between S. Augustine
and the Donatists, nor well comprehended the true Hypothesis of that Father. I
confess that this may be; but it may be also, that he did well understand it,
and that the misconstruing should be on the side of the Author of the
Prejudices. This is that which must be further cleared, and for this effect, we
must note a thing that the Author of the Prejudices seems not to have
comprised; which is, that if the Donatists had accused the Society of S.
Augustine of Heresy, S. Augustine had been very well able to have proved, that
they were Schismatics; but that he had not notwithstanding been able to
conclude from thence, that his Society was the True Church. The reason of this
is, because they had broken the general bond of an External Call, that S.
Augustine would have them obliged to keep, even in regard of Heretics; so that
according to him, they might very well have been Schismatics, although the
Church which they had forsaken had not been the true Church. He proved
therefore, that his Society was the true Church, only because they acknowledged
it to be Orthodox, and did not lay to its charge either any Error in the Faith,
or depravation in Worship. For in supposing that confession, it manifestly
appears, that that time was a time of the increase of the Church, since it
cannot be denied, that the Church does not then increase, when the true
Doctrine is spread abroad in all places, from whence would follow, that the
Society that taught that true Doctrine throughout the world, was the true
Church, rather than a small party that were shut up within one only Province.
So that the Error of the Donatists consisted in this, in that they would have
restrained the Church in their Africa in a time wherein it manifestly increased
in all Nations; and this increase was manifest, by the acknowledgement which
they themselves made, that the Society that was spread over all the world was
Orthodox. This is that precisely that Bellarmine would say: He would have S.
Augustine reason after this manner; in a time wherein it manifestly appears,
that the Church increases, it is an error not to acknowledge that Society that
is spread over all the world, to be the true Church of Jesus Christ, in
opposition to a small party. But in this time, it manifestly appears that the
Church increases, since by your own confession, it is the true Doctrine, and
not Heresy that multiplies it self. Therefore it is an error not to
acknowledge at this time, the Society that is spread over the world, to be the
true Church. This is in effect, the true reasoning of S. Augustine; and
Bellarmine is no ways deceived in it. But it clearly follows from thence, that
according to S. Augustine, that visible extension may be sometimes a mark of
the true Church in opposition to a small party; to wit, then when the true and
pure Doctrine is spread abroad every where, because that is the time of the
increase of the Church: But it does not follow, that this mark is perpetual,
since the time of that increase does not last always. From whence it appears,
that the arguing of S. Augustine can have no place in the question that is
between the Church of Rome and us. In one word, then when we contest the title
of the true Church with a Society that does otherwise own us to be Orthodox,
then visible extension decides the question according to S. Augustine. But then
when we contest that title with a Society that accuses us with false Doctrine,
that visible extension decides nothing; and the difference cannot be
determined, but by the discussion of the foundation it self. S. Augustine
alleged it in the former case, and the Author of the Prejudices alleges it in
the latter.

What need we to do more to set down this truth in its full evidence, and to
give the Author of the Prejudices entire satisfaction? Do we need to let him
see that if they had accused the Society of S. Augustine of false Doctrine,
that Father had not pretended in this case, that that visible extension should
have decided the contest, but that he would have decided it at the foundation?
Need we to go yet farther, and to show him that S. Augustine has formally
acknowledged, that there have been in effect, times wherein the true Church has
had no visible extension? If we could show him these two things, he would
methinks have some reason to be contented, and to leave us in peace about this
business of extension. Let us therefore endeavor to satisfy him about these
two Articles. The first will be decided, if we here appeal to what I have
related of that Father on the occasion of what Cresconius had said to him, that
he ought to withdraw himself from the Church of the Traditors. Is it, says he,
that the Traditors have composed Books, to show, that we ought to do, or
imitate their action? Is it because they have recommended those Books to
posterity? Is it because we hold and follow that Doctrine? If they had done
that, and if they would have permitted none to remain in their communion, but
such as would read those Books and approve that Doctrine; I say that they would
have separated themselves from the Unity of the Church, and if you saw me in
their Schism, you would then have reason to say, that I am in the Church of the
Traditors. We need no great learning, to understand by this discourse, 1. That
S. Augustine had acknowledged, that if in effect his Society had determined a
false Doctrine, if it had framed Books about it, and suffered no person its
communion, who had not approved it, it had lost the title of the True Church,
although that visible extension should have been secured to it. 2. That if the
Donatists who were but a small party, had accused it, it would have admitted
them to proof, without a wrangling with them about that extension. For he who
says, Is it because we hold and follow that Doctrine? makes us sufficiently
see, that he would not have refused them liberty to come to a proof if his
adversaries had said, that they held and followed it indeed. And it ought not
to be said, that S. Augustine makes not that supposition only in regard of the
whole of his Society, but only in regard of some Traditors? For he makes that
supposition in regard of that same Society that Cresconius had called the
Church of the Traditors, and these words, Is it because we hold and follow this
Doctrine? leave no place for that evasion.

See here the first Article; the second is yet more formal in S. Augustine; for
no one can doubt, that he has not acknowledged, that there have been, in
effect, times wherein the true Church has scarce had any visible extension.
This is that which he has in his Letter to Hesychius, wherein he treats of the
state of the Church in those miserable times, which Jesus Christ foretold in
Aug Ep. 80.
the four and twentieth of S. Matthew. Then the Sun, says he, shall be
darkened, and the Moon shall not give her light, the Stars shall fall from
heaven, and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken. The Church shall not
appear, because the wicked becoming persecutors, shall no more observe any
bounds in their cruelties. Temporal Prosperity shall accompany them every
where; so that seeing no occasion of fear, they shall say, peace and security
to themselves. Then the Stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers of the
heavens shall be shaken, because many in whom grace seemed to be resplendent,
shall yield to the persecutors, and some of the most firm among the faithful
shall be troubled. The Church, says he, shall not appear, Ecclesia non
apparebit. She will not therefore have then, that visible extension which the
Author of the Prejudices would have to be her perpetual mark for all Ages. He
further acknowledges the same thing in his Epistle to Vincentius, where he
treats of the state of the Church under the Aug. Ep. 48.
Arians. There he teaches in express terms, That the Church is sometimes
obscured and covered with clouds, through the great number of offenses, that
she is then only eminent in her most firm defenders, while the multitude of the
weak and carnal is overwhelmed with the floods of temptation. That under the
reign of the Arians the simple suffered themselves to be deceived, that others
yielding through fear, dissembled, and in appearance consented to Arianism.
That indeed some of the most firm escaped the snares of those Heretics, but
that they were but few in number in comparison of the rest. That nevertheless
some of them generously suffered banishment, and some others lay hid here and
there throughout the Earth. I pray tell me, what visible extension could the
Orthodox communion have then, which subsisted only in a small number of the
firm, of whom even the greatest part had suffered exile, or lay hid here and
there throughout all the Earth? I confess, that History notes, that there were
yet some small flocks in some places of the East and of the West, who set up
their Assemblies apart as at Edessa, at Nazianzen, at Antioch, and in some
Provinces of France and Germany; but what was this in comparison of the Arian
communion, which had filled the Churches, and held Councils, as we have so
often proved.

We must therefore seriously profess, that this visible extension is a vain and
deceitful mark, when they would make it perpetual to the true Church, as the
Author of the Prejudices would make it, and that no one could abuse with
greater injustice the Authority of S. Augustine than he has done. We must
profess also, that a small handful of the Faithful, a little party, have right
to separate themselves from the whole multitude; I mean, from a communion
spread over all the world, which has on its side, the Ministry, the Pulpits,
the Councils, the Schools, Titles, Dignities, and all that retinue of temporal
splendor, when it has not the true Faith. For the rest, that which I have
handled in this Chapter about the two former Propositions of the Author of the
Prejudices, already sufficiently lets us see the falseness of his argument. For
if he would take the pains to read this Chapter with never so little
application, he will see all these following Propositions well established
there. 1. That in General, this Author has not comprised the true Hypothesis of
S. Augustine, nor the state of his dispute against the Donatists. 2. That he
can draw no advantage from the diverse ways in which that Father conceived the
word Church. 3. That the separation which that Father judged to be fit to be
condemned and wicked, under what pretense soever it should be made, is wholly
different from that which is between the Church of Rome and us. 4. That there
is not any Christian Society from which one may not lawfully separate ones
self, in a certain case and manner. 5. That that which is disputed between the
Church of Rome and us being of this number, they must consider the causes and
circumstances of it, rightly to judge of it, and not pretend to convince us of
Schism, without entering upon any other discussion. 6. That according to the
principles of S. Augustine, the Church of Rome is Schismatical, in respect of
us, supposing that she is in error, because it is she that has broken Christian
Unity, and that we are in respect of her, in a passive separation. 7. That it
is absurd to make that visible extension, a perpetual mark of the true Church,
which way soever they take it. 8. That this pretended mark is contrary to the
experience of our Age, and does not properly agree to any one of these
Societies, that at this day divide Christianity. 9. That it is contrary to the
experience of the Ages past, and to the Doctrine of the Fathers. 10. That it is
rejected in the sense of the Author of the Prejudices, by the famous Doctors of
the Roman communion. 11. That it has no foundation in the dispute of S.
Augustine against the Donatists. 12. That it is even directly opposite to the
Doctrine of that Father. These are the just and natural consequences that are
drawn from the things which I have handled in this Chapter; I will examine in
the following, the other Propositions of the Author of the Prejudices.

CHAP. V.
A further Examination of the Reasoning of the Author of the Prejudices, upon
the subject of our Separation.

THe Third Proposition of the Author of the Prejudices is already sufficiently
confuted by what I have said. He says, that since our Society is not visibly
extended throughout all Nations, therefore it cannot be the True Church. But we
have shown him, that we cannot at this day rationally attribute that visible
extension throughout all Nations, to any of the Societies that divide
Christianity, and by consequence, that it is a chimerical mark, by which we may
conclude, that there is no true Church in the world, since there is none which
is not visibly excluded from many Nations. We have shown him also, that his
pretended mark does not agree either with the experience of the Ages past, nor
with the doctrine of the Fathers, nor even with that of the Doctors of the
Roman Church; and that instead of having any foundation in the Doctrine of S.
Augustine, it is evidently contrary to him. So that we have nothing to do at
present, but to go on to the Examination of the Fourth and Fifth Proposition.
They bear this sense, That the Calvinists urge the principle of the Donatists
far higher, than ever those Schismatics did. For as for them, they did not
say, that there was any time wherein the whole Church had fallen into Apostasy,
and they excepted the Communion of Donatus; whereas the Calvinists would have
it, that there have been whole Ages, wherein all the Earth had generally
apostatized, and lost the faith and treasure of salvation. That the Societies
of the Berengarians, the Waldenses and Albigenses, etc. in which he says, that
some of us include the Church, could not be that Catholic Church whereof S.
Augustine speaks.

To establish that which he lays to our Charge concerning the entire
extinction of the Church, he first produces the testimony of Calvin. This is,
says he, that which Calvin has distinctly Prejug. chapter 9. p. 200, etc.
declared in his Commentary on the Epistle to the Romans, where after having
pretended, that the threatening that S. Paul uses against those who do not
remain in the state of grace, where the goodness of God had sent the Gospel, in
declaring to them, that they ought to fear being cut off, as the Jews, from the
Covenant of God, he addresses himself to the whole body of the Gentiles
converted to Jesus Christ. Ad totum Gentium corpus, adds he. And certainly,
that horrible Apostasy of the whole world which has fallen out since,
manifestly shows us, that this advice of S. Paul was not unprofitable. For God
having diffused in so great an extension of Countries, almost in a moment, the
waters of his Grace, so that Religion flourished every where; within a very
little while after, the truth of the Gospel was vanished, and the treasure of
salvation banished out of the Earth. But whence could that change come, unless
from this, that the Gentiles were fallen away from their Call, and therefore it
is that he clearly professes in a Letter to Melancthon, that they had separated
from all the world. Plusquam enim absurdum est postquam discessionem a toto
mundo facere coacti sumus alios ab aliis desilire. The Author of the
Prejudices, yet further makes use of an Article of our Confession of Faith to
prove the same thing, which says, That we believe, that no one ought of his
own authority to thrust himself into the government of the Church; but that
that ought to be done by election while it is possible, and while God permits
it. Which exception we emphatically add to it, because it has failed sometimes,
and even in our time, in which the state of the Church was interrupted, till
God had raised up men after an extraordinary manner, to order the Church a new,
which was in ruin and desolation. Grounding himself on these two passages, he
insults over Monsieur Vigerius, the Author of the Discourse in the Book of the
Perpetuity of the Faith, because he had declared, That none of us had ever
said, that it could be possible that the Church should no longer subsist, and
that he defied Monsieur Arnaud to show him one only Author among us who had
thought so. Before he had expressed such desires, says the Author of the
Prejudices, it would have been well to the purpose, that he had better informed
himself about that which not only some Authors of his Sect have wrote, but the
Master of all their Authors, which is Calvin, who says a great deal more than
that which is contained in that Book of the Perpetuity of the Faith, since he
looks upon the Church not only as possible to perish, but as having effectually
done so for many Ages, so far as to say, that the threatening of S. Paul, which
he pretends to be spoken to the whole body of the Gentiles, had its effect,
that all the Gentiles had fell from their Call through a general Apostasy, that
the light of the Gospel had vanished, in respect of them, and that they had
lost the treasure of salvation. It is upon this foundation that he builds his
Proposition, and pretends to make us pass for worse men than the Donatists.

But all this is nothing else but an effect of the unjust and violent hatred
that this Author has conceived against us, and Monsieur Vigerius had reason to
deny that which he has denied. As the dispute here is only to know, what our
Hypothesis is P. 287.
upon the point of the perpetual subsistence of the Church, it would be
sufficient methinks to stop the mouth of the Author of the Prejudices, to tell
him, that he troubles himself to no purpose, that we do not believe, that
entire extinction of the Church throughout all the world, which he lays to our
charge, and that he has mistaken the meaning of Calvin, and that of our
Confession of Faith; for there is no likelihood that he should better know what
we believe, than our selves, nor that he should be a more faithful Interpreter
of the sense of Calvin, and that of our Confession of Faith, than we our
selves. Notwithstanding, to make the Character of the Author of the Prejudices
more and more known, and what judgment we ought to make of that which he
propounds, when he speaks with the greatest confidence, it will be good to
relate here the testimony that Monsieur the Cardinal of Richelieu, has given to
the Protestant Churches concerning that that they believe and teach upon the
subject of the perpetual subsistence of the Church until the end of the world.
For we might say, that he had the Author of the Prejudices in his view, and
wrote about this matter only to confute him. There is not, says he, any point
in controversy between our Adversaries Monsieur le Cardinal de Richelieu, live.
1. c. 4.
and us, about which their Confessions of Faith speak so clearly, and agree so
uniformly as this, which I may truly say ought not to be put into the number of
the controverted points. The Confession of Ausburg, which may be said to be as*
well the Rule, as the source and origin of all the other Confessions of Faith
of our Adversaries, says in express terms, that the Church ought perpetually
to remain, one and holy. That of Saxony says, that the Article of the Creed
which declares the Church Holy and Catholic, was inserted therein, only to
confirm the faithful against the doubts that they might have of the stability
of the Church. That of the Switzers, does not only affirm this truth, but sets
down the same reason for it that I my self have made use of here above, since
God, says it, would from all eternity that men should be saved, we must
acknowledge this truth, that the Church has always been for the time past,
that she subsists for the present, and that she will do so till the end of the
world. The Scotch holds this Article to be so undoubtedly true, that it
compares the belief of it to that of the Mystery of the Trinity, saying, That
as the faithful believe the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost, so they also
constantly believe the perpetuity of the Church. The Flemish professes the same
truth, and gives the reason, altogether founded upon the Regality of Jesus
Christ, which being perpetual, supposes in all times some subjects, over whom
he must reign. The French Confession alone says nothing upon this occasion;
but it is so far from saying nothing of it, through the difficulty that they
found in this point, that on the contrary, the certainty which they had of it,
was, in my opinion the cause of their silence. She does not therefore, it may
be, speak any thing, because she did not think she could doubt of so evident a
truth, of which her founders have spoke so clearly for her. Luther teaches it
in terms so express, that he makes perpetuity to enter into the definition of
the Church, as a quality that making a part of its essence, is altogether
inseparable from it. He draws the duration of the Church from an Article of the
Creed and the words of Jesus Christ, which bind us to believe it, saying that
it is an Article of Faith taught in the Creed, and founded upon the promise of
Jesus Christ, who ought always to have a holy Christian Society in this world,
that should subsist until the consummation of Ages. Calvin does not say less,
and his words are not less express. We must, says he, hold it for certain,
that from the beginning of the world, there never was a time wherein the Church
of God was not, and there never will be, till the consummation of Ages, in
which it shall not be. Upon this foundation refuting Servetus, who maintained,
that the Church had been banished from the world for a certain time, he says
boldly, that to say, that God had not always preserved some Church in this
world, would be to accuse him of a lie, because he has promised, that it shall
endure as long as the Sun and Moon shall. Beza speaks as the Flemish
Confession, which acknowledging that the reign of Jesus Christ is perpetual,
acknowledges also, that he ought always to have subjects, upon whom to
exercise that Kingly Office. Du Moulin and Mestresat, are not less ingenuous in
this point, etc. Thus it is that Monsieur the Cardinal of Richelieu has
justified us against the Author of the Prejudices. He could not, in my
judgment, have spoken either more clearly or more strongly.

In effect, they cannot without ignorance or calumny, ascribe that opinion of
the entire extinction of the Church throughout all the world to us. We say
indeed, and we say it with an extreme grief, that the Church has been for some
Ages in so great an obscurity, that we can very hardly see any traces of the
natural beauty of Christianity shine forth there, Ignorance, Error,
Superstition, as most thick Clouds have covered the face of Religion and the
Government of the Church has fallen into so strange a disorder, that we can see
nothing but confusion in all parts; so that the Church could not but appear
under a very deplorable condition under that Eclipse. This is that which Calvin
means, by that entire defection of the world, whereof he speaks in the passage
that the Author of the Prejudices has alleged, and that which is also
represented in our Confession of Faith, by that ruin and desolation, whereinto
we say the Church was fallen. But how great soever that ruin should have been,
we do not believe as the Donatists do, that the Church had absolutely perished,
or that it was entirely extinct through all the world. We do not so much as
believe that it was restrained to those Societies which the passion of their
enemies has labored to cry down under the names of Sects, calling them
Berengarians, Waldenses, Albigenses, Petro-busians, Henricians, Wicklefists,
Hussites, etc. and over whom the Author of the Prejudices has insulted so
fiercely after his usual manner. Those Societies were yet the most illustrious
part of the Church, because they were the most pure, the most enlightened and
the most generous; but the Church did not wholly and entirely reside in them.
For, not to speak of the little Children that dyed before the Age of
discretion, and to whom we do not doubt that God was merciful, we are persuaded
that while Errors and Superstitions might be seen to reign in their Pulpits, in
their Books, in their Schools, and in the Councils, and that a great number
were filled with them, that God preserved to himself amidst the people a
considerable number of the truly faithful, who have kept their faith and their
conscience pure, by reason of their simplicity, contenting themselves with the
principles of the Christian Religion, adoring one only God, their Creator and
Father, putting their confidence in one only Jesus Christ, dead and risen again
for them: and as to the rest, living holily and Christianly with embarassing
themselves either with the opinions of the School, which they did not know, or
the Superstitions wherewith they beheld Christianity loaded, and which the sole
instinct of their conscience could make them reject. We no ways doubt, that
even among the most enlightened persons, there has been a great number who have
groaned under so many corruptions as they saw the Church afflicted with, and
who in waiting for better times, have kept themselves, without bearing a part
in them. But we say nothing upon this subject, but what the Fathers, and in
particular S. Augustine, have said concerning the state of the Church under the
domination of the Arians. For they have said two most remarkable things. First,
That while the wicked and the Heretics possessed the Pulpits, while they
preached their blasphemies there, whilst they were Masters of the Councils,
whilst they had the multitude and the powers of the Age on their side, while
they persecuted the good to the utmost, and while all seemed to stoop under
their yoke, God preserved in that corrupted Ministry, a considerable number of
the truly faithful, who kept under the veil of their simplicity, their faith
pure, receiving that which they preached of good to them, and not being
infected with the bad. The second thing that they have said is, that there were
those there, who being more enlightened and more strong in the faith than the
others, opposed themselves to the Heresy of the Arians, and would not have any
communion with them, suffering constantly their banishments, and the most cruel
punishments for so just a cause. To justify this truth, I shall only here set
down that which S. Augustine has wrote upon this subject in his Epistle to
Vincentius: but before I relate his words, we must note, that the Donatists
precisely did that which the Author of the Prejudices has done, when he has
abused some hyperbolical expressions that Calvin made use of, and the words of
our Confession of Faith, to lay it to our charge, that we believe an entire
extinction of the Church. For the Donatists after the same manner abused some
passages of S. Hilary, in which that Saint had exaggerated the lamentable state
of the Church in his days, under the domination of the Arians; from whence
they conclude, that S. Hilary had thought that the Church had entirely failed.
It is therefore to refute this Objection that S. Augustine explains Aug. Ep. 48.
himself after this manner. The Church, says he, is sometimes obscured and
covered as it were with clouds, by the great number of Page 290.
scandals, when the wicked take the advantage of the night to shoot against
those who are true in heart. But even then, she is eminent in her most firm
defenders: and if it be allowed to us to make some distinction in the words
that God spoke to Abraham, Thy posterity shall be as the Stars of Heaven, and
as the Sand that lies upon the Seashore. I mean, that we must understand by
the Stars, some few persons more firm and illustrious than the others; and by
the Sand, the multitude of the weak and carnal, which in a time of a calm
appears quiet and free; but which is sometimes covered with the floods of
tribulations and temptations. Such was the time whereof Hilary speaks in his
Writings, which you artificially make use of to elude so many Divine
Testimonies which I have set before you, as if the Church had perished
throughout all the world. You may as well say, that there were no more Churches
in Galatia, when the Apostle said, O foolish Galatians! who has bewitched you,
that after having begun in the Spirit, you should end in the flesh! for thus it
is well nigh that you calumniate the learned Hilary, under a pretense that he
censured the negligent and the fearful, for whom he has as it were so many
birth-pangs till Jesus Christ should be formed in them. Who is there that knows
not that in the time of Arianism, diverse simple persons, deceived by obscure
expressions, imagined, that the Arians believed the same thing with themselves;
that others yielded through fear and dissimulation, and consented in appearance
to heresy, not walking in integrity in the way of the truth of the Gospel, you
would see, you Donatists, that he had not pardoned those persons: for you are
not ignorant of the doctrine of the Scripture upon this subject. Read what S.
Paul has wrote concerning S. Peter: See afterward, what S. Cyprian has thought
was to be done on these occasions, and you will find, that it is to very ill
purpose to blame the mildness of the Church, which gathers together the members
of Jesus Christ, when they are dispersed, instead of dispersing them when they
are gathered together. Howsoever it be, there have been yet some firm ones, who
were sufficiently enlightened to know the snares of the Heretics. They were
indeed very few in number, in comparison of others; but yet nevertheless, some
of them generously suffered banishment for the cause of the faith, and others
kept themselves concealed here and there throughout the earth. Thus it was that
the Church, which increased in all Nations, preserved within her self the good
Wheat of our Lord, and thus it is that she will preserve her self unto the end,
till she extend her self over all people, and even over the Barbarians
themselves. The Church therefore consists in the good seed that the Son of Man
has sown, and of which it is said, that it should grow up, until the harvest,
amidst the Tares. The field is the world, and the harvest is the end of the
world.

See here, after what manner S. Augustine declares his opinion concerning the
state of the Church and its subsistence under the Arians; since coming
afterward to speak of a passage of S. Hilary, which they had objected to him,
he says, that we must understand that which he had said, not in regard of the
good Wheat which was yet mingled with the Tares; but only in regard of the
Tares: or if his words had any relation to the good Wheat, we must take them as
only designing to inflame the zeal of the fearful by such answers. And he adds
that the holy Scripture it self frequently makes use of this way of expressing
it self in general terms, which at first seem to belong to the whole body; but
which notwithstanding regard only a part. Habent etiam scripturae canonicae,
hunc arguendi morem, ut tanquam omnibus dicatur, and ad quosdam verbum
perveniat.

We may now see very clearly, that we are so far from being like to the
Donatists, as the Author of the Prejudices lays it to our charge, that we
tread on the contrary, in the footsteps of St. Augustine. For first of all, our
Hypothesis touching the subsistence and obscurity of the Church, is throughout
conform to his. We say, as he does, that God has always preserved his truly
faithful in the very communion of the corrupted Church. We say, with him, that
in the most violent entering in of Error and Superstition, God has not left
himself without witness, since he has raised up, not only persons, but whole
Societies, that have openly and courageously maintained the truth, and
withdrawn themselves from under the Roman Domination. And as to the passages
that the Author of the Prejudices objects to us out of Calvin and our
Confession of Faith, we give the same explication of it that S. Augustine gave
to those of S. Hilary, which the Donatists objected to him: That is to say,
that that defection of all the world, and that ruin and desolation whereinto
the Church had fell, that Eclipse of the truth and treasure of salvation, are
expressions that regard properly only the Tares that covered the Field of the
Church, and not the good Seed which was mingled with those Tares. These
expressions only regard the greater number of those who followed those
Superstitions and Errors, and not those who in the midst of that confusion kept
their Religion pure; and much less those who had the courage to oppose
themselves openly to Error, and to resist it even unto Persecutions and
Martyrdom.

I know that he has accustomed himself to form some difficulties and Objections
against our Hypothesis; but we have this satisfaction, to know, that he can
make none that does not equally regard the Hypothesis of S. Augustine and ours,
and to which, by consequence, the Author of the Prejudices himself would not be
obliged to answer, if he would not act the Donatist. He confesses himself, that
S. Augustine had acknowledged, that there might have been some Catholics hid
in Heretical communions; and besides, he cannot deny, that the passage which I
have set down, is express upon that subject. 1. If therefore he demands of us,
who those faithful were, who before the Reformation, kept their faith pure,
without infecting themselves with the public errors; and if he urges us to
mark them out to him one after another, to tell him their names and their
Genealogy, I will demand of him likewise, who were those good seed of S.
Augustine, who under the Arian Ministry, preserved their faith, without being
infected with Heresy; and I will entreat him to mark them out to me by name,
and to give me their history. 2. If he demands of us, how we understand those
persons could with a good conscience live under a Ministry, where they taught
Transubstantiation, the Adoration of the Eucharist, the Sacrifice of the Mass,
the religious worshipping of Images, which we believe to be fundamental errors;
I will also demand of him, how he understands, that the good seed of S.
Augustine could live under an Arian Ministry, where they taught, that the Son
of God was not consubstantial with his Father; and that the Father was not the
Father eternally; which are errors that the Author of the Prejudices himself
judges abominable. 3. If he tells us, that our Fathers ought not therefore to
have undertaken a Reformation; but that they ought to have left things in the
estate wherein they were; since howsoever corrupted the Latin Church was,
according to us, we could yet be saved in her communion: I shall tell him, that
by the same reason, the Orthodox ought not to have taken care to have
re-established the purity of the faith in the Church, nor to have extirpated
Arianism; since that however corrupted and infected the Church was with that
Heresy, there was yet a way to work out their salvation in her communion, and
under her Ministry. 4. If he says to us, that our Fathers ought not at least
in reforming themselves, to have separated themselves from those who were not
for a Reformation; nor to have forsook their communion and assemblies, I will
also say to him, that after this reckoning, the Orthodox in laboring to purge
the Church from Arianism, ought not at least to have separated it self from
those who would retain Arianism, but that they ought to have remained with them
in one and the same communion, and in the same assemblies, which nevertheless
they did not. 5. If he says to us, that the Berengarians, the Waldenses and
Albigenses were Schismatics, since they had withdrawn themselves from a
communion, and a Ministry under which God yet preserves the truly faithful, I
will likewise say to him, that those courageous men of S. Augustine were in
this reckoning Schismatics, since they had not less withdrawn themselves from
that communion and public Ministry, when that Ministry was in the hands of the
Arians, as I have shown by express testimonies. 6. If he tells us, lastly, that
since we acknowledge, that they could have worked out their salvation under the
Ministry of the Roman Church before the Reformation, we ought to confess, that
we may yet at this day be saved in it, since things are in the same estate now,
in which they were before; I shall tell him, that the Arians could have raised
the same objection against the Orthodox after their separation. For the Arians
did not pretend to have changed any thing in the state of the Ministry under
which S. Augustine acknowledged, that God had preserved the truly faithful. So
that all the Objections which he shall make against our Hypothesis, will be
common to those against that of S. Augustine; and the Author of the Prejudices
will himself be as much concerned as we to answer them.

But not to refer our selves wholly to him, let us see whether those
difficulties are of such a weight, as that there is no way left rationally to
satisfy us. It seems to me therefore, that as to the first, S. Augustine has
said, that it is great injustice to demand the names of those particular men,
who kept themselves pure under an impure Ministry, since we do not keep a
register of every particular man, nor of the state of their consciences; and
that it is sufficient to know in the general, that the promises that Jesus
Christ has made, always to preserve to himself a Church upon Earth, are
inviolable, that we must not therefore doubt, that there has always been good
seed in the midst of the Arian tares. It is the same answer that we make, there
needs nothing but to apply it.

To the second, he has answered, that the simplicity of many among the people,
who went not so far as to understand the bad sense of the Arian expressions,
sheltred them under Heresy; that many others of the more enlightened remained
in silence, through the fear of persecutions, contenting themselves to keep
their own faith pure, without partaking in the wickedness of the wicked, and
without listing themselves up against it. In effect, it is a Maxim of
Phoebadius, That it is sufficient to an humble Phoebad. contr. Arian. Aug.
passim.
conscience, to keep its own faith, without engaging it self to refute the
belief of others: and it is one of S. Augustine himself, That no body can be
culpable for the sins of another, nor by consequence, for the Heresies and
Superstitions that infect a Ministry; provided he take no part in them, and no
ways consent to them, either in effect or appearance. But this is yet the same
answer that we make: for as I have already said, we do not doubt, that there
was among the people a very great number of persons whose light went no further
than the mere knowing of the chief Articles of Christianity, contained in the
Creed, in the Decalogue and Lords Prayer, and who by consequence were hid under
those capital Errors with which the public Ministry was then loaded. We no
ways doubt, that in the midst of that darkness there were not a great many
enlightened persons, who through the fear of persecutions, remained under the
same corrupted Ministry, with the others, separating the good from the bad,
discerning the Errors and Superstitions, taking no part in them, and living as
to other things, in that hope that they should not be culpable for the sins of
others.

To the third, S. Augustine has answered, that it is an absurd Objection. For
it is not more absurd to say, that we ought not to take care to heal a Disease,
under a pretense that as great as the Disease is, life yet remains, than to
say, that we ought not to take care to purge the Church and the Ministry from a
Heresy that infects it, under a pretense, that there is yet a way to be saved
in her communion and under her Ministry. That we must, on the contrary, labor
as much as possibly we can, to re-establish Christianity in its whole frame,
lest the evil should increase, and be made incurable through a too great
negligence, and least that good which remains in the Church, should be wholly
corrupted by the contagion of the evil. But this is also the very same answer
that we make. Our Fathers ought to have employed all their endeavors to reform
the Latin Church, by their Exhortations, by their Books, by their Sermons, by
their Example, because that we ought always as much as possibly we can, and as
the time and our knowledge call us to it, to labor to settle Religion in a
state of purity, lest in the end Errors and Superstitions render themselves
universal, and the whole Church should perish through our negligence. For
although Jesus Christ has promised us, that it shall never perish, yet
notwithstanding this would be to tempt God, and to render our selves unworthy
of his grace, to neglect the means that he gives us for its preservation, and
that so much the more, as according to humane judgments, there was no other
than that of the Reformation.

To the fourth, S. Augustine has answered, That in laboring to purge the
Church from Arianism, it was necessary that they should separate themselves
from the communion of those who obstinately persisted in that Heresy; and the
fixed resolution that they testified to remain in it, was a sufficient cause to
make them withdraw themselves from their Assemblies. But we answer with greater
advantage, that our Fathers in laboring for a Reformation, ought to have
forsaken the Assemblies of those, who not only were fixed in the opinion of
having nothing reformed, and opposed themselves with all their might to hinder
a Reformation; but who went so far as to impose a new necessity on men's
consciences to believe their Opinions, and even to excommunicate all those who
would not believe them.

As to the fifth, S. Augustine, did not intend to say, that those who had
separated themselves from the Arians, when the Arians were the Masters of the
Ministry, were Schismatics, since he himself calls them the Stars of Heaven,
the Courageous and Unshaken, firmissimi qui fortiter pro fide exulabant: he
never meant to condemn their Assemblies which they made apart, to have nothing
common with Heresy, since it was nothing else but the effect of that heroical
courage which he ascribes to them, and of that ardent zeal which they had for
the glory of God. In effect, S. Hilary praises some Bishops of France, Germany
and Flanders, of whom he writes that they had separated themselves from the
communion of those who held the Orthodox Bishops in Exile; and in particular,
he extolls those among them, who having appealed to a Synod of Bithynia
remained firm and constant in the faith, and in gathering themselves into a
communion among themselves, they separated themselves from the communion of the
others. S. Augustine has therefore answered, that they were no ways
Schismatics, for two reasons. The first is, because the causes for which they
refused communion with the Arians, and withdrew themselves from their Ministry
were just and lawful; not frivolous and capricious, as those of the Donatists,
but weighty and fundamental; since they disputed about the Eternal Divinity of
Jesus Christ, which the Arians would abolish. The second, because that although
these courageous men of S. Augustine had renounced the communion of the Arians,
and withdrawn themselves from their Ministry, yet they did not believe
notwithstanding, that there was absolutely no more salvation to be had in the
Society which they had forsaken. For, besides that receiving as they did, their
Baptism from it, they could not doubt, that the Children who dyed before they
were infected with that Heresy, were saved, they did not also condemn the
simple and the weak, who remained unfeignedly in that communion, without taking
part in the impieties which were taught there, so that their separation did not
absolutely respect that Society; but only the Heretics that corrupted it. But
this is that which we say concerning the Berengarians, the Waldenses, the
Albigenses, etc. we need but only to apply the same answer to them.

Lastly, as to that which regards the sixth Objection, S. Augustine has said,
that there was a considerable difference between the time wherein the Arians
made up almost the whole body of the Christian Church, and that wherein the
true Doctrine was re-established in a great part of the Churches; that the
first was a time of oppression, and the other a time of liberty; that in the
former time there being scarce any more a visible communion on the Earth, under
which the faithful might place themselves, they could remain under a corrupted
Ministry, from which each one in particular had a right to separate the pure
from the impure, in waiting till God should deliver his Church out of the hands
of those bad Pastors. But in the second time, where the Orthodox and Arian
communions were in a visible opposition, and such as was every where known, it
was not possible for them to remain under the Arian Ministry, without having an
Arian heart; or at least, without falling into a detestable hypocrisy. For in
the opposition of these two communions, this very thing that they should remain
in the Arian, was a manifest condemnation of the Orthodox; which they could not
do, without being either Arians, or hypocrites. Moreover, in the former time
those who remained out of necessity under the Ministry of the Arians, remained
there in grief, and ardently desiring that God would procure them some means to
get out of it, and to return to an Orthodox Ministry. But in the latter, God
having given them the power to join themselves to a pure communion, they could
not remain in the Arian, without loving and being pleased with it, through
those worldly interests which they could never prefer before the Confession of
a pure faith, without being injurious to God, without wounding their own
consciences, without having a debauched and profane spirit; and in a word,
without binding over themselves to eternal damnation. Behold here, what S.
Augustine has answered; and it is no hard matter to judge, that we must answer
them thus when they make the like Objections to us. We must distinguish between
two Times, to wit, that which went before the Reformation, and that which
followed it; and by the same reasons which I have alleged, we will show them,
that although it was possible in the former time for some to work out their own
salvation under the corrupted Ministry of the Latin Church, yet it does not
follow, that we may do so at this day, under that of the Church of Rome, since
those two communions are now found to be set in opposition.

I shall not urge this matter further. We may now methinks, conclude from all
that which I have handled in the foregoing Chapter and in this, that if there
ever was a vain and ill-grounded Objection, that which the Author of the
Prejudices has made against us, is certainly one of that nature. His Argument
is founded upon nothing else but false or ill-understood Propositions. For it
is not true, that S. Augustine believed that there was any particular Society
among all those which make a profession of Christianity, from whose Assemblies
one might not, in certain cases, depart and withdraw ones self from its
communion. It is not true, that the Separation which is between the Church of
Rome and us, is that which that Father has absolutely condemned, and for which
he accuses the Donatists to be Schismatics. It is not true, that he would
accuse them of Schism without examining the foundation, by a mere passive
Separation, as that is wherein we are, from the Church of Rome. It is not true,
that he has taken that visible extension throughout all Nations, for a
perpetual mark of the true Church. It is not true, that he would have that mark
to decide the question of the true Church, when the Doctrine of it is disputed.
It is not true, that we hold, that the Church before the Reformation, had
perished throughout all the Earth. It is not true, that we reduce all to the
Berengarians, Waldenses and Albigenses, etc. only. Lastly, It is not true, that
the Doctrine of S. Augustine upon this subject, is any way contrary to us; but
it is true, that our Principles have all the conformity with his that any man
can reasonably require. This is in my judgment, that which may be clearly
collected from that which I have said.

As the Interest that we have in the clearing of this matter, does not go much
farther, I would here put an end to this Chapter and this Third Part,
concerning our Separation, if the interest of Truth and Charity did not bind me
to make a reflection upon a Proposition that the Author of the Prejudices has
set before us, which is, that Schismatics are out of a state of Salvation. For
I hold, that this Proposition cannot be maintained after the manner that the
Author of the Prejudices has propounded it, that is to say, absolutely, and
without any distinction. I am not ignorant that to establish this rigorous
sentiment, they produce some passages of the Fathers, who have in effect spoke
of Schism in extremely vehement terms, as if they had a design to exclude from
the communion of God, and all hopes of salvation, all those in general who
should be found engaged in it. But that very thing, ought to be an example to
let us see, that we must not always take according to the rigor of the
Letter, all that the Fathers have said in the heat of their disputes. For
unless we should be altogether unreasonable, we must place a difference between
three sorts of persons who are to be found in a Schismatical communion. 1. The
Authors of Schism, who usually are the Pastors and Guides of the flock. 2.
Understanding persons, who take part in the affairs, and who very well knowing
what they do, give their consent to Schism, and defend the Authors of it. 3.
The people, that is to say, the ignorant persons who scarce know any thing that
passes, or who know but very confusedly. And for that which regards the Authors
and other intelligent persons, as it is most frequently, passion, interest,
pride and ambition, that make them separate, and that all those passions turn
them in the end, into an implacable hatred against their brethren, they deserve
our condemnation; for those crimes are incompatible with the Spirit of Jesus
Christ; and it is a manifest demonstration, that the world and its corruption
reigns in the souls of those who are guilty of it; we must therefore say of
such Schismatics as these, that while they remain in this condition, there is
no hope of salvation for them, because that the true faith, the Covenant of
God, and the communion of Jesus Christ cannot subsist under the reign of those
brutal passions. But to imagine, that the whole body of a people, who are to be
found engaged in a Schism, either through the faction of the more powerful, or
a conscience prepossessed by a zeal without knowledge, by a Piety too
scrupulous, should be deprived of all hope of salvation; this would be without
doubt to fall into a very rigid Opinion.

To make this clear by Examples, I have already mentioned elsewhere, that
Victor Bishop of Rome excommunicated the Churches of Asia, upon the difference
about the day of Easter, from whence there followed a Schism between those
Churches and this of Rome. I do not now enquire to which of the two parties the
crime of the Separation, ought to be imputed, either to the Asiaticks, who
adhered too strictly to the custom of their Ancestors and the Authority of
Polycarp; or to Victor, who without Prudence and Charity, separated him from
diverse great and flourishing Churches, about a matter that was left self-free
and indifferent in Religion. I only say, that this would be an horrible
injustice, to condemn those people to eternal flames, who should be found to be
engaged in that ridiculous quarrel, only through the capricious humors of
their Bishops. In effect, we have seen, that notwithstanding this Schism, they
did not fail both the one and the other to sit together in the Council of Nice.

We must pass the same judgment of a Schism that fell Socrat. Hist. Eccles. l.
2. cap. 34.
out in the fourth Century, at Antioch, between the Meletians and the
Eustatians, both the one and the other Orthodox and separated from the Arrians,
but who nevertheless would not communicate together, because that although
Meletius had preached and defended the Council of Nice, and suffered
persecution for it, yet he had been created Bishop by the Arians, by reason of
which, the other Orthodox would no more communicate with those of his party,
which obliged them to hold their Assemblies apart. It was therefore a true
Schism on one side and on the other; but as it proceeded only from an excess of
zeal on the side of the Eustatians, we ought not to pass a sentence of
damnation so lightly against them.

I say the same thing of the Schism that fell out about the Baron. ad ann. 484.
end of the Fifth Century, between Acatius Bishop of Constantinople and Felix
the Third Bishop of Rome, who mutually excommunicated one another, for the
interests of John Talaia and Peter Mongus competitors for the Patriarchate of
Alexandria. Acacius defended the side of Peter, whom Felix accused to be a
Heretic, and an enemy to the Council of Chalcedon; and Felix, on the contrary,
upheld Talaia, whom Acacius had accused of Perjury, and to be unworthy of a
Bishopric; and this Schism also lasted down to their Successors, thirty and
five years between the East and West. But although Acacius, drawn in by
intrigues to the side of an hypocrite, had wrong at the foundation, yet we
ought not notwithstanding to believe that all those great Churches who kept
communion with him, and defended his memory, after his death, were absolutely
cut off from the hope of Paradise.

In the Sixth Century, there was another Schism, whereof I have already spoken,
which was very contentious, and embroiled, Baron. in Vigil.
under the Emperor Justinian, Vigilius being Bishop of Rome, and Mennas
Patriarch of Constantinople. The ground of the quarrel, was taken from the
Writings that had been approved in the Council of Chalcedon, and which
afterward were condemned as heretical by the Emperor Justinian, and the
condemnation was subscribed by Mennas and the other Patriarchs and their
Bishops, Vigilius who was of another opinion, undertook the defense of those
Writings, and excommunicated Mennas and the rest who had condemned them. But
some Months after, he took off his Excommunication, at the solicitation of the
Empress Theodora, to whom he owed his Bishopric; and which was more, in the
following year, he himself pronounced an Anathema against those three Writings.
But the Bishops of Africa, Illyria and Dalmatia persisted to defend them; and
those in Africa assembled in Council, excommunicated Vigilius, as a dissembler.
Some time after Vigilius Victor. Tunun. in Chron.
repenting himself of that which he had done, undertook a second time the
defense of those Writings. Justinian, on the contrary, made an Edict, by which
he renewed their condemnation; and Vigilius, on his side, excommunicated all
those who should consent to this Edict. In fine, the Fifth General Council
assembled at Constantinople, where in spite of all the Decrees of the Bishop
of Rome, the three Writings were condemned, and all those who should approve
them were excommunicated. Vigilius persisting in his opinion was banished, and
dyed some years after. But his Successors, Pelagius and Gregory approved the
Council, and subscribed to what had been done there; and it was in fine,
generally received by all, and reckoned for a Fifth General Council. We must
acknowledge, that if the people were to be saved or damned according to the
good or bad conduct of their Pastors, Heaven and Hell would be very miserably
dispensed, while the time of those disorders lasted. For our adversaries
themselves are constrained to confess, that this quarrel that made so great a
noise, that produced so many Excommunications, so many Separations, so many
acts of violence, and so many banishments, and which ended by the dishonor of
the Council of Chalcedon, was founded upon nothing but a personal animosity,
says Baronius, or as Sirmundus says, upon an indifferent Sirmond. prae^. in
facund.
controversy, which concerned nothing the doctrine of the faith, on which side
soever it had been decided. If we must therefore judge according to the
relation of these two Authors, all that we can say is, that both the parties
were equally Schismatical, who violated the peace and unity of the Church
without any just reason: and who mutually excommunicated one another for
nothing: and if we add that rigorous judgment against the Schifmatical
Societies, without any exception or distinction, we must say, that there was
then no longer a true Church upon the Earth, nor any hope of salvation.

But to go yet further; If all those who live in the communion of Schismatics,
are out of the Church, in a state of Damnation, I would fain have them satisfy
me about some difficulties that I find in the History of the same Vigilius. For
Vide Baron. in Vigil.
the two first years of his Papacy, it was he that was called, a false Pope, a
Schismatic, an Usurper of the Bishopric of Sylverius, whom the Heretics had
banished, to set up this man, who had promised them to communicate with them.
And in effect, Liberatus and Victor of Tunis relate, that after Liberat.
Breviar. cap. 22.
he was in possession of the Papacy, he wrote to the Heretics, as having the
same faith with them; and Bellarmine declares, that at this time, Vigilius was
an Antipope and a Schismatic; Victor. Tunun. in Chron.
because that Sylverius the lawful Pope, was yet living, Bellar. de Romans Pont.
l. 4. c. 10.
and there could not be two lawful Popes at the same time. Baronius and
Petavius say the same thing. Notwithstanding it is true, that during these two
years of Schism Vigilius was peaceably acknowledged to be the Bishop of Rome,
both by the Church of Rome and by all Christendom. No Church refused to live in
his communion, no Bishop withdrew himself from him as a Schismatic. He
performed without any opposition all the Functions of his Bishopric, he
received the honors, and had the profits of it. All the Earth was then
Schismatical with him, and by consequence, there was no further either a Church
or Salvation in the World, if it was only in the person of Sylverius and some
Bishops who had subscribed to the Sentence of the Deposition and Anathema that
Sylverius being in Exile pronounced against Vigilius, and against all those who
should adhere to him. After this Baron. ad ann. 539.
I would fain have them tell me, how Vigilius could pass from the state of a
Schismatic, to that of a true Pope. It was, say Baronius and Bellarmine, by
the consent of the Clergy and Baron. ad 540. Bellar. de Romans Pont. l. 4. c. 10.
People of Rome, who assembled together and chose him lawfully after the death
of Silverius. But besides that, this new Ordination of Vigilius, and this
Assembly of the People and Clergy, is an effect of the invention of Baronius,
which is grounded upon nothing but one word of Anastasius the Popes
Library Keeper, who lived above three hundred years after; besides this, I say,
that the People of Rome and that Clergy, had not they themselves lost through
Schism, the form of the true Church? how was it restored to them? how could
they re-establish themselves? Who gave that right to a company of Schismatics
cut off from the communion, and the covenant of Jesus Christ, to make a Rebel,
a Schismatic, an excommunicated person, a man that by the sentence of
Sylverius could not perform any Sacerdotal Function, to make such a one, I say,
a lawful Pope?

See here already some inconveniences considerable enough, that flow from that
rigorous sentiment; but if we would go yet further, we may find it may be
others that are not less severe. For what will they say to the Schisms that
fell out so frequently in the Latin Church through the concurrence of
Anti-Popes? Will they dare roundly to pronounce, all those people who have
lived and dyed, under the obedience of those false Popes, and who by
consequence having been engaged in a true Schism, have been totally cut off
from the Christian Communion, and deprived of salvation? Let the Author of the
Prejudices, who has taken such pains to damn the World without any mercy, take
the pains if he pleases to examine one matter of fact, that I will set before
him, and which should be enough, methinks, to decide this Question, at least in
regard of him. It is this, that during the great Schism of two Anti-Popes,
which was ended at the Council of Constance, there were Saints that the Church
of Rome has canonized, and whom it prays to, who lived and dyed under two
contrary obediences, and who by consequence dyed, both the one sort and the
others, in a true Schism. For in the year 1380. Vide Raynald. ad ann. citatos.
S. Catherine of Siena dyed under the obedience of Urban the Sixth, in the year
1381. S. Catharine of Swedeland, the Daughter of S. Bridget dyed under the same
obedience. In the year 1395. S. Margaret of Pisa dyed under the obedience of
Boniface the Ninth, in the year 1399. S. Dorothy of Prussia dyed under the
obedience of the same Pope; and in the year 1405. S. William the Hermit of
Sicily dyed under the obedience of Innocent the Seventh. On the other side, in
the year 1382. S. Peter of Luxemburg dyed under the obedience of Clement who
was the Antipope of Urban; and some time after S. Vincent of Ferrara lived,
and wrought Miracles in the party of Benoist the Antipope of Gregory the
Twelfth. Behold here Saints of both sides, and yet one or the others must of
necessity have been Schismatics. From whence it appears, that the Church of
Rome her self is concerned to oblige the Author of the Prejudices to moderate
his style, and not to take as it seems he has done, that which the Fathers have
said in disputing against the Schismatics, in its utmost latitude.

But although all that I have said, should have no place, the holy Scripture
distinctly decides this difficulty. For if he would but read the History of the
Ten Tribes of Israel, after they were separated from that of Judah, at the
instigation of Jeroboam, he will find that they were in a real Schism, since
they had forsaken the Worship at Jerusalem, and had built new Altars, against
the express commandment of God; and yet nevertheless that did not hinder God
from preserving his truly faithful and elect, even in the midst of them. For
there were those seven thousand who in the time of Elias had not bowed the knee
to Baal, and whom S. Paul calls the remnant of the Election of Grace, were not
these Israelites engaged in a bad party? Had not God his Prophets and his
Altars yet among them? Lord, said Elias, they have killed thy Prophets, and
thrown down thy Altars. And the hundred Prophets of God that Obadiah hid in two
Caves, to withdraw them from the persecution of the Idolatress Jezabel: the
Altar of God that Elias repaired in Carmel, to sacrifice there by the
miraculous fire that fell down from Heaven to consume the victim, the calling
of Elisha and Micaiah; and in a word, the whole History of those schismatical
Ten Tribes, does it not evidently note, that God looked on them as his true
Church, in which there was yet a means to be saved? We must not therefore abuse
that which the Fathers have wrote against Schismatics, in intending to
aggravate their crime, and to draw them from it; nor must we take their
expressions in the whole rigor of the letter. Their meaning is not, that all
those generally who are found engaged in a Schismatical Communion, even down to
Tradesmen and Laborers, who remain there with an upright heart, and through
the prejudice of their consciences, are out of the Church, and eternally
damned; but that the Authors and Defenders of Schism, who run into it, through
their personal interests, or out of a spirit of fierceness, pride, and an
hatred incompatible with the Spirit of Jesus Christ, commit a horrible crime;
and that while they are in that state, they remain deprived of all hopes of
salvation. That if the Fathers have said any thing more generally, and which
cannot be thus restrained, it is just to understand it in a comparative sense;
that is to say, that setting that Schismatical party of the Church, in
opposition to that which is not so, the hope of salvation appears evidently in
this, which it does not in the other, where it is obscured by that Schism.

The End of the Third Part.
An HISTORICAL DEFENSE OF THE Reformation; Against a Book Entitled. Just
Prejudices against the CALVINISTS.
THE FOURTH PART: Of the Right that our Fathers had to hold a Christian Society
among themselves, by Public Assemblies, and the Exercise of the Ministry.
CHAP. I.
That our Fathers had a Right to have their Church Assemblies separate from
those of the Church of Rome, on the supposition that they were right in the
Foundation.

THE Order of the Matters of this Treatise requires, that we now go on to that
Separation which the Author of the Prejudices calls Positive; and that after
having confirmed the Right that our Fathers had to Examine the State of
Religion and the Church in their days, after our having showed the
indispensable necessity that lay upon them to forsake the Assemblies of the
Church of Rome, and to live apart from her Communion, that we also establish
the Right that they had to set up a Christian Society among themselves,
notwithstanding their going off from the other Party, who were not for a
Reformation; and to make up alone, and apart, a Body of the Church, or an
External and visible Communion. This is that which I pretend to establish in
this Fourth and last Part, and to that end I shall here Treat of two things:
The first shall respect the Right of those Public Assemblies, and the Second
shall be, concerning that of the Gospel Ministry wherein our Function lies.
Howsoever these two things have a dependence one upon another, it will yet be
well to Treat of them with some distinction.

To make the First clear, I shall first lay it down as an indisputable Truth,
That the Right of Religious Assemblies naturally follows that of Societies; I
mean, That as far as a Religious Society is Just and Lawful, so far the
Assemblies that are therein made are Just and Lawful; and that on the contrary,
as far as a Society is unjust and wicked, so far its Assemblies are so too.
This Principle is evident to common sense, and it is for that Reason that we
condemn the Assemblies of the Heathens, Jews, and Mahometans, as Unlawful and
Criminal, because their Societies are impious and wicked; and that having no
right to be united, to believe and practice those Errors which they believe and
practice, they have also no right to Assemble themselves together in order to
make a Public Profession. It is for the same Reason that we hold on the
contrary, the Christian Assemblies to be not only Just and Allowable, but to be
necessary and commanded by Divine Right, because the Christian Society, that is
to say the Church, is it self also of Divine Right. It is then True, that the
Right of Assemblies follows that of Societies.

But we must further suppose, as another evident and certain Truth, That our
Fathers before the Reformation were Latin Christians, living in the Communion
of the Latin Church, in which they made as considerable a party, as the rest of
the Latins; and that from Father to Son, throughout a long succession, Time out
of mind, they enjoyed with the others the rights of that Society. That they
were equally in possession of it with the other common Assemblies of that
Religion, having a part in the Ministry, in the Churches, in the Sacraments, in
the public Prayers, in the Reading and Preaching of the Word; and that as far
as the communion of the Latin Church was lawful, so far the part that our
Fathers had in it was lawful also. That it was not a company of Strangers, or
unknown persons come from the utmost parts of America or the Southern Lands,
nor a sort of People dropped down from the Clouds, who were newly joined together
with them in the same Society, but Persons, and whole Families settled a long
time ago, who were joined together with them in the Profession of the Christian
Religion many Ages before, and who by consequence were in possession of the
Rights of that Society. Although had they been Strangers, Americans, and
Barbarians, on whom God should have suddenly bestowed the Favor of Calling
them to the True Faith and the True Holiness of Christanity, yet we could
believe that by that thing alone they would have been invested in all the
Rights of that Society, as much as if they had had it by a long possession,
time out of mind. But howsoever it be, they were Christians from Father to Son,
and neither their blood nor their birth did distinguish them from the others.

We are now concerned only to search out whether that which happened to our
Fathers, that is to say their Reformation, their Condemnation by the Popes and
by their Council of Trent, and their Separation from the Church of Rome, can be
able to spoil them of all their Rights. For if it be True, that they were
fallen off, either by their own ill Carriage, or by the mere Authority of the
Church of Rome, we must yield that our Assemblies are Unlawful and Criminal;
but if on the contrary, they were not so fallen off, if that which happened to
them, did nothing else but confirm their Right and render it more pure, more
just and more indisputable, they ought also to come to an agreement with us
that our Assemblies are Holy and Lawful, even in a far greater degree then they
were before. To begin that Disquisition with the Condemnation of the Popes and
their Council: I confess, that if it were the Court of Rome, that out of its
pure Liberality should Communicate Christianity to those only whom it should
please, and that none could either have or preserve it but by the continual
influence of its Favor, after the same manner as we have the Day by the
influence of the Sun, it would depend on her and her Councils, to take it from
us whenever she should see good with all its Rights and Privileges. We might
very well say that it would be too injurious to take it away from us, that we
did not deserve so hard a Treatment, yet we should be deprived for that very
Reason, when she should have taken them from us, whether it should have been
with Justice or against it, with or without any reason. But we do not believe
that either the Court of Rome, or its Council, or that all that party who have
followed them, though it should have a thousand times greater strength and
Authority then it has, would carry their pretensions so high as to imagine that
it depends on their mere good pleasure to bestow on, or to take away
Christianity and its Rights, I do not say from an innumerable multitude of Men,
as that is which makes up the Body of the Protestants, but even not so much as
from two or three persons who should be assembled in the Name of Jesus Christ.
Saint Paul has said indeed, Who art thou O man that reply against God? Shall
the thing formed, say to him that formed it, Why have thou made me thus? Has
not the Potter of the Earth Romans 9.
power out of one and the same clay to make one Vessel to honor, and another
to dishonor? And by these words he gives us to understand the absolute Power
that God has to make us whatsoever it shall seem good to him.

But he has Taught us nothing of the like Power concerning the Pope and his
Councils, he has not said, Who are you that contend against Rome? Nor has he
ascribed to him the power to make and destroy us as it shall please him. In
effect, There is none but God alone on whom our Christianity depends, it is his
Favor that has given it to us, his Spirit and his word have formed it in us,
and his Apostle has Taught us to say with a Holy boldness, That there is no
Creature either in Heaven, or upon the Earth that can be able to Separate us
from his Love. We ought Romans 8.
then to lay aside that Sovereign and absolute Authority, and to come to the
causes or reasons that could have been able to move the Court of Rome, and its
Council to condemn the Protestants, and to deprive them of their Rights; for if
those causes are not only vain and frivolous, but unjust, and contrary to the
Christian Faith and Piety, as we maintain them to be, a Condemnation of that
Nature cannot but fall back upon those who have thrown it, since they
themselves have broken the Christian Unity; so that their ill Carriage has made
them justly lose that of which they would unjustly deprive the others. And
because in those kinds of Contests, That which one Party loses by its injustice
and its obstinacy in Error, is recollected and restored in the other Party,
which does its Duty, The Condemnation of the Council of Trent being ill done as
we suppose, cannot but have heightened and strengthened the Rights of the
Protestants.

As to the Reformation, it is not less True, that if that should be found to be
indeed Conformable to the Word of God, and the inviolable Laws of Christianity,
as we suppose that it is; I mean, if the Things that our Fathers rejected were
indeed Errors and Superstitions contrary to the* True Faith and Piety, as we
maintain them to be, so Holy an Action would be so far from depriving our
Fathers of the Right of that Christian Society, that on the contrary it could
not but fortify that Right, and render it more lawful then it was before. For
before the Reformation, That Society was, as I may so say, a Composition of
good and evil, of Justice and Injustice, by reason of those Errors which were
mixed with the true Doctrine, and those Superstitions which were to be found in
conjunction with that Religion; whereas the Reformation having freed it of that
which it had of impurity and dross, has without doubt put it into a far more
Holy State, and much more agreeable to God. How prejudiced soever they may be,
they can never maintain it, That Error and Superstition should establish any
right of Society, nor deny, that, as they are in their own nature more worthy
of the Aversion of God and men, then their Approbation, they render those
Societies unlawful and criminal. For although all the World by a Universal
Consent should be united in believing a Heresy, or practicing an Idolatrous
Worship, That consent how General soever it should be, would not change the
natures of things; Heresy would be always Heresy, and Idolatry Idolatry, and in
that respect the Agreement of all mankind would make up a wicked and unjust
Society. Whence it follows, That a mixed Communion is only lawful in proportion
to that which it has of good, and that as its Justice is lessened when its
Corruptions increase, so its Justice also increases when its Corruptions are
lessened. We ought not then to imagine that the Reformation of the Protestants
has deprived them of the Right of that Christian Society, but we ought to
assert on the contrary, That it has put them in that respect into a far more
advantageous condition then they were in before.

There is nothing further remaining but that Separation, which was but by
accident, as they speak, the Consequence of the Reformation: if the whole Latin
Church had done her Duty, she would have reformed her self as well as our
Fathers. But the Court of Rome and its Clergy would not, and that Refusal has
caused that breach of Communion which is fallen out between the two Parties. It
concerns us to inquire, Whether even upon supposition that that Reformation was
Just, and by consequence that that Refusal of it which they made was unjust,
That Separation could lawfully hinder our Fathers from holding a Christian
Society among themselves. But this is what they cannot maintain with the least
color of Reason. For if the Reformation was Just, and if the Refusal which
they made was unjust, how can the injustice of that Party which should have
forgot its duty, and which would have constrained the other Party to have
forgot it too, deprive the other Party of those Rights that Faith, Holiness,
The Fear of God, and the Communion of Jesus Christ, have naturally given it?
Must Injustice needs Triumph over Justice, and Error over Truth? Is it that the
Rights of that Society were so inseparably joined to those who opposed the
Reformation, that that Society could not subsist without them, and that
separating themselves out of the motives of an illgrounded Prejudice, or in
giving a Just ground to others to separate themselves from them, they should
have carried away all that Society with them? This cannot be said, For among
all those persons who compose the Body of the Visible Church, it is certain
that there are none, to how high Dignities soever they may be raised, and
whatsoever number of them there may be, that are such Essential Parts, as
without which the Church cannot subsist, while there are two or three remaining
who may assemble together in the Name of Jesus Christ. For Jesus Christ himself
restrained himself to that Number, When two or three of you are gathered
together in my Name, I will be in the midst of you. Jesus Mat. 18.
Christ himself alone, his Truth, his Gospel, his Providence and his Spirit are
essential to the Church, without which she can never subsist, but she may
without the Pope, without the Court of Rome, without the Council of Trent,
without the Bishops, and without the people who follow Rome, and in a word,
without that whole Party which refused the Reformation. The Christian Society
does not depend on their capricious humors, nor on their Temporal Interests.
They are not the Soul of that Body, They will be Members of it while they make
profession of the True Faith, or at the furthest while they do not oppose it,
but when they shall obstinately remain in Errors incompatible with the
Communion of Jesus Christ, and when they shall break by unjust Anathema's the
bond of that Society, We may very well say that the Body of the Visible Church
is Lessened, but we can never say that their withdrawing leaves the Faithful
under a Dispersion.

The better to understand this Truth, we must know, That although that External
Society be common to the good and the bad, to the truly Faithful, to Heretics,
and the men of the World, in a word to all those who are found to be externally
mingled in the Body of the Church, yet in effect, the Right of that Society
will not, to speak properly, belong to any but the truly Faithful. For the
wicked, the Heretics and those Worldly men who fill up their Assemblies, are
only associated here while they remain such, in dishonouring God, by the
Contempt they have of his word, and the Indignities they offer in receiving his
Sacraments. Therefore God said to the wicked in Isaiah, When you come to
appear-before Isa. 1.
me, who has required this at your hands to tread my Courts? And in the
Fiftieth Psalm David assures us, that God has said to the wicked, What have
thou to do to Read my Laws, and to take my Covenant into thy Mouth? Since thou
have hated instruction, and have cast my Words behind thee. It is certain then
that the right of the External Society resides in the Faithful only, who only
are the Church of Jesus Christ, his Mystical body for which he dyed, the Seed
which he sowed with his own hand against his harvest. As to the rest, they are
in that Communion only by Accident, and are the seed of Tares which the Enemy
rising at night has thrown into the Field of the Son of God, and which grows
with the Wheat until the Time of the Harvest, and it is also only by Accident
that they are suffered there, to wit, because most commonly their wickedness is
not known, or if it be, their Conversion may yet be Charitably hoped for, or in
fine, it may fall out that in going about to pull up the Tares, one must also
pluck up the Wheat with it. But being what they are, they have not any part in
the rights of that Society and of those Assemblies. Therefore Jesus Christ has
promised his presence to none but such as shall be assembled together in his
Name, And Saint Austin St. Augustine de Bapt. contra. Don. lib. 7. cap. 51.
expressly Teaches that the Power of the Keys, and that of binding and loosing
was given to the Church of the Just and true Believers, in opposition to the
wicked, to Heretics, and to the men of the World that are mixed with them. And
it is said of that Church only so considered in that same opposition, what
Jesus Christ has said in the Gospel, If thy Brother sin against thee, tell it
to the Church; and if he refuse to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as a
Heathen man and a Publican. Which lets us see that he gave only the truly
Faithful the Right to be in a Society, for there those only have a Right to be
in a Religious Society, who have the power of binding and loosing, and of
hearing those private complaints to Judge concerning them. But according to
him, the truly Faithful have only that power, and it is only to those that
Jesus Christ has given it. They are then none but those, to speak properly, in
whom the Right of being in an External Society, and of making those Assemblies,
resides.

That being so laid down, who sees not, that when it falls out that the Body of
that mixed Church is divided into diverse parties, about those important matters
that respect either Faith, or Worship, or the General Rules of Manners, all the
Rights of that Christian Society remain in that Party which retains true
Doctrine and Piety, because it is on that side that the truly Just and Faithful
place themselves. There it is that the true Church of Jesus Christ is assembled
in his Name, to which he has promised his presence: for as I have before said,
Error, Superstition and Injustice, give none a Right to be in a Society, nor by
consequence any to make those Assemblies.

But, they will say, if the Body of the Pastors be found in the other Party, if
External Splendour, Multitude, Extent, Succession, Authority of Councils are
found there, can any one forbear acknowledging it to be the Body of the Church?
There are seen amongst them the Pulpits, Schools, Churches, Bishoprics,
Benefices, Revenues, Dignities, and in a word, all those advantages that mark
out the Body of the Visible Church. A Party that is in that condition, cannot
suffer that any should put its Rights in Question, its Assemblies pass for
lawful throughout all the World, and the Assemblies only of the other Party are
here Treated of, who finding themselves spoiled of those advantages, cannot be
considered otherwise then as a Sect divided from the Body, as a Branch
separated from the Tree, or as a Ray divided from the Sun, according to the
comparison of the Fathers. I answer, That those Divisions that fall out in a
mixed Church may be of two sorts, for sometimes they are founded only upon
personal accusations, or points of Discipline, or light and less important
Questions, the Foundation of the Orthodox Doctrine, and true Worship remaining
entire in both Parties. Of this sort were the Divisions of the Novatians, the
Donatists, the Luciferians, as it has been noted in the Third Part. But
sometimes the ground of those Divisions is taken from Doctrine, or Worship, or
the general Rules of Manners, and consists in those things that are
acknowledged by both sides to be weighty and essential, and in this Rank we may
place those Divisions which arose in the Ancient Church, by reason of the
Samosatenians, the Arrians, the Macedonians, Nestorians and Eutychians. I
acknowledge, that when the Question is only about Divisions of the former sort,
we cannot rationally hinder our selves from acknowledging that Party to be the
Body of the Church which has the advantages before spoken of, and looking by
consequence on the other Party as a Sect cut from it. The one is the Tree, and
the other the cut off Branch, the one is the Sun, and the other a separated
Ray. And the Reason that makes that Prejudice Just, is not that the greater
party cannot have done wrong at the bottom, or that it cannot err. For it
frequently happens that Prejudice, Passion, Interest, Cabals, prevail among
those who have the Ecclesiastical Authority in their hands, which makes them
give unjust Judgments, and it may be the Author of the Prejudices would not
maintain all the decisions and Excommunications of the Church of Rome to be
Just. But the Reason of that Prejudice is, that though even the greater Part
should have done wrong in the Foundation, yet the matter treated on is not of
such importance, as that it can take away from a Society the Quality of the
true Church of Jesus Christ, while sound Doctrine entirely subsists there, and
Worship remains pure. From whence it follows, that there being there no
sufficient cause of Separation, the lesser Party cannot be looked upon otherwise
then as Schismatical, because it is cut off from the Greater without necessity;
and supposing at the same time that it should have Reason in the Foundation,
yet its Separation would not cease to be criminal. It is in this Case that
Saint Augustine would have those whom violence, or as he says, carnal Sedition,
has driven from the Christian Assemblies, to suffer patiently the injury done
to them without throwing themselves either into Heresy or Schism, and without
setting up of Assemblies apart, but that they should maintain and defend even
to the death, the Faith which they know Preached in the Church. Sine ulla, says
he, Conventiculorum segregatione usque ad mortem defendentes and Testimonio
juvantes eam August. de vera. Relig. cap. 6.
fidem quam in Ecclesia Catholica praedicari sciunt. But it is otherwise when
the Division is about matters of the Second sort, those I mean that are founded
upon the weighty points of Doctrine or Worship. For then the true Church ought
alone to be sought for, where the true Faith is, where it is goes neither by
extent of places, nor by number, nor by the Body of Pastors, or Prelates, nor
by the Walls of Temples, nor by Councils that we ought to Judge of it, but by
the true Doctrine, and where that is to be found, there without doubt is a
Right to be in a Society and to gather Assemblies. The Reason is evident,
because we cannot say in that Case, that although the more numerous Party, more
extended, and which has the Body of Pastors of its side, should be wrong in the
Foundation, yet that it would not always keep the quality of a true Church, as
it may be said in the former Case. For a Society that Teaches Error and
practices a false Worship, and that will receive none into its Communion but
those who believe all that it believes, and practice all that it practices,
cannot be a True Church, whatsoever advantages it have otherwise; so that
finding it opposite to another pure Society, there is no need to hesitate in
ones Choice.

In the first Case, the lesser Party cannot be other then Schismatical, because
whatsoever Reason it may have at the bottom, it would be better to yield then
to Separate ones self, but it is not so in the Second, for it would be better
to separate ones self then to yield, since in yielding one should fall into
Fundamental Errors and Superstitions contrary to true Piety. In a word, in the
former Case, the Number, Dignity, Extent of place, the Body of the Pastors,
Multitude, ought to prevail over Reason in a particular Injustice, because a
Church may be in some respect unjust, without hazarding the Salvation of its
Children; but in the Second, Reason drawn from Injustice, Error, false
Doctrine, false Worship, is a thousand times more considerable then all those
advantages which I have noted, because we cannot renounce the true Doctrine,
and the true Worship of God in things of great moment, in which our Salvation
would not be absolutely concerned. It is this difference that causes us to take
notice of two different ways in the Fathers, which appear so opposite and
contrary one to another, that at first sight trouble our minds. For when they
wrote against the Novatians or against the Donatists, or against the
Luciferians, who separated themselves out of frivolous Reasons, that is to say,
upon points of Discipline and personal accusations, but who otherwise
acknowledged the Church they had quitted, to be Orthodox, they set before the
people, that Multitude, Extension, the Body of the Pastors, Succession and
other advantages of that Nature, as things that showed of what side the Church
was, and then they held that the lesser Party cut off from the greater was as a
Member divided from the Body, a Branch cut off from the Tree, or as a Ray
Separated from the Sun. But when they were engaged against the Arrians, who
taught false Doctrine, they did not care to make use of those sorts of
Arguments; on the contrary they restrained themselves to look for the Church
where the True Doctrine and Faith was, and they had no Consideration either of
the Body of the Pastors, or of the Multitude, or Pulpits, or Councils, when the
Arrians made use of them to the Prejudice of the true Doctrine, as I have shown
in the Third Part. But that very thing evidently discovers the Ordinary Cheat
that their Missionaries are guilty of, and the other petty Writers of
Controversy of the Church of Rome, and into which the Author of the Prejudices
himself falls. Which is, that in stead of following with respect to us the way
of Writing that the Fathers took, when they wrote against the Arrians, from
whom they differed in points of Doctrine, since the Cause is like, they follow
on the contrary that that the same Fathers took against the Novations, the
Donatists, and Luciferians, with whom they did not quarrel about matters of
Doctrine; which is a mere Sophism, where they confound two altogether different
Questions, in referring to one Case that which cannot have any place but in the
other.

But they will say, Are not you your self guilty of Fallacy, in perpetually
supposing, as you do in this dispute, that you have Right at the Bottom? For
that is the thing that is most Contested, and when we allege to you the Body
of the Pastors, Extension, Multitude, and the other advantages of the Church of
Rome, we do not pretend to own, that the Doctrine of that Church is false, or
that its Worship is corrupted, or to conclude that those Advantages alone would
give it the Quality of a True Church, though it should not be Orthodox; but we
pretend only, that setting aside the Discussion of Doctrines, we can Convince
you of Schism by those Prejudices alone, which without any further Examination,
mark out which of the two Communions is the True Church, and by Consequence
which is false and Schismatical. I have already answered Diverse Times this
Objection; but that it may be revived here further in the Minds of the Readers,
I shall not fail to show yet farther the Vanity of it, and to discover more and
more on which side the Fallacy lies. I say then, that when I suppose in this
Dispute that we have Right at the Bottom, my Supposition is just and within the
Rules of good Reason, for I do not Suppose it either as a thing that I have
already proved, nor as a thing granted to me, but as a Matter which ought to be
Examined, and on the Examination of which that Question of Schism, and the True
Church, ought necessarily to depend. We would, say they, show you, without
entering into the Discussion of the Doctrine, by mere Prejudices that you are
guilty of Schism, and that you have no Right to be in a Society, nor to gather
Assemblies. And as for me I pretend to show, that that way is Illusory and
Sophistical, and that one ought to examine the Doctrines in order, to know
which of the two Communions is Schismatical, and which is the True Church. To
this effect, I prove that though the Protestant Party should be despoiled of
all those Advantages treated on, Provided it have on its side the True Doctrine
and Worship, and the Church of Rome have it not, it has all the Rights of a
Christian Society, that its Assemblies are Lawful, and that its Separation from
the Church of Rome is just, from whence it evidently follows, that all those
Prejudices are to no purpose in the deciding of our Question, and that all
depends on the Discussion of those Points that are in Controversy between us.
See here the use of my Supposition, The Business at present is not to know
whether we have Right in the Foundation or not; if that were all the Business,
I would not suppose it at all, I would prove it; but the Business is to know
whether they can by those mere Prejudices prove that our Separate Assemblies
from those of the Church of Rome are unlawful. But I show that they cannot,
because if we have Reason on our side in the Matters that are Controverted, our
Assemblies are Lawful, notwithstanding those Prejudices. In a word, we pretend
to maintain our Assemblies no otherwise then by the Right that the Foundation
gives us, but by that Right alone, we pretend to maintain them; so that when
they Contest it with us we run back to the Foundation, and we show them that
the Foundation is sufficient to render our Assemblies Lawful, from whence it
necessarily follows that they cannot treat us as unjust and Schismatics
otherwise then in coming to the Discussion of the Foundation it self. When
therefore they tell us, that to Convince us of Schism they need but to set
aside the Discussion of Doctrines, it is as much as if they should say, that to
show us that we have no Reason, they need but to lay aside that Reason upon
which we ground our selves. The Author of the Prejudices has found this shift
to be so Fine and Ingenuous, that he has Judged it worthy to be Consecrated to
Posterity by one of his Books.

In Fine, if we were to clear this Truth by Examples, we need but to repeat
here two things which we have justified in the Third Part, and which are clear
and certain out of the History of the Ancient Church. The one, That in the Time
of the Arrians the Body of the Pastors followed Heresy; and the other, That a
small Number of the Orthodox, a small Party separated from the Body of its
Pastors, and spoiled of all those kinds of Advantages, did not fail to set up
its Assemblies apart, and to hold the best Christian Society that it was
possible for them to do. Those that were Heretics filled the Churches, and as
for the Orthodox they met as they could, sometimes in the Fields, and sometimes
even in the Churches of the Novatians. As these Matters of Fact are
Indisputable and Justified by History, we have nothing else to do but to demand
of the Author of the Prejudices, Whether he believes that those Orthodox were
Schismatics for having so Separated themselves from the Body of their Pastors,
not only by a Negative Separation, but even by a Positive one? Whether he
believes that their Assemblies were Unlawful? Whether he believes that they
had done better to have remained in the same Communion with Heretics, then in
withdrawing from them? Whether he thinks that the Arrians could have said to
them with any Reason, That without Entering upon any Examination of their
Doctrine they could Convince them of Schism by that Separation alone? Whether
he believes that those Orthodox had given a very ill answer in saying, That
since their Separation was only founded on their Doctrine, it was by that that
they ought to judge, and not by those vain and deceitful Advantages which
sometimes follow the Church, but which oftentimes Abandon it also, and upon
which nothing of Certainty can be established? The Author of the Prejudices may
answer what he pleases, but we are at least assured that he can neither condemn
the Arrians without Justifying us, nor justify the Orthodox without Condemning
himself.

It is Necessary then that we come to agree in this Truth, That the Right to be
in an External Society, and by Consequence to raise Assemblies, belong to the
truly Faithful only; and that if it falls out, that the Body of the Pastors
teaches false Doctrine, and corrupts the Ministry to that degree that it cannot
be allowed to the Faithful to live in Communion with them, The True Faithful
remain yet united among themselves by that External Union out of which their
Assemblies proceed, and that by Consequence they have a Right to meet together
and to make up a Body in a visible Communion. But they will say, If it falls
out that generally all the Pastors forsake those pretended True Faithful
whereof you speak, Who is there that shall Assemble them? they are all but so
many mere private men, and what Right have those private men to gather
Assemblies? besides, Religious Assemblies are chiefly Instituted for the
Preaching of the Word, and Administration of the Sarraments, and can any
ascribe the Right of Preaching, and Administering the Sacraments to mere private
men Separated from their Pastors? When therefore it should be True that the
Right of being in an External Society, That of making Assemblies, that of
Preaching, That of Administering the Sacraments, that of Binding and Loosing,
and the whole Ministerial Power should reside in the Faithful only, yet it
must be Confessed notwithstanding, That all those Rights are to no purpose
while they are Separated from their Pastors, because that each person among
them being but a mere private man, they could not reduce those Rights into Act,
as they say, that is to say, They could not tell how to make any Actual
Function. They have none who could join them together into a visible Body, none
among them can Lawfully Assemble them, none can Exercise the Functions of the
Ministry among them, none can either Preach or Administer the Sacraments, or
Exercise the Power of the Keys. Whence it follows that whatsoever Right they
have ascribed to them, yet they do not cease to be in that Condition in a True
Dispersion, according to what is said in the Scripture, I will smite the
Shepherd, and the Sheep shall be scattered abroad. And therefore Saint Mark.
14. Ephesians. 4.
Paul says, That God has given some to be Apostles, others to be Prophets,
others Evangelists, and others Pastors and Teachers, for the Assembling of the
Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the Edifying of the Body of Christ.
The Church in as much as she is an External Society, is as an Organical Body,
which has its noble parts necessary for Life, without which it could not
subsist for a moment, and those parts are her Pastors, who are not it may be
absolutely necessary for the Subsistence of Faith and Piety in the Souls of
particular men, but who are at least absolutely so for the Subsistence of that
External Society, and the Public Exercise of Religion. If they overthrow this
Order, they change the Church into a rash Assembly, made by Chance, and
Licentiousness, and of whose Convocation there can be no Reason given. Even the
very name alone of the Church, which signifies a called Assembly, denotes, that
to assemble in a Body there ought to be a Lawful Call, which can be in none but
the Pastors. The Pastors are then necessary to Bind an External Society; but
they are yet further so, for the setting it in any Order, for otherwise it will
depend on the Capricious humor of each private man to usurp the Public
Functions, each man will Imagine himself to have a Right to Preach the word of
the Gospel, to Administer the Sacraments, and to do the other Functions of the
Ministry, which would turn the Church into an Anarchy. These are to me the most
specious Objections that they can make against what I have said concerning the
Right that the Faithful have to be in a Society, even then when they are
Separated from the Body of their Pastors, and they cannot Complain that I have
weakened them, for they will not find any thing, either in that Book of the
Prejudices, or it may be in all their other Controversial Writings, that will
appear to have as much Force and Likelihood of Truth, as that which I have
gathered together in these few words.

To Answer in some Order, I shall in the first place affirm, That that
Objection does not any way touch the Body of the Protestants, since it is
evident not only that all their Pastors were not contrary to the Reformation,
but also that in the greatest part of those places wherein it was made, those
who were most ardently engaged in it were persons high in Office and Dignity in
the Latin Church, Who had as much a Call as they can reasonably desire to
preserve the Bond of Society entire, and to call Assemblies together. It is as
certain that in diverse places the Reformation was made by the consent of the
greatest part of their Pastors, as in England, in Scotland, in Swedland, in
Denmark, in Saxony, in the Palatinate, in Hessia in Switzerland, and in many
more Cities and Countries in Germany. So that we may say with certainty, That
the Reformed People Separated from the Roman Communion did not assemble of
themselves, but that they kept up an External Society under the lawful Ministry
of a Considerable number of their Pastors who called them together into a Body,
or to speak better, who hindered their dispersion and preserved the Bond of
their Unity. They had in that Number their Monks, their Preachers, Priests,
Curates, Canons, Doctors, Professors in Divinity, whole Universities, and
Abbeys, Bishops, Archbishops, Cardinals, and if the light of the Gospel had
not been then inaccessible to the Sea of Rome, they had had it may be Popes
themselves, for some of them were sensible enough of the Necessity of a
Reformation. Howsoever it be, we may say, That there was yet in the Body of the
Pastors, a Remnant according to the Election of Grace, as there was in the Time
of the Arrians according to the Remark of St. Gregory Nazianzen. I confess that
in some places the People of themselves Assembled to Choose their Pastors, but
when they should have been guilty of any irregularity in that, besides that
they cannot impute it to all the Body, it would have been rectified by the
approbation that all the other Pastors made of that Election, and by the right
hand of Fellowship which they gave them, finding themselves to be in the same
Ecclesiastical Assemblies with them, and acknowledging them for their Brethren
and Companions in the Work of Jesus Christ. And by so much the more as the
Times of Persecution wherein the Faithful were then, often forced them to pass
over those Formalities which it was impossible for them to observe, and as God
himself seemed to have ratified the choice of those persons by the blessing
which he spread upon their Labors, as he did particularly upon the Ministry of
John le Mason la Riviere, whom the people chose at Paris in the Year 1555.

But howsoever we are but a very little concerned in the Principles upon which
that Objection is grounded, yet we shall not fail notwithstanding to Examine
them, to know a little more distinctly of what necessity Pastors are for the
subsistence of the Society or External Communion of the Church. I say then in
the first place, it must not be thought that the Bond of the External Society
of the Faithful absolutely depend on their Union, or as Cardinal du Perron
speaks, on their Adherence to the Body of their Pastors. It may fall out
sometimes that the Body of the Pastors, that is to say, the greater number of
them, fall into Heresy, and corrupt the Ministry in such a manner as the
Faithful would be bound to Separate themselves from them. If there yet remain
some few Pastors who maintain the True Doctrine, and oppose Error, in that Case
I say that the Faithful may most lawfully hold a Christian Society with them in
the using of all their Functions, assemble themselves under their Ministry,
hear the word of the Gospel from their Mouths, and receive the Sacraments from
their hands. They cannot say that the Church would then be dispersed, nor that
the greater number of the Pastors had carried away with them all the Rights of
the Society, but they ought on the contrary to say that being obstinate in
Error, and abandoning the Purity of the Faith, they themselves in that respect
lost the Right of being in the Society, and making up a Body of an External
Communion. For that Principle remains always unshaken, that Error,
Superstition, and falsehood do not give the least Right to any men to Assemble,
and that a Society is Just only in proportion to that that it has of true
Doctrine and Evangelical Worship. So that the greater number of the Pastors is
not a Party absolutely necessary to the Body of the Church for its subsistence,
and this appears evidently from the Example of the Orthodox in the Time of the
Arrians; for as I have said before, their External Communion did not cease to
subsist in diverse places separated from the Body of the Pastors, they met
together, they prayed to God in Common, they heard his word, they received his
Sacraments; in a word, they performed all the actions of Religion under the
Ministry of those few persons that remained. This is precisely the Case wherein
our Forefathers found themselves in the Time of the Reformation, as I have
before shown, and it will not signify any thing to say that that small number
of Pastors that our Fathers followed had themselves according to us corrupted
their Ministry by the Errors and Superstitions of the other Pastors, and that
they received their Call from their hands, for I affirm that their return to
the true Doctrine rectified their Call, and freed it from all the impurity or
ill it could have had, after the same manner that Felix Bishop of Rome, and
Meletius Bishop of Antioch, who being ordained by the Arrians, rectified their
Ministry by Preaching the Truth and opposing of Heresy, and as Liberius and a
great number of the other Bishops who had subscribed to Arrianism, purified
their Call in returning to the True Faith which they had forsaken. It is
certain therefore that the greater number of the Pastors is not a party of the
Body of the Church absolutely necessary for the subsistence of the External
Communion, and that it is an Error to imagine that the bond of the Society
depends on them, or that there can be no Assemblies made of those who shall be
separated from them, but such as are Unlawful and Schismatical.

But in the Second place, I affirm that it is not even absolutely necessary,
and in all respects, to the making that External Society to subsist among the
Faithful, that it should have Pastors. For as it is nature alone that makes man
a Sociable living Creature, that is to say, that renders him capable of Civil
Society, and gives him also a right to it, so also it is Grace which makes a
Christian a sociable man, which renders him, I would say, capable of a
Religious Society, and gives him a right to it. Ten Men that should meet one
another hy Chance in an uninhabited Desert, would they not have a Right to join
themselves actually together, to assemble and to take all the joint
deliberations in public that they should Judge necessary for their own
preservation? And would it not be an extravagance to demand of them what
Magistrate had assembled them, what public Authority had called them together,
who had given them a right to speak among themselves and to consult for their
common interests? Then when there are lawful Magistrates, their intervention is
necessary for the calling and Authorizing of Civil Assemblies, and if any
undertake to assemble together without their Authority, or without their
consent, their Assemblies are rash and unlawful, but it does not follow from
thence that Magistrates should be so absolutely necessary to a Society, that
when there should be none, men could not any more speak or act together, nor
assemble themselves, nor take common Consultations. It is the same thing in
Religion, if Ten Laymen of the Faithful should meet together casually, or to
speak better, if the sole Providence of God should make them meet one another
in a Desert Island, or in the farthest part of America, and engage them all
their days in a strange Land, and if they should come to acknowledge each other
for true Faithful Christians, can any believe that (...) ought to remain so
dispersed that they could never law^^^^^ commune together concerning the
Christian Faith and Pie^^ nor meet together to provide for the preservation of
their Religion. This is that which I hold, to be, not only unable to be
maintained, but impious. For as Nature alone assembles men, when they have no
Magistrates, and cannot have any; so Grace alone assembles Christians when they
have no Pastors, and cannot have any. She will not suffer them to remain in an
entire dispersion while there remains yet any means to assemble them, it is she
alone that convokes or calls them together, and her instinct forms an unanimous
consent in them, that consent alone renders their Assembly as lawful as it can
be made by the Convocation of Pastors. Thus also diverse Parties who divided the
Latin Church in the Time of the Great Schism of the Anti -Popes, protested,
That they met together at the Council of Constance when they no more
acknowledged the Pope, nor by consequence, held any more a Head that could
lawfully call them together, for they declared that they called one another
together, and that they assembled themselves sub Capite Christo, under Jesus
Christ their common Head, that is to say, by his instinct, and under his
Authority, which suplied the want of a Pope. Quatenus, say they, in illo quiest
verus Ecclesiae sponsus, congregati in unum simul, matrem Ecclesiam divisam
uniamus. In respect of an Assembly in the Body of a Council, each Bishop, each
Prelate was but a mere private man, as much as every Believer is in respect of
an Assembly in the Body of the Church; and yet notwithstanding they assembled,
they reunited themselves, they deposed a false Pope who troubled them even
then, and they created another. A mutual Convocation then, which is nothing
else but an unanimous consent, is sufficient to make an Assembly lawful, when
there is no Public Authority that can call them together.

This is that which justifies the Conduct of our Fathers in some places of this
Kingdom at the beginning of the Reformation, for they Assembled sometimes
without any Pastors, to pray to God together and to Read the Holy Scriptures,
their Consciences could not any more allow them to be present at the Assemblies
of the Roman Communion, and not having further any Pastor who might Assemble
them after the Ordinary manner, the Spirit of Christianity Assembled them under
the Sovereign Pastor and Bishop of Souls which is Jesus Christ, and their
mutual consent without doubt made their Society and their Assemblies most
lawful. For as to that which is said in the Scripture, I will smite the
Shepherd, and the Sheep shall be scattered abroad; it would be manifestly to
abuse that passage, if they would conclude from it an absolute necessity of the
Pastors for the subsistence of that Society. For that is a Prophecy which
notes, not that which the Faithful ought to do when they have no Pastors, but
that which should befall the Disciples of Jesus Christ in the Time of his
Passion, when the fury of the Jews, and the sad Condition wherein they should
behold their Divine Master, should force them to be scattered, which has
nothing common to the Question we are now Treating of.

In the Third place I say, that to understand well the true use, and the
Necessity of the Actions of the Ministry, the Church must be considered in two
Seasons, in her first formation and in her subsistence. For in her first
formation it is certain that the Actions of the Ministry were necessary for the
calling of men to the light of the Gospel, whereof as yet they had no
knowledge, and by Consequence they were necessary to the Establishment of the
Christian Communion or Society amongst them, which could not be without that
knowledge. To this end Jesus Christ employed his Apostles and Evangelists, Go,
says he, and Teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, of
the Son, Mat. 28.
and of the Holy Ghost; and it is that to which Saint Paul has a chief regard
when he says, That Christ has given some Apostles, Ephesians. 4.
and some Prophets, and some Exangelists, and some Pastors, and Teachers, for
the gathering together of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the
edifying of the Body of Christ. Those glorious Heralds by the efficacy of their
word, accompanied with the power of Jesus Christ, called together the Church,
if we must so say, as the Holy Assembly of God; they Established the Christian
Religion in the World, and so united men among themselves in an External
Society by the profession of one and the same Faith, of one and the same Hope
and Charity which inspired them, so that the Acts of their Ministry were
absolutely necessary for that first Establishment, because their Preaching was
the only means that God would make use of to draw men from the Pagan Idolatry
or the Jewish Obstinacy, and to give them that Faith without which they could
never have had a Christian Society. In this respect, there is Reason to urge
the force of the word Church, which signifies not a rash and tumultuary
Assembly made by chance or Sedition, but an Assembly lawfully called, for it
was God himself who called it by the voice of his Apostle according to the
Prophecy of David. The mighty Lord, the Eternal God Psalm 50.
has spoken, and called to all the Earth, from the rising up of the Son to the
going down of the same. He has called the Heavens from on high, and the Earth
to Judge his People; saying, Gather ye my Saints together.

In this first Establishment the Apostles and Evangelists did three things: On
one hand they spread abroad the Faith every where, and by this means bound men
in an External Communion or Society; on the other hand, they set together the
Christian Truths which are the Objects of Faith in the Cannon of the
Scriptures; and in fine they established Ordinary Pastors for the upholding and
Government of the Church. By the first of those things, in Establishing the
Faith in men's hearts, they assembled, called them together, and put them into a
Society, by the second, they laid, as I may so speak, the Fountain; or the
External and perpetual Magazine of the Evangelical Doctrine. By the Third, they
provided for the Ordinary Dispensation of that Fountain, settling of Ministers
to distribute it by their Preaching, the Sacraments, and the Exercise of
Discipline. Of these three things, there is none but the first only to which we
ought to refer the Convocation of the Church and Establishment of the Christian
Society. But we must say that all Three serve for its preservation and
increase, for they are so many ways and means which the Apostles left for the
preservation of the Faith, and strengthening of it in those who had before
received it, and to propagate it to their Children, and in those who had not as
yet received it, in which the preservation of a Society consists. The first
contributes much, for as Lights or Torches lighted all together preserve and
mutually strengthen their fire, and are capable of lighting others; So many
faithful Christians united together, confirm one another in the Faith and
Piety, and are fit to Communicate that Faith and Piety to those who have not
yet received it. The Second does not contribute less, for the Faithful preserve
and increase their light, their Faith, Piety, Sanctity, by the immediate
Reading of the Holy Scriptures; Infidels themselves may be converted this way,
and those that go astray be brought back to the purity of the Gospel. The Third
is also of exceeding great Use, for the Pastors by their Preaching, their
Direction, and their Writings, by their Examples, by the Sacraments they
Administer, and in a word by all the Actions of their Ministry, confirm the
Faith where it is, and propagate it where it is not. The Divine Wisdom has so
prepared its diverse means for the preservation of that Society, and the
Propagation of his Church, That if the Actions* of the Ministry do not produce
that effect for which they are appointed, the other means shall, and supply
that defect. In Effect when the public Preaching and presence of the Pastors
fail, the Reading of the Scripture, private Exhortation of the simple
Christians, the writings of their Pastors, either dead or absent, may come to
succor, and make the Faith and Charity and Piety subsist, and by consequence
the External Society of the Church and its Assemblies.

How then are the Actions of the Ministry necessary? They are so first, By
Necessity of Precept, as they speak; I mean as it is a means that Jesus Christ
has ordained, the Use whereof we cannot neglect without sin. Those who contemn
it, resist the Order that God himself has established, and make themselves
unworthy of his Grace; and to this those passages in the Scripture refer, which
recommend the Pastors to the Faithful. He that hears you hears me, and he
that rejects you, rejects me. Obey them that have the Rule over you, and
submit your selves, for they watch for your Souls. 2. The Actions of the
Ministry are necessary to the Churches well being, though not absolutely
necessary to its being. It is not absolutely impossible for a Church to subsist
without having actually any Pastors, not only because sometimes Faith and Piety
may subsist without their heavenly food, which is the Word and Sacraments, as a
Body may subsist sometimes without its nourishments, but also because one part
of that food may come to us otherwise then from the mouth of the Pastors, as I
have shown. But they are necessary to the well being of a Church, but it is the
hand of the Pastors alone that dispences the Sacraments to us, and their
Preaching is a public instruction that more strongly sets before our Eyes the
Truths of the Gospel, that livelily applies its Precepts, its Promises, its
Threatenings, and its Exhortations to us, and frequently forces us to make those
Reflections on our selves which we should not do without their Aid. Their
Authority restrains us, their light inlightens us, their Direction guides us,
their Example excites us, and their Labors case ours. It is certain that a
Flock without a Pastor cannot but be in a very bad condition, for howsoever
each of the Mystical Sheep who compose it may defend themselves against the
assaults of the Wolves, yet it is not ordinarily done either with such force,
or such success as when the defending of them lies in the hands of Faithful
Pastors to whom God communicates a greater measure of his Light and Grace; and
although the External Society among the simple Faithful may not cease to
subsist though they have not actually any Pastor, since they may be joined
together in Jesus Christ by the profession of one same Faith, and the same
Piety which assembles them, by virtue of the first Convocation that the
Apostles made, yet that Society, as far as it is External, would be far better
maintained by the Actions of the Ministry of the Pastors, then it would be
otherwise. 3. I shall not fear to say that even the Actions of the Ministry are
necessary for the perpetual subsistence of that External Society, for however
the mere Reading of the Word of God, Public Prayers in Common, the mutual
Exhortations of the Faithful, and the Writings of the Doctors of the Church,
are without doubt sufficient to preserve the Faith and Piety in the Souls of
men, not only during some time, but even always, if they do not neglect their
duty, yet notwithstanding it must be acknowledged that according to the way
that we are made, and to speak as they say after the manner of men, a Flock
cannot abide a long Time without a Shepherd, so as not to fall into Negligence,
and by that Negligence into an Oblivion of its duty, and in fine, so as the
Sheep should not be in a great danger of dispersion. See here after what manner
Pastors are necessary to the Church, but to imagine that it cannot absolutely
have any more a Christian Society, or lawful Assemblies among the Faithful,
when their Ordinary Pastors forsake them, is that which they can never maintain
with any Reason, For the Faithful are the Sheep of Jesus Christ, and when their
Pastors scatter them, the Grace and Name of Jesus Christ calls them together,
They are in a Society by the right of the first Convocation of the Church,
which is a perpetual right, which subsists every where, where the True Faith
and true Christian Piety are found Common among many persons, and it is from
that perpetual and immovable Right that that of the actual Assemblies Flows.

But what Order can they hold in their Assemblies, since they have none to
direct them Externally? I answer, That the same Spirit of Grace which inspired
them with Piety and Charity, would it self suggest an Order and subject them
one to another by a mutual consent; for God does not forsake his own Children,
though men and the Church may always say in the Languague of the Prophet, When
my Father and Mother forsake Psalm. 27.
me, the Lord shall take me up. If there be any Magistrate to be found among
the Faithful, it belongs to him to settle an Order among them, for the Civil
Society comes in Naturally to the succor of the Religious, when the Religious
is cast into any Extremity. If there be no Magistrate they ought to agree about
an Order in private Conferences, before they come to Assemble together in a
Body, to avoid Confusion, and every one has a Right to make those private
Conferences.

But what can they do in those Assemblies? They may pray to God there, they may
implore the succors of his Providence, and put their Trust in his Promises.
They must begin by that Afterward they will search out all possible means to
have Pastors called to that Office by the Ordinary ways, to receive the
Sacraments and Preaching of the Gospel from them; but if that is impossible, or
if they see that that would be evidently to Tempt God, and put the Flock in
danger of dissipation, it is Necessary in that case that the Flock should choose
a Pastor for it self, and Consecrate him to God by ardent Prayers, in
committing to his Trust the Rights of the Ministry that reside in the Body of
the Faithful, to whom Jesus Christ, according to Saint Augustine, has given the
Power of the Keys. For we ought not to imagine that the Body of the Faithful
should be stripped of the Right of the Ministry as often as they should be
actually without Pastors. That Right is inviolable, it cannot be either lost or
separated from the Body of the Faithful. We will in the Close examine whether
an Election made after that manner gives a sufficient Call; it is sufficient at
present to know that neither the Right of a Christian Society, nor that of
Christian Assemblies, is so necessarily tied to the Pastors, That when there
should be none of them, the Faithful could not remain united together
externally in a Body of a Visible Church, or make those Assemblies lawful.

The Author of the Prejudices Treating about this matter, distinguishes between
two sorts of Separations, the one Negative, the other Positive. There is, says
he, a mere Negative Separation which consists more in the denial of certain
Acts of Communion, then in positive Actions against that Society from which one
separates. Prejug. Chap. 7. Page 147.
And there is another Positive Separation which includes the erecting of a
Separate Society, the Establishment of a new Ministry, and the positive
Condemnation of the former Society to which he was united. He says afterward,
That we did not content our selves with the first kind of Separation, that we
have gone further, that we have formed a new Society, a new Church, that we
have set up new Pastors; That it is that kind of Separation whereof he accuses
us, and that it is this also that we ought to Justify our selves about. He
repeats the same things in the end, and concludes, That when the Faithful
should believe themselves obliged out of a good Conscience to separate
themselves Negatively, they ought not to form a Society, nor have any Pastors;
But, that they ought to remain in that State without any Pastors, and without
any External Worship, in waiting until God extraordinarily raise up some with
visible Characters of their Mission.

I acknowledge that that Distinction of two kinds of Separation, is of some
Use, and I have my self made use of it for the putting of the matters of this
Treatise into a more natural Order; but I deny that the Consequences which the
Author of the Prejudices pretends to draw from them, are True. We shall see in
the sequel, whether the Society of the Protestants separated from those of the
Church of Rome, may with any reason be called a new Church: We shall see also
what Right they had to a Gospel Ministry, and whether they can say that their
Ministry is new, I consider only that Principle which he propounds, which is,
That when the Faithful separate themselves Negatively from those with whom they
were before united, they ought not to set up a Society apart. For he knows not
how to say any thing that is more contrary to Piety and the Spirit of
Christianity. I hold then that if that Negative Separation of the Faithful be
Just, if it be necessary, if they made it out of a good Conscience, not only
they can, but they ought to hold a Christian Society among themselves, to make
a Visible Body, to Assemble, to pray to God together, to Read his Word, to
consult and deliberate for their common Interests, even while they should be
separated from the greater number of the Ordinary Pastors, or even when they
should have no Pastors among them. I mean that that is not only a Right but a
Duty, an Obligation, and such an Obligation that there is nothing can dispense
with but an absolute and invincible impossibility. The Reason upon which I
found this Proposition is taken from the very Nature of the Christian Faith,
Piety and Charity. For when God has given us these virtues, he has by that very
thing indispensably bound us to keep and strengthen them, and by consequence he
has bound us to practice those means which he himself has established for that
purpose. But among those means, That of External Communion with our Brethren to
whom he has given the same grace, is one of the most considerable, as I have
said before. Therefore Saint Paul told the believing Hebrews, Let us take heed
to stir up one another to Charity Heb. 10.
and good works, not forsaking the Assembling of our selves together, but
admonishing one another. And to the Colossians, Let the word Col. 3.
of Jesus Christ dwell richly in you in all wisdom, Teaching and admonishing
one another, in Psalms and Hymns and Spiritual Songs. And to the Thessalonians,
We entreat that you would admonish the 1 Thessalonians. 5.
disorderly, that you comfort those that are in affliction, that you uphold the
weak. And to the Ephesians, Speak ye one to another in Ephesians. 5.
Psalms and Hymns and Spiritual Songs, Singing and making melody in your heart
to the Lord.

Moreover, according as our Brethren labor on their part in the preservation
and confirmation of our Faith, Piety, Hope, and Charity, by the Society that we
hold with them, so we produce the same effect in respect of them, for we
mutually edify one another. But it is further a Duty to which Christianity
engages us. God would not that we should only labor for our own preservation,
he would have us also take care of that of our neighbors, and it would be a
detestable word in the mouth of a Christian, if he should say with Cain, Am I
my Brothers keeper? We are further bound to propagate our Faith and Piety in
the Souls of our Children, and to labor even to the utmost of our power to
make it spring up in the Souls of Infidels, as one lighted candle may light
another; which evidently notes that the Instinct of Christianity, is an
instinct of Society that carries us out not only to own our Brethren, when they
are so, but to gain more then we had before, and even those which we cannot
have.

In fine, Piety would have us give God the highest honor and Worship that it
is possible for us to give him. But it is certain This passage yet cleared in
the Orig. Page 321.
that God is more honored in a Society, when all in one Body offer up their
Prayers to him, their vows and their praises, then when each does it apart,
more hearts united together pay God a homage more worthy of his Majesty. They
cannot then imagine a State more contrary to the nature of the true Faith, of
Christian Piety and Charity, than that of Dispersion, nor by consequence any
thing that the Faithful ought to have more horror for, and when the misery of
the Age shall cast them into it by an unavoidable necessity, they ought always
to preserve a Spirit of Society, and to pant after the company of their
Brethren. My Soul, said David, then when he was in that Condition, Thirsts
after God, after the living and true God, O when shall I come and appear before
Psalm. 42.
the presence of God! My Tears have been my meat Day and Night, while they say
unto me, Where is now thy God? I remember the Time wherein I went with the
multitude, and when I went sweetly in company with others, with the voice of
Triumph, and praise, unto the House of God.

It is so certain, that the Actual dispersion of the Faithful does not break
the natural bond of their Society, for they are always Brethren, Children of
the same Family, it can only suspend the Acts of it, and when that absolute
necessity which forced them into dispersion is gone, they return of themselves
naturally into an actual Society, by the force of that Unity of Faith and
Religion that is among them, without any necessity of a new Convocation. It
will signify nothing to say that the Duties which I have noted respect the
Faithful only then when they are already in an Actual Society, but that they
are not bound to remain there, nor to enter into it, when they have no Pastors
to Assemble them. For I say that those Duties arise not from the nature of that
Society, but from that of Faith, Piety, and Charity, and by consequence they
bind them to preserve an actual Society, wherever it is, and even to make one
where it is not yet; that is to say, they oblige us to United all those to us
in whom we see the same Faith, Piety, and Charity shine forth, that we perceive
in our selves.

In a word, since Faith, Piety, Charity, and the other Christian Virtues, bind
us to those Duties, they bind us also to an External Society, without which
they cannot be performed, whence it comes to pass, that the Faithful are called
in the Scripture Sheep, not in respect of their Ordinary Pastors, but in
respect of their Faith in Jesus Christ; to note, That it is the Faith and not
the Ministry which makes the Society, and which renders by consequence their
Assemblies lawful and necessary.

CHAP. II.
That the Society of the Protestants, is not a New Church.

ONe of the most Ordinary and powerful means that they make use of to render us
odious to the People, and to drive them from our Communion, is to represent us
to them as Innovators, and full of Confusions, who have overthrown all, and
made a new Religion, and a new Church; and it is very true that the greatest
part of the World Judges of things no otherwise then by what they tell them,
and by some light appearances, without informing themselves any further.
Nevertheless it is certain that there never was a more unjust Accusation then
that, nor whose injustice could be more easily seen, if they would but open
their Eyes a little. For as to that which respects that pretended Novelty of
Religion which they say that we have introduced, I would fain have them mark
out some positive Articles of our Faith, that were not always believed in the
Christian Church, and which they* themselves to this day do not believe in the
Church of Rome, without any ways scrupling them. I confess that they may have
among them some Questions of the School about which our positive Doctrine is
different from that of the Church of Rome, as the Question of the Nature of
Concupiscence, that of the dolors of the Soul of Jesus Christ, and that of the
Definition of the Faith.

But besides that those Questions are very few in Number, and that they are
scarce known by the People, we have the Holy Scriptures so clearly on our side
upon all those points, that they cannot lay any Novelty to our Charge, and for
the rest all our great Differences consist in respect of us, in Negative
Articles, that is to say, in those points which the Church of Rome believes,
and which we do not believe, as the Sacrifice of the Mass, Transubstantiation,
Oral Manducation, Adoration of the Host, Purgatory, Invocation of Saints and
Angels, Religious Worship of Images, that of Relics, the Divine Service in an
unknown Tongue, the Necessity of the Caelibacy of the Clergy, the merit of good
works, the Authority of Traditions, the Monarchy of the Pope, the Infallibility
of the Church of Rome, her Sovereign power over men's Consciences, and other
such like Doctrines. It is True that we have rejected those Doctrines, but
since it is also true that we have rejected them only because they are
Novelties that men have added to God's Revelation, beyond which there can be
nothing in Religion that should not be new, what ground have any of them to
accuse us as Innovators? They would have far more ground to say that we are too
rigid Followers of Antiquity, and that we urge our Scruples and our Aversions
for these Novelties further then we ought, or at least that we deceive our
selves, and take that for new, which indeed is not so, If they said no more but
that, we should labor to justify our selves; but to charge us under that
pretense with a Spirit of Novelty, is the most unreasonable and groundless
thing in the World. That which makes the Fallacy is, That the people, whose
sight is extreme short, and who Judge of the Novelty and Antiquity of things
only by that which appears open to them, imagine that all that which they
received from their Fathers, and which they found settled when they came into
the World, is Ancient throughout; so that a false Antiquity which shall be only
of two or three Ages past, passes in their Judgments for as good and true a one
as if it had been always so. Notwithstanding which, it is certain, that in
matters of Religion, nothing can be truly Ancient but that which was from the
beginning, and nothing can be Divine but that which is from Jesus Christ and
his Apostles; for it is a thing very evident and acknowledged on both sides,
that from the Time of Jesus Christ and his Apostles, There has been no
immediate Revelation; whence it follows, That all that which is sprung up
since, is humane, and by consequence New. This is the True Idea that we ought
to form of Old and New, and not that popular Idea, which cannot but be false
and deceitful, and yet notwithstanding it is upon this latter that they ground
themselves when they accuse us to have been Innovators, and to have made a new
Religion: as if Jesus Christ had been an Innovator then, when he would correct
the abuses that the Jews committed in their Divorces, by telling them, In the
beginning it was not so.

It is after the same manner that they charge us with having made a new Church,
for they play upon the Equivocalness of the word, New. The People who imagine
that all that which appears to them in another form then that which they have
been wont to see, is new, believe that our Society is new, because they see
that we do not Assemble our selves any more with them as we did before, that we
have other places then the usual, that we do not any more say Mass in our
Assemblies, that we hold another Order, and that we have other Ministers.

But there needs here only a Distinction: For a thing is called New either with
respect to its being and its Essence, in respect of its External State, and its
changeable Accidents. When an Infant comes into the World, they say a new man
is born, when a new House or Town is built where there none before, they say it
is a new Town, or a new House; and the same may be said when one thing is
essentially changed into another thing, as when God changed Moses's Rod into a
Serpent, or when Jesus Christ changed the water of Cana into Wine, it might be
said that it was a new thing, because in effect it was not essentially the same
thing that it was before. But when it is only changed in its State or External
Form, as when a Man changes his countenance, his Stature or his Inclination,
manner of acting, or Clothes, or when he repairs a House or a Town, if then any
should say this were a new thing, without doubt he would speak improperly. It
is not less manifest, that it is no more then a sigurative Expression, which
ought not to be taken literally, nor in a rigorous sense. So when Saint Paul
calls a converted man a new Man, a new Creature, and the Church a new Heaven, a
new Earth, a new World, every one sees that these are ways of speaking that
ought not to be taken literally, but figuratively; for a Believer is
essentially the same man, and the same Creature of God that he was before his
Conversion, and Heaven, Earth, and the World are not changed in their Essence
by the manifestation of the Gospel. Besides a thing that is changed in its
external Form may be called new, either with respect to the State wherein it
was immediately before its change, or with respect to the Just and lawful State
wherein it should be according to its first Establishment; so when one repairs
a ruined House, if it keeps its first proportion, We may say that it is made
new in respect of what it was before its Reparation, but if its first and
natural Fashion should be changed, it would be new, even in respect of what it
should have been according to the Model by which it was made at first.

These Distinctions clear this whole Dispute, and it is not difficult to apply
them to the subject we are upon. For if they mean, That the Society or Church
of the Protestants is new in respect of the State wherein it was, or of that
external form which it had, immediately before the Reformation; we shall
voluntarily agree that it is made new in that sense, after the same manner that
the Scripture calls the Regenerate a new Man, or as God promises to give us a
new heart, or as they call a House repaired, and put into its natural State, a
new House. That would speak the Favor God showed to our Fathers, in
re-establishing the Christian Society in that Just and lawful State, wherein it
ought to be according to its first Establishment, and that that State is very
much different from that wherein it was immediately before the Reformation:
This is that which we do not deny, and are so far from it, that on the contrary
we praise and glorify God for it. But if they mean that we have made a new
Church, that is to say, one essentially differing from that which Jesus Christ
and his Apostles would establish in the World, and which has always subsisted
even to our days, or that, in all that, which depends on us, we have not
re-established it in its first and lawful State, this is what we deny; and in
this sense, which is the only one that can render the Accusations of our
Adversaries just, we maintain, that we have not in the least made a new Church.
In a word, we say, that the Church of Jesus Christ has subsisted down from the
Apostles to us inclusively, in all that which it has Essentially, and that she
yet subsists at this day among us, but that having changed her State or
External Form in the Ages that preceeded the Reformation, she was
re-established in her just and lawful State by the Reformation of our Fathers,
which no ways hinders but that she was, and might always be the same Church.

To make this Truth to be the better understood, we need only to clear on the
one side what that Essence of the Church is, that ought always to remain
immovable, to show that it may be but one and the same Church by descent and
uninturrepted Succession, and on the other side what State it is that she has
suffered change in, and how it could be altered and repaired. The Essence of
the Church consists in this, That it is a Body of diverse persons united
together in the Commnion of one only True God, under one only Jesus Christ
their Head and Mediator; and it is Jesus Christ himself that has given us this
Idea of it, when he says that, This is life Eternal to know the only True God
and Jesus Christ whom John 17.
he has sent, That Definition which we give of the Church supposes, 1. The
subject, or matter whereof the Church is composed, which are diverse men, diverse
persons united among themselves, and with God. 2. It supposes the Necessary
means, without which that Communion cannot be, which are the word of the Gospel
and the Holy Spirit. 3. It contains not only the True Faith, Charity, Hope,
which are the natural bonds of that Communion, but all the other Christian
Virtues also, as Worship, Adoration, Truth, Obedience, Thanksgiving, Justice,
Temperance, etc. which are the the duties to which that Communion engages us.
4. It comprehends in it further, all the fruits that we gather from that
Communion, as Remission of Sins, Peace and Tranquillity of Soul, Consolation in
Afflictions, Succors in Temptations, etc. 5. In fine, it includes all the
Rights that necessarily follow that Communion, as that of being joined together
in an External Society, that of Public Assemblies, that of the Ministry, that
of the Sacraments, and that of External Government and Discipline. See here
that which is Essential to the Church, for I call that Essential, without which
the Church cannot subsist, and which yet is sufficient to make it subsist; that
which cannot subsist if that Church fail to subsist, and that which cannot be
wanting if there be a Church.

As to the State in respect of which it suffers changes, it consists in all
that that depends on the different disposition of Times, Places, and Persons.
For Example, To have the Bodily presence of Jesus Christ, to have Apostles and
Evangelists for its Pastors, to have the Miraculous gifts of healing, that of
Tongues, that of the Descent of the Holy Ghost upon the Faithful by Visible
Symbols, that of Prophecy, and that of an external and infallible direction and
instruction, is a State wherein the Church was in the Time of its Birth, but
which was changed in the other Times that followed. To have Pastors illustrious
for Zeal, Learning and Piety, as a Saint Augustine, a Saint Basil, a Saint
Chrysostom, is a State wherein it was not always, nor every where, but in some
Times and Places only. To be flourishing and in Peace, without Persecution,
without Schism, without Error, is a State wherein it has neither been always,
nor in all Places, nor in respect of all those persons who have composed it,
but which it has been in, in some Times and Places only, and with respect to
some Persons. We ought then to set down in their proper Order those things
which belong to the State of the Church, and to its Essence, and which by
Consequence are liable to change, as to be extended every where, or in the
greatest part of the World, to have a multitude, or the greatest number,
Temporal Splendour or outward Glory, Peace, whether in regard of those without,
or in respect of those within, Liberty in External Profession, Visibility of
Assemblies, Purity of the Ministry, Holiness of External Worship, Form of
Government, that of Discipline, and that of Liturgies, an Actual Bond of the
Parts of the Church in one Body of External Communion, and the Actual Exercise
of the Ministry, or if you will, the Actual Presence of the Pastors. All those
are things that do not absolutely belong to the Essence of the Church, but only
to its State or Condition, and of which it may be sometimes spoiled either
wholly or in Part, without being absolutely destroyed. It may be restrained to
a few places, and a few persons, and therefore it is called in some places of
Scripture a little Flock, she may be so, in her low State. We are, says Saint
Paul, not many wise, not many mighty, not many noble, but God has chosen the
weak things of this World to confound the strong. She may be in Trouble and in
Affliction through the Persecution of Infidels, as she was under the Heathen
Emperors, or in Fighting against Heretics, as she has been almost always; she
may lose the Visibility of her Assemblies, as she did in most places in the
Time of Decius, and Dioclesian; she may find her Ministry corrupted, as it
happened in the Time of the Arrians; she may see her external Worship sullied by
Actions of superstition and Idolatry, as it fell out in Judah and Israel in the
days of the Prophets. As to the Form of her Government, we cannot deny that in
that respect she has not under-went diverse changes; I do not mention the
Introduction of the Episcopal Order, for that is a Question, but I speak of
those changes that have befell her, through the Usurpations and Contests of the
first See's, and chiefly by the Usurpations of that of Rome, which the greatest
part of the World will own to have been very considerable.

Her Discipline and her Liturgies have also undergone many Changes, and they
cannot in that regard ascribe any Uniformity to the Church, either in respect
of Times or Places. In fine, she has sometimes beheld the Body of her Ordinary
Pastors turned against her self, she has seen a great part of her true Children
scattered, and dispersed here and there, without being able to perform any Acts
of an External Society; and she has seen some of her Flocks deprived of their
Pastors, and forced to set up some among themselves in the room of those who
had abandoned them. For all that fell out in the days of the Arrians, the
Councils determined Heresy; the greatest part of the Orthodox, who opposed
themselves to their Impiety, were either banished or forced to fly into the
Deserts, and according to the Testimony of St. Epiphanius, Epiphan. Haer. 73.
comm. 28.
diverse People who saw that their Bishops were turned Arrians in the Council of
Seleucia, looked on them as the miserable Desertors of their Ministry, and set
up themselves other Bishops.

The greatest part of those Changes that fall out in the Church come from two
sources; the one, That she is mixed with the Worldly and Profane in the band of
the same External Profession; and the other, That the Truly Faithful
themselves, who only are the Church of Jesus Christ, as truly Faithful as they
are, fail not to have a great many other imperfections, their knowledge is
obscure, their Righteousness is accompanied with its faults, their Inclinations
are not all right, and even their most just Inclinations do not fail to have
some farther irregularity. These two Fountains produce an heap of evils and
disorders, the Worldly on their part bring thither Covetousness, Ambition,
Pride, Opinionativeness, contempt of God, his Mysteries, and Worship, Politic
Designs, Worldly Interests, a Spirit of Grandeur, Luxury, Superstitions,
Heresies, Love of Dominion, Presumption, Opinion of Infallibility, Forgeries,
and all other Perversities of the heart of Man. The Faithful they bring thither
on their side, their Ignorance, their Negligence, their Fearfulness, their
Simplicity, and sometimes their Passions, their Personal Interests and Vices.
From all which a Chaos is made up of darkness and Confusion, a Mystery of
Iniquity, a Spiritual Babylon, that perpetually makes war against the Church,
which reduces her sometimes into very strange Extreamities, and which would
without doubt destroy her, if her Eternal Head did not keep her up above all. I
acknowledge that the Spirit of God fights against that Babylon on the Churches
side, and that he presides over that Chaos, to expel those Confusions, and to
hinder the Churches Perishing. But it must not be imagined under a pretense of
that presence of the Spirit of God, that there never happens any disorder in
it. He indeed always preserves the Essence of the Church, but he frequently
permits her State to be altered. This is the Effect that that heap of Crimes,
Vices, and Imperfections may produce which I have mentioned as well on the side
of the Truly Faithful, as on that of the Worldly. They never go so far as to
destroy her entirely, but they go so far sometimes as to spoil her of her
Ornaments, of her External Advantages, and even of her very Health, if I may so
speak; and therefore Jesus Christ told his Disciples, In the World you shall
have Tribulation, John 16.
but be of good cheer I have overcome the World. God has always preserved, and
he will preserve to the end of all Ages, a Body of many persons united together
in the Communion of his Son Jesus Christ. This Body can never perish, it can
never cease to be, nor lose any thing that is absolutely necessary to its
subsistence; but it may be deprived of its large Extent, Temporal Splendour,
Worldly Glory, Peace, Rest, and Visibility. It may see its Ministry Corrupted,
in as much as it is in the hands of men, it may see its External Worship
dishonored, and Error and Superstition fill its Pulpits, Possess its Schools,
and diffuse it self over its Councils; its true Members may be hindered from
making external Assemblies, and a Body of a Visible Communion, and it may be
abandoned by its Pastors, and reduced to a Necessity of Creating others. See
here what the State of the Church is.

Upon all these Illustrations, it will be no difficult matter to decide the
Question concerning the Novelty and Antiquity of our Church. For if we have
made a Society essentially different from that which Jesus Christ and his
Apostles formed at the first, and which has all a long subsisted down from his
Birth to this present, if we cannot justly say, That we are a Body of many
Persons united together in the Communion of one only true God, under one only
Jesus Christ our Head and Mediator, if they can with any ground contest with
us the Unity of the True Christian Faith, Piety and Holiness; in one word, if
we want any thing that is necessary to the Constitution of the Church and its
subsistence, or if there be any thing in us that hinders that that good which
we have does not produce its effect, to give us the Form and Nature of a True
Church, it is certain, that we have made a new Church, and by a Consequence a
false and an Adulterous Church. But if we can truly and justly glorify God for
all that which makes up the Essence of a True Church, if our Faith is sound, if
our Piety is pure, if our Charity is sincere, if we can upon good grounds
maintain that God preserves and upholds in the External Communion of that Body
which we compose, the Truly Faithful and Just persons, who only, as I have said
often, are the Church, it is certain also that there is nothing more unjust
then that Accusation of a New Church which they charge us with. There never was
in the World any other Church of God then that of his truly just and Faithful
Ones, that Body only is in the Communion of the Father and of his Son Jesus
Christ, that alone is entrusted with the Truth, that alone is animated by the
Holy Spirit, that alone is God's Inheritance, his People, his Vine, his
enclosed Garden, his House and Mystical Family, as the Scripture calls it, that
alone in fine has all the Rights of the Ecclesiastical Society, the Right of
External Assemblies, that of the Ministry, Sacraments, Government, and
Discipline. Let the Author of the Prejudices and his Brethren stir themselves
as much as they please, let them animate one another, let them cry out, write
Prejudices and invectives never so much against us, let them do all that they
please, we are firm and fixed upon two Principles against which we are sure
they cannot do any thing. The one, That if our Communion Teaches the True
Doctrine, if it has the True Worship, and the True Rules of Christian Sanctity,
to a degree sufficient for Salvation, and if the Causes for which we separated
our selves from the Church of Rome were Just, God nourishes and preserves his
True Faithful Ones in our Communion, whatsoever mixture there may be of
Worldly, Wicked, and Hypocrites in it. The other, That if God nourishes and
preserves his truly Faithful in our Communion, we are the True Church of God,
that which has a Right to be in a Society, and to which all the other Rights
that follow that of a Society belong, of Assemblies, Ministry, Sacraments,
Government, Discipline, and by Consequence we are the Church which succeeds not
only de Jure, but de Facto, the Church of the Apostles, that of the Ages
following, and even that which was immediately before the Reformation.

These two Propositions are framed in clear and distinct Terms, they have
neither Ambiguity, nor Equivocation, but I hold also that they are of a certain
and indisputable Truth. For there neither is, nor ever was there any other True
Church then that of the Truly Faithful, and there never will be any other. The
Holy Scripture sets down no other, Reason will not suffer us to acknowledge any
other. The Fathers never owned any other. This is the constant and evident
Principle of Saint Augustine, as may be seen in the Fourth Chapter of the Third
Part, and it is also the Principle of the other Fathers, as may be Justified by
almost an infinite Number of passages. The Ancient Catholic Church, says
Clemens of Alexandria, is but one only Church, which Clem. Alex. Strom. lib. 7.
assembles in the Unity of one only Faith, by the will* of one only God, and
the Ministry of one only Lord, all those who are before Ordained, that is to
say, whom God has predestined to be Just, having known them before the
Foundation of the World. Where is the place where Jesus Christ should dwell?
says Origin; It is the Mountain of Origin. in Jos. Hom. 26.
Ephraim, which signifies a fruitful Mountain; but where are those fruitful
Mountains among us where Jesus Christ dwells? They are those on whom the fruits
of the Spirit, Joy, Peace, Patience, Charity, and other virtues may be found.
They are those fruitful Mountains which bring forth fruit to Jesus Christ, and
which are eminent for knowledge and hope. And a little after, The Grace of the
Holy Spirit has gone over to the People of the Gentile:, and their Ancient
Solemnities are come to us, because we have with us the True High Priest after
the Order of Melchizedec, True Sacrifices are offered up amongst us, that is to
say, the Spiritual Sacrifices; and it is among us that he builds with living
Stones the Temple of God, which is the Church of the living God. And elsewhere,
The Church desires to be Orig. in Cant. Hom. 1.
united to Jesus Christ, but note, that the Church is a Society of the Saints.

And further elsewhere explaining those words, Thou art Peter, Idem. in Mat. 16.
and upon this Rock I will build my Church; The Church, says he, that God
builds, consists in all those who are perfect, and are full of those words,
thoughts, and actions that lead to blessedness; and a little lower, How ought
we to understand those words, The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it?
For that expression is ambiguous, is it the Rock that he speaks of, or if it be
of the Church, is it that the Rock and the Church are but one and the same
thing? This latter I believe to be True, for the Gates of Hell prevail neither
against the Rock upon which Jesus Christ has built his Church, nor against the
Church, according to that which is said in the Proverbs, That the way of the
Serpent is not found upon the Rock. If the Gates of Hell do prevail against
any, there is neither that Rock upon which Jesus Christ builds the Church, nor
the Church that Jesus Christ builds upon the Rock. For that Rock is
inaccessible to the Serpent, and stronger then the Gates of Hell. And as to the
Church as it is the Building of Jesus Christ, she can never let in the Gates of
Hell against her, those Gates may very well prevail against every man that is
without the Church, and separated from that Rock, but never against the Church.
Jesus Christ, says Saint Ambrose, knows those that are his, and as to those
Ambros de Abrab. patr. lib. 1. cap. 3.
who do not belong to him, he does not vouschafe even to know them. And
elsewhere, God called his Tabernacle Bethlehem, because the Church of the
Righteous is his Tabernacle, and there is a Mystery in it, for Bethlehem is
Situate upon the Sea of Galilee on the East side, which signifies to us that
every Soul that is worthy to be called the Temple of God, or the Church, may be
built upon the waves of this World, but can never be drowned, it may be
encountered, but can never be overthrown, because it represses and calms the
wild impetuousness of sufferings. It looks upon the Shipwraecks of others while
it self is Ibid. 1. 2. cap. 3.
safe from danger, always ready to receive the illumination of Jesus Christ,
and to rejoice under his Rays. And further elsewhere, he says Expressly, That as
the Saints are the Members of Jesus Christ, In Psalm. 35.
so the wicked are the Members of the Devil. Saint Hierome Teaches the same
thing. The Church, says he, which is the Assembly of all Hieron. in Job. cap.
26.
the Saints, is called in the Scripture, the Pillar and ground of Truth,
because she has in Jesus Christ an eternal firmness.

And in the Exposition of the Song of Songs, he lays down this Maxim, That the
Church is the Assembly of all the Saints, and that Idem. Cant. Hom. 1.
she is brought in speaking in the Canticles, as if all the Saints were but one
person. And even the Author of the Commentary on the Psalms, ascribed to Saint
Hierome, Explaining these words of the Prophet, I will drive away from the City
of the Lord all the workers of Iniquity; The City of the Lord, says he, is the
Church of the In Psalm. 101.
Saints, the Congregation of the Just. I do not deny, that the Fathers
sometimes give a very large extent to the Church, when they consider it as
mingled with almost an infinite number of the wicked, and the Worldly, as we
have frequently explained it already, and it is to this Idea that they refer
their comparisons of a Field, of the Air, and the rest, which we have often
mentioned. But it is certain, That when the Question is to be decided, which of
the two Parties that make up that mixed Body, is the Church, that they
unanimously agree to give that Title to the truly Faithful, and to the
Righteous only, and that they deprive the wicked and the worldly of it; and it
is for this Reason that Saint Augustine Aug. de Bapt. cont. Don. l. 7. cap. 51.
always distinguishes in that extent of the mixed Church, two People, or two
Nations, Jerusalem and Babylon, which although they be mixed together, do not
fail to be really separated; and he would have the Head of the one to be Jesus
Christ, but the Devil the head of the other. It is for the same Reason that he
distinguishes between being in the Church, and being of the Church, for he
would, that although the wicked might be in the Church yet that nevertheless
they were not of the Church; that they do not belong to its Body, but that
they are in its Body as ill humors that oppressed and disturbed it; and it is
to the Faithful alone, Exclusively to all others, that he ascribes all the
Rights of the Church, although the wicked may sometimes have the dispensing
them in quality of Ministers and Pastors; for he would in that Case, that those
might be inhabitants of Babylon, who distributed that good which did not belong
to them, Aug. in Psalm. 61.
but to the Truly Faithful only, the only Inhabitants of Jerusalem.

It is then a certain and manifest Truth, That the Truly Faithful only are the
Church, and that to them alone belong all the Rights of the Church; but if we
would here add another to it, which is not less certain, since it is founded
upon the promises of Jesus Christ, to wit, That there always has been a Church
in the World; it would evidently follow, That if our Communion has the
advantage of the True Faith and Worship over the Roman Communion, in a word, if
we have Reason at the Foundation, we are not only the True Church, but that we
are so by a Just Succession de jure and de facto to that Church which preceded
us, and which even preceded us immediately before the Reformation. It is no
more to be inquired after where it was, or which it was, for the promise of
Jesus Christ assures us, that he had one; his Scripture, Reason, the Fathers
declare to us that it consisted wholly in the Truly Faithful. Put then these
truly Faithful where you please, in France, in Spain, in Italy, in the West, in
the East, or in the Indies if you will, it is nothing to our Question. If we
are truly Faithful as they, we are their lawful Successors in all the Rights
of the Christian Society. Whether we received the Faith from their hands, or
whether we received it elsewhere, it matters not, we do not fail to be their
true Heirs; for God, as Saint John Baptist said, may even of these Stones raise
up Children unto Abraham. They are our Fathers by the Right of Age, but they
are our Brethren also by the Unity of the same Faith, and one and the same
Spirit that animates us, and makes us to be one Body with them: When they were
in the World, in what condition soever they were, the Ministry was theirs, the
Sacraments were theirs, the Right of Assemblies belonged to them, since those
things can only belong to the Faithful, and when God has sent them to their
rest, that Mystical Heritage could be raised by none but other true Believers,
for such is the Law of the Family of God, that it is neither flesh, nor blood,
nor Transmission of Pulpits and Benefices, that make a Succession, but the
Spirit of Jesus Christ; or as Tertallian speaks, the Consanguinity of the Faith
and Doctrine: Tertul. de praescript. advers. Haeret. cap. 32.
If then we have that Spiritual Consanguinity, we are their true Successors,
and we make but one only body, one Church with them.

But they will say, How can it be that you should make but one only Body with
the Church which was before the Reformation, since that Church lived then in
Communion with those from whom you are now Separated? She had an Exterual
Worship quite differing from yours, she was under quite another Ministry then
yours, for she was under a Ministry that professed to invocate Saints,
religiously to Worship their Images and their Relics, to Sacrifice really the
Body of Jesus Christ, to believe Transubstantiation, the Real Presence and all
the other Articles that you at this day profess to reject. How can you be the
same Church? How can your Ministers be Successors to those who were at that
time Bishops, Archbishops, Cardinals, Patriarchs, and Popes? Your Liturgies
are different, your Discipline is not less, you have neither Feasts, nor
Processions, nor any of the Solemnities practiced openly among us; how can it
be otherwise then that you should be a new Church?

I answer, First, That if that Reasoning were Just, it would conclude that the
Church before the Reformation, was not the same Church with that which the
Apostles established at first, for according to the Idea that the Holy
Scripture gives us of the Apostolic Church, we cannot see there any thing like
to that which was done immediately before the Reformation. We find there
neither the same Tenets, nor the same Worship, nor the same Solemnities, nor
the same form of Ministry, nor the same Government, nor the same Discipline,
nor the same Sacraments, nor the same Liturgies, nor in fine any thing of that
which our Fathers reformed: Let them tell us then after what manner they mean
that the Church before the Reformation was not the one and the same Church with
that of the Apostles. For if they were in effect two different Churches, and
that we were obliged to choose one to have Communion with, or an Identity with,
as they speak, we should not hesitate upon the choice. We should have a
thousand times more Consolation and Assurance to find our selves conformed to
the Apostolic Church, then to be in nothing different from that which
immediately preceded the Reformation; since the Apostolic ought to be looked on
as the Mother Church the Original, Exemplar, or Pattern to all the Ages
following, from which it is not allowable to recede. Let the Author of the
Prejudices then if he pleases do one of these two things, either show us in the
Church of the Apostles all those things which we have not in Conformity with
the Church that was immediately before the Reformation, and upon which ground
he would have us be a new Church, let him show us that there was
Transubstantiation there, the Real presence, the Sacrifice of the Mass, the
Adoration of the Eucharist, the Worshipping of Images, the Invocation of
Saints, the Worshipping of Relics, the Orders and vows of their Religious,
the Caelibacy of Churchmen, Worship in an unknown Tongue, Their Feasts,
Processions, and in general all that, that according to him made us a new
Church, differing from that which preceded the Reformation, or if he will not
engage himself so far, let him at least tell us after what manner he
understands that the Church before the Reformation was not it self a new Church
differing from that which the Apostles established. He cannot tell how to do
the first of those things because it is absolutely impossible, and he can never
do the second, because his principles wholly oppose it, and in effect it is
true, that those who believed and practiced all that which I have noted were
not one and the same Church with that of the Apostles. If then he can do
neither the one nor the other, he ought to look to it, how he means that his
Church should be the True Church of Jesus Christ, for it is enough as to us, to
find our selves conformable to the Church of the Apostles, since that being, as
we are certain that it is, the same Body that God has Established upon Earth,
to which Jesus Christ has promised a perpetual subsistence, and without which
we should very difficultly know precisely how he has Executed his promise, we
should no ways doubt that we were the same Church which has subsisted even down
to the Time of the Reformation. For when we should be ignorant of the manner
how it has subsisted, when we should not be able to understand that, we should
be notwithstanding certain, that it has subsisted, since the word of Jesus
Christ is inviolable, and none can call it in question without impiety, whence
it follows that we are not a new Church, but the same which has always abode,
and which was immediately before the Reformation.

That way which we hold to assure our selves of this Truth is not only good,
solid, and certain, but it is yet further the only one that any Communion can
or ought to hold, if it would be certain with a good Conscience that it was the
true Church of Jesus Christ which has always subsisted, and which will always
subsist, I would say, it ought to compare it self with the Church of the
Apostles to know whether it be conformable to that, and as to what respects the
following Ages, it ought to rest assured upon the word of Jesus Christ who has
said that he will be with his until the end of the World, for that certainty
arises from thence, that being one with the Church of the Apostles, it is also
one with that of all the Ages following. But if he will take another way, and
say that Communion is the same with the Church of the fifteenth or sixteenth
Age, therefore it is the same with that of the Apostles, because that Jesus
Christ has promised that his Church shall always subsist, it is evidently to
expose himself to Error and Illusion, and to follow a very false and deceitful
way of Reasoning; The Reason is evident, because by this means one is liable to
take that for the Church in the 15 or 16 Age which it may be is not so. For in
that visible Body which they call the Church mixed, there are two Parties, the
one which is properly the Church, and the other which is not, the one which is
the Wheat that the Son of God has sown, and the other which is the Tares sown
by the hand of the Enemy, the one which is the good seed, and the other which
is the chaff. But it may so fall out that the Tares should exceed the Wheat,
and that a heap of chaff should cover the good seed, and by consequence the
conformity which they pretend to have with that Church, might be nothing else
but a conformity with the Chaff and the Tares, and not with the Wheat which
would be the greatest of all Illusions. But if they took the former way, they
would be in no danger of falling into that Error, because we know that in the
Church of the Apostles the Wheat surmounted the Tares, the good grain the
Chaff, and that that which appeared to their Eyes was of Jesus Christ, and not
of the wicked one, whence it follows that they could not be deceived in taking
one Unity for another. This then is the way that we hold, and which by the
Grace of God gives us great peace of Conscience, those who follow the other
ought to take heed that they go not from it.

See here my first Answer, the second is, That that which regards the Essence
of the Church, never ought to be confounded with that which regards only its
Condition. The Church as I have so often already said consists only in the
truly Just and Faithful, and not in that confused heap of the worldly who
Assemble with them under the same Ministry, and who partake of the same
Sacraments. That therefore which makes the Essence of the Church, is the True
Faith, Piety, and Charity, and it is most true that those Virtues cannot be
without the true Doctrine, disintangled from all those Errors which separate us
from the Communion of one only God, and the Mediation of one only Jesus Christ.
Whence it follows, That the True and pure Doctrine is the Essence of the
Church. But it is also true, that while the Foundation of the True Doctrine
remains in a Communion, and there is yet left there some liberty to the Minds
and Consciences of men, for the choice of the Objects of the Faith, and
Practice of the Actions of Religion, how impure soever that Communion may be,
whatsoever Errors may be Taught there, whatsoever false Worship they may
practice there, how corrupted soever the Public Ministry may be, there is
always a means there to separate the good from the bad, and to secure one's
self from this in holding to the other, without falling into Hypocrisy, or
acting against the Dictates of ones Conscience by false shows. But I affirm
this to be the Condition of that Visible Communion that we call the Latin
Church immediately before the Reformation. I acknowledge that
Transubstantiation was believed there, the Real presence, the Sacrifice of the
Mass, the merit of good Works, Purgatory, human Satisfactions, Indulgences, the
Monarchy of the Pope, that they religiously Worshipped the Images of God there,
and those of the Saints, that in those days they gave a Religious Worship to
Relics, that they adored the Eucharist there as being the very person of
Jesus Christ, that they then Invocated the Saints, and in a Word that they then
believed and practiced all that which they now believe and practice in the
Church of Rome. But the foundation of Christianity was as yet there, and we may
truly say, that in that good which there was there, they had light enough to
reject that which was bad. That Commandment alone, Thou shall Worship one only
God was enough to let a good Soul know that he ought not to adore either Saints
or Angels, or to call upon them, or render any Religious Worship to their
Images and Relics, nor to take any Creature for the Object of this Devotion.
The Doctrine of the Sacrifice of Jesus Christ upon the Cross, and that of his
sitting on the Right hand of God was sufficient to make them reject those of
the Sacrifice of the Mass, the Real presence, Transubstantiation, the Adoration
of the Host, Haman Satisfactions, Indulgences and Purgatory. For it is true
that the Religion then was composed of two contradictory Parties that overthrew
one another, those who took things on the wrong side destroyed the good by the
bad, for in adoring, for Example, the Saints and Angels they overthrew that
good Doctrine, Thou shall worship one only God: in believing the Sacrifice of
the Mass, and Transubstantiation, they annihilated in effect, the Sacrifice of
the Cross, and they removed as much as in them lay Jesus Christ from the Right
hand of his Father. But those who took things in a good sense destroyed on the
contrary the evil by the good: for in adoring one only God, they taught others
not to pay any Religious Worship to Creatures; in placing their confidence in
the Death of Jesus Christ for their sakes, they taught Learned to reject the
Sacrifice of the Mass, all humane Satisfactions; and in seriously believing
that Jesus Christ was in Heaven, they were dis-abused about his corporal
presence on the Altars. In fine, they could each in particular very well do,
what our Fathers did altogether when they Reformed themselves, for their
Reformation wrought nothing but what the same Doctrine, which they had, Taught
them. One only God and one only Jesus Christ made them reject all that they
rejected. Besides it is certain that the greatest part of those things which we
believe contrary to the true Faith, were then Taught and received and practiced
in the Latin Church more by force of Custom, then any public Authority, that
could impose any necessity on men's Consciences even according to the principles
of the Church of Rome at this day which leaves private men liberty enough to
reject them. And when they should come to be even publicly determined with all
the necessary formalities, which they have not been yet, there would always
remain to every private man a natural right to examine and reject them, since
the Authority of Men, how great soever it be, can never bind the Consciences of
the Faithful. We do not therefore Question but that God has always preserved
under that Ministry, a great number of persons who have made that Separation of
the good from the ill, and it is in those that the Church may subsist. But
besides those, how many simple people were there, whose own simplicity and
ignorance hid them from those Errors that then reigned in the Ministry. They
knew enough to believe in one only God the Father Son and Holy Ghost, their
Creator and Father, and in one only Jesus Christ their Redeemer, Born
Crucified, and raised again for them, and to practice without Superstition all
the Actions of Christian Piety that those Doctrines inspired into them; but
they did not know enough to believe the Sacrifice of the Mass,
Transubstantiation, the real presence, humane Satisfactions, the merit of good
Works, and a multitude of other things that did not enter into them. Their
knowledge was bounded with the Articles of the Creed, the Lords Prayer, and the
Ten Commandments, which they received with all the submission of their hearts,
and which they labored to practice the best that they could, and we ought not
to doubt that that knowledge alone, plain and disintangled from all Error,
which they had, furnished them with a sufficient direction for their Salvation
without their being bound to make a more express rejecting of those Doctrines
they did not understand. But supposing that they had a knowledge of them, I say
that we ought carefully to distinguish two sorts of Times, the one in which the
falseness of a Doctrine or Worship is not so palpable discovered, and open to
men's Eyes, that their should be only a voluntary blindness or an ill Prejudice
that should hinder us from acknowledging and understanding how that Doctrine,
and that Worship are contrary to the True Faith and Piety, and the other in
which that falseness and contrariety are so openly or publicly manifested,
that one cannot be ignorant of them or not see them without shutting
voluntarily ones Eyes. For in the second of those Times, every one is bound,
for the integrity of his Faith and Religion and the preservation of his Soul,
earnestly and publicly to reject those Errors, to avoid them with an aversion,
to withdraw from those Assemblies where they are either taught or practiced,
and not to take part, how little soever, or if any do they have no excuse for
their crime, and this is the Time wherein we are at this day. But as to the
former, it is enough not to be corrupted with them, without any absolute
necessity of testifying publicly that strong aversion. In the second Time,
they ought to look on those kinds of things as they are in Effect, because they
are fully discovered, and they may be seen in all that have them to be opposite
to the glory of God and Salvation of men. But that Obligation can never be so
strong in the first Time because there* one has neither the same light, nor the
same helps, nor the same easiness to own them to be such as they are: not only
mere natural Light dictates this Distinction, but Jesus Christ himself has very
well established it in the Gospel, If I had not come, says he, and John* 15.
spoken unto them, they had not had Sin, but now they have no Cloak for their
Sin, which evidently establishes those two seasons, I spoke of, the one wherein
the Manifestation of good and evil is not yet so thoroughly made, that one can
acknowledge them in their greatest Latitude, and the other wherein it is so
that one cannot without a crime know it confusedly. But I say that before the
Reformation they were in that first Time in regard of that which we call the
Errors and Superstitions of the Church of Rome, they were neither so well
Examined, nor so clearly discovered, as they have been since, the Faithful then
could not openly believe and practice them, for that could not be done
according to us in any Time without destroying the true Faith and Piety, but
they could look upon them with a greater indifference, bear them with far less
Pain, nor cease for all that from frequenting their Assemblies, from holding
their peace, and contenting themselves with keeping their own Righteousness.

See here after what manner we believe that the Essence of the Church was
preserved before the Reformation. How corrupted soever the Ministry was, the
Foundation of Christianity remained there, and God had yet his remnant there
according to the Election of Grace, that is to say his Truly Faithful. It was
those alone in all that great mixed body, who were the Church, for they only
were in Communion with God and his Son, they alone enjoyed the benefits of the
Gospel Covenant; to them only, how small a number soever they were pertained
all the Rights and advantages of the Church of the External Society, of
Assemblies, of the Ministry, of the Holy Scriptures, of the Sacraments,
Government and Discipline according to the inviolable Maxim of Saint Paul, All
things are yours, whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the World, or Life or
Death, or things present or things to come, all are yours, and ye are Christ's
and Christ is Gods. All the rest then which were without in that mixed Body
which they Call the Latin Church and which had any Relation to that Religion,
was not of the Essence of the Church, but its State, the mixture of Errors and
Abuses with the sound Doctrine, the Corruptions of Worship, the Vices of the
Ministry, the Superstitious Ceremonies, the form of Government, the Religious
as they speak, that is to say, the diverse Orders of Monks, the different
degrees of the Hierarchy, Feasts, Processions, Fasts; and in a Word all that
which has been noted in the Objection, and in which that Church was then
different from the Protestant, All that I say belonged to the condition of the
Church then, and could by consequence be changed without making either the one
or the other a new Church. That the Faithful found themselves insensibly
overpowred by almost an infinite number of the Worldly who mingled themselves
with them, as Tares with the Wheat, That those worldly made themselves Masters
of the Pulpits, the Ministry, the Councils, that they brought in Errors,
Superstitions, and Abuses, that they changed the form of the Government of the
Church, and that of the Public Worship, all that does not respect the Essence
of the Church, which consists only in the True Faith, but its Condition, so
that when our Fathers Reformed those things, we may well say they Changed the
State of the Church in their days, but not that they changed the Church, nor
that they made a new one, and their Church will not cease notwithstanding that
Change to be joined by a true Succession of Times and Persons to that which was
before. A Town full of Strangers who make themselves more powerful there, left
desolate by those popular diseases which those Strangers brought thither, and
filled with those disorders which they caused does not cease to be the same
Town by a True Succession of Times and Persons, when those Strangers should
quit it, and its good Citizens be established in their Just and Lawful State,
as heretofore Rome sacked by the Goths, did not cease to be the same Rome, when
it was freed from them, and a River swelling with the Waters of the
neighboring Brooks, that make it overflow the Fields and break over its Banks,
is yet the same River when those Waters go back, and retire into their Ordinary
Channel.

CHAP. III.
That the Ministry Exercised in the Communion of the Protestants is Lawful, and
that the Call of their Ministers is so also.

WE come now to Justify the Right that we have to the Gospel Ministry, and to
defend our Call not only against the Ordinary Objections of those of the Church
of Rome; but also against the Accusations of the Author of the Prejudices in
Particular. For that Author who thinks it meritorious to go beyond others
especially in his Passions, is not contented merely to say, that we are Pastors
without Mission and Ministers without a Call, but by a heat of Zeal obstinately
adhering to him, he call us Thieves and Robbers, Tyrants, Rebels, false
Pastors, and Sacrilegious Usurpers of the Authority of Jesus Christ.
Nevertheless, as those injuries are nothing else but the Effect of his ill
humor, it will be no hard matter to show him, that all the Conditions that we
can rationally require to make a Ministry Just and Lawful, are to be found in
that of the Protestant Ministers, and that Thanks be to God they can reproach
them with nothing on that occasion. This is that which I design to show in this
Chapter, and to this Effect I shall first propound some Observations which I
Judge necessary for the unfolding of that Question.

I say then in the First place, That we do not here dispute about the Call that
our Fathers had for a Reformation, but only of that which they had, and which
we have after them for the Ordinary Ministry of the Gospel. For we ought to
take great heed least we confound as the Author of the Prejudices has done,
those two sorts of Calls that we acknowledge our Fathers to have had, and which
the Church of Rome disputes with them. For, That which they had to Reform
themselves, that is to say, to reject that which we call their Errors and
Superstitions that were brought into the Latin Church, and that which regards
the Ordinary Preaching of the word of the Gospel, the Administration of the
Sacraments, and the Exercise of Discipline. These two Calls are wholly
different. The one, which is that of the Reformation, is of Right common to all
Christians, there being no one who is not Lawfully called by his Baptism, to
destroy Errors contrary to the Nature or Purity of the true Faith, and to
exhort his Neighbors to do the same thing, for the Interest of his own
Salvation, and that of the Glory of God, as I have already shown in my Second
part. From whence it follows, That in that Respect they can have nothing to say
against our Fathers, and much less Chap. 4.
against those whom they call the first Reformers, since being as they were, in
public Offices, they had more of a Call for that then was necessary. The
other, which is that which respects the Ordinary Preaching of the Word of the
Gospel, the Administration of the Sacraments, and the exercise of Discipline,
is not common to every private man. On the contrary, no one ought on his own
head to thrust himself in without being otherwise Lawfully called. The Reason
of this Difference is, that the Reformation consisted in the mere Acts of Faith
and Charity, which are those Particular Acts that none can dispense with,
because no one can say that it does not belong to him to be of the true Faith,
or to be Charitable; but the Preaching of the Word, the Administration of the
Sacraments, and the exercise of Discipline, are those Acts of Authority that no
one can do in his own name, but in the name of another, that is to say, in the
Name of God, or in the Name of the whole Church, so that he ought to be
Lawfully Authorized to do them. It is then this latter Call that we are
concerned about in this Question.

2. In the Second place we must note, that we do not here any more dispute
about that Extraordinary Ministry which Jesus Christ himself immediately
Communicated to his Apostles to give men the first Call to the Christian Faith,
and to Assemble them in a Society. For our Fathers did not make any new
Convocation, nor any new Society, nor any new Church, as I have shown in the
Two Foregoing Chapters. They did not preach a new Testament or a new Covenant
differing from that which the Apostles preached. They were not qualified either
as new Apostles, or new Prophets, or new Evangelists; they did not bring with
them any new Revelation to the World, but they Purged and Reformed the
Corrupted State of Religion and the Church, by the same Scriptures that the
Apostles left us; they labored to Reduce things into their Ancient and Natural
State, and for the rest, they Preached the same Gopel and Administered the same
Sacraments that the Apostles left, and which had always Subsisted,
notwithstanding the Corruptions wherein they were plunged. In a word, they did
not set up any thing new, for which they can with any Color of Reason require
an immediate Mission either from God, or Jesus Christ his Son. We speak
therefore here only of the same Ordinary Ministry that the Apostles established
in the Christian Church, as they called or formed it, and which was there
appointed, to help its Preservation and Purgation. This is that Ministry which
we do not pretend to have a new, but that Ancient and perpetual one which Jesus
Christ and his Apostles left to the Church when they were Converted to the
Christian Faith.

3. In the Third Place, we must know that to Judge well of the Validity or
Invalidity of a Ministry, we ought to Consider it in three Respects: 1. In
Respect of the things themselves that are taught and practiced in it. 2. In
Respect of the Body, that is to say, the Society where it is exercised. 3. In
Respect of the Persons who exercise it in that Society. In Regard of the first,
the Ministry of the Jews, the Pagans, the Mahometans is Wicked and
Sacrilegious, because the things that are taught there are Impious. In the
Second, the Ministry of the Donatists and Luciferians, which was good and
Christian in it self, because there was taught and practiced nothing ill in it,
yet it was notwithstanding Vicious, because it was exercised in Schismatical
Societies, which had no right to have a Ministry apart, and to live in aState
of Separation. For the Third, the Ministry of an Intruder, an Usurper, a
Simoniack, howsoever good it be in it self, however it be set up in a Lawful
Society, that is to say, in the true Church, yet it is notwithstanding bad and
Unlawful, through the Defect of his Personal Call.

4. In the Fourth Place, we must here before we go any further, make Use of the
same Distinction, upon this Subject of the Ministry, that we have used in the
Preceding Chapter upon the Subject of the Church, I mean, that we ought to
place a great Difference between that which makes the Essence of the Ministry,
and that which belongs only to its State. For that which is Essential to the
Gospel Ministry cannot be changed so as to make another Ministry, and by
Consequence a False, Sacrilegious, and Criminal Ministry, since there can be
but one alone, good and Lawful; and on the contrary, the Essence of a Ministry
remaining the same and Entire, it must needs be said that it is the same
Ministry, though as to what Respects its State it should have received a
Change. The Essence of the Gospel Ministry Consists in the teaching the saving
Christian Truth, without excluding any Article that is necessary to the
Subsistence of the True Faith, Piety and Holiness, in dispensing the true
Sacraments that Jesus Christ has Established in his Church, and in guiding the
People in such a manner as helps to preserve the Religious Society, or which at
least does not absolutely destroy it. Its State is either good or bad; the Good
State is then when there is such a Purity in the Ministry that only Christian
Truths are taught there, and wherein those are taught in all their Force and
Natural Beauty with all the Diligence and Care that men assisted by the Grace
of God are capable of, and when the Sacraments also are purely administered
according to the Institution of Jesus Christ without Addition or Diminution,
and with all the Decency, Modesty, Simplicity, Gravity, Circumspection, that
those Mysteries of the Christian Religion require, so that God may be
Glorified, and his Kingdom more and more established in the Hearts of men, and
when further the Church is Governed by Just, Wise, Prudent, Charitable and well
Executed Laws, after a way that does not destroy but Edify. In Fine, that Good
Consists also in this, that those who Exercise this Ministry receive it by Just
and Lawful ways, that are proper to draw the Blessing of God upon them and
their Labors, and that they behave themselves worthily, quitting themselves
with a good Conscience in the Charge Committed to them. The bad Estate of the
Church, on the contrary, is then when that Ministry is found to be mingled with
Errors and Superstitions, when the Sacraments are Altered and Corrupted, when
the Government of it is worldly, or unjust, or Tyrannical, or Confused, when
those who fill up that Ministry, take it by ill, scandalous, and unlawful
ways, and behave themselves unworthily in it. The Good State of the Ministry
is a thing that is the most to be wished for in the World, and most proper to
preserve the Faith, Piety, Holiness, Peace, Comfort, and Public Rejoicing in
the Church; and the bad State is the most to be feared of any thing in the
World, and that which we ought to Labor the most to Remedy. Nevertheless we
are not to think that the Ministry may not yet Subsist in that bad State, as
our Bodily Life does not cease to Subsist in the midst of Languishing, and
heaps of Diseases.

5. In the fifth place, we ought Carefully to distinguish the Ministry
considered precisely in it self, and the same Ministry in as much as it is
Occupied or possessed by persons who are Invested in it, or if you will, we
ought to distinguish the Ministry and the Ministers, for there is a very great
Difference between the one and the other; as in a civil Society there is a
great difference between the Magistracy and the Magistrate; The Magistracy is
an Office, the Magistrate is a Person who possesses that Office, the Office
remains always, the persons are changed by Death or otherwise. This
Distinction is not hard to be conceived, but it is nevertheless of very great
Use in the Matter we are upon. For the Ministry Considered in its self is of an
immediately Divine Establishment; Whereas the Persons that are raised to it, are
raised thither by means of men, and if their Call be divine, as it is in
Effect, it is no otherwise then mediately so; for they are men who call them to
it, although they do it by the Authority of God. It is then certain that when
God has established the Ministry, he has not only established all that which it
ought to have Essential to it, but he has also Established it, de Jure and de
facto in a good State; I mean, he has not only laid an Obligation upon
Ministers faithfully to discharge all the Functions of so great a Charge, but
that he has even chosen Persons who have most faithfully acquitted themselves
of it. But it has not been always the same in those who have been called by
men, for as humane Judgments are so short-sighted, that they cannot pierce
through the Hearts of men, and as they are mixed with a great many
Imperfections, the Ministry may be Committed to persons who are Insensibly
Corrupted, either through their Ignorance or through other Inclinations yet
more Criminal then Ignorance, and it is from that humane Intervention that the
bad State of the Ministry proceeds. If God would always send them immediately,
as he did his Apostles and Evangelists, there would be some ground to believe,
that it would never be remote from its first Institution; but since they are
men that send them, no one can deny, that it cannot be Corrupted through that
Channel, for God has never promised any thing to the contrary in that matter.
God has not promised that he would accompany those Elections and Humane Calls
with an Infallible Spirit, that should give them all a happy Success; and
besides that the experience of all the Ages past Contradicts it, Jesus Christ
himself seems purposely to have forbidden such a rash Imagination; for although
he knew the Heart, and the thoughts of it, yet nevertheless he would have a
Judas added to the Number of his first Disciples, and he permitted that a
Nicholas, who was afterward the Head of the Sect of the Nicolaitans, should
have a part in the Election that the Church made of her first Deacons, to give
us to understand that it was not his intention actually to hinder the Ministry
from ever falling into very bad hands.

6. We must note in the sixth place, That although the Church and the Ordinary
Ministry which we speak of, are two things naturally joined together, -- yet it
is not the Church that depend*s upon the Ministry, but it is the Ministry on
the contrary that depends upon the Church. For the Ordinary Pastors were not
Established but when the Church was first formed, and when care was taken for
its Preservation and Propagation, so that naturally it preceded Pastors. The
Church was produced at first by the Extraordinary Ministry of the Apostles; the
first thing which they propounded was not to make Ordinary Pastors, but true
Beleivers. They called men to the Knowledge of Jesus Christ, they assembled
them together, they united them in a Society, before they provided for the
upholding of that Society in setting up an Ordinary Ministry in the midst of
it. They first took care for the birth of the New Creature, and after they
procured it Breasts to nourish it: Therefore it is that the Ordinary Ministers
were called Pastors, in reference to Shepherds who fed and led their Flocks.
They were called Presbyters or Elders, with reference to the Senators among the
Jews; they were called Bishops, that is Overseers, or Super-Intendants, by an
Allusion to the Super-Intendants of Victuals among the Greeks, who were called
Bishops also. But the Shepherds suppose their Flocks, the Chosen Senators
among the people suppose the people, the Super-Intendants or Overseers suppose
those over whom they gave a right of Super-Intendance and Inspection. The
Ordinary Ministers therefore suppose the Church, and not the Church the
Ministers; she is not, because they are, but they on the contrary because she
is; she does not own her being to them, but they theirs to her. This Truth will
yet appear more clearly, if we set before their eyes, what I have already said
in the first Chapter of this Fourth Part, That the Ordinary Ministry is not
absolutely necessary to the being of a Church, but that it is only necessary to
its well being, and to hinder it from falling into Ruin. For when the Faithful
should have no Pastors, they would yet be joined together in a Society, since
it is Grace and Faith that unite*s them, and not the Ministry. And as in the
Civil Society it is the Nature and not the Magistrate that unites men, and that
after men are united in a Society, the Magistrate is made, by reason of Order,
and by the necessity of the preservation of that Society; so that it is the
Society that makes the Magistrate, and not the Magistrate the Society: So here
it is the same; The Faith and Grace Assemble men into a Religous Society, they
are those things that make the Church, and afterward the Ministry arises by
reason of Order, and to help the preservation of the Church, and so naturally
it is the Church that produces the Ordinary Ministry, and not the Ordinary
Ministry that produces the Church. The Church was the Fruit of the
Extraordinary Ministry of the Apostles and Evangelists, that Ministry produced
it at first, and not only produced it, but it has always since made use of that
means or that source for its subsistence; and we may truly say that it yet
produces it, and that it will produce it unto the end of the World, for it is
the Faith that makes and always will make the Church; and it is the Ministry
of the Apostles which makes and will always make the Faith. It is their voice
that calls Christians together at this day, it is their word that Assembles
them, and their Teaching that unites them. It is certain that the Ministry of
the Apostles was singular, that is to say, only tied to their persons without
succession, without Communication, without Propagation; but it ought not to be
thought that it was also as Transitory a Ministry as that of other men, for it
is perpetual in the Church; Death has not shut their Mouths as it has the
others, they speak, they instruct, they incessantly spread abroad the Faith,
Piety and Holiness among the Souls of Christians; and there is not another
Fountain from whence those Virtues can descend, but from them. If any demand of
us what is that perpetual Voice that we ascribe to them? We answer, That it is
the Doctrine of the New Testament, where they have set down all the Efficacy of
their Ministry, and the whole virtue of that Word which gave a Being to the
Church. There it is that their True Chair and their Apostolic See is, there is
the Center of the Christian Unity, there it is that they incessantly call men,
and join them into a Society; every other Voice besides theirs is false and
supposititious, it is from theirs alone that the Church proceeds; and because
to Assemble with those is to Assemble with Jesus Christ, we may very well say,
that not to Assemble with them, is to disperse instead of Assembling. But as to
the Ordinary Ministry of the Pastors, we cannot say the same thing, it is not
their Voice, as it is distinct from that of the Apostles, that begets the
Faith, that Assembles Christians into a Society, or that produces the Church;
they are no more but mere dispensers of the Word of the Apostles, or if you
will, External Instruments to make us the better understand their Voice. They
are not, not only, the Ordinary Pastors who gave a Being to the Church at
first, but yet further at this day to speak properly, it is not their word that
produces the Faith in those who had it not before; for that which confirms it
in those who have it, and that which produces it in those who have it not, is
the word of the Apostles themselves, to whom we must go for conduct, if we
would have good success. They are then to speak properly no more than those
External Guides that God has Established in the Church to lead men to the
Scripture, and even such Guides as cannot hinder us from going thither of our
selves if we will, and it is the Scripture, the voice of the Apostles, or to
say better the voice of Jesus Christ, that speaks by the Apostles, that does
all. There is therefore a great difference between those two sorts of
Ministers, the one preceded the Church, the other follows it; the one is
immediately Communicated by God, and the other is Communicated by means of men;
the one has an Independent and Sovereign Authority and Infallibility on its
side, and the other is exposed to Vices, Disorders, Errors and humane
weaknesses; Inferior, and depending on the Church; the one is every way Divine,
and the other is partly Divine and partly Humane.

7. From that sixth Observation there arises another not less important, and
that which I have already touched upon in diverse places of this Treatise, that
is, That the Ordinary Ministry is a Right that belongs to the True Church, and
of which it can never be spoiled. The Reason of this Truth is taken from the
very Nature of the Church. For the Church being a Society that God has called
together by the Ministry of his Apostles, and which he yet every day calls
together and upholds by the word of his Scriptures, and the use of his
Sacraments, we must necessarily say that in forming it, he has given it in that
very thing that he has formed it a sufficient, full and entire Right to make
use of all the means that may help its preservation and upholding, amongst
which that of the Ministry is without doubt most considerable. That same
Providence that gives men a Natural Life, and appoints them to preserve their
life by that Food it furnishes them with, gives them by that very thing a right
to employ persons to gather that food together and to prepare it, to the end
they may make use of it according to what it is designed for; and it would be a
great Extravagance to demand of a man what Right he has to prepare himself to
eat and drink, for he could have nothing more to say but that the Nature that
gave him life, gave him at the same time all the Right that was necessary, to
provide for the upholding of that life. And, to make use of another Example,
The same Nature, or to say better the same Providence, that Assembles men
together in a Civil Society, and ordains them in their so uniting together to
uphold that Society by a rational Order, does it not give them at the very same
time and by the same Right that Assembles them, a Right to have Magistrates, to
Govern them by, and to make the Laws of that Society to be Executed, to have
Judges to decide their differences, to have Remedies for the Healing of
Diseases, and Tradesmen for the public good: And would it not be an absurdity
to demand of a people what Right they had to have Magistrates, Judges,
Physicians, Tradesmen, Teachers of Commerce, Lawyers, since they could not have
a fuller and juster Right than that which is founded upon the reason of Order
and the Society it self? We need but to apply these Examples to the Subject we
are upon. The Church is a Body to which God has given a Spiritual Life, and he
has ordained it to be preserved and upheld in the use of Mystical Aliments, of
which he himself has made a public Magazine in his Holy Scriptures; it is
therefore evident that he has given it by that very thing, a Right to have
Ministers or Pastors who should prepare those Sacred Aliments, and season them
for its Spiritual Nourishment. The Church is a Religious Society composed of
diverse persons that God himself has Assembled to live together, not in
Confusion but in Order, he would have that Society subsist, he has appointed it
to uphold and preserve it self, he himself has suggested the means; he has then
without doubt by that very thing given a Right to have Guides to Govern her,
Pastors to lead them forth into the Heavenly Pastures of the Scriptures,
Ministers to dispense the Divine Sacraments that he has instituted for her,
Watchmen and Guides to be careful of her, and to go before her. In a word he
who has given Faith, Piety and Christian Holiness to the Church, has at the
same time indispensably obliged them to these four Duties; one is, to persevere
in the Exercise of those Virtues unto the end. The other is, to defend
themselves against the Assaults and wiles of the Enemy of their Salvation; the
third is, to increase and strengthen themselves more and more; and lastly, to
propagate them as much as in them lies from us down to our Children, and even
amongst Strangers, that is to say, among those who are not as yet in that
Relation. It follows therefore necessarily that that has given the Church a
sufficient full and entire Right for the Ministry, since the Ministry is but a
fit and lawful means for all that.

It could not have a Right more lawful than that which is founded upon those
indispensable Duties, for in that case, it is not only a Right that makes the
thing just, but it is an obligation that imposes a necessity of it; as in the
State, the Right that every one has to learn the Will of the Prince is
indisputable, because it is built upon the obligation that lies upon every one
to conform himself to it. It is clear then that there could not have been a
Right to have Ministers more lawful than that of a Faithful People, a True
Church, since it is founded upon those four Duties which I have noted, that are
indispensable, and that give not only a Right but an Obligation to have a
Ministry. But we ought here to take notice of the Fallacy that their
Missionaries are wont to make, and that the Author of the Prejudices who has
Adopted their Method would have us make with them. For see after what manner
they argue. Where there is no lawful Ministry, there is no True Church: But
among the Protestants there is no True Church. I set aside the Question,
Whether we have or whether we have not a lawful Ministry in the same sense that
he intends, I will only at present consider his way of Reasoning, that makes
the True Church depend upon a lawful Ministry. Admitting that to be a True
Church where the Ministry is, and denying that to be a True Church where the
Ministry is not. I say that this is a vain, deceitful and illusory way of
Reasoning; to which I oppose this other Argument: Where there is the True
Church, there is a Right to a Lawful Ministry; But the True Church is among the
Protestants; Therefore the Right to a Lawful Ministry is among the Protestants.
Of those two ways of arguing it is certain that this latter is the justest and
almost only just, right and natural. For the True Church naturally goes before
the Ministry; it does not depend upon the Ministry, but the Ministry on the
contrary depends upon it: as in the Civil Society, the Magistracy depends upon
the Society, and not the Society upon the Magistracy: In the Civil Society the
first thing that must be thought on, is, that Nature made men; afterward we
conceive that she Assembled and United them together; and lastly that from that
Union that could not subsist without Order, Mastistracy proceeded. It is the
same thing in a Religious Society; the first thing that Grace did, was to
produce Faith in the Hearts of men; after having made them believe, she United
them, and formed a mutual Communion between them; and because their Communion
ought not to be without Order and without Government, from thence the Ministry
arose. So that a Lawful Ministry is after the True Church, and depending upon
it. It is not a Lawful Ministry that makes it to be the True Church, for it is
so by the Truth of its Faith, and it would yet be so, when it actually had not
any Ministers; but it is the True Church that makes the Ministry to be Lawful,
since it is from the Truth of a Church, that the Justice of its Ministry
proceeds. The Argument therefore of the Author of the Prejudices involves the
Dispute in a ridiculous Circle, for when he would prove that we are not the
True Church because we have not a Lawful Ministry, we maintain on the contrary,
That we have a Lawful Ministry, because we are the True Church. And he cannot
say that we are the cause of the ridiculous Circle, because our way of
Reasoning follows the Order of Nature, and his does not follow it. I omit that
his first Proposition, which is, Where there is no Lawful Ministry there is no
True Church, is Equivocal. For either he understands by that Lawful Ministry,
Ministers actually Established, or else he means a Right to Establish them. If
the former, his Proposition is false, for the True Church may be without having
actually any Ministers, that is no ways impossible, as I have already shown.
And if he means the latter, his Proposition is not to his purpose, for it would
maintain that the Society of the Protestants has a full and entire Right to set
up Ministers for its Government, supposing that it had the True Faith, as it
may appear by what I have said, and as it will appear yet more clearly by the
following Observation.

8. I say then in the eighth place, That the Body of the Church, that is to
say, Properly and Chiefly the Society of the truly Faithful, not only has the
Right of the Ministry, but that it is also that Body that makes a Call Lawful
of persons to that Office. This Truth will be confirmed by what I have already
shown, without any further need of new Proofs. But as the Question concerning
the true Fountain whence that Call proceeds, is it self alone almost all the
difference that is between the Church of Rome, and us about this matter, and
that moreover it is extremely Important to the Subject we are upon, It is
necessary for us to examine it a little more carefully. They cannot then take
it ill that I insist a little more largely upon this Observation then I have
done upon the rest. To make it as clear as I can possibly, I propose to Treat
of three Questions; The first shall be, To know whether naturally a Call
belongs to the Pastors only, excluding the Laity, or whether it belongs to the
whole Body of the Church. The Second, Whether in case it belongs to the whole
Body of the Church, it can be said that the Church can of it self spoil it self
of its right, or whether it has lost it any way that it could be supposed to
have. And the Third, Whether the Body of the Church may confer Calls
immediately by it self, or whether the Church is always bound to confer them
by means of its Pastors?

As to the first of these Questions, All the Difficulty it can have, comes only
from the false Idea of a Call that is ordinarily formed in the Church of Rome.
For first, They make it a Sacrament properly so called, and they name it the
Sacrament of Orders. From whence the thought readily arises that the Body of
the People cannot confer a Sacrament. They Imagine next, That that Sacrament
impresses a certain Character, which they call an Indelible Character, and
which they conceive of as a Physical Quality, or an Absolute Accident, as they
speak in the School, and as an Inherent Accident in the Soul of the Minister.
They persuade themselves further that Jesus Christ and his Apostles left that
Sacrament and that Physical Quality in trust in the hands of the Bishops to be
communicated by none but them. With that they mix a great many Ceremonies, and
External Marks, as Unction, and the Shaving which they call the Priesty Crown.
They add to all that, Priestly Habits, the Stole, the Alb, the Cope, the Cross,
the Miter, the Rochet, Hood, Pall, etc. They make Mysterious Allegories upon
these Ceremonies and those Ornaments, they distinguish those Dignities into
diverse Orders, they frame a Hierarchy set out by the Pompous Titles of Prelates,
Primates, Archbishops, Patriarchs, Cardinals, etc. They write great Books upon
all these things, and the half of their Divinity is taken up in explaining
their Rights, Authority, Privileges, Immunities, Apostolic Grants,
Exceptions, etc. What ground is here that all good men should not believe that
the Churchmen, are at least men of another kind from all others, and that they
are no ways made of the same blood, of which Saint Paul says, that God has
made all Mankind? Notwithstanding when we examine well that Call, what it is,
to form a just Idea of it, we shall find that properly it is but a Relation
that results from the Agreement of three Wills, to wit, that of God, that of
the Church, and that of the Person called; for the consent of these three make
all the Essence of that Call, and the other things that may be added to it, as
Examination, Election, Ordination, are Preambulatory Conditions, or Signs, and
External Ceremonies, which more respect the Manner of that Call then the Call
it self. In Effect, in a Call we can remark but three Interests that can engage
one to it, that of God, since he that is called ought to speak and Act in his
Name, that of the Church, that ought to be Instructed, Served, and Governed;
and that of him who is called, who ought to fulfill the Functions of his Charge,
and to Consecrate his Watchful Diligence, Cares, and Labors to it; from whence
it follows, That that Call is sufficiently formed, when God, the Church, and
the Person called, come to agree, and we cannot rationally conceive any thing
else in it. But as to the Will of the called, it does not fall into the
Question, for we all acknowledge that no one can be forced to receive the
Office of the Ministry; and therefore Saint Paul describing the qualities of a
Bishop, begins with the desire to be a Bishop; If any man, says he, Desire the
Office of a Bishop, he Desires a good Work. We are only then concerned about
the two others, to wit, that of God, and that of the Church. As for the Will of
the Church, they cannot methinks deny, that naturally it should not be that of
the whole Body, and not merely that of the Pastors that ought to be required to
it. For they are not the Pastors alone who have an Interest in the call of a
man, it is generally the whole Body of the Church, it is that which ought to be
as I have said, Instructed, Served and Governed, it is that that ought to
receive the Sacraments from his hands who is called, and that ought to be
Comforted and Edified by his Word. Its consent therefore is necessary there,
and it is of the Essence of the Call that it should intervene. As to the Will
of God, both the one and the other of us agree, that it is not any more not
made known to men immediately and expressly, for howsoever we may without doubt
referr it to a particular Dispensation of his Providence, the qualities, or as
they speak, the Extraordinary Talents that some persons have for the exercise
of that Office, and especially when those Talents are joined with internal
Dispositions, secret motions or desires to employ them in God's Work, and the
advancement of his Glory, we affirm that that cannot be enough absolutely to
conclude a Divine Revelation. God has therefore on this occasion put his Will
as a Trust into men's hands, and that very thing, that he has Instituted the
Ordinary Ministry in the Church, contains a Promise to Authorize those lawful
Calls that they shall give to persons for that Office. We are agreed upon that
Point, it concerns us only to know who are left in Trust with that Will, the
Pastors alone, or the whole Body of the Church. Those of the Roman Communion
pretend the former, and we pretend the latter.

To decide this difference, I say, That we cannot rationally own any other to
be left in trust with the Will of God in that Respect, then the Body to which
he himself has naturally given the Right of the Ministry, for whose sake he has
Instituted the Ministry, and which he has even bound by an indispensable Duty
to have Ministers. That Body I say, which has as great an Interest in it as
that of the Preservation of its Faith, Piety, and Justice, and whose consent
ought moreover necessarily to Intervene. But that Body is that of the whole
Church, and not of the Pastors only, it is to that, as I have shown before,
that the Ministry belongs, it is for the sake of that that God has established
it, it is Indispensably bound to have Ministers, it has the greatest Interests
in it, and it ought even naturally to concur. It is that therefore that God has
left his Will in Trust with, as to those Calls, and by Consequence it is from
that that those Calls ought to proceed, and it would be Absurd to make them
flow from any thing else.

We have already frequently said, That the Body of the Visible Church, as it is
upon Earth, is always mingled with the good and bad, with the true Believers,
and the Wicked, and that when these two Orders of persons are set in
Opposition, they are the truly Faithful only, that are properly the Church of
Jesus Christ; That Church I say, which he has appointed to Assemble in his
Name, to which he has promised his Presence, to which he has given the Keys of
his Kingdom, the Power of Binding and Loosing, and in a word, to which he has
given the Ministry and all the Rights that follow upon it, or go before it; so
that to be of that Church, it is necessary to be a True Believer, and no Body
without True Faith can have that Advantage, the Profane and the Wicked, as
just, being all naturally Excluded. But it is Evident that the Pastors may not
be of the Number of those true Believers; Experience justifies that the
greatest Number may forsake the true Faith; and there is no promise of God that
that shall never happen in Respect of all of them. It would then be a great
Rashness to make those Pastors alone Depositaries of that Will of God whereof
we speak, and which is essentially necessary to the Call of Persons, since not
having any Revelation that promises that he will always preserve the Faithful
in their Body, none can be assured that since the first rise of the Gospel till
this present time they have always been, none can be assured that it never
happened or that it will never fall out, that that Order may not be wholly filled
up with, and possessed by the worldly and Hypocrites. It would be to deposite
the Will of God in a Body that might sometimes not be the true Church, and not
have the least part in its Interests, it would be to derive that Call from a
Source that might be wholly cut off from the Church. It would be to make the
Validity of the Sacraments, that are a chief means of the Preservation and
Propagation of the City of God to depend on the Inhabitants of Babylon, which
Saint Augustine says, is always mixed with the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, which
would be manifestly contrary to the Order of Gods Wisdom. It is therefore
without doubt more conformable to that Wisdom, to make his Will known, and by
Consequence the Lawful Call of a man, throughout the whole Body of the Church,
since that howsoever mixed the wicked may be there with the righteous in the
same External Profession we are notwithstanding assured by the promises of God
that there will be always some true Believers in that External Profession,
even until the end of the World, and by Consequence there will be always the
True Church, that very same that Jesus Christ has Assembled, and to which he
has properly given as well the Right of the Ministry as all the other Rights of
a Religious Society. It is far more just, that since God has not more
immediately by himself declared his Will, upon the occasion of those personal
Calls, that we should regard that Body which we are certain of that God loves
and looks upon as his Family, and as the Spouse of Jesus Christ his Son, that
we look upon it, I say, as his Interpreter in that Regard, then to go to seek
for his Voice, and as I may so say his Oracle, in a Body whereof we cannot have
the same certainty that it cannot be, or that it has not even sometimes been
wholly made up of the unjust and worldly.

They will say it may be, that it would not be better if those Calls should
proceed from the Body of the Church, although they might be certain that God
always preserves the truly Faithful there; since the wicked most frequently
prevail there over the Good, that they would make themselves Masters of those
Calls, and that they could neither more nor less Communicate them to the wicked
and the worldly, then if there were no Believers in the Church. I Answer, That
it is true, that whether those Calls come from the Pastors only, or whether
they proceed from the Body of the Church, we could have no certainty that they
should be well made as to the choice of Persons, for God has not promised his
Faithful Ones even when they shall be a greater number then the worldly, that
they shall always make good Elections, they may without doubt be deceived in
that respect, although there may be a greater Likely hood that those Elections
should be more just, when they should be made by a Body in which one is assured
that there are always True Believers, then when they should be made by a more
particular Body whereof one cannot have the same Assurance. But not to stay
upon that, I say that my Argument Respects not the goodness of that Election,
but the Validity of the Call in it self whether it be conferred upon a good
man, or whether on a wicked, for the Call of a wicked man ought not to cease to
be good, although the Choice should be illmade. My meaning then is, that if the
Call proceed only from the Body of the Pastors, without the consent of the
whole Church Intervening, after whatsoever manner, it may be so brought about,
as that it may proceed from a Body of impious and Profane Persons, who should
all be really Separated from the Church, and who would have no part in its
Interests; so that it would be to make the Divine Authority that ought to
accompany that Call, and the Validity of the Actions of the Ministry, to depend
on a Body of wicked men, and to make the Enemies of God the fit Depositaries of
his Will, which to me seems no ways conformable to the Order of his Wisdom,
especially when there is another Body where we know that he always preserves
and upholds his Faithful.

But they will say yet further, If your arguing took place, it would take away
from the Pastors all the Functions of their Ministry to give them to the Body
of the Church. The Pastors would have no more any Right, either to Preach, or
to Administer the Sacraments, or to Govern the Church, or to censure, or to
suspend, or to Excommunicate. For it we say that that Call would not depend
upon them, under a pretense that we have not any Certainty that God preserves
and will always Preserve True Believers amongst them, we must say the same,
that the Government of the Church, Preaching, the Administration of the
Sacraments, and the Exercise of Discipline could not be committed to them,
since we have not any more Certainty for those things, that there should be any
truly Faithful among them, then we have upon the matter of that Call; so that
all must be overthrown if that Reason take place. I answer, That the Donatists
heretofore fell into that Extravagance to imagine that the Preaching of the
Gospel, the Sacraments, and the other Actual Functions of the Ministry ought to
be performed by Holy Pastors, to become good and valid, and not by the Wicked;
so that being moreover Prejudiced with this thought, that the whole Body of
those Pastors who retained Communion with Caecilianus were fallen off from
their Righteousness and become Wicked, they held that there was not any more a
Church in the World besides the Party of Donatus. But Saint Augustine showed
them that their Principle was false; and it is worthy the noting by what Way he
made them see the falsness of their Opinion, for it was neither by telling them
that the Body of the Pastors when they all became Wicked failed not to be the
Church of Jesus Christ, nor in holding that Jesus Christ having at first put
the Ministry into the hands of the Pastors, it must necessarily follow by that
very thing, that he was bound to preserve their Righteousness, or at least
always to preserve the truly just and Faithful Persons in their Body, and
those who should make the Sacraments to all the rest. He says nothing of all
that, but he had recourse to the Body of the Church, and he says, that the
Sacraments are not the Pastors, nor the Power of the Keys, nor that of Binding
and Loosing, nor any of the Functions of their Ministry, but that all that
belongs to the Church; that it is that that Baptises when the Pastors Baptize,
that it is that that binds when the Pastors bind, and that looses when they
loose; and that it is to her that Jesus Christ has given all those Rights. But
what will you say he understands by that Church? The Truly Faithful, whatsoever
they be, the Wheat of God, the good Seed, the good Fish, as they are called; in
a word, the Just, the Children of God, in Exclusion of the Worldly. It is from
that Fountain that the Validity of the Sacraments is drawn, and the other
Functions of the Ministry, and not from the Body of the Pastors. I say then,
the same thing. All that which the Body of the Pastors does, it does in the
name of the Church, and by Consequence in the name of Jesus Christ, for the
Name of Jesus Christ is in the Name of the Church, it is the Church that
preaches by them, that administer the Sacraments by them, that governs by them,
that censures, that suspends, that absolves, that Excommunicates by them, they
are only its Ministers and the Dispensers of its rights. Whether then they be
wicked, whether they be Profane or Impious, that hurts their own Persons, but
it does not hurt their Functions, because their Functions are not their own,
but the Churches.

Furthermore, that Hypothesis of St. Augustine concerning the source from
whence the Validity of the Action of the Ministry proceeds, furnishes us with
another Argument which to me seems Demonstrative not only from the Authority of
that Father, but from the Nature of the thing it self. For it is evident that
we ought to refer that Call to the same Body to which God originally gave the
Power of the Keys, and which is exercised by the Pastors, so that the Pastors
are no more but the Dispensers of its Rights. As that which makes Baptism, the
Communion, the Government, and the Acts of Discipline good and valid, is not
because they proceed from the Pastors only, but because they proceed from the
Body of the Church. So the same must be said, that, that which makes a Call
good, valid, and lawful, is, because it comes from the Church, that is to say,
from the truly Faithful. But it is certain that it is properly the Body of the
Faithful that has received Originally the Power of the Keys, that is exercised
by the Pastors, and upon which the Validity of all the Actions of the Ministry
depends, as being done in the Name and Authority of the whole Body, and by
Consequence it is to that we must refer that Call.

If I had a mind here to set down all the passages of St. Augustine when he
establishes this Truth, I should engage my self in an excessive Tediousness. It
shall suffice to set down some few that may clearly let us see what his
Doctrine was upon this matter. Judas says he, Represented the Body of the
wicked, and Saint Peter represented the Body of the good, the Body of the
Church; I say The Body of the Aug. Tract 5^ in Joan.
Church, but the Church which consists in the good: For if St. Peter had not
represented that Church, our Lord would not have said to him, I give unto thee
the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and whatsoever thou shall bind on Earth
shall be bound in Heaven, and whatsoever thou shall loose on Earth shall be
loosed in Heaven. For if that had been said but to St. Peter only, the Church
does not do it. But if it be done in the Church, to wit, that the things that
are bound on Earth are bound in Heaven, and that those which are loosed on
Earth are loosed in Heaven, in as much as he which the Church Excommunicates,
is Excommunicated in Heaven, and he to whom the Church is Reconciled is
Reconciled in Heaven, since that I say is done in the Church, it follows that
St. Peter receiving the Keys represented the Holy Chvrch. And as the good who
are in the Church, were represented in the person of St Peter, so the wicked
who are in the Church, were represented in the person of Judas, and it is to
those that Jesus Christ said, Me you have not always. And further, after having
described the Church of the Truly Faithful, in these Terms, God has sent his
Tract 124. in Joann.
Son into the World to the end that those who believe in him should by the
laver of Regeneration be loosed from their Sins, as well Original as Actual,
and that being delivered from Everlasting Damnation they should live in Faith,
Hope and Charity, as Pilgrims in this World, amidst Temptations, and Labors,
and amidst the Corporal and Spiritual Consolations of God, walking in Christ
Jesus, who is their way. But because in that very way in which they walk they
are not free from those Sins that arise through the Infirmity of this Life, he
has appointed them the saving Remedy of Alms, to help their prayers which he
has commanded them to make; Forgive our Trespasses, as we forgive them that
Trespass against us. After, I say, having described the Church of the Just in
that manner, he adds, This is that which makes the Church blessed in Hope in
this miserable life, and it is this Church that Saint Peter represented by the
primacy of his Apostleship, Nam Ecclesiae gerebat figurata generalitate
personam. If you look upon Saint Peter in himself, he was but a man by Nature,
a Christian by Grace, and the first of the Apostles by the super-abundance of
Grace. But when Jesus Christ said to him, I will give unto thee the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, and whatsoever thou shall bind on Earth shall be bound in
Heaven, and whatsoever thou shall loose on Earth shall be loosed in Heaven, he
Represented the whole Body of the Church, that Church I say which in that Age
was moved with diverse Temptations, as by so many Storms, Torrents and Tempests,
and which yet does not fall into ruin, because it is founded upon the Rock,
from which Saint Peter took his Name. I say that Saint Peter took his Name from
it, for as the Name of Christian is derived from Christ, and not that of Christ
from that of Christian, so that of Saint Peter, is derived from the Rock, and
not that of the Rock from the Name of St. Peter, and therefore Jesus Christ
said to him, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church. For
Saint Peter having made this Confession, Thou art the Christ the Son of the
living God, our Lord told him that he would build his Church upon that Rock
which he had confessed. For that Rock was Jesus Christ, upon which Saint Peter
himself is built, according to what is said, No man can lay other Foundation
then what is already laid, which is Jesus Christ. It is that Church therefore
that was founded upon Jesus Christ which received from him in the Person of
Saint Peter, the Keys of that Kingdom, that is to say, the Power of binding and
loosing. In the same sense he Aug. in Psalm. 108.
says elsewhere, That there are some things said to Saint Peter that plainly
seem properly to belong to him, and which nevertheless cannot Nec Tamen habent
Illustrem Intellectum nisi cum referuntur ad Ecclesiam.
be so well understood, if they are not referred to the Church that Saint Peter
represented, and of which he was the Figure by that Primacy which he had among
the Disciples, as are, adds he, these words, I will give unto thee the Keys of
the Kingdom of Heaven; Yet elsewhere, Jesus Christ has given the Keys to his
Church, to the end that that which it should bind on Earth should be bound in
Heaven, August. de Doctr. Chr. l. b. 1 cap. 18.
and that whatsoever it should loose should be loosed; that is to say, to the
end that he that should not believe that his Sins are pardoned in the Church,
to him they should not be pardoned, and that on the contrary he who being in
the bosom of the Church should believe that his Sins were pardoned, and who
should be reduced by a holy correction, should obtain pardon. It is not August.
de Baptis. Contra Donat lib. 7. cap. 51.
rashly, says he in another place, that I make two Orders of men. One sort are
so much in the House of God, that they are themselves that House that is built
upon a Rock, and that which is called the only Dove, the Spouse without Spot
and Wrinkle, the Enclosed Garden, the hidden Fountain, the Wells of Living
Water, the Paradise where the Fruit of Apples is. It is this House which has
received the Keys and the Power to bind and loose, and it is this to which he
said, That if any would not hearken to it when it Reproved and Corrected, that
he should be esteemed as a Heathen man and a Publican -- That House consists in
Vessels of Gold and Silver, in Precious Stones and Incorruptible Wood, and it
is to that that Saint Paul says, Bear with one another in love, keeping the
Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace; and again, The Temple of God is Holy,
which Temple ye are. It Consists in the good, in the Faithful, in the Holy
Servants of God spread abroad every where, joined together in a spiritual Unity
by the Communion of the same Sacraments, whether they know one another by
sight, or whether they do not. But as for the others, they are so in the House
as not at all to belong to the Structure of the House, and they are not in that
Society that is Fruitful in Peace and Righteousness. They are as the Chaff
amidst the good Corn, and we cannot deny that they are in the House, since the
Apostle says that there are in the House not only Vessels of Gold and Silver,
but Vessels also of Wood and Earth, the one to Honor and the others to
Dishonor. They must wilfully shut their Eyes that will not acknowledge by
these Passages that it is only to the Church of the Faithful, and not to the
Body of the Prelates that that Father refers all the Efficacy and Force of the
Actions of the Ministry, and all the Power of the Keys. But further if you
will, he explains himself yet more expressly in the same Book out of which I
have taken these last Words. Hitherto, says he, I have methinks clearly enough
demonstrated by the Holy Scriptures and by the Testimony of Saint Cyprian, that
the Wicked who have Aug. de Bap. contr. Donat lib. 6. cap. 3, and 4.
undergone no change in their Natural Estate, may both give and receive
Baptism. Notwithstanding it is manifest that those men do not belong to the
Church of God, since they are Covetous, Extortioners, Usurers, Envious,
Malicious, and Enslaved by such * Raviseurs
like Vices, for the Church is the only Dove that is modest and Chaste; the
Spouse without Spot and Wrinkle, the Enclosed Garden, the Sealed Fountain, the
Paradise full of Fruits, and such other Titles that are given it can be
understood of none but the Good, the Saints, and the Righteous; that is to say,
those in whom not only the Operations of the Gifts of God are found, that are
common to the good and bad, but who have also the inward and Supernatural Grace
of the Holy Spirit. It is to those that it is said, Whosoevers Sins you shall
remit, they shall be remitted; and whosoever Sins you retain they shall be
retained. I do not then see why we may not say that a wicked man may Administer
Baptism, since he may have it, and as he has it to his ruin, he may give it to
others also to their ruin, not because that that which he gives may be a
Pernicious thing, but because that he himself who receives it is a wicked man.
For when a wicked man gives Baptism to a good man who dwelling in the bond of
Unity is truly Converted, the wickedness of him who gives it is overcome by the
goodness of the Sacrament and the Faith of him who receives it, and when his
Sins are pardoned who is truly Converted to God, they are pardoned to him by
those with whom he is joined by a true Conversion. For the same Holy Spirit
which was given to the Saints with whom he is united by the bond of Love, is he
who pardons them, whether he knows that Body, or whether he knows it not. And
so when the Sins of any are retained, they are retained by those from whom they
are separated by the Difference of their Lives and the Malice of their Hearts,
whether they know that Body or whether they do not.

It could not methinks be said either with greater strength or Clearness, that
all the Efficacy of the Actions of the Ministry that the Pastors Exercise,
depends not on the Body of the Pastors, but on the Body of the truly Faithful,
and that in Effect they are those who pardon and retain Sins when the Ministers
pardon or retain them. From whence it necessarily follows, That if the same
Actions of the Ministry belong to the Society of the Faithful, the Call of the
Ministry, does so also with a far greater Reason; for if the Power of the Keys,
the right of Remitting and Retaining Sins, belongs to the body of the Faithful
only, it must be every way necessary that the Pastors should hold the exercise
of that Power, from the body of the Faithful; for if they should not hold it
from thence, they would have no Right to exercise it, nor could have it
elsewhere. And if they should have it elsewhere or that it should belong
properly to the body of the Pastors exclusively from the Simple Faithful, it
would be not only not true, but it would be further absurd to say that the body
of the Faithful exercised that Power by the Pastors, or that they pardoned and
retained Sins, as Saint Augustine teaches.

I cannot avoid taking notice here, by the by, of that Ordinary Error whereinto
those of the Church of Rome fall, who do not believe that immediate, absolute
and Independent Authority that the Pope ascribes to himself over the whole
Church, but who would that the Power of the Keys is given to the whole Body of
the Hierarchy, that is to say, to those Pastors who are Priests and Bishops.
For to prove their Opinion they do not fail to set the Sentiment of St.
Augustine before us, which plainly, as we have seen, shows us that the Keys
were given to the whole Church; from whence they draw two Conclusions, The one
against that great Authority that the Pope pretends to, and the other for the
Authority of the Bishops, which they would have to flow immediately from Jesus
Christ. But of these two Conclusions it is certain that the First is just and
wholly conforming with the thoughts of that Father, but it is not less certain
that the second is not; and that, at least without going about to deceive our
selves willingly, or to cheat the World, we could not say, that That Church
figured by St. Peter, to which God gave the Power of the Keys, which is
exercised by the Ministry of the Pastors, should be any other according to
Saint Augustine, then the Body of the Truly Faithful and Righteous, in
opposition to the Worldly and the wicked who are mixed with them in the same
External Profession; and this is in my Judgment so clear and evident in the
Doctrine of that Father, that they must needs be ignorant of it who deny it. It
is therefore a manifest Illusion to go about to make use of those Passages in
favor of the Bishops, for that Church is not the Body of the Hierarchy, but
that of the Truly Faithful, whether they be Laymen, or Pastors, and it is to
those only that Saint Augustine ascribes all the Rights and all the Actions of
the Ministry, as it may appear by what I have related, and by consequence it is
to those that the lawful Call of the Pastors belongs, and not to the Body or
Order of the Hierarchy. For it would be absurd to derive that Call from any
thing else, then from that very Church which has received the Power of the
Keys, and which is exercised in her Name and her Authority by her Ministers.
Tosta us Bishop of Abyla, seems to have acknowledged this Truth conformably to
the Principles of Saint Augustine, for see Tostat Abulens in Numer cap. 15.
quest. 48. and 49.
after what manner he explains himself in his Commentaries upon Numbers, upon
the story of the man who was brought before the whole Assembly of Israel,
because some had found him gathering of Sticks upon the Sabbath Day and put him
in Prison for it. First of all he says, That although the Acts of Jurisdiction
cannot be exercised by the whole Community, yet that Jurisdiction belongs to
the whole Community in regard of its Origin and Efficacy, because the
Magistrates receive their Jurisdiction from it. He adds afterward, That it is
the same in the Keys of the Church, that Jesus Christ gave them to the whole
Church in the person of Saint Peter. And that it is the Church that
Communicates them to the Prelates, but which notwithstanding Communicates them
without depriving it self of them, so that says he, the Church has them and the
Prelates have them, but in a different manner; for the Church has them in
respect of Origin and Virtue, and the Prelates have them only in respect of
Use; The Church has them vertually, because she can give them to a Prelate by
Election, and she has them Originally also. For the Power of a Prelate does not
take its origin from it self, but from the Church, by means of the Eelction
that it makes of him. The Church that chose him gives him that Jurisdiction,
but as for the Church it receives it from no Body after its having once
received it from Jesus Christ. The Church therefore has the Keys Originally and
Virtually, and whenever she gives them to a Prelate, she does not give them to
him after the manner that she has them, to wit Originally and Virtually, but
she gives them him only as to Use.

To this we may add, that some Councils of these latter Ages, as those of
Constance and Basil, seem to have acted themselves upon this Principle when
they gave themselves the Title of Representing the whole Universal Church.
Vniversalem Ecclesiam Representans. For to what end did they take that specious
Title, if they would not acknowledge that the Origin of the Authority of the
Prelates or the Pastors, is in the Body of the whole Society, and that it is
from thence that it is transmitted to them to exercise it in the name of the
whole Body?

But that which is most considerable is, That it appears from the Testimony of
the Holy Scripture, that the Body of the Church, that is to say, the faithful
people, in opposition to the Pastors, has taken part from the beginning in the
Acts of its proper Government, and particularly in the Calls of Ministers;
which evidently notes, that it is a natural Right that belongs to it. For that
when after the Apostasy and Tragical Death of Judas, they were to substitute
another Apostle in his place, Jesus Christ not having done it immediately by
himself before his Ascension, the History of the Acts relates, that the whole
Church, which then only Consisted in an hundred and twenty Persons, was
Assembled, Acts 1. v. 15*
and that upon the Proposal that Saint Peter made to them, they appointed two,
upon whom the Lot having been cast, and falling upon Matthias, with a common
consent he was put into the number of the Apostles. They were there about the
Call of an Apostle, that is to say of a Minister who ought to come immediately
from God, and therefore it was that they cast the Lot; but because the Church
was then formed, and that Jesus Christ being no more corporally present upon
Earth, those Calls could not be made wholly and immediately by him, men took
some part in them, for by their Election they limited the Lot to two persons,
and in the end declared by their acquiesence that they looked upon the
Declaration of the Lot, as if it had been the very voice of Jesus Christ. This
is all the part that men could take there, but it was not only the Apostles who
did those two things, it was the whole Body of the Church. The History notes
that the Assembly was about an hundred and twenty persons, that Saint Peter
made a Proposal to them, that upon that Proposal of Saint Peter they presented
Two, Joseph and Matthias, and that the Lot falling upon Matthias, he was
numbered with the Eleven Apostles by common Agreement, that is to say, by the
common consent of all. That evidently shows us, that the Body of the Faithful,
and not merely the Body of the Pastors, is the Right source of Calls. The same
things appear in the Call of the Seven Deacons, for the Story expressly notes,
that the murmuring of the Acts 6.
Greeks against the Hebrews, falling out, and giving occasion to the Apostles
to think of that Call, they called the multitude of the Disciples, and that
when they had made a Proposal to them, the Assembly approved of it, and that in
the end they chose seven persons, whom they presented to the Apostles, who
after having prayed to God, laid their hands on them. But that further lets us
see from whence a Lawful Call proceeds, to wit, from the Body of the Faithful,
and not merely from the Body of the Pastors, for it was the whole Assembly that
approved of the Proposal of the Apostles, and that chose, and not the Apostles
alone, who did nothing else but propose and lay their hands on them. This is
further justified by the Practice of the Apostles, which would readily admit
the people in the most weighty Affairs that respected the Government of the
Church into their deliberations and Acts, when that might be done without
Confusion. So in the First Council of Jerusalem, the Question being ventilated
whether the Observation of the Ceremonies of the Law was necessary to the
Gentiles, it is said that it pleased the Apostles and Acts. 16.
Elders or Presbyters (for it is the same thing) with the whole Church, to send
to Antioch and write to the Church there. That Letter was in effect written in
the name of all, and sent to all indifferently, The Apostles and Elders and
Brethren unto the Brethren which are of the Gentiles in Antioch, and Cyria and
Cilicia, and it is expreslynoted that when Jude and Silas, who were the bearers
of that Letter, were arrived at Antioch, they Assembled the multitude, that is
to say the people, and there acquitted themselves of their Commission; which
distinctly shows that the people then took cognizance of the matters of
Religion, and that they intervened in public Deliberations. So when Saint Paul
would Excommunicate the Incestuous person of Corinth, he calls the Church to
that Action, In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are gathered
together, and my Spirit, let such a man be delivered unto Satan for 1. Cor. 5.
the Destruction of the Flesh, that the Body may be saved in the day of the
Lord Jesus, which notes the same thing.

Those who have read the writings of Saint Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, cannot
be ignorant that that great Saint governed his Church by the common Suffrages
not only of his whole Clergy, but of all his people also, and that he consulted
with them in the most weighty Affairs, since he has declared it himself in
diverse places of his writings. I could not, says he, in one of his Epistles to
his Clergy, answer to that which our Brethren Donatus, Fortunatus, Epist 6.
Novatus, and Gordius have wrote to me, because I am alone, for from the first
entrance into my Bishopric, I purposed to do nothing of my self without your
Counsel and the Consent of my people. So that when the Favor of God shall have
joined me again to you, we shall treat of all things in common according to
what our mutual honor requires of us. In his Tenth Epistle, he complains of
some Priests who without ever consulting others had received those into
Communion who in time of Persecution had abjured Christianity, and he ordered
that they should be deprived of their Functons, for says he, they must give an
account of their Actions before us and before the Confessors, and before all
the people, when God shall give us the Favor to let us meet together again. In
the Twelfth he writes to the People of his Church, Fratribus in plebe
consistentibus, he notes concerning those who had fell in time of Persecution,
and who desired to be restored to the peace of the Church, That when God should
have sent Peace again to his Flock, and that they should again recover their
Assemblies, that Affair should be examined in the presence of the people, and
that they should judge of it among themselves; Tunc, says he, Examinabuntur
singula presentibus and judicantibus vobis. In the 28th Epistle, answering his
Clergy who had consulted together concerning some Priests who had abandoned
their Flocks, I could not says he, make my self the sole Judge of business.
Which ought to be exactly managed, not only with my Colleagues but with the
whole Body of the people also, non tantum cum Collegis meis, sed et cum plebe
universa. In the 68th Epistle, answering as well in his own name, as in the
name of diverse other Bishops of Africa Assembled in Council to the Churches of
Leon and Astorga, on the matter of Basilides and Martial, Bishops who had been
deposed for their Crimes: The People, says he, who obey the Commandments of the
Lord, and who fear God, ought to separate themselves from a wicked Pastor, and
not to take any part in the Sacrifices of a Sacrilegious Priest. Since it is
the people who have chiefly the power to Elect those who are worthy, and to
reject those who are unworthy. The Divine Authority it self has established
this Law, that the Priest should be chosen in the Presence of the People,
before the eyes of all, to the end he should be approved as worthy of the
Ministry by a public Judgment and Testimony. Therefore it is that God said to
Moses in the Book of Numbers, Thou shall take Aaron thy Brother and his Son
Eleazar, and thou shall make them come upon the Mountain in the presence of all
the Assembly, thou shall take off Aarons Vestment and put it upon Eleazar, for
Aaron shall dye there. He ordained that the Priest should be established in the
presence of the whole Assembly, to teach us that the Ordination of Priests
ought not to be performed without the Knowledge of the people assisting, to the
end that in their presence the Crimes of the wicked and the Deserts of the good
should be discovered, and that so the Ordination should be good and lawful when
it should be examined by the Suffrages and Judgments of all. We find in the
Book of the Acts that the same thing was practiced when they were to ordain
another Bishop in the place of Judas. Peter stood up in the midst of the
Disciples, and all the Multitude Assembled together into one place. And that
was observed not only in the Ordination of the Bishops and Priests, but it was
observed also in that of the Deacons, as it appears from the same Book of the
Acts, where it is said that the Twelve Apostles called together the whole
multitude of the Disciples. Therefore according to Divine Tradition, and the
observation of the Apostles, that Order ought to be diligently preserved and
held, which is also observed among us, and almost in all Provinces, that in
Order to the making of lawful Ordinations, the nearest Bishops of a Province
should Assemble with the people, who ought to ordain a Prelate, and the Bishop
should be chosen in the presence of the people, who may perfectly know the Life
and Conversation of every one. And this is what was done amongst you in the
Ordination of Sabinus our Colleague, for by the Suffrages of all the Brethren,
and by the Judgment of the Bishops who came themselves to you, after you had
wrote, they conferred the Order of Episcopacy on him and laid their hands on
him in the Room of Basilides.

See here the first Question decided. The second consists in knowing whether we
can say with any Reason that although Quest. 2.
those Calls ought naturally to proceed from the whole Body of the Church, as
we have just before shown, yet that the Church has lost that Right, and that it
is now lawfully deprived of it. That which gives ground for this Difficulty is,
that although in the Civil Society the Right of Creating of Magistrates seems
naturally to belong to the whole Body of the Society; yet it fell out that the
Order of Nature has been interrupted, for in Monarchical States it is not the
people, but the Prince only that confers Offices, and that Right is so lawfully
in him, that there is no Office that does not depend upon his Nomination. They
may therefore pretend that the same thing falls out in the Religious Society;
from whence it will follow, That it is no more the whole Body of the Church
that ought to confer those Calls, but the Body of the Prelates, or if you will
the Sovereign Monarch of the Church, who is as they pretend the Pope. But I
maintain that that cannot be any ways said. It is not so in respect of the
Religious Society, as it is in that of the Civil. In the Civil, the people may
be lawfully deprived of the Right that Nature has given them to Create their
Magistrates, and to provide for its Government, whether they be done by a
voluntary Transmission which they themselves have made to a certain Family, or
to a certain Person to whose Rule they submit themselves, or whether it come to
pass by a just Conquest. But these ways have no place in the Church, she can
neither create nor acknowledge a Sovereign Monarch, in whose favor she should
deprive her self of her Rights in that regard, to make him an Absolute Master.
For being concerned for her own Salvation, which she finds interested in the
Functions of the Ministry, and moreover having no assurance, as I have already
noted, that he or those in whose Favor she should strip her self of her
Rights, should themselves be faithful, it would be visibly to expose her self,
to give her self over into the hands of the Palpably Profane, the Unbelievers,
or Hypocrites, to make her Enemies her Lords, and it would be palpably to
hazard her Faith and Conscience, which she could never do without a Criminal
negligence, of which she never ought to incur the Guilt. In the Civil Society,
where the matter is only about Interests, and not about those that concern ones
Salvation, nothing hinders but that a people may wholly resign themselves to
the Cares of a Sovereign Power to Govern them, and it may be most frequently
advantageous for them to do so also, to avoid the Evils that arise from the
thwarting of diverse private Interests, which may do a prejudice on the public.
But in the Church, or where ones Salvation is concerned, the Faithful can never
without a Crime deprive themselves, to give it into the hands of another, of
that Care that God has Commanded them to have over all the external means they
may make use of for the procuring of that Salvation, for howsoever their Faith
and Piety does not absolutely depend upon their Pastors, yet the Functions of
the Ministry, when they are pure and Holy, are a great help to them for that,
and the preservation of their Faith becomes most difficult when the Ministry is
corrupted. The Church therefore in that respect can never be lawfully spoiled
of its Rights, and he who has given them to it, has not given it the power to
quit them, nor to transport them to another. As to the way of Conquest, every
one may see that has less place in the Church then that of Transmission. For
that which in the Civil Society makes the Dominion of a Conqueror to be just,
is, that when he enters into a Society with the people which he has Conquerr'd,
he is not bound to repent that he made War with them, nor to seek their Favor,
or ask their Pardon; so that the Fruit of his Conquest remains with him, and
without renouncing it, he may become the Friend of that People, that is to say,
be their Lord and their Friend together. But it is otherwise in the Church, he
who makes War against it, cannot enter into its Society to govern it, unless he
repent of his having treated it as an Enemy, unless he Humble himself before
it, unless he beg pardon of God for what he has done, and by consequence unless
he renounce all the advantages which he could pretend to by the Right of Arms.
If he does not do that, he can never enter into the Church, nor by Consequence
have any part in its Government; and if he does, he has no more Ground to say
that the Church should belong to him by Conquest. It is Evident therefore that
the Body of the Faithful can never Lawfully either deprive it self, or be
deprived by another, of the Right that naturally belongs to it to provide for
its Support, and its own Government, in calling Persons to the Ministry: From
whence it follows, That that Call, in order to its being just, ought to proceed
from the Body of the Church, and that it ought not to proceed from any else.

There remains therefore now, nothing but the third Question which is this,
viz. Whether the Body of the Church be Quest. 3.
always bound to confer Calls by means of its Pastors, or whether in some Case
the Body of the Faithful Laity may not confer them immediately? To clear this
point, we must plainly distinguish that Call in it self, I would say into that
which it has of Essential, and the way of its being Conferred, that is to say
the Formalities practiced in it. That which is Essential to it consists in
these three Consents which I have noted, that of God, that of the Church, and
that of the Person called. The way or manner of Conferring consists on one side
in some preambulatory Acts, without which that Call would be very Confused and
Rash, and these Acts are Instruction, Examination, Proof of Doctrine, the
Testimony, of a good Life and a good Conversation in regard of manners, and on
the other side in some Solemnities or External Ceremonies that serve to render
that Call more Public, Majestic and more Authentical, as Fasting, Prayer,
Exhortation, Benediction, and Imposition of hands.

As to the Essence of a Call, since as I have shown, that in supposing the
consent of the person called, the will of God is found included in that of the
whole Body of the Church, and that moreover it appears that the simple
Faithful, whom they Term Laymen, do not cease to be joined in a lawful
Society, and to make a Body of the Church although they should have no Pastors,
it is evident that those Faithful people are alone sufficient to make Calls
Lawful. When they have Pastors, they ought immediately to concur with them, and
to make Elections in Common, if it may be done without Confusion, and if it
cannot, they ought at least to ratify by their Approbation the Elections that
the Pastors shall have made, and when they cannot have any without a visible
danger of dispersion, it is certain that they may alone and immediately by
themselves confer that Call. For the Call proceeds from the Society, not in as
much as it has Pastors, but in as much as it is a Society, I would say, in as
much as it is a Body of the Faithful United together in the Communion of Faith,
Piety, and Justice. It is that Society that naturally makes its Order, it is
naturally in as much as it is a Society, put in trust with the will of God in
that respect, and the Mistress of its own Consent. When then it shall have no
Pastors the Call it shall Communicate will not fail to be full, lawful and
sufficient, and to have all that which is essential to it. It is as certain
also that the Pastors in the True Church have not naturally any Right to concur
to Calls, if they are not Faithful, since that if they are not Faithful they
are really without that Society, and that the Right of Calls in the True Church
can belong only to the Truly Faithful, and not to others. It ought not then to
be doubted that a Faithful People alone, and abandoned of all its Ministers,
may make a Call.

But they will say, How can it be that Laymen should make Ecclesiastical
persons, and confer a power and an Authority which they have not themselves? I
answer, That this Difficulty is null, for it is true, That no one can lawfully
give away that which does not belong to him either de jure, or de facto; and it
is further true that the Office of the Ministry belongs neither de facto, nor
de jure, to any private man, nor even to diverse private men taken out from the
Body. And therefore it is, that not only no private man can thrust himself into
the Ministry of his own head, but even that a part it self of the Society
cannot Lawfully confer a Call, without the consent of the other, though it have
the greatest number of its side. So that we may say with Reason that there is
the Body, in comparison of the other party. But I say that the Ministry belongs
to the whole Society, not that all the whole Body can Exercise immediately all
the Acts of it, of it self, but that no one Body can either Preach or
Administer the Sacraments, but only because it is its Authority and its consent
which renders those Acts valid, in virtue of the institution that Jesus Christ
has made of that Religious Society with all its Rights. From whence it follows,
that the Body of the Faithful, howsoever it be composed all of Laymen, does
not cease to have the power Lawfully to confer the Ministry on a Man, without
its being liable to be said, that it confers that on others which it has not it
felf; for it is certain that the Ministry belongs to it, and that a Call
consists but in depositing the public Right into the hands of him who is
called, to the end it may be reduced into Act in the Name of the whole Society.
But I say, that the Faithful people themselves have a Just and lawful Call, to
give up that Trust: For as I have noted already, there is no Call more Lawful
then that which is founded not only upon a sufficient Right, but upon a Duty
also, and an indispensable Obligation. When the matter is about Societies,
there is nothing more absurd then to imagine, that a whole Body cannot
Communicate that which all the parts that compose it have not. For if it were
so, a People could never make a King, which is yet notwithstanding done in all
Elective Kingdoms, and the Church of Rome her self cannot give a reason why she
makes her Popes, since there is not any Pope present who should make his
Successors. They are all Created by the College of Cardinals, who are not
Popes themselves, so that they give that which they have not. They must
therefore needs say, That the Papacy is virtually in the College of the
Cardinals, and that that which each one among them has not, they have all
together in a Body, otherwise they could not Create a Pope with that fullness of
Power, and that extent of Jurisdiction, which is not in mere Bishops.

As to what regards the manner of conferring those Calls, they will agree with
me that there are things there, that the Body of the People may and ought
immediately to do by themselves, as proof of the purity of Doctrine,
Information of manners, Fasting and Prayer; and I will acknowledge that there
are others there that ought not to be done but by the Pastors only, when they
have them, as Examination in respect of Knowledge, Exhortation, Public Prayer,
Benediction, and laying on of Hands. But in Cases Extraordinary and of absolute
Necessity, the Church not having any Pastors, and notbeing able to have any
without a visible danger of dispersion, I say that they may and ought to
appoint some persons to do those things in their Names. And those of the Church
of Rome ought not to think that which I propound strange, seeing that they
would readily in a Case of absolute Necessity, have any simple Laymen, or a
simple Woman, have the power of Administering of Baptism: Baptism is a
Sacrament, it is the public introduction of a man into the Church of God, if
therefore according to them, a Sacrament so great and august, does not fail of
being good and valid, though Administered by a Layman who has no particular
Commission from the Church, if the Church is esteemed to Baptize by that
Layman, how much more good and available should the Prayer, Benediction, and
laying on of hands, conferred in a Case of absolute necessity by a Layman, be,
since that not only it is not a Sacrament properly so called, but that further
that Layman does not Act in that Solemnity in the quality of a mere private
man, but as having received the Office and Commission from the whole Body of
the Faithful, the whole Body doing it by him, and Authorizing it by its
prefence.

Tertullian has gone much further then we go upon this matter, For he would,
that, where there there should be no Pastors, every Layman should have the
power, not only to Baptize, but also to Consecrate the Eucharist, and to
Administer it; and his words seem to be grounded upon the very ordinary
practice of his Time. Where says he, there is no company of Churchmen, you
offer and Baptize, (he speaks to the Laymen) and you your selves are alone
Priests to your selves. Where there are three persons, if they should be
Laymen, there is a Church there, for each man lives by his Faith, and God has
no respect of persons. I do not pretend to approve of that which he says
concerning the Eucharist, that he would have a simple Laymen have the power of
Celebrating when there should be no Minister, and I acknowledge there is an
excess in that Proposition. But it may appear from thence at least that the
Right of Consecrating a Pastor in a Case of absolute Necessity was not then
denied to the whole Body of the Church.

These are the General Observations that I had to make upon this matter. It
will be now no hard thing to apply them to the Ministry of the Protestants, and
the Personal Call of their Ministers, to make a solid Judgment of it. First,
then, I say, that our Ministry considered in it self, that is to say, with
respect to the things which we Teach and Practice, cannot but be most Lawful.
For we suppose here that our Doctrine is the very same that Jesus Christ and
his Apostles Taught, we add nothing to it, we diminish nothing from it; the
Sacraments that we dispense are the very same that Jesus Christ has instituted;
and the Government that he has set up in the midst of us, is not remote from
that of the Primitive Church according to what it is represented to us in the
Scripture. If the Author of the Prejudices has any thing to say to us upon that
Subject, he ought to come to it by way of discussion, and not by that of
Prescription. But before he forces us to give a Reason of our Ministry, he
would do Justly if he would give us Satisfaction concerning his own, which he
well knows we desire; I would say, he would do Justly, if he would show us what
Call he himself had at first, by the Justification of the things that he
Teaches: What Right he had to Teach Transubstantiation, the Real Presence, the
Adoration of the Host, the Worshipping of Creatures, Humane Satisfactions, etc.
and Really to Sacrifice the Body of Jesus Christ. If he cannot make it appear
that all those things that are in Dispute between the Church of Rome, and us,
are Gospel Truths, he can neither prove his Call, nor hinder us from holding it
null and unlawful. For he cannot have any Lawful Call to Teach Errors, nor to
perform those Actions of Religion that Jesus Christ never instituted, and by
consequence it is from that that he ought to begin, when he would inform us of
the Truth of a Call. In Effect all other Inquiries will signify nothing, if
that does not go before; since Piety, Truth, Sound Doctrine, are the necessary
Foundations to every Lawful Call; and that on the contrary, no Creature can
have any Right either to Teach a Lie, or make the People practice, or to
practice it self, a Worship contrary to the true service of God, or to
celebrate the Sacraments that Jesus Christ has not instituted. It belongs
therefore to the Author of the Prejudices to tell us how he pretends to avoid
that Discussion, for it is certain that the first Question that must be decided
to make the Validity of a Call clear, is that of the Justice of the Ministry in
it self, that is to say, in regard of those things that are taught and
practiced in it, when that Justice is in dispute, as it is between the Church
of Rome and us; after which, when that point is once decided, we must pass over
to two other Questions; the one, whether the body, that is to say the Society
wherein one is, has it self the Right to have Ministers, and the other whether
the Persons who exercise the Ministry therein are well and duly called, as I
have shown in my third Observation. That first Point then being supposed, to
wit, that the things that are taught and practiced among the Protestants are
good and Christian, I say, that they cannot dispute with them the Right of
their Ministry but by accusing them of a Schism like that of the Luciferians or
the Donatists. But we have so clearly shown that if we have Reason at the
bottom, our Separation from the Church of Rome is just, and that she her self
is guilty of chism, that there is no further ground for that unjust Accusation.
They cannot therefore any further contest our Ministry with us, and in effect
if we are true Believers, and if we are justly Separated from the Church of
Rome, it is Evident that we are Lawfully United among our selves in a Religious
Society, as I have shown in the first Chapter of the Fourth Part. And if we are
Lawfully United in a Religious Society, it is not less Evident that all the
Rights of the Christian Society belong to us, and that in all those Rights that
of the Ministry is Comprised, as it appears from my Sixth and Seventh
Observation. So that our Right to a Ministry is indisputable, supposing that we
have Reason in the Foundation, and all that which they propound against us will
remain null and Fallacious. If we have Reason at the bottom, we are the true
Church of Jesus Christ; but the true Church of Jesus Christ can never lose its
Rights, she is never deprived of them, and she cannot so much as deprive her of
them, none can ravish them from her; they are Rights that cannot be Alienated,
they can neither be lost by the Inundations or Concussions of the World, with
and by Interruption of Possession, or Invasion of Enemies, as the Inheritances
of the World are; and in one word, there where the true Faith and Charity is,
there is the true Church, and where there is a true Church, there is the Right
to a Ministry.

But say they, Is the Ministry which you have that Ancient and perpetual
Ministry, that Jesus Christ has established in his Church, or is it a new one?
For if it be a new one, it is a false and Unlawful Ministry, and if it be the
Ancient and perpetual Ministry of the Church, whence comes it to pass that we
do not see among you any of the degrees of that Hierarchy which was established
in the Church before your Reformation? I answer that our Ministry is that
Ancient and perpetual one that Jesus Christ and his Apostles have set up in the
Church, and if it were a new one we must needs have set up a new Gospel, which
is a thing so remote from the Truth that our most passionate Adversaries,
except the Author of the Prejudices, would never in my Judgment have us charged
with it. But I say that we must distinguish of the Essence of a Ministry from
its State, as I have shown in my Fourth Observation. Before the Reformation, we
grant that the Ministry was preserved in the Latin Church in regard of all that
which was Essential to it, and it is in that that our Church has Succeeded it,
so that in that Respect they are not two Ministries, but only one and the same,
which we have retained. We preach the same Truth that they teach yet, we Adore
one and the same God the Father Son and Holy Ghost. There is among us a
Baptism, an Eucharist, a Government, a Discipline, as there was then, but we
have not succeeded it in that bad and Corrupted State whereinto the Ministry
was then fallen, we have no more either any Sacrificers of the Body of Jesus
Christ, or a Sovereign Monarch of the Church, or Patriarchs, or Cardinals, or
Preachers of Indulgences, or Framers of Legends, all that was not any thing of
the Essence of the Ministry, and in having retrenched those kinds of things we
have it no more abolished then a Town is abolished when its excesses are
retrenched, or then a House is abolished when it is cleansed, and its ruins
repaired.

As to a Personal Call, I say that we have that Body of the Church which only
upon Earth has a Lawful Right to confer it on us. That which our Reformers had,
they had from the Church in their days, which did not consist in that Multitude
of Profane Worldly and Superstitious Persons which swelled their Assemblies
then, but in those truly Faithful Persons who as yet preserved themselves pure
in the midst of that Corruption, in that good Corn which as yet grew amidst the
Tares, although it was almost Swallowed up by them. It was in those that the
Right of the Ministry properly and truly resided, it was those who made as yet
that Society any ways Lawful, and it was from those that the Justice of a Call
proceeded. I confess, that they Communicated it then in a very corrupted State,
and after a very impure manner, but God gave our first Reformers the Grace to
purify theirs by the sound Doctrine, and to rectify it by a Holy and Lawful
Use. It is therefore with and by those, that the Body of that Society which is
Reformed has conferred that Call upon others, and that the Propagation of the
Ministry has come down even to us, after the most Evangelical manner in the
World, on one side with Instruction, Examination, Proof, Inquiry, and Testimony
of good manners, as exact as could possibly be made, and on the other with
public Prayers, Exhortation, Benediction, laying on of hands, Mission, and a
particular Tie to a Flock. Behold here what our Call is in Regard of the Body
of the Protestants. I do not deny that in some places of this Kingdom at the
beginning of the Reformation there was not some Calls which were conferred by
the People without a Pastor, as that of La Riviere was at Paris in the year
1555. Which the Author of the Prejudices has not been wanting to reproach us
with. But besides that these are particular Cases of a very small number, which
has not followed, nor produced any settled Custom, and by Consequence cannot be
imputed to the whole Body of the Protestants, which has all along elsewhere had
Pastors called by the Ordinary ways, besides all that I say, I have shown that
in a Case of Absolute necessity, such as those Flocks were in then, the People
may Lawfully make use of that Right which God and the Nature of a Christian
Society have put into their hands.

CHAP. IV.
An Answer to the Objections of the Author of the Prejudices about the Call of
the First Reformers, and the Validity of our Baptism.

THere Remains nothing at present but to give a Satisfactory Answer to some
Objections that the Author of the Prejudices has made against the Call of the
first Reformers, which may all be reduced to this, to wit, Whether it was
Ordinary or Extraordinary, or whether it was neither the one nor the other.
Their Ministers, says he, are divided upon this point into two different
Judgments, which Prejud. Chap. 4. page 87.
some have United together, to make up a Third Composed of those two. Some
distinctly say that the mission of their Ministers is Extraordinary, others
that it is Ordinary, and others that it is Extraordinary and Ordinary both
together. But as this last Opinion includes the two others, so it destroys it
self in destroying them. So that properly it will be only necessary to examine
in particular the two first Opinions.

It is in the first place very remarkable, that the Author of the Prejudices,
after having raised the Question, as he has done, whether the first Reformers
were Thieves and Robbers, Tyrants, Rebels, False Pastors and Sacrilegious
Usurpers of the Authority of Jesus Christ; he has reduced all his proof of it
to wrangling about those Qualities, of Ordinary or Extraordinary, that be given
to their Call. From those high words it seemed to have lain upon him to have
shown us that that Call was destroyed and annihilated without any Return, and
that he should at least have brought us what would have wholly overthrown the
first and Resource.
Natural Foundations upon which we establish it. But, Thanks be to God, that is
not done, and the choler of the Author of the Prejudices is turned upon those
Titles that we give to the Call of the first Reformers he does not further
concern himself to know directly whether it is good and Lawful, but merely to
know whether it is Ordinary or Extraordinary, or whether it be neither the one
nor the other. Moreover it is certain that to decide even this last Question,
it is very ill done to begin with the setting aside the Sentiment of those who
hold that it is Ordinary and Extraordinary both together. For as those Terms of
Ordinary and Extraordinary are Ambiguous, and that by reason of their
Ambiguity, it may be so that a Call that is Ordinary in one respect, shall be
Extraordinary in another, so to set aside those who would have that of the
first Reformers to be Ordinary and Extraordinary both together, is to set aside
those who would clear that Ambiguity; it is designedly to shut up the dispute
in Equivocal Propositions, to give way to the making a long discourse to no
purpose, it is in a word to imitate those who propose nothing else to
themselves but how to cast dust in the Eyes, and to suspend the Judgments of
their Readers, in removing far from them the clear Knowledge of things. It is
therefore necessary for the Author of the Prejudices to redress that, and
because that those two Sentiments, one of which carries this with it, that that
Call is Extraordinary, and the other that it was Ordinary, do not encounter one
another at the bottom, it is necessary to show in what respects both the one
and the other may be said. To this Effect, I shall first say a Word of the
Ministry of the first Reformers, and then afterward I shall speak of their
Call.

As to their Ministry, it is true that it is not Extraordinary nor newly
Instituted, but the same that the Apostles established at first for the
Preservation and Propagation of the Church, which was preserved in the Latin
Church down to the Age of our Fathers in respect of all that was absolutely
Essential to it, and which shall also subsist unto the end of the World, as I
have explained in the foregoing Chapter. We may say notwithstanding, that the
Reformation in which they were employed was an Extraordinary Function of their
Office. For however they did not need either a new Right or a new Ministry for
that, since every Pastor is bound to labor to Reform that which regards his
Flock, when it is necessary that he should do it, yet such a Reformation as
they made, is not a thing that should be done always. So that in that Respect
their Ministry had something Extraordinary, to wit, in as much as their Flocks
had an Extraordinary need of their help to drive back those Errors and
Superstitions which had got ground, as a vessel that is ready to be Shipwrackt
has an Extraordinary need of the Assistance of those who Steer it, to avoid
that entire destruction wherewith it is threatened. But besides this we may say
also that it had this of Extraordinary in it, that though it was yet the same
Gospel Ministry which had till then subsisted in the Latin Church, in respect
of all its Essentials, yet they put it into another State then that wherein it
was for many Ages before, as having purged and freed it from all the
Corruptions that disgraced it, and as those things are called Extraordinary
that are not wont to be seen, and which are not so often done, that Change of
the Form or State that happened to the Ministry, after its having for so long a
time appeared to the eyes of the people quite otherwise then they saw it then,
may very well be called Extraordinary.

As for that which regards their Call, it was not Extraordinary, if by that
Term they mean that it should have come immediately from God, as that of Moses
and the Ancient Prophets, or immediately from Jesus Christ, as that of the
Apostles, but it was Ordinary, that is to say, they received it from God
mediately by means of men. It is also certain that the manner of receiving
their Call, as to the greater part, was the very same with that that is most
Common and usual in the Church, which is, that they received their Ordination
from the hand of those Pastors who were themselves in that Office. All that
therefore which there was of Extraordinary in their Call, in that respect, was,
that they rectified it by freeing it from all the Impurity it had, and which
came from the Corruption of the men of that Age, and in referring it to its
true End, which should be the Purity of Gods Worship, and the Salvation of
Souls. I acknowledge that in their Administration they went beyond the intention
of those who had conferred their Offices on them, but they did no more in that
then they ought; for the Ministry which they had received being Gods and the
Churches, and not those private men's who Communicated it, they were bound to
refer theirs to the greatest Glory of God and the Edification of his Church,
and not to the Wills and Interests of the Court of Rome and its Prelates,
although ir was through their Channel that they had received it. They did well
therefore to make use of that which they had of good in their Call, to purify
that which was bad in it, and they also did well to make use of it against the
ill intention of those who had given it them for an ill end, even as those who
have received Baptism from an Heretical or Schismatical Society, are bound by
that same Baptism which they have received from them, to oppose themselves as
much as possibly they can to that Heresy or Schism, and to make use of their
very Baptism for it, although it should be against the intention of those who
gave it to them. I acknowledge also that there were some few who received their
Call immediately from the Churches hand, I would say, the Body of the faithful
people; and we may say of those, that their Call was extraordinary, in the
sense that we call unusual things Extraordinary, which happen very rarely, and
which are done against Custom and ordinary practice. For howsoever that those
Calls were not unlawfully made, and without Right, as I have proved in the
foregoing Chapter, it is notwithstanding True that it is not, nor ought to be
the Common Practice, and that it has no place but in a case of absolute
Necessity. So also in the Church of Rome the Call of Martin V. may be said to
be Extraordinary, who was called to the Papacy immediately by the whole Body of
the Latin Prelates assembled in the Council of Constance, and not by the
College of Cardinals, as it is ordinarily done.

As to those Ministers who succeeded them, and who received their Ordination
from the hands of the first Reformers, their Call was without doubt Ordinary,
and conformable to the practice of the Ancient Church, according to the Idea
that the Scripture gives us of it, and all that it can have of Extraordinary
consists in this, that in the distinction of Bishops and Presbyters they have
not followed them, and it is the Presbytery and not the Bishop who gives the
Ordination, but in that very thing they did nothing remote from that which was
practiced in the Apostolic Church, acording to the Idea of it that the
Scripture furnishes us with, since Saint Paul says in express terms concerning
Timothy, That he had received it by the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery. I do not here enter upon the Question, whether that Distinction is
of Divine or only of Humane Right, I will say something to that in the close. I
do not so much as blame those who observe it, as a thing very Ancient, and I
would not have it made a matter of difference in those places, wherein it is
established, but I say where that Distinction is not observed, as it is not,
nor can be amongst the Protestants of this Kingdom, their Call will not cease
to be lawful, since besides the Case of absolute necessity, which sufficiently
dispences with that Form, besides that neither the Bishop nor the Presbyter are
of themselves any more than Executors of the Will of the Church in that Regard,
and not the Masters of that Call, besides that I say, there is a Formal Text of
the Apostle that justifies the Right that the Church has to give the Imposition
of hands by the Presbytery, which alone is sufficient to stop the mouth of all
Contradiction whatsoever.

That being so explained, we may easily see what we ought to answer to all
those petty Objections of which the Author of the Prejudices has composed his
fourth and fifth Chapters. Some says he, were called to the Ministry and made
Pastors only by Laymen, others were ordained by Priests only, and those who
had been Prejud. chap. 4. page 78.
Ordained by Bishops lifted themselves up against their Ordainers, and that
Church which had given them their Mission. I have shown in the foregoing
Chapter, that those who were called by Laymen, that is to say, by the whole
Body of the Church, had a sufficient Call. That which I have also said
concerning those who received their Ordination from the Presbytery, does not
leave any more difficulty, and as to those who resisted their own Ordainers, I
have shown that they did nothing in all that whereunto their very Office did
not bind them.

We may see, says he, yet further, by the thirty first Article of their
Confession of Faith, that it was upon this supposition of a power given Prejud.
chap. 5. page 91.
immediately by God to these men Extraordinarily sent to Order the Church a
new, that all their pretended Reformation is founded. That Article of our
Confession of Faith says not, that the Church had absolutely perished, nor that
the Ministry was entirely extinguished, but that the Church was fallen into
Ruin and Desolation, and that its State was interrupted, which only shows that
she as well as the Ministry under which she was, were both in the greatest
Corruption, and this is that which we also hold. It says not that God had given
an immediate Mission to the Reformers, but that God had raised them up after an
extraordinary manner to order the Church a new. That signifies that God by his
Providence gave them Extaordinary Gifts to undertake so great a Work as that of
the Reformation was, and that he accompanied them with his Blessing. All that
includes neither a new Revelation, nor a new immediate Mission, and hinders
not, that the Right which they had to employ themselves in it should not be
annexed to their Charge, and that it should not be common not only to all the
Pastors, but even to all Christians, as I have shown in my Second part.

Their Discipline, adds he, Ordains* that the Priests of the Roman Church who
upon turning of Calvinists, should be Elected to Prejud. chap. 5. page 92.
the Office of Ministers should receive a new Imposition of hands, which shows
that they suppose their precedent Mission to be Null, and so that that which
Luther and Zuinglius Received from the Church of Rome signified nothing, whence
it follows, that that which they ascribe to them can be no other than
Extraordinary. There is a great Difference between the Call which was given
before the Reformation, and that which is at this day given in the Roman Church
since those Two Communions are separated. The Former was indeed very much
corrupted, but yet nevertheless it supposes the consent of the whole Latin
Church, and it was not given by a Party so confirmed in Error; where the
second supposes no other than the consent of a Party so confirmed in those
Errors which we believe to be most contrary to the Purity of the Gospel, which
makes the matter so that our Society can no more look upon it as a Lawful
Call, in regard of it and its Service. Besides that when we see the Conditions
that are necessary to a Lawful Call, as Examination, Information of manners,
and the like, so ill observed in the Church of Rome, that Christian Prudence
will not suffer us to Trust to her and her Elections, which for the most part
would be Null, if they were Examined according to their own Canons.

Calvin has wrote that God set up Apostles in his time, or at least,
Evangelists to draw men from the Party of Antichrist. I answer, Prejug. chap.
5. page 92.
that Calvin only called the Reformers Apostles and Evangelists, by some kind
of resemblance which they had with the first Evangelists, in some respect, not
that they brought a new Revelation with them into the World, as the Apostles
and Evangelists did, but because God made use of them, to make the light of his
Gospel which was much darkened strike upon the eyes of Men with splendour, and
they honor those to this day with the Title of Apostles who now employ
themselves in making Christianity known to the Nations that are Strangers to
it, although they are not immediately sent from God, and though they have not
any new Revelation.

He alleadges in the end, the Dispute that was between a Protetestant named
Adrian Saravias and Beza, where Beza seems to Prejug. chap. 5. page 94.
admit of only an Extraordinary Call in the Reformers, I answer, That as well
Saravias as Beza are particular Authors, who may have had both the one and the
other thoughts a little excessive about this matter, and it may be may have
even disputed the one against the other, without well understanding one
another. This is that which falls out every day between persons otherwise very
learned. Beza rejected the Ordinations of the Church of Rome, not, that he
thought the Ministry was absolutely extinct there, nor that they had not there
any Right to a Call, but because the Calls of persons there were made after a
very confused and corrupted manner without Examination either of Doctrine or
manners, by reason of which they were most frequently given to unworthy
persons, and that instead of ordaining them to Preach the Gospel, they ordain
them only to Sacrifice. That concludes that the Ordinary Call which the first
Reformers received was not purer than that of others, if God had not given them
the Grace to rectify it as they did by a just and lawful use of it, but that
does not conclude that such as it was it did not put them into a Right and
Obligation to cleanse it from that ill which it had by that good which remained
in it.

The Author of the Prejudices opposes further an Article of a National Prejug.
chap. 5. page 100.
Synod held at Gap, Anno 1603. which he sets down in these words, Upon the 31
Article of the Confession of Faith, it having been put to the question whether
when they came to Treat of the Call of our Pastors, they should found the
Authority which they had to Reform the Church and to Teach, upon the Call which
they had received from the Roman Church: The Assembly determined that they
ought merely to referr it to the Article of the Extraordinary Call, by which
God extraordinarily and inwardly stirred them up to their Ministry, and not in
the least to any thing that remained of that Ordinary Corrupted Call. But since
he would give himself the trouble to look into our National Synods, he ought
not to stop there, he ought to go on even to that of Rochel, which was held
immediately after that of Gap in the year 1607, and there he would have found
that that Article having been set down differently in several Copies, and
having been altered by the negligence of the Copiers, it was reestablished in
that Synod, which was drawn into an Act in these words: In the 31 Article of
the Confession of Faith of the Synod of Gap, wherein mention is made of the
first Pastors of the Reformed Churches, these words and to [Teach] which are
found in some Copies, should be raised out, and in the place of merely there
should be put, chiefly; and that last Clause, [And not in the least to any
thing that remained of that Ordinary Corrupted Call] should be also mended,
Rather than to that little which remained of their Ordinary Call. To have made
use of that Article seriously, he ought to have done it not in the State
wherein the ignorance of the Copiers had put it, but in that wherein a whole
Synod had re-established it. At the bottom it will appear that they there
treated only about a Call for the Reformation, and not for the exercise of the
Ordinary Ministry, and the Synod does not, but in some respects only, deny that
that Call for a Reformation, was not founded upon that that the first Reformers
had received from the Church of Rome, howsoever corrupted it was, but it would
that it should be chiefly referred to a particular Providence of God, which by
Extraordinary Gifts and Talents had raised men up for so great a work. In
effect, although we should acknowledge that in the Church, the rejecting or
Reformation of Errors should be the common Right of all Christians, and that
that Right would yet more especially belong to the Ordinary Pastors then to
others, by the Obligation of their Charge joined to that of their Baptism, yet
we do not fail to acknowledge also, that there was something extraordinary in
the persons of the Reformers, to wit, the Gifts, or the admirable Talents which
made them fit for that work, and capable of reducing their Right into Act,
without which their Right would have been to no purpose, as it did remain in
diverse others unprofitable, who had not the same Gifts. But that very thing
might gain them the greatest Authority, and this is that which the Synod would
say, and which we say also with it. For we distinguish three things in the
Reformers, from whence there results as full and entire a Call to Reform the
Church as they can desire: the one is, The general and common Right that all
Christians have to Combat Errors, since they are all called to defend the
Truth; the other is, a more peculiar Right which they had for the same thing in
quality of Pastors, for how impure soever their Call was, it would always bind
them to have a Care of their Flocks, and to procure Gods Glory; and the third
is, the Extraordinary Graces and Light that God had communicated to them, and
rendered them thereby fit for that work. But it is this last that reduced the
two others into Act, and therefore they looked on it there principally when
they treated of the Reformation, because if they had never met with this, the
two others would have been useless Rights, and ineffectual Obligations.

After that, it is easy to comprehend how the Author of the Prejudices was
mistaken, when under a pretense of that Extraordinary Call, that we Attribute
to the first Reformers, in respect of their Gifts or Talents, he imagines that
he can lay it to our charge that we believe that the ordinary Ministry was
entirely lost, and that it was renewed by an extraordinary and immediate Call
of God. For it is upon that, that with great heat, to very ill purpose, he
spends his reasonings throughout his whole fifth Chapter, in Allegations of
Fathers, and Observations to no purpose upon the Rights of that pretended
immediate Ministry. We Answer him in a Word, that he only Combats his own
Shadow, for we do not hold that the Ordinary Ministry established by the
Apostles was absolutely extinct. It is a Good that belongs to the Church, and
as the Church has always subsisted by the special Providence of God, though in
a different State, that same Providence has also made that Good to subsist
always. It is True that it was very ill dispensed while it was in the hands of
bad Stewards, and that where the Inheritage should have been cultivated, and
have brought forth without doubt much fruit, it produced on the contrary
abundance of Thorns and Briars. But notwithstanding the Inheritance was not
lost. The Ministry was always preserved, not only de Jure, in as much as the
Church is never lost, but de facto also, for it always had Ministers, ill
chosen indeed, ill called, designed to bad uses, called by very confused Calls,
but called notwithstanding, and having a Right sufficient to make them do their
Duty if they would, and if they were capable. So that the good State of the
Ministry might be very well altered, Corrupted, Interrupted, overthrown, but
the Ministry was not absolutely lost

I will not be afraid even to go further, and to say that when it should be
true that the Ministry should be wholly annihilated, that which notwithstanding
has never happened, and it may please God that it never shall, it would not be
necessary that God should renew it by an immediate and every-way Supernatural
Mission, while there should be two or three of the Faithful in the World, who
would be able to Assemble together in the Name of Jesus Christ. For the Right
of the Ministry would always remain in those two or three, and they might
confer a Lawful Call upon one of themselves. If it could even happen that there
should not be absolutely any more Faith upon the Earth, and that Heresy or
Paganism or Judaism, or Mahumetanism should generally overspread the whole
World, without leaving any Truly Faithful in it, which certainly will never
come to pass since we have the promise of Jesus Christ to the contrary, I say
in that case, Provided, that the Book of the Holy Scripture remained, the Germe.
young Buds of the Church, and that of the Ministry, would subsist even there.
The Apostles who left it to the world, would yet further call men from thence a
second Time to the true Faith, and by that true Faith to the Re-establishing of
a Christian Society, and by the Re-establishing of that Christian Society to
that of the Ministry, without any absolute necessity of Gods immediately
sending new Apostles. One man only who should learn the heavenly Truths
contained in that Book, might teach them to others and reduce Christianity to
its first State, if God would Accompany the word of that man with his Ordinary
Blessing. Those who are acquainted with History are not Ignorant that in the
Fourth Century, two young men named the one Edesius, and the other Frumanius,
having been taken on the Theodoret. hist lib. 1. cap. 23.
Sea and carried Captive to the King of the Indies, converted many persons to
the Christian-Faith in that Country, and that they might make Assemblies there,
where they might celebrate the Worship of God.

This is that which manifestly discovers the Injustice of the Author of the
Prejudices, and other Writers of Controversy of the Church of Rome, when they
demanded Miracles to prove the Call of the first Reformers. For while the
Scripture remains in the midst of men, it is not necessary to make new miracles
to Authorize Ministers; that Scripture sufficiently Authorizes the Church
immediately by it self to confer a Call, when its Pastors forsake it. It would
sufficiently Authorize one man alone, whoever he should be, a Layman or
Clergyman, to communicate the light of his Faith to others, if he were the
only Faithful Person that was in the World: it would Authorize two or three
Faithful, who should find themselves alone, to Assemble together and to provide
for the Preservation and Propagation of their Society, and Miracles would not
(...)
be necessary for all that, because in all that there would be nothing new
there, nothing that might not be included in the Revelation of the Scripture,
or drawn from thence by a just Consequence, as it may appear from what I have
handled in the foregoing Chapter. Miracles are necessary to those who preach
new Doctrines, and those which are not of ancient Revelation, and which besides
have not in themselves any Character of Truth such as the Sacrifice of the
Mass, the Corporal Presence of Christ in the Sacrament, Transubstantiation,
Purgatory, Invocation of Saints, Merit of good Works, Adoration of the Host,
etc. are. It belongs to those who teach those things to tell us whence they
hold them, and since they give us them as holding them from Gods hand, it
belongs to them to prove them by Miracles, for they cannot prove them
otherwise, and when they should even have wrought Miracles, or things that
should pass for such, it would belong to us to examine them, since Jesus Christ
has given us warnings upon that point, which we ought not to neglect.

See here what I had to say upon the Fifth Chapter of the Author of the
Prejudices. The sixth wherein he treats further of the same matter contains
nothing which I have not already satisfied. It pretends that the Call of our
First Reformers was not Ordinary, under a pretense that some few received their
Ministry from the people, that others were ordained by mere Priests, and that
those who had been Ordained by Bishops, have, says he, Anathematized that
Church from which they received their Ordination. But as to the first, we have
shown him that the Calls that are made by a Faithful People, are Just and
Lawful in a case of absolute necessity, that naturally dispences with
Formalities. Besides that those Calls were very few in number, that they were
not followed, that they do not infer any Consequence against the Body of the
Pastors and that even when it should have had any Irregularity, that
Irregularity would have been sufficiently repaired by the hand of Fellowship,
which the other Pastors have given those who were so called, and by the consent
that the whole Body of that Society gave to their Calls. We ought not for that
to leave off holding them for Ordinary, although in that Respect they should be
remote from the Common Practice, no more or less then they in the Church of
Rome to leave off holding the Call of Pope Martin V. and that of diverse other
Popes for Ordinary, although they were not made according to the accustomed
Prejug. chap. 6. page 129.
Forms. I demand of their Ministers, says the Author of the Prejudices, some
Passages of Scripture that clearly give Laymen a Right to ordain Ministers in
any case. That demand is but a vain wrangling, for when the Scripture
recommends to the Faithful the taking diligent heed to the Preservation and
Confirmation of their Faith, and to propagate it to their Children, it gives
them clearly enough by that very thing a sufficient Right, to make use of all
the means that are proper for that, and that are naturally appointed to it. But
every one knows that the Ministry is one of those means, whence it follows that
the Obligation that the Scripture lays upon the Faithful people in that
respect, includes that of creating it self its Pastors, when it is not possible
that they should have them otherwise; for that he that ordains the end, ordains
also by consequence the means that are naturally appointed for that end. When
the Scripture commands that all things be done with Order in the Church, it
gives by that very thing clearly enough a sufficient Right to the Church to
make its Pastors, when it has none, and when it can have none but by that way,
since it is clear that Pastors belong to that Order. In fine, when the
Scripture teaches that the Faithful people have a Right to choose their Pastors,
it teaches clearly enough by that very thing, that they have also a Right
themselves to instal them in their Office in a case of necessity, for that Call
consisting much more Essentially in Election than in Installation, which is but
a Formality, there is no reason to believe that God would have given the people
a Right to have chosen their Pastors, and to have made them be installed by
other Pastors, and that he has not given them at the same time that of
installing them themselves, when it cannot be done otherwise, since naturally
that which we have a Right to do by another, we have a Right to do by our
selves.

As to those who were ordained by mere Priests, can the Author of the
Prejudices be ignorant that the Distinction of a Bishop and a Priest or
Minister, as if they had two differing Offices, is not only a thing that they
cannot prove out of the Scripture, but that even contradicts the express words
of the Scripture, where Bishops and Priests are the names of one and the same
Office, from whence it follows that the Priests having by their first
Institution a Right to confer Ordination, that Right cannot be taken from them
by merely humane Rules. Can the Author of the Prejudices be ignorant that Saint
Jerome, Hilary the Deacon, and after them Hincmar, wrote formarly touching the
Unity, or as they speak the Identity of a Priest and a Bishop in the beginning
of the Church, and about the first rise of that distinction which was
afterward made of them into two different charges? Can he be ignorant that
Saint Augustine himself, writing to Saint Jerome, refers that difference not to
the first Institution of the Ministry, but merely to an Ecclesiastical use.
Although, says he, that by different Terms of honor the custom of the Church
has now brought in the Episcopacy to be above the Priesthood, yet Augustine is
in many things beneath Jerome? Can he be ignorant that some Fathers Teach us
that the Ordination of a Priest and a Bishop are but one and the same
Ordination, and not two, which distinctly shows that they are but one and the
same Office? And as to the right of making Ordinations, can the Author of the
Prejudices deny that Saint Paul speaks of the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery? Can he deny that the Priests did not heretofore ordain, as well as
the Bishops? Does not Eutychius Patriarch of Alexandria relate that Saint Mark
setting up Ananias to be Patriarch of that same Church of Alexandria,
established also twelve Priests with him, to the end says he, that when the Sea
should be vacant, it should be filled by one of them, and that the Eleven that
remained should lay their hands on him and bless and create the Patriarch; and
that afterward they should choose another man and make him a Priest in the
place of him who should be chosen Patriarch, and that by that means the number
of Twelve might remain always complete? And does not Saint Jerome, more Ancient
then Eutychius say to the same sense, that at Alexandria down from Saint Mark
the Evangelist unto Heraclius and Dionysius Bishops, the Priests always took
out one from among themselves whom they set in the highest Seat and called him
Bishop, after the same manner, says he as an Army makes an Emperor, or as if
the Deacons should choose one out of themselves and call him their Archdeacon?
Does not Cassian relate the story of a certain young man named Daniel, who
lived among the Monks of Egypt about the year 420. and who was first made
Deacon, and in the end Priest by his Abbot called Paphnutius, who was himself
but a Priest? Does not Baronius himself say after Anastasius, that after the
Death of Pope Vigilius in the year 555. Pelagius his Successor received his
Ordination at the hands of two Bishops and a Priest of Ostia named Andrew?
Which shows that even then the Priests were not wholly excluded the Right of
Ordination. They were not yet absolutely so in the seventh Century, since we
learn from Bede's History, That the Monks and Priests of the Isle of Jovan in
Scotland not only ordained Priests among them, but even Bishops also, and that
they sent them into England, and that those Bishops were under their Abbot, who
was himself but a mere Priest.

It is therefore a Right that is naturally belonging to the Priests and of
which they cannot be deprived by humane Constitution, and Orders, which cannot
hinder that Right from always remaining annexed to their Office, and that they
may not reducs it into Act when the necessity of the Church requires it. In
effect, William Bishop of Paris has made no scruple to say according to his
Hypothesis, That if there were no more but three mere Priests in the World, one
of them must needs consecrate the other to be a Bishop and the other to be an
Archbishop. And to speak my own Thoughts freely, it seems to me, that that
firm opinion of the absolute necessity of Episcopacy, that goes so high as to
own no Church, or Call, or Ministry, or Sacraments, or Salvation in the World,
where there are no Episcopal Ordinations, although there should be the True
Faith, the True Doctrine and Piety there, and which would that all Religion
should depend on a Formality, and even on a Formality that we have shown to be
of no other than Humane Institution, that Opinion I say cannot be looked on
otherwise then as the very worst character and mark of the highest Hypocricy, a
piece of Pharisaism throughout, that strains at a Gnat when it swallows a
Camel, and I cannot avoid having at least a contempt of those kind of thoughts,
and a compassion for those who fill their heads with them.

I come now to that which the Author of the Prejudices propounds, That if the
Church of Rome were so corrupted as we hold, its Calls could not be lawful,
from whence it follows that our First Reformers, who had received their
Ordination from the Hands of the Bishops of that Church, had received no other
Call than what was Null, and Unlawful. But we have answered him already, that
although the Latin Church before the Reformation was very much corrupted, the
Essence of the Ministry did not fail to be preserved in it, and that though its
Calls were very [rude] and confused, yet they did not cease to be Calls and to
be lawful ones, in proportion to that Good which remained in that Society
wherein God yet kept the Truly Faithful. The Foundation of the Christian
Doctrine yet remaining there with its Efficacy, which was found in some
persons, the Ministry, and by consequence their Calls, were yet lawful in that
respect, and the first Reformers, who referred those which they received to
their right and lawful use, in freeing them from that impurity which they had
they were by that means rectifyed, purifyed, and freed from that ill which they
had. It is to no purpose that he alleadges the Authority of some Ancients who
seem to have held Ordinations made by Heretics Null, for he cannot deny that
the common Opinion of the Church was not contrary to it, that all that ought to
be held for good and lawful, that was good and lawful in it self, which the
Heretical or Schismatical Society held, and to be approved rather than denied.
This is what Saint Augustine expressly August. de Bapt. contr. Donat. lib. 3
sub finem.
teaches. Not only, says he, our Fathers who lived before Cyprian and
Agrippin, but those also who lived since, have observed that wholsome Custom
of approving and not denying all that which they have found to be Divine and
Lavvful that Heretics and Schismatics preserved entire, and of rejecting that
which they beheld to be foreign and erroneous among them. Let the Author of
the Prejudices read what that Father has vvrote not only in his own name, but
in the Name of the whole Church, against Parmenio and the other Donatists,
who said that Baptism truly remained among Heretics, but not the Right to
Administer Baptism, and he will find that Saint Augustine strongly maintains
that the Right of Ordination, upon which that of administering Baptism depends,
remains even among Heretics and Schismatics, in respect of all that good that
remains there. I have said elsewhere, that in the Confusions of Arianism diverse
Ordinations made by Arian Bishops were not held to be Null. In effect that of
Meletius ordained by the Eudoxians, who had it disputed for some time, by some
few, was at last generally acknowledged to be lavvful, and that of Faelix
Bishops of Rome, which was also made by the Arians was never called in
question, both the one and the other purifying their Ministry by returning to
the Orthodox Faith.

I should have shut up this Chapter, and with it this work, if I did not
further think my self bound to answer that great and solemn defiance of the
Author of the Prejudices about the validity of my Baptism, not that I pretend
to vie with him in his manner of disputing, but merely because I believe that
I have been very well baptized. I do not fear, says he, openly to maintain to
Monsieur Claude, That remaining in the Principles of his sect, he neither has
nor can have any rational assurance of the Prejug. chap. 17. page 422.
validity of the Baptism which is administered and approved in their Communion.
That by consequence he does not know whether he is Baptized, or whether any
Calvinist ever was. That all the certainty he can pretend to have is rash and
ill grounded: That it can be no other than a certainty of Fancy and Humor and
not of Knowledge and Truth, and that he can never have a rational one but in
sincerely acknowledging the falseness of the Principles of his Religion, and in
rendering that deference and submission to the Catholic Church which he ows it.
I speak to him purposely after this manner to engage him the more to clear out
this matter to us. It was not necessary for that to speak to me after that
manner, for he very well knows that I have all the readiness in the World to
content him. A word is enough without any heat and Elevation of voice to make
me obey. What does he then desire I should do? To show him, he adds, what he
has to do, and what that proof ought necessarily to include, I Page 4 24.
beseech him to note that the validity of the Baptism of the Calvinists depends
upon four Principles. Let him blot out the word Beseech, which agrees neither
with the manner in which he speaks to me, nor with that wherewith I desire to
obey him. First, as they were all Baptized in their Infancy, they must, to the
end they may be certain that their Baptism was good, be assured, that the
Baptism of Infants be good, and that the Anabaptists who deny it are in an
Error. Secondly, as they were all Baptized by Sprinkling and not by Immersion,
they cannot further be assured of the validity of their Baptism, unless they
know certainly that Baptism by sprinkling is good, and that Immersion is not
necessary, In the third place, as they all proceeded either mediately or
immediately from the Catholic Church, which they so loudly accuse of Heresy
and Idolatry, it necessarily follows, that they were all Baptized either
mediately or immediately by Heretics. They cannot therefore have rational
Certainty of their being Baptized, unless at least they are assured, That the
Baptism which they received in an Heretical Communion is good, or that that
which is administered by a man not Baptized, does not fail to be good. In fine,
the Calvenists being persuaded on one side that Baptism administered by Laymen
is Null and of no effect, and on the other, that the Catholic Priests and
Bishops are false Priests and false Bishops, yet notwithstanding as they derive
their Baptism from those false Priests and false Bishops, they must needs show
us by the Scripture the agreement of these opinions, and that they can prove by
clear and express passages out of it, that although the Call of the Catholic
Priests should be Null and Unlawful, they have yet nevertheless that Power of
Baptising which the Laity has not.

See here therefore what I have to do; but I need to say but a word to each
point. I say then as to the first, That when the Scripture has said, Be
Baptized every one of you in the Name of Acts 2. 38, 39.
Jesus Christ, for the Promise is to you, and to your Children, and to all that
are a far off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call, it has clearly
established Infant Baptism. For since Baptism ought to be given to them to whom
the promise is made, and that that is made to our Children as well as to us, it
ought to be given not only to us, but to our Children. So that without going
any further, I have in that respect all the Certainty that I can reasonably
desire.

As to the second, I say that the Word Baptize, equally signifying in the
Original Tongue to plunge and to wash, and being used diverse times in this
latter sense, as it may appear in the Translation of Mons in the seventh of
Saint Mark, and eleventh of Saint Luke, and there being moreover nothing in the
Scripture that precisely enjoins Immersion or forbids Aspersion, it is my part
to believe that in the Thoughts of Jesus Christ those two ways of Baptizing
are indifferent, and that so much the more as I know the Spirit of the Gospel
is not so nice and punctual about forms, or the manners of External Actions,
which is proper to Superstition. So that I have further for that all the
Assurance that I ought to have.

For the third, being certain as I am by the Promises of Jesus Christ, that God
has always Preserved a True Church in the World, that is to say, the Truly
Faithful howsoever mixed they may have been with the Worldly, I am assured also
that the Baptism which was Administered not only before the Reformation, but
since, in the Latin Church, and in other Christian-Societies where the Essence
of Baptism remains, is good because that being made in the Name of the Father,
the Son and the Holy Ghost, it is the Baptism of the True Church, although it
be administered by Persons filled with Errors and Superstitions. Baptism is not
theirs, they are only the Ministers of it. That Sacrament belongs to God and
his Truly Faithful ones, in what Quarter of the World soever they be. That same
Scripture that says, That the Promise is made to us and to our Children, and
to all that are a far of, even as many as the Lord shall call, says by a
necessary Consequence, that the Seal of that Promise, which is Baptism, and all
the other Rights of the Covenant of Jesus Christ, belongs to us and to our
Children, that is to say, to the Truly Faithful. The Heretics who Administer
it, do not do it, as a good that belongs to them under that Quality, for in
that respect nothing belongs to them, but as a good that belongs to the True
Church, the Dispensation whereof they have, by the part which they have yet
with her. For they Baptize not by that which divides them from the truly
Faithful, but by that which after some manner Associates and unites them with
them. It is therefore the Baptism of the True Church which they give and not
that of Heresy, it is the Church that Baptises by them, and in that respect
they are yet, as I have said, the Dispensers of its goods. If the Author of the
Prejudices desires yet further to see a greater Number ot proofs drawn from the
same Scripture that should Establish this Truth, he needs but to read what
Saint Augustine has wrote in his Treatise against the Epistle of Parmenio, and
that of Baptism against the Donatists, and he will learn there not to make any
more Questions of that Nature.

I know not for the rest, whether he as well as the others of his Communion who
shall take the pains to read this work, will be satisfied. But I dare say at
least that I have done all that was possible for me to do, to set before them,
without Offense, the Truths that are most Important for them to know. It
belongs to them to make a serious Reflection upon that which I have represented
to them, and upon the present State of Christianity, which the profaneness,
Impiety, and Debauchery of men's Minds do every day reduce into an Evident
danger of ruin, if we do not bring a Remedy, both on the one and the other
side. Nevertheless instead of having in view that grand Interest upon which the
Glory of God wholly depends, and the Salvation of men, they apply themselves
only to destroy us, and their Passion prevails to that height, that they do not
take heed of making irreparable Breaches in Religion, as that is, of bringing
the Use and Authority of the Holy Scripture to nothing, provided they can but
do us any Mischief. But although they should do whatsoever they pleased, God
would always be a Witness on our Side that in the Foundation of the Cause,
that upon which we have Separated from them, is the Love which we have for the
Truth, and the Desire that we have to Work out our own Salvation. And to let
them see that it is not a false Prejudice that Corrupts us, let them go through
all the Christian Communions that are in the world, Let them Judge in cold
blood, and I am assured that they will come to a serious Agreement that ours is
the purest Church, nd the most approaching to the Primitive one. Our Opinions
are the Fundamental Opinions of Religion, which are great, Solid and
Convincing; our Worship has nothing that is not Evangelical, for it consists in
Prayers to God, in Thanksgivings, in Singing of Psalms, in Celebration of
Fasts, in Humiliation, in Acts of Repentance, in tears and groans, when we are
pressed with the thoughts of our Sins and the Wrath of God; our Morals consist
more in Exhortations, in Censures, in Corrections, in Threatenings on Gods side,
in Representations of the Motives that bind us to do good Works, then in
unprofitable decisions of Cases of Conscience. Our Government is plain, remote
from the Formalities of the Barreau.
Bar, founded as much as can be upon good Reason, Justice and Charity, but very
opposite to the Maxims of Humane Policy, and especially to Ambition,
Covetousness, and Vanity, which we believe to be the Mortal Enemies of
Religion. Every one in the World knows that, and yet notwithstanding the Author
of the Prejudices, and all those who with him take false lights, have not
failed to cry out against us not only after a very uncharitable but an
unchristian manner. As for us, we shall always pray to God for those who will
not Love us, we shall bless them that Curse us, but we shall also with Gamaliel
give them this Advice, Take heed that in Tormenting us, you do not fight
against God, instead of fighting with him. Let us pray on both sides that he
would give us his Blessing and his Peace, and that he would make us to do his
Will.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS of the CHAPTERS.
The First Part. Wherein it is shown that our Ancestors were obliged to Examine
by themselves the State of Religion and of the Church, in their Days CHap. I.
General Considerations upon this Controversy. The Division of this Treatise
Page 1. Chap. II. That the State of the Government of the Latin Church some
Ages ago, gave to our Fathers Prejudices of its Corruption in Doctrine and
Worship, sufficient to drive them more nearly to Examine their Religion. Page
8. Chap. III. That the External State of that Religion it self, had in the
times of our Fathers Signs of its Corruption sufficient to afford them just
Motives to Examine it, Page 23. Chap. IV. That such a Corruption of the Latin
Church as our Fathers had conceived, was no ways an Impossible thing. Page 37.
Chap. V. More particular Reflections upon that privilege of Infallibility
which they ascribe to the Church, and of its Authority. Page 45. Chap. VI. An
Examination of the Proofs which they produce to Establish the Infallibility of
the Church-of Rome. Page 54. Chap. VII. That the Authority of the Prelates of
the Latin Church had not any Right to bind our Fathers to yield a blind
Obedience to them, or to hinder them from Examining their Doctrines. Page 75.
Chap. VIII. A further Examination of that Authority of the Prelates, and that
Absolute Obedience which they pretend ought to be given them. Page 85. Chap.
IX. An Examen of those Reasons they Allege to Establish that Sovereign
Authority of the Prelates in the Latin Church. Page 109.
The Second Part. Of the Justice of the REFORMATION. CHap. I. That our Fathers
could not expect a Reformation either from the hands of the Popes, or from
those of the Prelates. Page 125. Chap. II. A Confirmation of the same thing,
from the History of that which passed in the first Quarrels of Luther with the
Conrt of Rome concerning Indulgences. Page 142. Chap. III. That our Fathers,
not being able any more to hope for a Reformation on the part of the Pope or
his Prelates, were indispensably bound to provide for their own Salvation, and
to Reform themselves. Page 156. Chap. IV. That our Fathers had a Lawful and
sufficient Call to Reform themselves, and to labor to Reform others. Page 166.
Chap. V. An Answer to the Objections that are made against the Persons of the
Reformers. Page 177. Chap. VI. A further Justification of the first Reformers
against the Objections of the Author of the Prejudices contained in his Tenth
and Eleventh Chapters. Page 196. Chap. VII. An Answer to the Twelfth and
Thirteenth Chapters of the Prejudices. Page 222. Chap. VIII. That our Fathers
in their Design of Reforming themselves, were bound to take the Holy Scriptures
alone for the Rule of their Faith. Page 241 Chap. IX. An Examination of the
Objections which the Author of the Prejudices makes against the Scripture. Page
260.
The Third Part. Of the Obligation and Necessity that lay-upon our Fathers to
separate themselves from the Church of Rome. CHap. I. That our Fathers had
just, sufficient, and necessary Causes for their Separation, supposing that
they had Right at the Bottom, in the Controverted Points. Page 1. Chap. II.
That our Fathers were bound to Separate themselves from the Body of those who
possessed the Ministry in the Church, and particularly in the Sea of Rome,
supposing that they had a Right at the Foundation. Page 15. Chap. III. That the
Conduct of the Court of Rome, and those of her Party, in respect of the
Protestants, has given them a just cause to separate themselves from them,
supposing that they had Right at the Foundation. Page 53. Chap. IV. An
Examination of the Objection of the Author of the Prejudices taken out of the
Dispute of Saint Augustine against the Schism of the Donatists. Page 79. Chap.
V. A further Examination of the Reasoning of the Author of the Prejudices upon
the Subject of our Separation. Page 113.
The Fourth Part. Of the Right that our Fathers had to hold a Christian Society
among themselves, by Public Assemblies, and the Exercise of the Ministry.
CHap. 1. That our Fathers had a Right to have their Church Assemblies separate
from those of the Church of Rome, on the Supposition that they were right in
the Foundation. Page 1. Chap. II.That the Society of the Protestants is not a
new Cburch. Page 28. Chap. III. That the Ministry Exercised in the Communion of
the Protestants, is Lawful; and that the Call of their Ministers is so also.
Page 48. Chap. IV. An Answer to the Objections of the Author of the Prejudices
about the Call of the first Reformers, and the Validity of our Baptism. P. 84,

The End of the CONTENTS of the CHAPTERS.
Advertisement.
THere is newly Published a Book Entitled, (...) or, a Treatise, wherein you
have, 1. The Divine Auhtority of the Holy Scriptures proved by undeniable
Demonstrations, and the Cavils of Objectors confuted. 2. A Continuation of the
Metaphors, Allegories, and Express Similitudes of the Old and New Testament
gradually expounded, Parallel wise, with short Inferences from each. 3. Sacred
Phylologie, viz. the Schemes and Figures in Sriipture reduced under their
proper Heads, with a brief Explication of the most obscure. 4. A Treatise of
the Types, Parables, and Allegories in the Old and New Testament. 5. Plain and
Evident Demonstrations, that by the Great Whore (Mystery Babylon) is meant the
Papal Hierarchy, or present Church of Rome. The whole Work being partly
Compiled, and partly Translated from the Works of many Learned and Orthodox
VVriters, Ancient and Modern; completing what was intended by the Undertakers,
in order to explain that difficult part of the Word of God: It being encouraged
and recommended by diverse Worthy Ministers of London, as useful for all
Students in Sacred Writ. Sold by John Hancock at the Three Bibles over against
the Royal Exchange in Cornhil, and Benj. Alsop at the Angel and Bible in the
Poultrey, over against the Compter.


