

THE HISTORY OF THE GLORIOUS Life, Reign, and Death Of the ILLUSTRIOUS Queen
ELIZABETH.

CONTAINING

An Account by what means the Reformation was promoted and established, and
what Obstructions it met with: the Assistance she gave to all Protestants
abroad; the several Attempts of the Papists upon her Life; the Excommunications
of Rome; Bishop Jewel's Challenge to the Papists; the several Victories she
gained; and more particularly that in 1588; with all the other Remarkable
Occurrences of that time.

By S. CLARK.

Illustrated with Pictures of some considerable matters, curiously engraven in
Copper Plates.

London, Printed for Henry Rodes, next door to the Bear Tavern, near Bride
Lane, in Fleet Street. 1682.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
I Here present thee with the Glorious Life and Reign of the ever Renowned
Queen Elizabeth; a Piece as full of various Occurrences and Transactions, as
can well be comprehended in so small a Volume. Thou have here an Account of the
many Persecutions she suffered both under the Reign of her Father, and that of
her Sister, from her Mortal Enemies, the Blood-thirsty Papists; and how, after
that, it had pleased God to shield her from all their Execrable Designs and
Attempts. Being placed upon the Throne of her Ancestors, she introduced the
Reformed Religion, regulating it according to the Word of God, the General
Consent of the Fathers, the Practice of the Primitive Times, and the Example of
such Churches as were freest from Superstition and Idolatry. Here is likewise a
Relation of the several Commotions in England, Scotland, and Ireland, and by
what means raised and suppressed. Thou art here also entertained with a
Faithful Narrative of the Supplies she gave to those of the Reformed Religion
abroad, and the Courses she took to defend and promote Protestantism in the
Dominions of her Neighbors; The whole Affair of the Queen of Scots is herein
couched; the several Conspiracies of the Papists against her Life during her
Reign, inserted, and the utter Defeat of the, so called, Invincible Armado in
Eighty Eight, represented; with all her other Victories, both over the French
and Spaniard; and an Account of the Veneration and Respect that the Great Turk
himself, and the most barbarous Princes of that time, had for this Illustrious
Queen; with all the other material Circumstances of her Victorious Life and
Reign: wherein, if thou meetest with that Satisfaction I desire thee, I shall
think my Endeavors well bestowed.

S. CLARK.

THE HISTORY OF THE Life, and Glorious Reign OF Queen ELIZABETH.
ELizabeth, the youngest Daughter of King Henry the Eighth, was born at
Greenwich on the 7th day of September 1533. Her Mother being Queen Anne Bollen,
the Eldest Daughter of Thomas Bollen Earl of Wiltshire, and of Elizabeth his
Wife, one of the Daughters of Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk, and Earl Marshal
of England. Now Anne Bollen, in her tender years, attending on Mary the French
Queen, to the Court of France, was, after that Queens return, placed in the
Retinue of the Duchess of Alanzon, where she got, in perfection, both the
French Language and Air. She so abounded in all the Gifts of Nature, that she
became the most celebrated Beauty of that Court; and returned to her own
Country, with all those Advantages that the French Breeding can add to an
English Beauty. Whereupon, being admitted amongst the Queen's Maids of Honor,
at the Age of two and twenty years, King Henry being thirty eight years old,
and overcome with the Excellency of her Charms, and the gracefulness of her
Behavior, endeavored to make her his Wife, in hopes of Issue Male.

Now some time before this Lady's return from France, King Henry, being, after
seventeen years Marriage, something disgusted with the Bigottry, Reservedness,
and Spanish Gravity of Queen Katharine, he became very susceptible of the
Doubts and Scruples that were insinuated by the Ministers of the French King,
concerning the lawfulness of his Marriage with Queen Katharine, his Brother
Arthur's Wife. The like being started by those of the Emperor, concerning the
Legitimation of the Lady Mary, and all these fomented by Cardinal Wolsey; who
being disappointed of the Popedom, and the Archbishopric of Toledo, both which
the Emperor had flattered his hopes with; He resolved to promote a Divorce,
for the better effecting his Revenge on the Emperor; and the Measures he had
taken with France, by proposing a Match between Henry and that King's Sister,
and concluding a League with the French, when they were at the lowest Ebb of
Fortune. In consideration of which, the English remitted unto them a Debt of
500000 Crowns, partly accruing by some former Contracts, and partly for the
payment of the Forfeiture incurred by Charles the Emperor, with which the
French King had charged himself by the Capitulations.

Hereupon, the King makes it his Request to the Pope, that he would send
Delegates into England, to hear and examine this Business: To which end, the
Pope appointed the Cardinals, Campeius and Wolsey: But the Pope did privily
deliver a Bull to Campeius, wherein, seeming to be favorable to the King's
Request, he granted all things, in case it should happen that the Marriage
contracted with Queen Katharine were declared Null, and no Marriage. But this
Bull was either to be concealed or published, according to the Success of the
Emperor's Affairs in Italy. Now were Questions every where started and
handled, Whether it were allowed of by God's Law for the Brother to take to
Wife the Brother's Widow? and if this were forbidden by the Law of God, whether
it might not be made Lawful by the Pope's Dispensation? But when several of the
Universities of Christendom, as likewise many of the Learned men of that Age,
had asserted such a Marriage to be repugnant to the Sacred Laws of both
Testaments, notwithstanding the Pope's Dispensation, the King became daily more
charmed with Anne Bollen; which being discovered by Wolsey, it not only cooled
his Zeal in promoting the Divorce, but made him endeavor, and procure of the
Bishop of Rome, not to confirm the Judgments of the Universities; by reason
that Anne Bollen, being extremely addicted to the Doctrine of the Protestants,
had conceived a great Aversion against him for his Pride and Ambition.
Whereupon the Pope, notwithstanding the Supplications of the Prelates,
Nobility, and Clergy of England, for the confirming, by his Apostolical
Authority, what the two Universities of this Land, that of Paris, and several
others, as well as diverse Just and Learned men, had affirmed to be true, and
were ready to maintain and defend, as well by Word as Writing; I say,
notwithstanding such manifold Assertions, the Cause being prolonged and
delayed, both at Rome and in England, without Consideration had to the King's
having defended the Apostolic See by his Sword, Pen, Word and Authority, the
King grows exasperated at the Court of Rome, and resolves to make way through
all Obstacles which might stand betwixt Him and the accomplishment of his
Desires; wherefore he first sends back Campeius, an Alien born, then caused
Wolsey to be Indicted and Attainted in a (...)nire; and not long after, by the
counsel of Thomas Cromwell, (who ^^d formerly solicited the Cardinal's Business
i^ the Legantine Court) involves the whole Body of the Clergy in the same Crime
with him. By the Instigations and ^^^swasions of this man, he requires the
Clergy to acknowledge Him for Supreme Head, on Earth, of the Church of England;
nor that any new Canons or Constitutions could be made or executed, otherwise
than by his Consent and Allowance. Thus, the King, being grown more confident
in the Equity and Justice of his Cause, by the Determinations of most of the
Universities abroad, and his own Clergy at home, and wanting no Encouragement
from the French King, for the promoting of his business; he advanced Anne
Bollen to the Honor of Marchioness of Pembroke, took her to Wife, and gave
Order for her being inaugurated Queen.

By this Marriage, as we have already said, was born the Lady Elizabeth. And
shortly after, the said Marriage contracted with Queen Katharine, was, by the
Authority of the Parliament, judged void and incestuous; and this with Queen
Anne, lawful, and agreeeable to the Word of God, the Crown to be entayled on
the Kings Heirs Males, to be begotten on her Body, and for default o^ such
Issue, on the Princess Elizabeth; and Queen Katharine's Daughter, the Lady
Mary, was declared illegitimate: an Oath was likewise devised in defense of the
said Succession, and some Persons executed for the refusal of that Oath. And
Pope Paul the Third, designing to renew His Sentence against this Marriage, the
States of the Realm, assembled in Parliament, confirmed what the Clergy had
before declared, that is, That the King was Supreme Head of the Church of
England, with all manner of Authority to reform Errors, Heresies, and Abuses in
the same. However, She had scarce been fully married three Years, than that,
miscarrying of a Son, the King grew extremely discontented, looking upon it as
an Argument of Gods displeasure, as being as much offended at this second
Marriage, as he was at the first; And though she used all lawful Arts of Love
and Entertainment for the inflaming his Passion, he grew as weary of her gay
and merry Humor, as he had been formerly at the Gravity and Reservedness of
Katharine. So that falling in love with Jane Ser(...), one of the Queens Maids
of Honor, and a person of extraordinary Pe^^^y, He put in practice all the
cruel Acts that His Jealousy and Aversion to the present Queen could inspire
him with; and at length, to make way for his New Passion, he caused Queen Ann
to be brought to her Trial, as being accused of Adultery and Incest. And being
condemned, though she made so good a defense as persuaded all the world of her
Innocenee; she went to the Sca^fold with great Cheerfulness, Praying most
fervently for the King, and asserting her Innocence to the very last.

The King, the very next day after, marryeth Jane Seymour, and causes a Solemn
Instrument to pass under the Seal of the Archbishop of Canterbury, by which
the Marriage with Anne Bollen is declared null and void, and the Lady
Elizabeth, the only Issue of this Marriage, to be illegitimate; which Sentence
was pronounced at Lambeth on the 17th of May following, in the presence of
several of the Principal Ministers, Nobility and Clergy, and was afterward
confirmed by Authority of Parliament.

Queen Jane fell in labor of Pri(...) Edward, and died presently after the
Prince was brought into the World; who was cut out of her Womb, and succeeded
his Father in his Kingdom. The King being little concerned at his Wives Death,
looks out for New Amors both in France and Italy, that he might thereby
procure Friends, and strengthen himself by Alliances. For that he was grown
fearful of the Nobility, lest they, who had already influenced several
Commotions and Rebellions at home, should likewise join with a foreign Enemy;
for which reason, he caused several of them to be executed. He likewise put
frequently to Death Religious Men, for their stiff and resolute Asserting the
Pope's Authority, and causes the great, as well as he had already done the
small Abbeys, to be demolished, and confiscated their Wealth to his own use;
which he did by reason of vicious Lives and dissolute Courses they led in those
Religious Houses; and he likewise causes the Protestants to be burned as
Heretics, by a Law called the six Articles, made against those who ^mpugned
the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, touching Transubstantiation, one ^ind of
the Eucharist, the unmarried life of Priests, Vows, private Mass, and Auricular
Confession. By these means, being grown terrible to his own Subjects, and being
looked upon as Tyrannical by Foreigners; he was both rejected by Mary of
Lorrain, Daughter to the Duke of Guise, whom he demanded in marriage, and was
Rival therein to James King of Sootland, and likewise by Christiana of Denmark,
Duchess of Millain, Niece to Charles the 5th, who declared, That she would
willingly give an Arm, but was loath to purchase with her Head the Honor and
Happiness of being Queen of England. At length, after much difficulty, he
obtained Anne of Cleve to Wife, while he made it his business to acquire the
friendship of the Protestants in Germany. But she, far from being charming, was
accused of certain Female Weaknesses, and having likewise formerly been
betrothed to the Duke of Lorraine's Son; he put her away and married Katharine
Howard Daughter to Edmund Howard, and Niece to the Duke of Norfolk: Whom,
within a year after, he caused to be beheaded as convicted of Incontinency
before Marriage, and took to Wife Katharine Parr, the Daughter of a Knight,
whom he left a second time a widow.

And now, finding that the intemperance of his Youth had much decayed his Body,
and being enraged against the French, for that they had underhand given Aid to
the Scots against the English, he made a League with the Emperor Charles,
against the most Christian King, thereupon designing to invade France; and
thought convenient to settle first the Succession; to which end, he proposed to
the two Houses of Parliament, that if he and his Son Prince Edward should
decease without Issue, first the Lady. Mary, and if she should fail of Issue,
then the Lady Elizabeth should succeed to the Crown. But in case all these
should die without issue, that then the Crown of England should be devolved
upon those, whom he should assign it to, either by his Letters Patents, or by
his last Will and Testament, which was unanimously agreed to and enacted, upon
pain of high Treason. After his re^^^^ home from the taking of Bolloign,
finding his Exchequer drained by that Expedition, and England distracted
through the new Opinions that daily arose, and the People dissatisfied, to see
the Wealth of the Land exhausted to so little Advantage; their Ancient
Structures demolished, the Blood of the Nobility and others, both Papists and
Protestants, promiscuously spilt, and the Country encumbered with a Scottish
War; taking all these Circumstances to heart, and being grown extraordinary
Corpulent, he died of a Virulent Inflammation in his Leg, in the beginning of
the Year 1547.

He was succeeded by Prince Edward, his Son, though not fully ten years old, of
whose Person the Earl of Hartford, his Uncle, was made Governor, and Protector
of the Kingdom, until he should have attained the Age of Eighteen years* and as
such was proclaimed in all Parts of London. It was under his happy Government,
that the English gained a great Victory over the Scots, whilst they were
demanding, with Sword in hand, the performance of a Treaty touching a Match
between King Edward and Mary Queen of Scotland; the severe Law of the Si^
Articles, and others, were repealed, that were made by Henry the Eighth against
the Protestants; those for abolishing the Pope's Authority, are confirmed, the
Mass is abrogated, Images are taken out of Churches, the Books of both
Testaments printed in English, Divine Service celebrated in the same Tongue,
and both kinds ministered in the Sacraments. At which, the Romanists being
enraged, they put in practice all their Arts for the making a stop to such fair
beginnings, caused Dissension to be sowed amongst the Nobility, and thereby the
loss of several considerable Places both in France and Scotland, promoted
Tumults, Factions, debasing of Money, and all other things that might stir up
the People to Rebellion, procured the Protector to be accused, condemned, and
beheaded, for Felony, and at length removed the King himself, by an untimely
Death, whether by Poison or otherwise is uncertain, apprehending and hating him
for his extraordinary Virtues, which much surpassed what could have been
expected from his tender years.

During these sad Occurrences, the Duke of Northumberland, being ^ound by the
Papists to be the fittest Instrument for the effecting their Designs, as being
of their own Religion, under a Protestant Mask, they made Use of him for the
bringing about their Ends, by sowing Distraction in the Nation, by setting the
Protector and his Brother Thomas Seymour at variance, which he effected,
through a Female Emulation between the Duchess of Somerset, the Protector's
Wife, and the Queen Dowager, the Wife of Thomas. And amongst other Articles of
High Treason that were laid to Thomas his charge, was that of intending to
seize the King, and of taking the Lady Elizabeth, the King's Sister, to Wife.
But she, being wholly ignorant of this business, and freeing her self from all
suspicion, and advancing toward a mature Age, she was not only extremely
beloved by the King her Brother (who never called her by any other Name than
his sweet Sister Temperance) but likewise by the Nobility, and the whole Nation
in general.

King Edward, by the Practices of the Duke of Northumberland, having declared
the Lady Jane Gray for his Successor, she was immediately after his Decease
publicly proclaimed Queen of England: and for the maintaining her in that
Degree, pretensions were put forward; as first, the Invalidity of the Lady
Mary's and Elizabeth's Mother's Marriage; both being made void by Legal
Sentences of Divorce, and those Divorces ratified by Acts of Parliament, which
Acts of the Lady Mary's and Lady Elizabeth's Illegitimation, were never duly
repealed: (Notwithstanding that the King their Father had by the same Act
declared, that they should succeed in order after Edward the Sixth, in case he
failed of Issue.) Secondly, It was pretended, that these two Sisters, being but
of half Blood to the Deceased King, (admitting them to have been born in lawful
Wedlock) were not in a capacity by the Common Law to be Heirs unto him, or to
succeed in any part of that Inheritance, which came ununto him by his Father.
Now the Lady Jane's Mother, being the Lady Frances, Daughter, and one of the
Coheirs of Charles Brandon, the late Duke of Suffolk, by Mary his Wife, Queen
Dowager to Lewis the Twelfth of France, and youngest Daughter to King Henry the
Seventh, Grandfather to King Edward, now deceased: Now, I say, the Lady
Frances, her Mother, might seem both by the Law of Nature and the Right of
Succession, to have precedence in Title before her; yet she received no injury,
because she was willing to pass by all her personal Claims for the Preferment
of her Daughter. It was also given out, that Henry the Eighth, by his last Will
and Testament, conveyed the Title of the Crown to the Lady Jane Gray: and
moreover, Politic Reasons and Pretexts were used, as that there was an
unavoidable danger of reducing this Kingdom under the Vassalage and Servitude
of the Bishop of Rome, in case either of the King's two Sisters should marry
with a Foreign Prince of that Religion, or otherwise of themselves revoke the
Bishop of Rome's Authority, and subject the English to a Popish Yoke.

But, through the extraordinary Affection the Nobility and Commons had for the
Daughters of King Henry the 8th, this great Storm was dispersed within the
space of twenty days, to the fatal End of the Duke of Northumberland, and the
Lady Jane: and the Lady Mary was proclaimed Queen throughout all England. And
at her coming to London with an Army, the Lady Elizabeth met her with five
hundred Horse, (notwithstanding the offers that had been made her by the Duke,
of a vast Sum of money, and certain Lands, if she would resign her Title to the
Crown) lest she should fail her Sister's, and her own Cause, which was then in
hand.

Queen Mary caused, in the first Parliament that she held, all those Acts to be
repealed, that had been made against the Marriage of Queen Katharine, her
Mother, and King Henry the 8th, and the Marriage was judged to be agreeable to
the Laws of God, and to all intents valid and available. The same Form also of
Religion, and Service of God, and Administration of the Sacraments, which had
been in use at the Death of Henry the 8th, were re-established; however,
without any acknowledgment or mention at all of the Pope's Authority;
notwithstanding all the Efforts of the Queen and Cardinal Pool: for the
Parliament were very unwilling to admit and acknowledge the Authority of the
Bishop of Rome, which was now shaken off. Neither would they suffer that the
Queen should lay down the Title of Supreme Head of the Church of England, unto
which most of the Nobility, Bishops, and Commons, had sworn to Henry the 8th,
his Heirs and Successors. But the Queen was very desirous to lay down this
Title, as believing that her Pretensions to the Crown had no better Foundation
than the Authority of the Bishop of Rome; who had maintained her Cause, after
that her father had procured her to be declared Illegitimate. And indeed, at
this time, the apprehensions of the English were so great of Popery, and of
being inslaved by it is means, and by the Match that was concluded with Phillip,
to the Yoke of Spain, as that it caused some to break out into Rebellion, as
Wyat and others.

But notwithstanding the Papists had got their will, by procuring, after much
opposition, the Roman Religion to be established in the Kingdom, by authority
of Parliament, and those Acts to be repealed that had been made against the Sea
of Rome, in the time of Henry the 8th, and Edward the sixth; yet there being no
Issue to be expected from the Queen, seeing she was forty Years old, Weak and
Infirm, they stood in fear of the Lady Elizabeth, who had gained the hearts of
all the Nation, by her Loyal and Prudent Conduct, being the Admiration of her
Age, both for her Beauty, and the Qualities of her Mind, and was so
indefatigable in Study, that before she had attained to the Age of Seventeen
Years, she had acquired, to Perfection, both Greek, Latin, and other ancient
Languages, and French, Italian, and other Modern Tongues; and had likewise
gained all other Accomplishments that are necessary to the composing a Perfect
Princess. Thus, being looked upon as a Miracle of Learning and Prudence, as
well by Foreigners as the English, the Papists were sensible, how much it was
their Interest to remove out of the way, a Princess, who seemed threatening the
Fall of their Superstitions here in England; they used all their Arts to
dispose Queen Mary to take away her Life; which the Queen refused to do,
notwithstanding they would have persuaded her, that she was obliged to do every
thing, though never so unjust, that was requisite and necessary for the
promoting and settling the Catholic Religion. And Sir Thomas Wyat, Sir Peter
Carew, and others, having stirred up some Commotions, the Papists, most
maliciously, set Rumors on Foot, that the Lady Elizabeth did countenance, and
was privy to, those Tumults, and that she was to be married to the Earl of
Devonshire. Hereupon, they caused her to be put into Prison, and
notwithstanding, they would have forced several of the Tumultuaries, by
Torture, to have declared her Accessory to their Rising; yet, the Rack was not
able to make them wrong her Innocence; and, such as had seemingly accused her,
in hopes of Advantage, cleared her at the time of their Execution.

But, the Papists having got that Princess into Prison, they were so far from
putting an End to their Persecutions, notwithstanding her Innocence, that they
used her with all the Barbarity imaginable: Insomuch, that the French and
Danish Kings thought it convenient to comfort her, by making her great Offers,
Promises of* doing all that lay in their Power, in her Behalf. But this did but
the more inflame the Rage of her Popish Enemies, who were resolved to take away
her Life, either by accusing her of High Treason, or of Heresy; Hereupon, they
forced her to hear Divine Service, after their Superstitious manner, and to go
likewise to Confession; yet, Cardinal Pool, Bonner, and others of the Bishops,
were not satisfied with this severe and cruel Treatment, but declared, that it
was requisite she should dye, for the Security of the Catholic Religion;
insomuch, that this harsh Usage moved the Spamard himself to pity, and King
Philip, Queen Mary's Husband, interceeded in her Favor, and admiring her
extraordinary Virtues, would have married her to his Son Charles, or, as others
say, designed her for himself, maugre the different Principles of Religion.
And, for this Reason, he broke off the Proposals that were made for the
marrying her to Emanuel Philibert Duke of Savoy. However, he was not able to
gain her for his Son, finding, that the People of England would never permit,
that the next Heir of the Crown should be sent out of the Kingdom. In the mean
time, Queen Mary's Hatred daily increasing against her Sister Elizabeth, this
Lady's Ruin must have been certain, had not it pleased God to divert the
thoughts of it, by the War that Queen Mary declared against France, in favor
of her Husband Philip.

During this War, and the Scots Excursions into England, Calice, and several
other considerable Places being lost, and the Queen finding her self neglected,
laid all these things so to heart, and having lain languishing under a Tympany
and six Months Fever, which then raged over all the Land, she departed this
Life on the 17th of November 1558. having reigned five Years and four Months.

During her Reign, there are said to have perished by the Flames, five Bishops,
twenty one Divines, eight Gentlemen, eighty four Artificers, one hundred
Husbandmen, Servants and Laborers, twenty six Wives, twenty Widows, nine
Virgins, two Boys, and two Infants, the one springing out of the Mothers Womb,
as she was at the Stake, and most inhumanely flung into the Fire in the very
Birth* Besides several others that were whippe^ to death, perished in Prisons,
and others that were condemned for their Faith, and lay ready for Execution, if
they had not been delivered by the seasonable Death of Queen Mary, and the
auspicious Entrance of Queen Elizabeth.

Elizabeth, the only Child then living of King Henry the Eighth, succeeded her
Sister in the Throne, on the 17th of November 1558. And a Parliament having
been convened some time before Queen Mary's Death, after her Dissolution had
been for some hours concealed, the News thereof was carried to the Lords, then
sitting in the House of Peers, who, after a short Debate amongst themselves,
sent a Message to the Speaker of the House of Commons, desiring him and all the
Members of that House to come immediately to them; And they being come, Heath
Archbishop of York, and Lord Chancellor of England, signified unto them, that
the Lord had been pleased to take to his Mercy the late Queen Mary, that by
Right of Succession the Crown did belong to the Princess Elizabeth, and that
therefore they were desired to concur in the proclaiming the new Queen, with
all possible Expedition; which being unanimously agreed to by the House of
Commons she was incontinently proclaimed Queen of England, France, and Ireland,
Defendress of the Faith, in the Palace-yard o^ Westminster, in the presence of
the Lords and Commons, and presently after in Cheap Side, in the presence of
the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Principal Citizens, with great Acclamations, and
extraordinary joy of the People.

It was not long before some of the Lords brought her the News of her Sisters
Death, with the General acknowledgment of her just Title to the Crown*
Whereupon she prepared to remove from Hatfield, where she had been under
Consinement, and set forward with a splen^ did and Royal Train, for London,
being met all along upon the way by the Nobles, Bishops, and crowds of others,
to a^ whom she made so affable a Reception as confirmed the general Opinion of
h^ benign Disposition.

The first-Publick Testimony she gave of her Discretion, after her coming (...)
the Crown, being then twenty five (...) old, was the Choice she made of a
Council, picking out such of Queen Mary's Council, as were well known to be
able men, and such as were firm Pursuers of the True Interests of the Nation;
adding such others, as might moderate and temper them for the Protestant
Religion. She likewise caused new Commissions and Instructions to be sent to
the several Ambassadors as resided in the Courts of the various Princes and
States; but more particularly, her Minister at the Court of Spain, was ordered
to represent unto that King, how sensible she was of the Humanities she had
received from him, in the time of her Persecution and Troubles. Instructions
were likewise dispatched to Sir Edw. Harne, the English Agent at the Court of
Rome, to acquaint the Pope with Queen Mary's Death, and her succeeding upon the
Throne, with a desire that they might mutually receive all good Offices from
one another. But, the Pope's Answer was in the usual rigorous Style of that
Court, That the Kingdom of England was held in Fee of the Apostolic See; that
she could not succed, being illegitimate; that he could not contradict the
Declaration of Clement the Seventh, and Paul the Third that it was a great
Boldness to assume the Name and Government of it, without him yet, being
desirous to show a fatherly Affection, if she will renounce her Pretensions,
and refer her self wholly to his free Dispositions, he will do whatsoever may
be done with the Honor of the Apostolic See.

But the Queen having made him this Complement, did not think of having any
Answer, nor was she much concerned when she had. In the mean time, King Philip,
having had notice of Queen Mary, his Wife's Death, he caused his Ambassador the
Count of Feria, to propose a Match between Queen Elizabeth and himself,
promising to procure a Dispensation from the Court of Rome. These offers put
the Queen into great perplexity, as thinking it but an ill return, to reject a
Prince who had done her such Kindnesses during her Troubles. And the French
King was no less concerned, fearing lest this Kingdom, being again united to
the Spaniard, his Dominions must at length have buckled under so great a Power.
Wherefore, he used all his Endeavors to put a Stop to the Dispensation at the
Court of Rome, and to all the other Places that might be made toward this
Match elsewhere. But he might have spared himself these Troubles; for Queen
Elizabeth never designed to enter into any such Marriage; well knowing, she
would thereby have acknowledged her self to have been born in unlawful Wedlock;
and, likewise considering, that the Marriage of a Woman with her deceased
Sister's Husband, is prohibited by Sacred Authority, as well as the Marriage of
a man with his Brother's Widow, and therefore unlawful, notwithstanding the
Pope's Dispensation: wherefore, she puts off King Philip by degrees, and
with all the Civility and Circumstance imaginable. Now many, who were
imprisoned upon the Account of Religion, were set at Liberty; at which time, a
merry Gentleman of the Court petitioned her in Favor of the Evangelists, who
had been so long imprisoned in a Latin Translation, that they might be set at
Liberty, and walk abroad as formerly, in the English Tongue. To whom she
immediately replied, in this manner, That he should first endeavor to know the
Minds of the Prisoners, who, possibly, desired no such Liberty as was demanded.
Now the Queen, being extremely desirous of promoting the Protestant Religion,
she consulted with her most trusty Counselors, how that Religion might be
established, and the Popish abolished, causing all Dangers to be well poised,
that might arise on this occasion, and the Means and Expedients that might be
used for the preventing and avoiding them. Hereupon, she put into the Principal
Courts of Judicature, and Offices of Trust, such Persons as were well known to
be of the Protestant Religion, or inclined to it, and did the same in the
Commission of the Peace, in every County. The Dangers that might be expected
from abroad, were either from the Bishop of Rome, by his Excommunication, and
exposing the Kingdom to any Invasion; or, from the French King, who, in such a
Juncture, might have broke off the Treaty of Peace at Cambray, and make War
upon the English, in Favor of the Queen of Scots, not only as Enemies, but
likewise, as they are pleased to call the Protestants as Heretics, and might
have procured Scotland to have done the same, being at that time at his
Devotion; or from the Irish, a People extremely bigoted to Popery, and always
very ready to break out into a Rebellion. Now, as for the Thunderbolts of
Rome, they were looked upon as things not at all to be dreaded; but was
resolved that in case the French made any offers of a Peace, they were to be
accepted; if they did not, then offers were to be made to them, by reason that
such a Peace would also comprehend Scotland; but however to stick close to, and
give all manner of Aid and Countenance to those of the Reformed Religion both
in France and Scotland; that the Garrisons in Ireland and upon the Borders of
Scotland should be better manned and fortified, and that the Treaties with the
House of Burgundy, should be confirmed, and friendship continued with the
Spaniard. And now having provided against all Mischances that might happen from
abroad, she proceeded to do all that might conduce toward the advancement and
settling of the Protestant Religion at home, by ordering that none should be
chosen into any Colleges of both Universities, but Protestants; and that all
Roman Catholic Presidents, Heads, and Masters, should be put out and removed,
both from thence, and all other Schools of the Land; and for the curbing the
rash zeal of both Parties, she caused two Proclamations to be published; by one
of which it was commanded, That no man, of what Persuasion soever he was in
Points of Religion, should be suffered from thence* forward to preach in
public, but only such as should be licensed by her Authority; and that all
such as were so licensed or appointed, should forbear preaching upon any Point
which was matter of Controversy, and might conduce rather toward the
exasperating, than the calming of men's Passions: Which Proclamation was
observed with all the care and strictness imaginable. By the other
Proclamation, it was ordered, That no Man, of what Quality or Degree soever,
should presume to alter any thing in the state of Religion, or innovate in any
of the Rites and Ceremonies thereunto belonging; but that all such Rites and
Ceremonies should be observed in all Parish Churches of the Kingdom, as were
then used and retained in her Majesty's Chapel, until ^ome further Order
should be taken in it. Only, it was permitted, and withal required, That the
Litany, the Lords Prayer, the Creed, and the Ten Commandments, should be said
in the English Tongue, and the Epistle and the Gospel, at the time of the High
Mass, should be said in English, which was accordingly performed in all the
Churches of the Kingdom. She likewise ordered the Divine, who officiated in her
Chapel, not to make any Elevation of the Sacrament, for the abolishing the
Popish Superstitious manner of adoring it, which she could not endure should be
done in her Sight, as being wholly contrary to her Judgment and Conscience. And
then she proceeded to the reviewing and correcting of the former Liturgy, which
she committed to the Care of several learned, moderate, and judicious Divines
and Gentlemen; but, she only acquainted four of the Members of her Privy
Council with this Project.

About this time, the Funeral of the Deceased Queen was solemnized with very
great state, in the Abbey of Westminster, and the like Ceremony was performed
within a few days after, for the Death of that Great Emperor Charles the 5th*
who having two Years before resigned the Empire to his Brother, and all his
other vast Dominions to his Son, abandoned all the Grandeurs of this World, and
retired into a Monastery, where he wholly devoted himself to God and his
Service. But notwithstanding, the State of these Solemnities was extraordinary
in it is kind, yet was it far short of the Splendor and Majesty that attended
her Coronation. And as a Preparation thereunto, she restored some to their
former, and raised others to new Honors: Having performed which, she was
Conducted with extraordinary Pomp and Triumph from the Tower, through the City
of London to Westminster, with incredible Joy and Acclamations, and behaving
her self with so Graceful, Modest, and yet Majestic an Air, that as it caused
Tears of Joy to fall from some, so it inspired the Hearts of all, with Prayers
and Thanksgivings; but nothing charmed them more than her accepting of an
English Bible richly Bound; which was presented to her from one of the
Pageants, by a Child representing Truth. At the sight whereof, she kissed both
her hands, and with both her hands she received the Book, and then laid it to
her Bosom, intimating that it should be the nearest of all things to her heart,
being fuller of acknowledgment to the City for that Excellent Present, than for
all the rest she had received from them that day in ^uch Abundance, and
promised to be diligent in the reading of it: By which, and sundry other such
like Pious Acts, she perfectly gained the Affections of all the Spectators, and
by their means, the Hearts of all her other Subjects.

The next day after this Cavalcade, she was Crowned at Westminster, by the
Bishop of Carlisle, all the other Bishops refusing to perform that Office, as
fearing the Pope's Displeasure, and the Fall, or at least some Alteration of
the Catholic Religion in this Kingdom, which they were resolved not to Conform
themselves to. Her Devotion was so great, that every Morning, as soon as she
was up, she spent some time in Prayer, and besides, at the appointed hours, she
went constantly to her private Chapel. In Lent she was Clo^thed in Black,
after the ancient manner, hearing constantly an^ attentively the Sermons,
though she many times said, That she had rather tal^ with God devoutly by
Prayer, than hea^ others speak eloquently of his Divine Majesty. As touching
the Cross, the Blesse^ Virgin, and the Saints, she had no contemptible Opinion,
nor ever spoke otherwise of them than with Reverence, no^ would allow others to
speak irreverently o^ them.

And by the Parliament it was unanimously enacted, That the Lady Elizabeth was
by the Law of God, the Common* Law of England, and the Statutes of the Realm,
the most Certain, Lawful, and Undoubted Queen of England, but however, without
repealing the Statute where in her Father had Excluded her from the Succession,
or without making any Act (...) the Validity of her Mothers Marriage, o^ which
her Title principally depended For which Sir Nicholas Bacon, then Lo(...)
Keeper, was condemned of Impruden^ and Neglect, on whose Judgment the Queen
wholly depended in matters (...) Law, seeing it had been objected by some
against Queen Mary, and for that reason her Ministers had been careful to have
it repealed in what concerned her self. But Bacon not only knew the old Law
Maxim, That the Crown takes away all the defects and stops in blood, and that
from the time the Queen did* assume the Crown, the Fountain was cleared, and
all Attainders and corruption of blood discharged. And besides, he possibly
thought it more prudent that the Queen Mother's Marriage should pass as a thing
unquestionable and no ways subject to dispute, than to ground it upon the
inconstancy of Acts and Statutes. There passed also an Act for the restoring to
the Crown the Tenths and first Fruits, first settled upon it in the time of King
Henry the Eighth, and afterward remitted by Queen Mary. There likewise passed
an Act for the Dissolution of all those Monasteries, Convents, and Religious
Orders, as had been Founded and Established by the late Queen. In the passing
of these Acts there was little Opposition, but when they came to debate of the
Act of Supremacy, it seemed to several a thing both strange and contrary to
Nature and Policy, that a Woman should be declared Supreme Head on Earth of the
Church of England; whereupon, an Expedient was found out to satisfy their
Cavils, and remove all Obstructions by putting in Governor instead of Head,
the Act being couched in these Terms; That, whatsoever Jurisdictions,
Privileges, and Spiritual Preheminences, had been heretofore in use by any
Ecclesiastical Authority whatsoever, to visit Ecclesiastical men, and correct
all manner of Errors, Heresies, Schisms, Abuses and Enormities, should be for
ever annexed to the Imperial Crown of England; That the Queen and her
Successors might, by their Letters Patents, substitute certain men to exercise
that Authority. Provided, that they should define nothing to be Heresy, but
those things which were long before defined to be Heresies, out of the Sacred
Canonical Scriptures, or the first four Ecumenical Councils, or other
Councils, by the true and proper sense of the Holy Scriptures, or should
thereafter be so defined by Authority of Parliament, with Assent of the Clergy
of England, assembled in a Synod, that all and every Ecclesiastical Persons,
Magistrates, Receivers of Pensions out of the Exchequer, such a^ were to
receive Degrees in the Universities, Wards that were to sue their Liveries, and
to be invested in their Livings, and such as were to be admitted into the
Number of the Queens Servants, etc. should be obliged by Oath to acknowledge
the Queens Majesty to be the only and Supreme Governor of her Kingdoms, in all
Matters and Causes, as well Spiritual as Temporal, all Foreign Princes and
Potentates being wholly excluded from taking Cognizance of Causes within her
Dominions. This Act was stiffly opposed by nine Bishops, and only two Temporal
Lords, who were the Earl of Shrewsbury, and Anthony Brown Vicount Montacute,
who had been sent in the time of Queen Mary to tender Obedience to the
Apostolic See: But were joyfully and unanimously assented to by the far major
part of the House of Commons, the Papists complaining that the Votes had been
surprised, and that the Duke of Norfolk* the Earl of Arundel and Cecil, had by
cunning procured Voices in favor of those Acts.

Now Men differing so much in points of Religion, it was ordered by
Proclamation, that no man should speak unreverently of the Sacrament, and both
kinds were allowed to be administered. But notwithstanding that, a Conference
was appointed to be held at Westminster between the Papists and Protestants; 1.
Concerning Common Prayer, and administration of the Sacraments in the Vulgar
Tongue; 2. Concerning the Authority of the Church, in constituting and
abrogating Ceremonies, to edification; and 3. Concerning the Sacrifice of the
Mass: and Persons were chosen on both sides, for to dispute upon these Points:
yet all fell to nothing, not being able to agree upon the Method they were to
hold in their Disputations; the Papists not daring to dispute upon Points that
had never been controverted in their Church, without having first consulted the
Pope; but pretended and complained of the hard usage they had met with from the
Lord Keeper Bacon, in not giving them time sufficient to consider upon the
Points in Question; they looking upon him as their bitter Enemy. And some of
the Popish Bishops were so fiery and so extravagant in their Expressions, as to
declare, that the Queen, and all others that had occasioned the overthrow of
the Superstitions of the Church of Ro^^e, ought to suffer Excommunication; and
for this their impertinent Zeal were clap^ into Prison. But the more Prudent
thought it more fit that this Censure should be left to the Pope, lest, as they
were Subjects, such Declarations in them might prove to be Rebellion.

In the mean time, the Pope, being made perfectly well acquainted with all
these passages, and being netled to the quick by so great a loss as he suffered
by this change, he ordered Sir Edward Carne, who had been Ambassador at the
Court of Rome, for King Henry the Eighth, for Queen Mary, and now for Queen
Elizabeth, not to act any longer as such: And to use his own words, By Vigor
of a Commandment given by word of Mouth, by the Oracle of the most Holy Lord
the Pope, in virtue of his most Holy Obedience, and under pain of his greater
Excommunication, and loss of all his Goods and Lands, not to depart the City,
but should take upon him the Government of the English Hospital. Which was
likewise done, lest Sr. Edward should acquaint the Queen with the secret
Practices of the French against her, and was willingly submitted to by him out
of h(...) fervent Zeal to Popery; for either by the Pope's Instigation, or the
Solicitation (...) the French King, or the Dauphin's Ambition, who had married
the Queen (...) Scots, that Queen took upon her the still(...) and Title of
Queen of England, quartering the Arms thereof in her Plate, an^ in all other
things as she had Occasion^ which she did as Cousin and next He(...) to the
late Queen; by which means, she imputed Bastardy to the Queen then l(...) ving;
which Extravagance, was afterward the loss of that unfortunate Lady(...) Head.

As Queen Elizabeth was somethin^ startled at these Proceedings, so it move^
her to pursue the Reformation she ha^ begun, with the more Eagerness. T^ which
end, she set out, by Advice of h(...) Council, a Body of Injunctions, bein(...)
much the same with those that ha^ been published in the beginning of t(...)
Reign of King Edward, but better fut(...) to the Temper of that Juncture; (...)
containing the severe Course taken (...) bout Ministers Marriages, the Posture
(...) the Communion Table, the form (...) Prayers in the Congregation, and the
use of singing, and of Reverences in Divine Worship to be kept in Churches. By
the Injunctions she made way to her Visitation, which was performed by
Commissioners in their several Circuits, and regulated by a Book of Articles,
printed and published for that purpose. By Virtue of which Articles, the
Commissioners removed all carved Images out of the Church, which had been
formerly abused to Superstition; defacing likewise, all such Pictures,
Paintings, and other Monuments, as were made for the Representation of feigned
Miracles; and this they did with so much Order, Moderation, and Decency, that
the Papists themselves, could not find Fault with, and without commiting the
least Sacrilege, by appropriating to their own use any of the Plate or other
Utensils, that had been restored, and bestowed upon the Church, in the late
Queens Time. Inquiry was in like manner made into the Life and Doctrine of
Ministers, their Diligence in their respective Cures, the Decency of their
Apparel, the Respect that was borne them by their Parishoners, the Reverent
Behavior of all manner of Persons during Divine Service. Inquiry was also made
into all sorts of Crimes, as frequenting of Taverns and other public Houses by
the Clergy, Adultery, Fornication, Drunkenness, amongst the Laity, with several
other things that have since been practiced in the Visitations of particular
Bishops; an Oath of Supremacy was likewise offered to most of the Popish
Bishops, and others of the Clergy, which they had most of them sworn to in the
time of Henry the Eighth, and such as refused it were displaced, and others
substituted in their places. And this was the Course and Method that was taken
for the abolishing the Superstitions of Rome, and the introducing and settling
the true Reformed Religion in this Kingdom, which was done with that ease, and
with so little Commotion and Disturbance, as put all Christendom into
Admiration, to see that Gradually, Maturely, and yet in a short time, this
change had been brought to pass. For, after Popery had continued a full Month
after Queen Mary's Decease, in the same estate as formerly, on the Twenty
seventh of December, the Epistles, Gospels, the Lords Prayer, Ten Commandments,
the Creed, and the Litany, were allowed to be used in English: On the Twenty
second of March, the Parliament being then Assembled, a Law of Edward the
Sixth's was renewed, whereby both kinds were permitted to be administered in the
Lords Supper: On the Twenty fourth of June, by Authority of an Act, the
Sacrifice of the Mass was abolished, and the Liturgy in the English Tongue
Established; in July, the Oath of Supremacy was ministered to the Bishops and
others: And in August Images were removed out of the Churches, broken, or
burnt. Thus was our Church purified from the Filth and Idolatries of Popery,
and the Crown of England rendered more Independent than any other of
Christendom, who had rendered and continued themselves Slaves by submitting
themselves to the Yoke of Rome, and infinite Sums of Money were continued at
home, that used to be Exhausted hence by the Sea of Rome, by Popish Artifice
and Trifles, for first Fruits, Pardons, Dispensations, and other such like
trash of Popery.

During these religious Transactions, and while that Ecclesiastical Affairs
were thus settling, the Ministers of England and Spain at the Treaty of Peace at
Cambray, did contend hard for the Restitution of Calice; all which, was however
to no purpose, though they offered in Lieu thereof, to remit three Millions of
Crowns that were due from the French. The Spaniard, at that time, holding firm
to the English, both for that the English had lost it in his Quarrels, and that
he was sensible, according to all Appearances, that it would be more for his
Interest in the Netherlands, that it should be in the Hands of the English,
than possessed by the French. On the contrary, the French maintained, that
Calice alone was not sufficient to satisfy the Damages the English had done
them, in helping the Spaniards to take their Towns; many places in Brittany
having been burned by the English Fleet, their Ships taken, their Trade
interrupted, and vast Sums of Money spent in hindering an Invasion of the
English. But, the Spaniard in the mean while, having discovered Queen
Elizabeth's Aversion to a Match with him, the Paces she had made toward the
introducing the Reformed Religion, and her Resolution to treat with the French,
without Communication first had with him, he grew faint, and fell off from
promoting the English Pretensions; which being perceived by Queen Elizabeth,
and fearing that she should be abandoned if she continued any longer in her
demands upon that Point, or else, preferring Public Good before Private
Interest, she came at length to this Agreement; That the French King should
peaceably enjoy for the Term of eight years, the Town of Calice, with the
Appurtenances and sixteen great Pieces of Ordnance; and that when that term was
expired, he should restore the same with the Town, to Queen Elizabeth; or
otherwise, should pay unto the Queen, the Sum of five hundred thousand Crowns.
In Consequence of which Accommodation, Peace was proclaimed on the 17th. of
April, between the Queens Majesty on the one part, and the Most Christian King
on the other; as likewise, between her and the King Dauphin, with his Wife the
Queen of Scots, and all the Subjects and Dominions of the said four Princes.
The People were however, dissatisfied with this Peace, in regard, that Calice
was not restored, and laid the blame thereof upon the Bishops, and other
Papists. But, the French King lived not long to enjoy the Benefit thereof, he
being killed at a Turnament in Paris, by the Count de Montgomery; and though
his eldest Son and Successor, Francis, caused the Queen of Scots, his Wife, to
assume the Title and Arms of England, yet she resolved to bestow a Royal
Obsequy on the King deceased, which was accordingly performed in St. Paul's
Church in a most Solemn manner.

The Parliament being now to be dissolved, the House of Commons made an humble
Address unto her, in which they most earnestly besought her, that for securing
the Peace of the Kingdom, and the Satisfaction of all her good and loving
Subjects, she would think of marrying, without particularizing to her any one
man, but leaving to her the Choice of the Person. Whereto she made Answer, That
she was obliged to them for their good Affections, and took their Application
to her to be well intended; and the rather, because it contained no Limitation
of Time or Person; which, had it done, she should have disliked it very much,
and have looked upon it as a very great Presumption, That she had long since
made choice of the State of Life wherein she then lived, and hoped that God
would give her Strength and Constancy to go thorough with it; that if she had
been inclined to have changed that Course, she neither wanted many Invitations
to it, in the Reign of her Brother, nor many strong Impulsions in the time of
her Sister. Moreover, says she, to satisfy you, I have already joined my self
in Marriage to a Husband, namely, the Kingdom of England, and behold, continued
she, which I marvel you have forgotten, the Pledge of this my Marriage and my
Wedlock with my Kingdom; and thereupon, took the Ring off her Finger,
wherewith, at her Coronation, she had in a set Form of Words, given her self in
Marriage to her Kingdom: And then, making a Pause, And do not, said she,
upbraid me with miserable lack of Children; for, every one of you, and as many
as are Englishmen, are Children and Kinsmen to me, of whom, if God deprive me
not, (which God forbid) I cannot, without injury be accounted Barren. And then
having promised she would take a Husband in case the good of the State should
so require, she licensed them to depart to their several Businesses.

Amongst other Acts that passed during this Session of Parliament, besides
those that have been already related, was a severe one against any violence
offered against the Queens Person; one concerning going to Church upon Sundays
and Holydays, a Mulct of Twelve Pence being imposed for every days Absence:
Likewise one concerning Seditious Rumors against the Queen, Merchandise,
Shipping, Clothing, Iron-works, and of Tumultuous and Unlawful Meetings; and
besides several others, one concerning the Possessions of Archbishops and
Bishops; That they should not Give, Grant, or Lease out the Livings of the
Church, but for one and twenty Years, or three Lives, to others than the Queen
and her Successors, reserving the old Rents. But that Exception for the Queen,
proved beneficial to the Bishops and her Courtiers, who abused her Bounty to
the damage of the Church, for which reason The Queen Coming through ye City in
Triump^
The Return of the Gospel.
The Poolling down and burning of Popish Images
it was repealed in the beginning of the Reign of King James. In this
Parliament, there was not a Person proscribed, though usual in the first
Parliament of every Reign, but several were restored in Blood, and then it was
dissolved.

Shortly after which, came the Duke of Finland, as Ambassador from the King of
Sweden, to propose a Marriage between Her Majesty and Prince Ericus, that
King's Eldest Son; and, this Ambassador having been magnificently treated by
the Queen, was at length dismissed, with the same Success as all the rest, who,
before and after, came upon that Errand.

And now the Emperor and the Catholic Princes, interceeded with the Queen by
several Letters, that such Bishops as were displaced might meet with a kind
Usage, and that the Papists might be allowed Churches by themselves, in Cities.
Whereto she made Answer, Although those Popish Bishops have insolently and
openly repugned against the Laws and Quiet of the Realm, and do now obstinately
reject that Doctrine, which most part of themselves, under Henry the Eighth,
and Edward the Sixth, had of their own Accord, with Heart and Hand, publicly
in their Sermons and Writings, taught unto others, when they themselves were
not private Men, but public Magistrates: yet would she, for so great Princes
Sakes, deal favorably with them, though not without Offense to her own
Subjects: But, grant them Churches to celebrate their Divine Offices in, apart
by themselves, she cannot, with the Safety of the Commonwealth, and without
wrong to her own Honor and Conscience. Neither is there any Cause why she
should grant them, seeing England embraces no new and strange Doctrine, but
the same which Christ has commanded, the Primitive and Catholic Church has
received, and the Ancient Fathers have with one Voice and Mind approved. And to
allow Churches with contrary Rites and Ceremonies; besides, that it openly
repugneth against the Laws established by Authority of Parliament, were nothing
else but to sow Religion out of Religion, to distract good Men's Minds, to
cherish factious Men's Humors, disturb Religion and Commonwealth, and mingle
Divine and Humane things: Which were a thing indeed evil, in Example worst of
all, to her own good Subjects hurtful, and to themselves, to whom it is
granted, neither greatly Commodious, nor yet at all safe. She was therefore
determined out of her Natural Clemency, and especially at their request, to be
willing to heal the private Insolency of a few by much Connivance; yet so as
she might not encourage their obstinate minds by Indulgence.

The Spaniard having lost all hopes of a Match between Queen Elizabeth and
himself, and fearing lest the Crown of England might happen to be joined to the
Scepter of France, he persuaded the Emperor Ferdinand to propose one of his
Sons for a Husband to Queen Elizabeth; which accordingly he did by an
Ambassador, whom he sent to that purpose, but all to the same effect as the
rest that had been before him.

In the mean time, those of the Reformed Religion in Scotland, being weary of
the French insolency and oppression, and no longer able to endure the
Idolatries and Impositions of the Church of Rome, proceeded of their own
Authority to a change in Religion; and being influenced by the greatest Men in
the Kingdom, and stirred up by Knox in his Sermons, they fell upon destroying
all Altars and Images in several Places, demolishing of some Religious Houses,
and burning of others; And being countenanced and seconded by the Nobility,
they seize upon Perth and other places, and assuming to themselves the Name of
the Congregation, they managed their own Affairs apart from the rest of the
Kingdom, and began to stand upon such high Terms, as to pass an Act for the
depriving the Queen Regent of all Place and Power in the public Government.
Whereupon the Queen Regent, to provide for her own security, having already
received some Forces out of France, though not sufficient, she desires, and is
assisted with farther Supplies. Hereupon the Heads of the Congregation,
dispatch Melvin, and Maitland, Lord Secretary to the Queen of England, making
Complaints, that since the Queen of Scots had been married to the Dauphin, the
Government of the Kingdom was changed, all Places laid waste by Foreign
Soldiers, the highest Offices of the Kingdom were bestowed upon Frenchmen,
the Castles and all other fortified Places put into their hands, and the purer
Money of the Realm was embased for their gain; and that by these and such other
like Contrivances, the French made way for their seizing on the Crown of
Scotland, in case it happened otherwise than well with their Queen; and
therefore they implore her Succors and Assistance for the expulsion of that
People, who might otherwise be destructive, and of ill Consequence to both
Realms. Whereupon this Affair being taken into consideration, some were of
Opinion, that it was not safe for the Queen to condescend and comply with their
desires, but others were for the Queens granting them* Succors, considering
that the French were making such extraordinary Preparations, both in France and
Germany, of Men and Ammunition for to be transported into Scotland, as were not
only sufficient to subdue that Kingdom to their Wills, but seemed to threaten
an Invasion of England, through that Door, by their Contracting Alliances with
other States, and the French King's taking upon him the Title of England, and
therefore that the Queen was obliged, both out of Piety and Prudence, to give
such assistance to the Scots, as might hinder the French from taking possession
of that Kingdom.

Hereupon, great Preparations were made for this Expedition, the Duke of
Norfolk was appointed Lieutenant General in the Northern parts toward
Scotland; the Earl of Sussex, who had been Deputy of Ireland in the late Queens
time, was sent back thither, with Instructions for the preventing any Change in
that Kingdom; and the Queens Commissioners being met with those of the Scots at
Berwick, it was concluded, and a League made to this Effect: That whereas the
French go against all right and reason to subdue Scotland, and unite it to the
Scepter of France, the Queen of England shall take the Duke of Chastel-heraut,
Heir apparent to the Crown of Scotland, and the Scottish Nobility and People
unto her Protection, as long as the French King has Mary Queen of Scots in
marriage, and a year after. She shall send an Army by Sea and Land, with all
Warlike provision, to expel and exclude the French out of Scotland. She shall
not enter into Peace with the French, but with condition that Scotland may
enjoy her Ancient Liberty. The Forts and Strong Holds, recovered by the Aid of
the English from the French, shall forthwith be razed, or else delivered into
the hands of the Duke of Norfolk, at his choice. The English shall fortify no
Places in Scotland, but by the Consent of the Duke of Chastel-heralt, and the
Nobility of Scotland. The Confederates shall aid the English all they can; they
shall hold for Enemies all whosoever shall be Enemies to the English. They
shall not suffer the Kingdom of Scotland to be united to France, by any other
means than as they are now conjoined by Marriage. If England be invaded by the
French on this side the Rivor Tine, the Scots shall send two thousand Horse and
a thousand Foot under the Queen of England's Pay. But if it be invaded beyond
the Tine, they shall join with the English, to assist them with all the Power
they can make, and that at their own Charges, the space of thirty days, as
they use to do for the Defense of Scotland. The Earl of Argyle, Justicer
General of Scotland, shall do his best that the North part of Ireland be
reduced into order, upon certain Conditions, on which the Lieutenant of Ireland
and he shall agree. Finally, it is prescribed what both of them shall perform,
in case Mac Conel or other Hebridians shall attempt any thing in Scotland or
Ireland. For Confirmation of these Articles, before such time as the English
Army enter into Scotland, Hostages shall be sent into England, to be changed
every Sixth or Fourth Month, at the Choice of the Scots, during the Marriage
betwixt the French King and the Queen of Scots, and a year after, the Duke of
Chastel-herault and the Confederate Earls and Parliamentary Barons, shall
ratify these Articles by their hands and Seals, within twenty days: And
withal, (for as much as the Queen of England undertaketh these things, in no
other respect, than in regard of Amity and Neighborhood, to defend the Scots
from the Yoke of servitude; they shall make Declaration that they will yield
Obedience to the Queen of Scots,) and the King her Husband, in all things which
shall not make for the taking away of their ancient Liberty.

In Consequence of this Agreement, and of the public Declarations of the
French, of their design to invade England, an Army of six thousand Foot and
three thousand Horse, were sent into Scotland, under the Command of the Lord
Gray, an expert Captain; and some ships being sent to block up the Frieth of
Edenborough, they dispersed and put to flight some French Men of War that
hovered upon that Coast.

About the time that the English Army entered Scotland, the French made
Proposals and Promises* of restoring Calice, in case the Queen would recall her
Forces: Which she absolutely refused, saying; That she looked upon Calice as a
poor Fisher Town, in comparison of the safety and security of all Britain. Now
the French seeing that the English had blocked up the Town of Leith by Sea and
Land, i^ such ^^^^* as that there was no possibility of relieving it, and
finding themselves (...) able to maintain their projects against(...) English
Courages and Power, the Fr(...) King proposes a Peace; and to that (...)
sends. Ambassadors to Edenborough* (...) confer and treat with C^cyl, and
Nicho(...) W^tton Dea^ of Canterbury and York* (...) were sent thither as
Commissioners (...) Queen Elizabeth, who came at length* to this Conclusion;
That all the French Forces should immediately depart out of Scotland, except
sixty men only to b^ left in Dunbar, and as many in the Fo(...) of Nachkeeth;
that they should be transported, for their greater Security, in English
Bottoms; that all matters of Religio(...) should be referred to the following
Parliament; that an Act of Oblivion should be passed for the Indemnity of all
who ha(...) borne Arms on either side; that a general* Bond of Love and Amit^
should b^ made betwixt the Lords and their (...)r^nts of both Religions: And
(...)* amongst many other Particulars, That n(...)there the Queen of Scots, nor
the French King, should, from thence forward* (...) the Titles and Arms of
England. (...) Articles being signed for both Kin(...) the French (...)
Scotland* (...) English Army being returned home, was thereupon disbanded.
Shortly after which, the Earls of Morton and Glencarn were sent by the
Congregation to pay their most (...)mble Thanks and Acknowledgments to ^er
Majesty, for her ready and successful Assistance, and to implore the
Continuation of her Favor and Protection, in case they should be invaded by
the French, or any other Enemies. Whereof, having received gracious Assurances,
and being (...)obly entertained, and bountifully rewarded with Gifts and
Presents, they returned with such Joy and Satisfaction to ^he Congregation,
that for these Reasons, and for the further engaging her Protection, they
obliged themselves by their Subscription, to embrace the Liturgy, with all the
Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England; which, for a time, remained the
only Form of Worship retained in the Kirk of Scotland. After which, they
caused a Parliament to be called, in Pursuance of the Articles of the
Pacification; from which no Person* w(...)ed, who had any Right of Suff(...)ose
Authority three Acts pa(...)g wholly to the promoting and establishing of the
Reformation. The first was for the abolishing the Pope's Jurisdiction and
Authority within that Realm; the second, For the annulling all Statutes made in
former Times, for maintenance of Idolatry and Superstition; and the third, for
the Punishments of the Sayers and Hearers of Mass.

And now let us return to England, where the Earl of Arrain, being recommended
by the Protestants of Scotland, for a Husband to Queen Elizabeth; by that
means, to have united the two Crowns: this Match was handsomely rejected by her
and with great Commendation of the Person. The like Address was made by the
King of Denmark, in Favor of Adolph Duke of Holstein, a Prince who had gained
great Honors by the Wars, and who came himself over, for that purpose, but was
dismissed by the Queen with the Honor of the Garter, and a yearly Pension;
whereby she bound him for ever to her Interests.

At home, Sir William Pickering, the Earl of Arundel, and Robert Dudley, the
Duke of Northumberland's younger S(...) statter'd themselves with the hopes
(...)taining unto the Honor of being her Husband.

In the mean time, the Lord Vicount Montacute, the Queens Ambassador in Spain,
represents to that King the Necessity of the Scottish War; endeavors to free
the Scots from all Aspersions of Rebellion; proving, though a zealous
Catholic, that the Religion that was now introduced into England, was wholly
consonant to the Sacred Scriptures, and the four first General Councils; and
demanded, that the League of Burgundy might be renewed. Whereto, that King
replied, That the confirming of the League was in no wise necessary, bemoaneth
the Change of Religion in England, is troubled at the Expedition into Scotland,
sends back the Order of the Garter, and takes unkindly some Repulses in
things of small Moment; and though he gave some necessary Cautions, as to
Clauses to be inserted in the Treaty of Edenborough, and for a while, opposed
the French Practi^^ at Rome, who endeavored to pro^^^rt Queen Elizabeth to be
excommunicated; yet his Ministers* incensing him* (...) more and more against
the Engl(...) Affronts were offered to the Queens Ambassador at his Court; and
he is likewise said to have then endeavored to persuade the new elected Pope
to thunder out his Bulls of Excommunication against her Majesty. But the Court
of Rome, being sensible how little she valued those empty Crackers, instead of
complying with the Spaniard; sent to her the Abbot Vincentio Papalia, with
secret Instructions, and fawning Letters, whereof you have here an Abstract.

To our most dear Daughter, Elizabeth Queen of England.
OUR most dear Daughter in Christ, greeting, and Apostolical Benediction. How
greatly We do desire (according as our Pastoral Office requires) to take care
of your Salvation, and to provide as well for your Honor, as the Establishment
of your Kingdom, both God the Searcher of our Hearts knows, and you your self
may understand, by the Instructions which we have given to this Our beloved Son
Vincentio Papalia, Abbot of St. Savior, a man known unto you, and of Us well
approved, to be by him imparted unto You. We do therefore, most Dear Daughter,
exhort and admonish your Highness again, That rejecting bad Counselors, ^^^
love not you, but themselves, and serve their own De^^^s, You would take the
Fear of God to counsel, and acknowledging the time of your Visitation, o^ey Our
Fatherly Admonitions and wholesome Advices, and promise to your self all things
concerning Us, which you shall desire of Us, not only for the Salvation of
your Soul, but also for the establishing and confirming of your Royal Dignity,
according to the Authority, Place, and Function committed to Us by God; who, if
you return into the Boso^ of the Church, as We wish and hope you will, are
ready to receive you, with the same Love, Honor, and Rejoicing, wherewith that
Father in the Gospel received his Son, who returned unto him: although our Joy
shall be so much the greater than his, in that he rejoiced for the Salvation of
one only Son; but You, drawing with you all the people of England, shall not
only by your own Salvation, but also by the Salvation of the whole Nation,
replenish Us and all our Brethren in General, whom, God willing, you should
hear shortly to be congregated in an Ecumenical and General Council, for
abolishing of Heresies, and the whole Church, with joy and gladness: Yea, you
shall also glad Heaven it self, and purchase, ^y somemorable a Fact, admirable
Glory to your Name, and much more renowned than that Crown you wear. But of
this matter the same Vincentio shall treat with you more at large, and shall
declare unto you our Fatherly affection, whom we pray your Highness, that you
will graciously receive, diligently hear, and give the same Credit to his
Speech, which you would do to Our Self. Given at Rome at Saint Peter's, etc. The
1.5. day of May 1560. In our first year.


Notwithstanding all this Cajoslery, Queen Elizabeth kept firm to her Motto,
viz. Always the same, insomuch that the Pope was deceived in his hopes. The
proposals that the Pope is said to have designed to have made by this Abbot,
were, That he would disanul the Sentence against her Mothers Marriage, as
unjust, Confirm the English Liturgy by his Authority, and grant the use of the
Sacraments unto the English under both kinds, upon condition she would join her
self unto the Roman Catholic Church, and acknowledge the Primacy of the Sea of
Rome, and an offer made of several Thousand Crowns to such persons as should
persuade her to it.

In the mean time, notwithstanding that the French King had promised to ratify
all that his Ministers should conclude at Edenborough, yet he delayed, or
rather refused so to do, upon several frivoulous Pretexts.

Now the Affairs of the Kingdom being in a more settled Posture, Queen
Elizabeth, to promote and keep those of the Church from being corrupted, caused
two very seasonable Proclamations to be Published. By the one, she ordered the
Anabaptists and such like Sects to depart the Realm within Twenty Days, whether
her Natural born Subjects or Foreigners, upon very severe Penalties. By the
other, she restrained a Sacrilegious sort of People, who under the Specious
Pretext of abolishing Superstition, committed several Extravagances to the
disadvantage of Honorable Families, by defacing their Epitaphs and Coat
Armours, and to the Church, by taking away the Bells, and plucking away the
Lead from the Roofs. She likewise converted the Abbey of Westminster into a
Collegiate Church, and repaired and reduced the Money which had been embased in
the time of Henry the Eighth to the just value.

While that the Queen was busied in these Reformations both in Church and
State, there broke out a Rebellion in Ireland, which was headed by John-O-Neal,
a Man of great Authority in that Kingdom; but the Queen, having sent some
Forces thither out of England, he was quickly obliged to submit himself to her
Mercy.

Yet notwithstanding her Power, and the love of her Subjects at home, her
Authority and Credit abroad, and her Success every where, yet the Queen of
Scots, though her Husband the French King was Dead, refused to ratify the
Treaty of Edenborough, maugre all the Solicitations of the English
Ambassadors to the Queen of Scots, who were then at the Court of France, to
condole the Death of the late King, her Husband.

During these Transactions, the truly Learned and ever Famous Bishop Jewel, in
a Sermon Preached by him at St. Paul's Cross, made this bold and noble
Challenge, That if any Learned Man amongst the Papists, or all the Learned Men
in the World, could bring any one sufficient Proof or Sentence out of any
Catholic Doctor, or Father, or General Council, or Holy Scripture, or any one
Example in the Primitive Church, whereby it may clearly and plainly be proved,
during the first six Hundred Years, 1. That there was at any time any private
Mass in the World; 2. Or, that there was any Communion Administered unto the
People under one kind; 3. Or that the People had their Common Prayer in a
strange Tongue, that the People understood not; 4. Or that the Bishop of Rome
was then called an Universal Bishop, or the head of the Universal Church; 5. Or
that the People were then taught to believe that Christ's Body is Really,
Substantially, Corporally, Carnally, or Naturally in the Sacrament; 6. Or that
his Body is, or may be, in a Thousand places or more at one time; 7. Or that
the Priest did then hold up the Sacrament over his Head; 8. Or that the People
did then fall down and worship it with Godly Honor; 9. Or that the Sacrament
was then, or now ought to be hanged up under a Canopy; 10. Or that in the
Sacrament, after the words of Consecration, there remained only the Accidents
and Shows, without the Substance of Bread and Wine, 11. Or that then the Priest
divided the Sacrament into three parts, and afterward received himself all
alone. 12. Or that whosoever had said that the Sacrament is a Figure, a Pledge,
a Token or Remembrance of Christ's Body, had therefore been judged for an
Heretic; 13. Or, that it was lawful then to have Thirty, Twenty, Fifteen, Ten,
or Five Masses said in one Day; 14. Or, that Images were then set up in the
Churches, to the intent that the People might Worship them; 15. Or, that the
Lay People were then forbidden to read the Word of God in their own Tongue; 16.
Or, that it was then lawful for the Priest to pronounce the Words of
Consecration closely, or in private to himself; 17. Or, that the Priest had
then Authority to offer up Christ unto his Father. 18. Or, to Communicate and
receive the Sacrament for another, as they do; 19. Or, to apply the virtue of
Christ's Death and Passion to any Man, by the means of the Mass; 20. Or, that it
was then thought a sound Doctrine to teach the People, that Mass, ex opere
operato, (that is, even for that it is said or done) is able to remove any part
of our Sin; 21. Or, that any Christian Man called the Sacrament of the Lord,
his God; 22. Or, that the People were then taught to believe, that the Body of
Christ remains in the Sacrament as long as the Accidents of Bread and Wine
remain there without Corruption; 23. Or, that a Mouse, or any Worm or Beast,
may eat the Body of Christ, for so some of the Papists have said and taught;
24. Or, that when Christ said, Hoc est Corpus Meum, the Word hoc pointed not
the Bread, but individuum vagum, as some of them say; 25. Or, that the
Accidents, or Forms, or Shows of the Bread and Wine, be the Sacraments of
Christ's Body and Blood, and not rather the very Bread and Wine it self; 26.
Or, that the Sacrament is a Sign or Token of the Body of Christ that lies
hidden under it; 27. Or, that Ignorance is the Mother and cause of true
Devotion: Which if they did, he would be willing to yield and submit himself to
whatsoever they should impose. The Papists, both at home and abroad, were
extremely startled at this Challenge, that was made in so public a place, and
so great an Auditory, and none of them durst enter into the Lists against him;
but only at a distance let fly some small Crackers at him, which vanished
immediately into Smoke; until at length, his old Acquaintance and
School-Fellow, Doctor Harding, one of the most Learned Divines amongst the
Catholics, took up the Cudgels against him; but was so baffled by the Bishop,
that the Papists themselves acknowledged, that they had not a Champion that
could Oppose him.

During these Occurrences, St. Paul's Steeple being burnt, and the whole Church
having received extraordinary damage, through the negligence of a Plummer, the
Queen not only contributed very largely her self toward it is Reparation, but
likewise took care that a Benevolence should be raised for the Completing and
bringing it to it is former Luster and Greatness. Which Example and Zeal so
encouraged the Clergy, both of the Province of Canterbury and Diocese of
London, that the former contributed the fortieth part of their Benefices, and
the later the thirtieth part of the Livings that were liable to the
Benevolence, and the twentieth part of those that were not. By which means that
Work was so hastened and furthered, that in a short time it was completed and
finished.

In the mean time, great Preparations were making for the opening and holding
of the Council of Trent, to which the Pope endeavored to procure, that Divines
might be sent from England. To which end he dispatched to the Queen a Nuncio;
who being come into the Low Countries, stayed there in hopes of procuring leave
to be admitted into England; for, that it was provided by an ancient Statute,
that the Pope's Nuncio should not come into this Realm, without Leave first
obtained. But, the Queen, having absolutely refused to admit the Nuncio, most
of the Princes of Christendom endeavored to persuade her by then Letters, to
refer her self in matters of Religion, to the Occumenical Council of Trent.
Whereto she made Answer, That she was very desirous of an Occumenical Council,
but she would not send Deputies to a Popish Council; that she had nothing to do
with the Bishop of Rome, whose Authority was expelled England by Act of
Parliament; and that it did not belong to the Pope, but to the Emperor, to
call Councils; nor could, nor would she acknowledge any greater Authority in
him, than in any other Bishop.

Much about this time, the Queen of Scots, being solicited by the Popish
Party, to return into that Kingdom, and being grown weary of France, since the
Death of the late King, her Husband, she caused Queen Elizabeth to be desired
to grant her free passage thither, pretending that she could not ratify the
Treaty of Edinborough, without the Advice of the Nobility of Scotland. But
Queen Elizabeth, suspecting that some dangerous Practices were contriving
against England; for the preventing them, not only thought fit to deny her her
Request, but to send Sir Thomas Randolph into Scotland, to exhort the Nobility
to mutual Amity, and to keep firm to the Promises he had made her; and he found
them and the Congregation so well resolved to adhere to her, that she was under
no Apprehensions from the Scottish Queen, or her Party. However, it was judged
safe to intercept her, if possible, in her passage thither; To which end, a
Squadron of Men of War was fitted out, though under other Pretexts; yet the
Queen of Scots her self, by the favor of a great Fog, escaped unperceived by
the English, and landed safe in Scotland, though some of the Ships that
attended her in that Voyage, were taken, and brought into England. That Queen,
being now in Scotland, sends an Envoy, with Letters to Queen Elizabeth, wherein
she expressed a great deal of Love and Kindness to her, as her dearest Friend
and Sister, and desired that all true and sincere Friendship and Correspondence
might be maintained between them; Queen Elizabeth, receiving Letters at the
same time, to the same effect, from most of the Nobility of that Kingdom. But
this was not the whole Errand of this Envoy, for the Queen of Scots did
likewise by him demand to be declared Heir Apparent to this Kingdom, as being,
she said, the surest way to continue Amity and Friendship between the two
Crowns. Whereto the Queen could not be prevailed with to make any other Answer,
than that she would do nothing to the Prejudice of her Cousin of Scotland's
Title, leaving the rest to be considered of at a Personal Conference that was
to be held at York shortly after; which Interview was however broken off by
Popish Contrivances, lest it might be a means toward the creating in the Queen
of Scots an inclination to the Reformed Religion.

And now finding, that though she had made all the fair offers imaginable to the
Spaniard, and treated the Guises with all possible Kindness and Honor; yet her
Ministers at the Courts of Spain and France, instead of meeting with fair
Returns and Civilities, received affronts upon all Occasions; wherefore, though
she had found her Treasure all exhausted, yet she began to make all imaginable
Warlike preparations, for the security of her self and Subjects. And, amongst
other her Provisions for that purpose, having caused a many Pieces of great
Ordnance of Iron and Brass to be cast, God favoring all she undertook, caused
a most rich Vein of rich and Native Brass to be discovered at the same time; as
was likewise the Stone called Lapis Calaminaris first found out in England,
being very necessary for Brass Works. Her Majesty caused likewise Gunpowder to
be made here at home, being the first that had been made in England the English
before having been obliged to beg hard, and pay dear for it to Foreigners* She
also caused the several Garrisons belonging to the Kingdom to be better
strengthened with new Works, Men, and Fortifications. She likewise increased
the Pay of the Soldiers, and took Care to provide for those that had been
maimed in the Service of the Land. She added to, and provided her Fleet with
all manner of Necessaries, making it the best Navy that ever belonged to
Britain; insomuch, that all Foreigners did truly term her, The Restorer of the
Glory of Shipping, and the Queen of the North Sea. She caused all manner of
People to furnish themselves with Arms, and to use Martial Discipline and
Exercise. She gave all manner of Encouragement to Husbandry and Tillage, by
permitting the Transportation of Grain. And by a Proclamation she prohibited
the Merchants from supplying the Emperor of Russia with Ammunition against the
Polander^; and caused the Officers of her Exchequer to pay duly the Pensions
to such Religious Men as had been cast out of Abbeys. She revoked the
Commissions of the Purveyors both for the Garrisons and Fleet; and designed to
have done the same with those of her Household. She augmented the Stipends of
the Judges: And though she was extremely liberal and bountiful to desert, yet
she took Care not to alienate the Domain.

In the mean time, the Civil War broke forth in France; the Faction and Family
of the Guises aiming at that Crown, they were sensible, that they should never
compass their Designs* as long as the Hugonots were in Being: wherefore, they
used all manner of means to extirpate those Protestants; insomuch, that they
were forced to take Arms, both in Defense of their Sovereign and themselves.
Now Queen Elizabeth, well knowing the Practices of the House of Guise, to
advance the Interests and Pretensions of the Queen of Scots, she supplied the
Protestants of that Kingdom, with Money, Corn and Ammunition, for the Service
of the French King, and for the defending the Protestant Religion, and hindering
the Dukedom of Normandy from being possessed by the Guises, who might, from
thence, with more Ease, have executed their Designs upon England. She obliged
her self, to aid the Prince of Conde and his Associates, who headed the
Protestants, with her Forces both by Land and Sea, for the taking in of such
Castles, Towns, and Ports, as were possessed by the Faction of the House of
Guise; the Prince of Conde, and his Party, being bound not to come to any Terms
of Peace with their Enemies, without the Privity and Approbation of the Queen;
and, that for the Security of the Moneys and Forces that her Majesty should
supply them with; they should put into her hands, the Town and Port of New
Haven, or Havre de Grace, to be garrisoned by English Soldiers, and commanded
by any Person of Quality, her Majesty should authorize. Presently after the
Conclusion of this Agreement, she caused a Manifest to be published; in which
she declared, how that having preferred the Peace of Christendom before her
particular Interests, she had relinquished her Claim to the Town of Calais for
the term of eight years; when as all other Princes were restored to their lost
Estates by that Treaty; that for the same Reasons she had preserved the Scots
from being made Vassals to the French, without retaining any part of that
Kingdom in her own Possession, after the Service was performed: that with the
like sense of Commiseration, she had taken notice how much the Queen Mother of
France and the young King were awed and shackled by the Guisian Faction; who in
their Name, and under the Pretext of their Authority, endeavored to extirpate
the Professors of the Reformed Religion; In pursuance of which Design, those
bloody minded Papists had, in less than five Months time, caused above an
hundred thousand French Hugonots to be massacred and butchered; that with the
like Injustice and Violence they treated such of her Majesty's Subjects, as
traded into the Ports of that Kingdom, causing their Goods and Merchandise to
be seized, themselves imprisoned, and barbarously murdered, and for no other
Crime, than that they were Protestants; and therefore, in consideration of
what is aforesaid, Her Majesty thought her self obliged to endeavor the
rescuing the French King and his Mother out of the hands of so dangerous a
Faction, by aiding such of the French Subjects, as preferred the Service of
their Sovereign, and the good of their Country, before all other respects
whatsoever, for preserving the Reformed Religion from an Universal Destruction,
and the maintaining her own Subjects and Dominions in Peace and Safety.

She not only published this Manifesto, to acquaint the whole World with the
reasons of her taking up Arms on this Occasion, but she also commanded her
Ambassador to give a more particular Account of it to the King of Spain, whom
she looked upon as the Principal Patron of the Guisian League. She likewise
caused her Ministers and Agents with the Princes of Germany to solicit them to
aid and assist their Brother Protestants. And then she her self fell to
supplying the Hugonots with all things necessary to a War, sending them Ships,
Arms, and Men, both for the scowring the Seas, and securing the Land. The
Forces she sent amounting to 6000 Men, under the Command of the Lord Ambrose
Dudley, the Eldest Son then living of the late Duke of Northunberland.

The Papists, apprehending that the Queen by these Courses would lay the axe to
the Root of their Religion, laid a Conspiracy against her Life, for which the
Countess of Lenox, Grand daughter to Henry the Seventh, by his eldest daughter
Margaret Queen of Scotland, was confined with the Earl her Husband to her
House: and Arthur Pole, Grandchild of Margaret Countess of Salisbury, by
Geofry her third Son, the younger Brother unto Reginald Pole, the late Cardinal
Legate, was Apprehended and Arraigned, as also his Brother in Law Geofry
Fortescue, and were condemned to die, but confessing the Conspiracy and being
of the Blood Royal, they were reprieved by the Queen. The Lady Katherine Gray,
Daughter to the Duke of Suffolk, and Grand Daughter to another Sister of King
Henry the Eighth, was sent to the Tower, with her Husband the Earl of Hertford,
for marrying without the Queens Consent, and were detained there several Years,
and their Marriage declared by the Archbishop of Canterbury, to be an undue and
unlawful Carnal Copulation with her, and that for such their Excess, both he
and she to be punished. About the same time was Published an Elegant and Acute
Discourse, called, The Apology of the Church of England, written Originally in
Latin, by the truly Learned Bishop Jewel, and Translated immediately into
English, Dutch, Italian, Spanish, French, and Greek, and was highly approved of
by all Pious, Learned, and Judicious Men.

Now the Practices of the Papists, and the danger the Queen and State were in,
by their means obliged the Queen to call a Parliament, which being Assembled at
Westminster, the first Act that passed was, for assurance of the Queens Royal
Power over all Estates and Subjects within our Dominions: And Enacted, that the
Oath of Supremacy should be Administered unto all Persons, for the better
discovery of such as were Popishly affected; several of that Party having
lately busied themselves by inquiring into the length and shortness of her
Majesty's Life, by Conjurations and other Diabolical Arts, and thereupon had
caused some dark and doubtful Prophecies to be spread abroad; for which reason
there passed two other Statutes for suppressing the like dangerous Practices,
by which her Majesty's Person might be endangered, the People stirred up to
Rebellion, or the Peace disturbed. By which, and other Acts for the
strengthening of the Navy, and the continual breeding of a Seminary of expert
Mariners, the Queen was so well provided and secured against the Machinations
and Conspiracies of the Pope and his Adherents, as to lie under no
apprehensions of their bloody rage and malice.

During this Session of Parliament, it was declared by the Bishops and Clergy,
then Assembled in their Convocation, To be a thing plainly repugnant to the
Word of God, and the Custom of the Primitive Church, to have public Prayer in
the Church, or to Administer the Sacraments in a Tongue not understood by the
People. To confirm which Declaration, it was Enacted. That the Bishops of
Hereford, St. David's, Bangor, Llandaff, and St. Asaph, should take care amongst
them for Translating the whole Bible, with the Common Prayer Book, into the
Welsh, or British Tongue, on pain of forfeiting Forty Pound apiece in default
thereof. And to encourage them thereunto* it was ordered, that one Book of
either sort being so Translated and Imprinted, should be provided and brought
to every Cathedral or Parish Church, as also for all Parish Churches, and
Chapels of ease, where the said Tongue is commonly used, the Minister to pay
one half the Price, and the Parishioners the other. Care was likewise taken for
the Translating the Book of Homilies, being looked upon as a necessary part of
the public Liturgy, by reason of the Rubric at the end of the Nicene Creed.
This Parliament likewise congratulated her Majesty for the happiness of the
Times, for Religion Reformed, Peace restored, England with Scotland freed from
the Foreign Enemy, Money refined, the Navy strengthened, Warlike Ammunition
provided both for Sea and Land, and for the Laudable Enterprise in France, for
the securing of England, and of the young French King, and the recovering of
Calice, they granted the Clergy one Subsidy and the Laity another, with two
Fifteens and Tenths.

During these Occurrences at home, the Prince of Conde was intercepted, and
taken Prisoner in that memorable Battle of Dreux, as was likewise Sir Nicholas
Throgmorton, who shortly after paying his Ransom, was set at Liberty. But the
Admiral Chastillon, Commanding both the English and French Forces, had beetter
Success, by taking in of Caen and other considerable Places: which so startled
those of the Guisian Faction, that they agreed unto an Edict of Pacification,
by which the French Princes were restored to their Kings favor, Conde lured
with hopes of the Lieutenancy General of France, and a Marriage with the Queen
of Scots, the Hugonots allowed the free exercise of their Religion, and all
things settled for the present to their full satisfaction. And having thus
agreed among themselves, and treacherously abandoned the English, they join
their Forces, and contrive how to drive them out of New Haven in case they
would not evacuate it upon demand. Now sometime before this agreement, the
Hostages for Calice endeavored to make their escape, with Ribald, a Famous
Pilot, who had been sent secretly into England for that purpose, but were
discovered, and seized just as they were ready to take shipping. The Queen
having secret notice of the French designs upon New Haven, offered to exchange
it for Calice. Which being refused, War was Proclaimed on both sides. And such
an extraordinary great Fleet of the English scoured the Seas, as not only shut
up the French in their Havens, but the Spaniards likewise; and their Pyracies
upon them being very great, the Queen caused her Ambassador to make Excuses at
the Court of Spain, and restrained them by Proclamation.

In the mean time, New Haven being close Besieged, and hard pressed by the
French, and the Pestilence raging horribly in the Town, the English were forced
to capitulate, and render up that Place, hoping that by leaving it they should
escape the Plague; but instead thereof, they brought it with them into England,
where it sorely afflicted the whole Kingdom, and especially the City of London,
where there dyed of it Twenty one Thousand one Hundred and thirty Persons.

The Fathers at Trent were very much displeased with Queen Elizabeth, both for
assisting the French Hugonots against their King, and passing the Statute for
Punishing all those who countenanced and maintained the Popes Authority within
her Dominions* which so incensed the Pope, that he sent a Commission to those
Fathers, to proceed to an Excommunication of the Queen of England. But the
Emperor, being, by his Ministers, sed with hopes of a Marriage betwixt the
Queen and his Son the Archduke Charles; he, by Letters to the Pope and his
Legates, dissuaded them from proceeding to such Extremities, and caused the
Pope to revoke the Commission he had sent to his Legates in Trent. Shortly
after which, that Council broke up; but were so far from having reunited the
Church, that on the contrary, the Breach was become greater, and the Discords
inreconcilable.

In the mean time, the Cardinal of Lorrain, fearing, without any Reason, a
Match between Queen Elizabeth and Charles of Austria; to divert it, proposes
the said Charles for a Husband to his Niece, the Queen of Scots; who, imparting
this Business to Queen Elizabeth, she advised her to marry, but not the
Archduke; and recommended to her, for a Husband, Robert Dudley, and promised
her, That if she would marry him, She should, by Authority of Parliament, be
declared her Sister, or Daughter, and Heir of England, in case she should dye^
without Issue. But, as soon as the Queen Mother and her Uncles in France had
notice hereof, they dissuaded her from it; promising, if she would reject it,
and persist in the French Amity, they would pay her her Dowry Money: and lured
the Scots with hopes of confirming their ancient Liberties, and granting them
new ones. And though the Queen of Scots took all imaginable Care to gain the
Love of her Subjects, and keep them at Peace, yet they insulted her frequently;
nor was she able to suppress the Commotions.

The Spaniard now grew daily more enraged against the English, for that his
Ambassador here had been confined to his House, and subjected to Examinations
and public Reprehensions, for that the English Privateers had invested the
French upon the Coast of Spain, and intended to set forth a Voyage to the West
Indies. And the King of Spain manifested his Displeasure, by causing
Proclamation to be made in Antwerp, and other places, though under Pretext of
the Pestilence being in England, that no English Ship, with Clothes, should
come into any part of the Low Countries; causing the Goods of English men to be
confiscated upon very light Causes: and, by new Edicts, certain Merchandise
were forbidden to be transported, the Passage through the Low Country Provinces
with Horses, Salt Peter, and Gunpowder, out of Germany and Italy, was
forbidden. Whereupon, and at the earnest Suit of the Merchant-Adventurers, the
Queen prohibited the Transporting of Wool unwrought; and the Mart or Staple of
Clothes, or English Merchandises, was removed to Emden, upon the River Ems in
Friezland.

The Apprehension that these and other Circumstances gave the Queen of the
Councils of Spain, made her the more willingly hearken to a Peace with France,
which was concluded upon these Terms, which were as advantageous as the
Juncture would afford. That neither Party should invade the other. The one
shall not aid any that invade the other. Private Men's Facts shall bind
themselves only. Commerce shall be free. Traitors and Rebels shall not be
received. Letters of Reprisal shall not be granted. Injuries shall be buried in
Oblivion. Reservation of Rights and Titles, also, Actions, Demands, and Claims,
which they have, or pretend to have one against the other respectively, shall
remain to them safe and whole; and in like manner, Defenses and Exceptions
shall be reserved. A certain Sum of Money shall be repayed to Queen Elizabeth,
at times prefixed. Upon the Payment of six hundred and twenty thousand Crowns
the Hostages shall be delivered out of England; and Throckmorton shall return
free into his Country, after Confirmation of the League. Which Treaty being
ratifyed on both sides, the French King was invested with the Order of the
Garter.

Being now at Peace with France, and in fair-seeming Terms with the King of
Stain, she resolved to take the Diversion of a Progress; in the Course of which
she made a visit to Cambridge, where she was received with all the Respect,
Ceremony and Acclamation imaginable, and to her own, as well as their
extraordinary satisfaction; and the like Honor she did to Oxford, being
attended with the same Circumstances.

Don Alvarze a Quadra, Bishop of Aquila, and Spanish Ambassador here, a Man
zealously addicted to Popery, had fed the Papists here with hopes of having the
Romish Superstitions again restored in England, and had been a Grand Promoter
of the Distrusts and Dissatisfactions that were then brooding between the two
Crowns; being dead, he was succeeded by Don Diego Gusman de Sylva, who being a
wise Man, and sensible how damageable the Courses his Predecessors had taken,
were to both Parties, he endeavored to heal up the Breaches, and by his
mediation procured the Commerce to be restored, and all that had been Decreed
and Proclaimed on both sides to be suspended.

The most remarkable Action which attended the Queen's return from Cambridge,
was, the preferring Sir Robet Dudley to the Titles of Lord Denbigh and Earl of
Leicester; she having before made him Knight of the Garter, Master of the
Horse, and Lord Chancellor of the University of Oxford; and these Honors were
conferred upon him for the better qualifying him to be Husband to the Queen of
Scots. And now Leicester, for the better screwing himself into that Queens
favor, immediately accused to Queen Elizabeth the Lord Keeper Bacon, who was
looked upon as an Enemy to the Queen of Scots, and an Opposer of her Title to
the Succession.

In the mean time, the Queen of Scots, knowing her Title to be disputed in
England, and being grown jealous of the Practices of the Earl of Murray, her
Bastard Brother, and others at home, she thought it her interest to recall the
Earl of Lenox to his Native Country, from whence he had been driven in the
time of King Henry; by whose great Power and Influence she hoped to balance
the Authority of the Mutineers. This Lord, being of Royal Extraction, King
Henry to engage him the more in his Interests, had given him in Marriage the
Lady Margaret Douglas Daughter of Queen Margaret his Eldest Sister, by
Archibald Douglas Earl of Angus, lier second Husband; of which Marriage amongst
others, was the Lord Darnly. Now Lenox, being returned into Scotland, after
twenty Years Abode in England, he sends for the Lord Darnley to that Court.
Where, being arrived, and being a Person Graceful, Lovely, and of a Gentile
Carriage, and not yet full Twenty Years old; he quickly insinuated himself into
that Queens Affections. She fancied she had now met with a Man who was pleasing
to her Heart, and conducible to her Interests, for that both their Pretensions
being joined together, her Title to the Crown of England would be the better
secured.

Now Queen Elizabeth, having got some notice of this Design of the Scottish
Queen, she advised her to think of some other Match, saying, that this would
have so incensed the Parliament, that she was forced to Prorogue them, least
they should have acted something against her Title to the Succession.
Wherefore, she again recommended unto her, the Earl of Leicester, for a
Husband; to which purpose, she sent Commissioners to Berwick, to treat with
those of the Queen of Scots; about a Match. But this Queen had given such
Instructions to her Deputies, they maintained, That it did not stand with the
Dignity of their Queen, to enter into such Measures, after having refused the
Offers of several great Princes of Christendom. Wherefore, they broke up,
without coming to any Conclusion; And, the Queen being intent upon her Marriage
with the Lord Darnly, it was at length consummated: And of this Marriage was
born James the Sixth, in the Palace of Edenborough, on the 19 of July, in the
Year 1566, Solemnly crowned King of the Scots, on the same day of the Month, in
the Year 1567, and joyfully received to the Crown of England, on the 14 of
March, in the Year 1602.

But, not only the English, but the Scots themselves, being displeased with
this Match, the Scots raised some Commotions, with design to have prevented it;
but, being overpowered, were forced to take Refuge in England; where, by
Connivance, they were allowed a safe Retreat.

During these Transactions, the great Renown and Glory of Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, having invited Corcille, Sister to the King of Sweden, and Wife to
Christopher Marquess of Baden, to come, though big with Child, from the farthest
Places of the North, to see the Luster of her Court, and observe the Wisdom of
her Government; after a tedious Voyage by Sea and Land, she at length arrived
at Dover, where she was received with all possible Magnificence and Respect,
and entertained by the Queen all the while she stayed here, with all the
Tenderness, Affection, and Splendor imaginable. Within a few days after her
Arrival, she fell in Labor, and was delivered of a Son, whom the Queen
christened in her own Person, by the Name of Edwardu^ Fortunatus; Edward, in
Memory of her dearly beloved Brother; and Fortunatus, in regard of his being
born after a painful Journey. Having remained here, they were dismissed with
many rich Presents, and an Annual Pension from the Queen. During their
Entertainments here, a French Ambassador came hither to be installed Knight of
the Garter, in the Place and Person of that King; and, to present the Order of
St. Michael, the principal Order of France, to the Duke of Norfolk, and the
Earl of Leicester; which were performed with the Ceremonies, State and Pomp,
usual on such occasions.

In the mean time, Queen Elizabeth was again solicited to Marry, by those who
were fearful that the Protestant Religion in this Kingdom might be extirpated
by the Pretensions and authority of the Queen of Scots, should she come to the
Crown; and amongst other offers, the Emperor Maximilian did very seasonably
renew the Proposals of a Match between her Majesty and his Brother Charles.
About the same time, there arose great Dissentions at Court between the Earls
of Sussex and Leicester, the former favoring this Marriage, and the other
opposing, in regard of his own hopes and pretensions, but were at length, at
least seemingly reconciled by the Queen.

About the same time came likewise into England, Donald Mac Carty More, a Lord
of great Authority and large Territories in Ireland, which were confirmed to
him, and his Heirs Males by the Queen; who likewise conferred new Honors both
upon him and his Son, by making the Father Earl of Clencarn, and the Son Baron
of Valentia, and so engaged them by Gifts and Presents, that they procured
great Opposers of the Innovations designed by Desmond. Now Sir Nicholas Arnold
being called from the Government of Ireland, Sir Henry Sidney was sent in his
stead, as Justice of that Kingdom: The English Vicegerents there being at first
so termed, and since Deputies or Lieutenants, accoring to the pleasure of the
Prince. Sidney, at his Arrival finding great confusion, through the Discord of
the Earls of Ormond and Desmond; the Queen, to prevent any further mischief
through their Dissentions, thought fit to send for the latter into England.

And now the Parliament being met, they again move the Queen either to marry or
declare her Successor, which her Majesty looking upon as an Imposition, she
checked both Houses for what had passed in them upon this occasion; and though
they had offered far greater Sums than were usual, upon Condition she would
nominate a Successor, yet she flatly refused that extraordinary offer,
remitting the fourth payment of the Subsidy, saying, that Money in her
Subjects* Coffers was as well as in her own. Nevertheless, she favored very
much the Queen of Scots Title, and punished those who called it in question.

Shortly after these Occurrences, the Queen of Scotland falling into a
languishing Condition, she recommended the Prince, her Son, to the Protection
of Queen Elizabeth; but before that happened, her Affection for the King her
Husband being much cooled and abated, and this Unkindness in her being much
fomented by one David Rizie an Italian, first a Musician, and afterward French
Secretary to the Queen. The King, her Husband, through the instigations of
several Lords, resolved to dispatch a man, who had taken upon him more than
became him; which, having accordingly performed, it was not long before the
King himself was assassinated by Murray's Contrivances, though some Historians
have laid that Regicide to the Queen his Wife's Charge. After this detestable
Action, they persuaded the Queen to accept of the Earl of Bothwel, one of the
Conspirators, for a Husband, being a Person renowned for his Courage; and
therefore the better able to assist her against so many Enemies as she was
represented to have: but, being accused of that horrid Parricide, he was
brought to the Bar, and acquitted by Law. Whereupon, having new Honors
conferred upon him, the Queen accepted him for a Husband; which bred a
Suspicion in several People, That the Queen was privy to the Murder. Which
Umbrage being promoted by the Malcontents, they took Arms, caused Bothwell to
fly; though, as some say, privy to their Designs: and, having seized on the
Queen, they put her into Prison; which, Queen Elizabeth having notice of, and
detesting the Insolency of those People, she sent Sir Nicholas Throckmorton
into Scotland, to expostulate the matter with the Confederates, and procure her
Restoration to her former Freedom and Authority. Yet, though this Ambassador
used all imaginable Arguments, in Vindication of that Queen, yet, he found that
People so strangely exasperated against her, that instead of complying with his
Demands, they put the Queen under a stricter Confinement; insomuch, that at
last, to make her freely resign the Government of the Kingdom, they menaced to
call her in question for Tyranny, the King's Murder, and incontinent Living;
insomuch, that at length they compelled her to set her hand to three*
Instruments: In the first whereof, she resigned her Kingdom to her young Son,
at that time, scarce thirteen Months old; In the second, she constituted Murray
Viceroy, during the Minority of her Son; and, in the third, she named, in case
that Murray should refuse that Office, several of the principal Noblemen of
the Kingdom.

Within a few days after this Resignation, James the Sixth, her Son, was
crowned King; the famous John Knox preaching the Coronation Sermon. Now, Murray
being declared Regent, he advised the Queen not to disturb the Peace of the
Kingdom, by endeavoring her Liberty, by Instigating the Queen of England, or
the French King, to a War with Scotland, or by thinking any more of Bothwell's
Love, or meditating Revenge upon his Adversaries. As soon as Murray was
confirmed in the Regency, he put to death some of Bothwell's Servants, who
protested at their Execution, that Murray and Morton were the Contrivers of the
Kings Death.

But, while that the Queen of England and the French King were, in vain,
soliciting the Liberty of the Queen of Scots, eight years being now expired
since the Treaty of Cambray, Ministers were sent into France, to demand the
re-delivery of Calice, with the Appurtenances; but this Business being delayed,
and prorogued by the French from time to time, at length the thoughts of it
were wholly laid aside, through the Civil War that then broke out in France.

In the mean time, the Earl of Sussex, being sent Ambassador to the Emperor,
to treat of the Marriage that had been proposed by his Imperial Majesty, in
favor of the Arch Duke his Brother: which Commission he the more willingly
accepted of, in that it might be a means for the destroying the Earl of
Leicester's Pretensions. But he met with several Difficulties in this
Negotiation, both as to Religion, the Arch Duke's Maintenance, the Title of
King, and the Succession. As for the Title; the Arch Duke Charles should enjoy
the Name and Title of King of England: Concerning the Succession, He could not
by the Laws of England succeed, for that would have been prejudicial to their
Children; of whom it was agreed however, that he should have the Guardianship:
and all other things as fully granted, as they had been to Philip of Spain when
he married to Queen Mary. As touching his Maintenance, he would at his own
charge maintain the Train he should bring and keep about him; the Queen would
bountifully supply the rest, according to his Royal Dignity; nay, and that
other also, if he would require it. But the main obstacle was, concerning
Religion; the Emperor and Arch Duke requiring a public Church for the
celebrating Divine Service, after the Romish manner; which not being granted,
nor the Expedient allowed of that was devised by the Emperor, that he might
have some private place in the Court granted him for Divine Service; upon
condition, that no English man should be admitted thereunto: That he himself
should forbear, in case of any Disorders in point of Religion: That neither he,
nor any of his, should speak against the Religion of the Church of England: and
moreover, That he himself should be present with the Queen at Divine Service,
to be celebrated after the manner of the Church of England. Yet,
notwithstanding these plausible Offers, the Queen, after mature Deliberation,
made Answer, That should she consent hereunto, she should offend her
Conscience, and openly break the public Laws of the Realm, which could not be
done, without endangering both her Dignity and Safety; but however, invited the
Arch Duke Charles to come into England; promising, That he should not repent of
his Journey. Whereupon, the Emperor dismissed Sussex with great Honor; and
thus those Proposals fell to nothing by degrees, though all mutual good Offices
continued to pass between the Queen and the Emperor, who persevered in
thwarting all the Designs of the Pope against her Majesty; and not long after,
the Arch Duke Charles took to Wife, a Daughter of the Duke of Bavaria.

Much about the same time, came Ambassadors to the Queen, from the Emperor of
Russia and Muscovia, bringing very rich Presents to her Majesty, that Emperor
having granted very great Privileges to the English, who had, not long before,
discovered a Passage by Sea, into his Country; and of whom, a Company was
formed for Commerce into those parts. With those Ambassadors, returned into
England, Anthony Jenkinson, being the first of all the English, who sailed upon
the Caspian Sea: By him, the Czar made Proposals of an Offensive and Defensive
League with the Queen; which her Majesty made slight of, not being willing to
enter into farther League with a Prince, who had created an Aversion to him in
his Subjects, through his Tyranny and Arbitrary Practices.

Now, Let us pass over into Ireland, where we shall find Shan O Neal so puffed
up with some Victories he had gained in the Queen's Service, that he fell to
committing such Extravagances, that the English could not forbear checking him;
which his haughty Spirit not being able to brook, he again breaks out into
Rebellion; but, having received several Losses, and being defeated by the
English, he designed to have craved Pardon, and submitted himself to the Lord
Deputy. But, being dissuaded by some of his Crew, from so doing, he was advised
to try the Amity of the Hebridians, by whom, he and his were slain, after a
seeming kind Reception. After his Death, some Commotions were raised in other
parts of Ireland, through the Dissentions of the Earls of Ormond and Desmond,
which were stilled, by seizing on the latter, and sending him into England.

In Scotland, that Queen having made her Escape out of Prison, and called
together a great Assembly of the Nobility, there was drawn up a Sentence
Declaratory, That the Grant extorted from the Queen in Prison, through Fear,
was actually null from the very Beginning. Whereupon, such numbers of People
flocked Releiving the poor Protestants in France.
The Queen Courted by Several Prinfess
The Popes Bull set on ye Palace gate and he hang'dyt did it.
to her, that in three days time, she had got together an Army of six thousand
men, but her Soldiers being raw and unmartialized men, were easily defeated by
Murray: whereupon, she first writes, then fled into England, in hopes of the
Queens Aid and Protection. Being arrived at Hirkinton in Cumberland, she again
writes to Queen Elizabeth, imploring her Assistance and Favor. Queen
Elizabeth returns her an Answer by Sir Francis Knowls, with Promises of
Defense and Succor, according to the Equity of her Cause; but however, denies
her Access to her Person; and having referred her Case to the Privy Council,
they, after mature Deliberation, did unanimously conclude, That she was to be
detained, as one taken by the Right of War, and not to be dismissed till she
had made Satisfaction for assuming the Title of England, and for the Death of
Darnley, her Husband, who was one of the Queens Subjects born: which being
accordingly performed, she summoned Murray, Regent of Scotland, to appear or
send Deputies to York, to answer to the Complaints that the Queen of Scots made
against him and his Confederates: (...)to the Custody of the Earl of
Shrewsbury. The Duke of Norfolk grew likewise suspected, for though he had
rejected, as dangerous, the offer of a Match with the Queen of Scots, yet he
had since that time made several Paces, as seemed to tend toward the freeing
her out of Prison.

In the mean time, the Duke of Anjou was recommended for a Husband to Queen
Elizabeth, by the Queen Mother of France. And the English Ambassador at the
Court of Spain was uncivilly used, for having spoken irreverently of the Pope,
and Sir John Hawkins, being with some Ships in America for Commerce, he was set
upon by the Spaniards, contrary to Capitulations and Treaties, many of his Men
being slain by them, and his Goods pillaged, which so exasperated the English
here at home, that they demanded a War against the Spaniard.

In the mean time, the Protestants lying under heavy Persecutions in France,
Queen Elizabeth took them into her Protection, supplied them with Money and
Ammunition, and received, with all manner of kindness, those that fled hither,
notwithstanding they had basely abandoned her at New Haven.

And now the War began to flame forth in the Low Countries. For the Duke of
Alva, a Man of the highest Arbitrary and Tyrannical Principles, being sent
Governor thither by the Court of Spain, and being an Enemy of their Nations,
he trampled under Foot all their Privileges, introduced the Inquisition, and
endeavored by all manner of Cruelties to extirpate the Protestant Religion in
all Places of his Government; insomuch, that the People being no longer able to
support his Tyranny, began to be Tumultuous, which, though quieted for a while,
burst out at length into a long and dangerous War. At that time vast Sums of
Money being sent in some Spanish Ships by Italian Merchants, to be employed in
Bank in the Low Countries, for the ruin of the Protestants there, and being
forced by French Men of War, to take refuge in England; the Queen at first
ordered, that the Spaniards should be kindly used, and be defended against the
French; and the Money being brought on Land for the better security, and the
Queen having notice to what ill Purposes it was designed, and that it did not
belong to the Spaniard himself, she was advised by the Privy Council, to borrow
it of the Merchants; some of the Owners themselves being afraid the Duke of
Alva would seize upon it: Yet she religiously promised to restore it, if it was
made out that it was the Spaniards own Money. Whereupon, the Impetuous Duke of
Alva immediately caused all Goods to be seized that belonged to the English in
the Low Countries, and kept the Englishmen Prisoners. And the Queen caused the
same to be done with the Dutch Merchants here in England; which being of far
greater value than those of the English, the Spaniard had reason to repent of
these and other Courses, that brought upon him an Unfortunate and Bloody War.

Upon the Detention of this Money, several Peers of the Realm accused Sir
William Cecil of sending Money into France, but the Queen finding that all this
proceeded from their envying his being so much in her favor, she checked them,
and protected him.

In the mean time, the Duke of Alva sent a Person to demand the Money, but
after some stay, returned with a denial; hereupon that Duke prohibited all
Commerce with the English, and appointed Searchers to hinder any thing from
being imported or exported out of the Low Countries by them; amongst whom, was
one Doctor Story, an English Fugitive, and a Person who had used several means
against the Queens Life, and suggested to the Spaniard an Invasion of England.

Hereupon, the Duke of Alva gave order, that none but Men of War should put to
Sea out of the Low Countries, and that they should seize on the English,
wheresoever they met with them. And the Spaniard used several other Practices
for the raising a Rebellion in Engiand and Ireland, but all to no purpose. The
English hereupon remove their Staple to Hamburgh, and so plied the Spaniard
with Privateers, that the Queen thought fit to restrain them by Proclamation.

Now though such as envyed the Prosperity of England used all manner of
Contrivances to disturb it; and amongst others, endeavored to put a stop to
that part of our Trade as then flourished in Russia, by sowing Dissension
between the English and the Russians, and amongst the English themselves; yet
they were in that Favor with that Emperor, out of the respect he bare to
Queen Elizabeth, that he granted them freedom from all Customs in his
Country, allowed them liberty to trade all over his Empire, and through it to
Astracan, and so by the Caspian Sea into Persia. And though that Emperor was
somewhat disgusted at some Refusals and Slights of the Queen, yet he ever
continued to use the English with all possible Humanity and Kindness.

In the mean time, Murray, having clapped up in Prison the principal Favorers
of the Queen of Scots Party, it caused several Rumors to be spread abroad to
his disadvantage; which Queen Elizabeth having dispersed by a Public Writing,
she taking Pity of the Queen of Scots condition, solicited her Restoration to
her Crown and Dignity. But while she was making these Paces in her favor, she
found that that Queen did underhand Cabal against her, and was contracting a
Marriage with the Duke of Norfolk, without her Privity and Consent; whereupon
that Duke was committed to the Tower, and the Bishop of Rosse and Ridol^h the
Florentine to Sir Francis Walsingham's Custody.

About which time, the Earls of Northumberland, Westmerland, and others, made
an Insurrection in the North, being instigated thereunto by one Morton, a
Popish Priest, who was sent by the Pope to pronounce Queen Elizabeth an
Heretic. But after these Rebels had by their Declarations invited all the
Catholics to come in to their Assistance, and committed several Extravagancies
at Durham, by tearing to pieces all the Bibles and Common-Prayer-Books in the
English Tongue, that they could find in the Churches there; and after twelve
days Rebellion, finding their Army to be but six hundred Horse, and four
thousand Foot strong, and hearing that the Queens Forces were marching against
them in two Bodies, the one of seven, and the other of twelve thousand; and
being proclaimed Traitors, the two Earls, finding themselves unable to make
head against such great Forces, they fled with a small Company into Scotland;
from whence, the Earl of Westmerland made his Escape into the Low Countries,
where he lived, though poorly, to a great Age. But Northumberland was betrayed
by his Party, to Murray. The Heads of the Rebels being convicted of High
Treason, were proscribed, and several of them executed: Presently after which,
there broke forth a new Rebellion in Cumberland, the number of the Rebels
amounting to three thousand Men; but, were fought, routed, and dispersed, by
the Baron of Hunsdon. There was likewise a Rebelliin Ireland, but was quickly
extinguished through the Queens prudent Conduct, and the Orders she sent to the
Deputy of that Kingdom. But notwithstanding these Commotions both in England
and Ireland, she failed not to assist the French Protestants, with Men, Money
and Ammunition. But, as the Queen assisted the French, the French King, out of
Revenge, designed to have done the same to the Scots, had he not been prevented
by Death.

During these Occurrences, Murray, Regent of Scotland, when he had settled all
things to his Desire, and thought himself secure against all Attempts, he was
shot by one Hamilton in the Belly, as he was riding along the Streets in
Litchquo; of which Wound, he immediately dyed, the Assassinate making his
Escape into France. Presently after his Death, the Scots that were devoted to
their Queen, being joined with the English Fugitives and Rebels, made some
Incursions into England; but, Forces being sent against them under the Earl of
Sussex and the Lord Hunsdon, they were defeated, and the Borders of that
Kingdom severely punished for their Folly. After which Performances, the
English assisted their Friends in Scotland, and by so doing, removed from the
King, the Hamiltons, and the rest who stood for the deposed Queen. Whereupon,
the Lords of that Kingdom met together about choosing a new Regent, and
demanded Queen Elizabeth's Advice in the Business; but she replied, That she
would not be concerned in it, lest if any thing should be done to the prejudice
of the Queen of Scots, she might be suspected for it: whereupon they created
the Earl of Lenox Regent; which was the more pleasing to Queen Elizabeth, as
hoping he would have a particular care of the young King, being his
Grandchild, and live in good Intelligence with the English, by Favors and
Benefits he had received during his abode among them, and be at her Devotion,
because she had his Wife in her Power.

Whilst Queen Elizabeth was thus assisting the Queen's Party in Scotland, the
Duke of Castle-Herault, the Earls of Huntley and Argyle, the Queen of Scots
Lieutenants, send an Envoy to the Duke of Alva, to demand his Assistance and
Offices, in favor of their Queen; which he readily granted, promising to do
all that lay in his Power to satisfy their Request; and thereupon sent them
Arms, Powder, Cannon and Money. In the mean time, the French and Spanish
Ambassadors request Queen Elizabeth, in the name of their Masters, to set the
Queen of Scots at Liberty; to all which Importunities, Queen Elizabeth returned
Answer, That as she would do all that lay in her Power to reconcile the Queen
of Scots and her Subjects, so she thought it was but Justice in her to provide
for her own, and her Subjects Safety. And now the Pope, seeing that these
Princes could not procure that Queens Liberty, he caused one Felton to fasten
up in the Nightime his Bull Declaratory, upon the Bishop of London's Palace;
wherein, he absolved all Queen Elizabeth's Subjects from their Oath of
Allegiance, or any other Duty; and all who obey her, accursed with Anathema.
Whereupon, Felton being taken, and confessing, and justifying the Fact, he was
condemned, and executed accordingly, near the Place where he had fixed up the
Bull.

About this time, were some Commotions, and Suspicions of more; amongst the
rest, a Conspiracy of some Norfolk Gentlemen, to set the Duke of that Name at
liberty; but soon defeated, and some of them executed.

The Duke of Norfolk was delivered out of the Tower the same day that Felton
was Executed, having Confessed, and asked forgiveness of his Crime, with a
promise under his hand, never to think of Marrying the Queen of Scots, nor to
do any thing more against the Queens Authority.

Shortly after which, broke out a new Conspiracy in Darbyshire, whereof the
principal Ringleaders were two o^ the Stanleys, being the younger Sons of the
Earl of Darby; their Design was to have freed the Queen of Scots out of Prison:
But the Plot being revealed by one of the Conspiracy, the Heads of it were
taken, and put into Prison.

Hereupon followed an Expedition into Scotland, under the Earl of Sussex and
the Lord Scroop, who forced the Scots, of the Queen of that Names Party, to
give it under their hands, that they would abstain from War, and forsake the
English Rebels.

Queen Elizabeth being now full of Ombrage and Suspicions, by reason of the
several late Conspiracies, and the Popes Bull, she sent Sir William Cecyl, and
Sir Walter Mildmay to the Queen of Scots, to Treat with her; they found her
bemoaning her Condition, excusing Norfolk, and referring her self wholly to the
Queens Clemency, they proposed, that the Treaty of Edenborough should be
confirmed; that she should renounce her Title and Claim to England, as long as
Queen Elizabeth, and the Children lawfully born of her Body should live: that
she should not renew or keep any League with any Foreign Prince against
England: that she should not receive any Foreign Soldiers into Scotland: that
she should have no intercourse of Counsels with the English or Irish, without
acquainting the Queen therewith: that she should deliver up the English
Fugitives or Rebels: that she should recompense the damages done to the
English Borderers: that she should enquire according to Law, into the Murder,
as well of the Lord Darnly her Husband, as of Murray: that she should deliver
her Son into England as an Hostage: that she should Contract Marriage with no
English Man, but with the Advice of the Queen of England, nor with any other
against the Wills of the Estates of Scotland: that the Scots should not cross
over into Ireland, but by License obtained out of England: that for
Confirmation of these things, the Queen, and the Delegates to be appointed,
should set to their Hands and Seals: that the Hostages whom the Queen of
England should name, should be sent into England: that if the Queen of Scots
should attempt any thing by her self, or any other, against Queen Elizabeth,
she should, ipso facto, forfeit all her Right and Title she claims to
England: that Humes Castle, and Fast Castle, should be holden by the English
for three Years: that in like manner, some strong Holds in Galloway or Cantyr,
should be delivered into the English men's Hands, lest from thence the Scottish
Irish might infest Ireland. Lastly, That the Estates of Scotland should confirm
all these things by Authority of Parliament. To which Propositions, the Queen
of Scots replied, with a Proviso, referring the fuller Answer to the Bishop of
Ross, her Ambassador in England, and to some other Delegates, who afterward,
granting some of the Propositions, and rejecting others, the Treaty came to
nothing, and things remained in the same state as they were in before: Only
Queen Elizabeth, as Head of all Britain, by her Authority prorogued the
Parliament of Scotland. Whilst things were in this posture, the Pope supplied
the English Rebels and Fugitives with Moneys, and Philip of Spain contracted a
Marriage with Anne of Austria Daughter to the Emperor Maximilian, his own
Niece by his Sister; and she being to go by Sea from Zealand into Spain, Queen
Elizabeth, to show the Love and Respect she had for the House of Austria, sent
Sir Charles Howard, with the Navy Royal, to Convoy her through the British Sea.

And now Queen Elizabeth, having completed the Twelfth year of her Reign,
which some Wizzards had flattered the Papists that it would be her last, the
People, out of their great Affection and Loyalty to her Majesty, celebrated the
17th of November, with all the Pomp, Joy, and Thanksgiving imaginable; which
was not only continued upon that day during her Life, but even to this very day.

In Ireland, a new Rebellion was contrived, by the Earl of Thoumond, and his
Adherents; which was disappointed when it was just ready to break out, merely
by the Earl's Suspicions of his being discovered: whereupon, he fled into
France, and confessing his Crimes, and showing himself very penitent to the
Queen's Ambassador there, this Minister procured him his pardon, and the
Restitution of his Estate.

Soon after which, Queen Elizabeth made a very magnificent Entry into the City
of London, for to go see the new* Burse, which Sir Thomas Gresham had newly
built; and, in a solemn manner, named it the Royal Exchange, with Sound of
Trumpets, and by the Voice of an Herald. Shortly after which, she created Sir
William Cecyl Baron of Burghley.

There was at this time in England Delegates from the King of Scots, of whom
Queen Elizabeth having demanded that they should explain the Reasons they had
for deposing their Queen; whereupon, they exhibited so insolent a Writing, that
the Queen could not read it, without Indignation; and told them, That she did
not see that they had any just Cause to treat their Queen after that manner;
and therefore, desired they would immediately think of some means to allay the
Dissentions of that Kingdom. Hereupon, several Propositions were again made
them for the setting the Queen of Scots at Liberty; which being rejected by the
Scottish Delegates, and Norfolk beginning a new his Practices in favor of that
Queen, and she her self corresponding and caballing with the Enemies of the
Crown of England, whereto, they were both excited by Ridolpho the Pope's Agent,
that Queen had many of her Servants taken from her, and she her self put under
a stricter Confinement, and a watching Eye was kept over the Duke, to whom, the
Pope had promised great Assistance, both of Money and Men, in case he would
raise a Rebellion; assuring him, That the King of Spain would aid him with four
thousand Horse, and six thousand Foot, and that he had already deposited a
hundred thousand Crowns, and that he would be at all the Charge of the War.

But whilst these things were acting in England, the Queen of Scots* Party was
very much oppressed in Scotland, several of her principal Adherents being put
to Death, and their strongest Holds taken in. In France was the Marriage now
solemnized between Charles the Ninth, the French King, and Elizabeth of
Austria, Daughter to the Emperor Maximilian, to Congratulate which, the Lord
Buckhurst was sent into France by Queen Elizabeth, and was there received with
all the Honors and Pomp imaginable and possibly the more, in respect of a
Motion that the French Court designed to make in favor of a Match between the
Duke of Anjou and the Queen of England.

After the Lord Buckhurst had performed his Commission, he returned home with
great Presents, and with one Cavalcantio a Florentine, who had attended him in
his Embassy. This Cavalcantio being a prudent Person, was entrusted by the
Queen Mother of France, to make a motion of this Match to Queen Elizabeth.
Which he accordingly performed, and the Queen seemed to listen favorably to
the Proposal; for by this Match, there should be added to the Kingdom of
England, the Dukedoms of Anjou, Bourbon, Avern, and possibly the Kingdom of
France it self. Whereupon a Treaty was held, in which the French proposed three
Articles, one concerning the Coronation of the Duke; another concerning the
joint Administration of the Kingdom; a third, concerning a toleration of his
Religion; whereto it was replied, that the two first Articles might in some
sort be composed, but hardly the third; for though a contrary Religion might be
tolerated between Subjects of the same Kingdom; yet between a Wife and her
Husband, it seemed very incongruous and inconvenient; however the matter was
brought at length to this Conclusion, that if the Duke would afford his
presence with the Queen at Divine Service, and not refuse to hear and learn the
Doctrine of the Church of England, he should not be compelled to use the
English Rites, but at his pleasure use the Roman; not being expressly against
the Word of God. But they could not accommodate these Niceties; insomuch that
the Treaty was quite broak off, after it had continued almost a Year.

But during these Occurrences, it happened at Kinnaston in Herefordshire, the
ground was seen to open, and certain Rocks with a piece of Ground removed, and
went forwards four days together, carrying along great Trees and Sheep-Coats;
some with sixty Sheep in them, and overthrew Rimnalstone Chapel: the Depth of
the whole where it first broke out, is thirty Foot, and the breadth of the
Breach, sixteen Yards; also, Highways were removed near an hundred Yards, with
Trees, and Hedg-rows, and the like.

And now the Papists were plotting and contriving new Attempts against the
Queen, but they were all frustrated by the goodness of God, and the Prudence of
the Queen, and the Loyalty and Zeal of her Ministers and Protestant Subjects.
Amongst others of those Devilish Instruments of Popery, was the Bishop of
Ross, the Queen of Scots Ambassador; who made it his whole Business to excite
and stir up People to Rebellion. He had laid several Plots for seizing Queen
Elizabeth, and freeing the Queen of Scots; but they all failed him in the
Execution. But notwithstanding that Bishop had received so many checks for
these Practices of his, yet he continuing them to that degree, as not only to
pervert the Subjects from their Loyalty, but even to Designs against the
Queen's Life; the Privy Council, after mature Deliberation in the Business,,
notwithstanding his Character, thought fit he should be sent, and kept close
Prisoner in the Tower; which was accordingly done,: as likewise with the Duke
of Norfolk, who was again committed to the same Place, it having been
discovered by a Packet of Letters, that he still continued in his Affections,
Design to marry, and free out of Prison the Queen of Scots; having for that
end, kept correspondence with the Pope, and the other Enemies of the Crown, and
traitorously consulted to take away the Queens Life, and to bring in Foreign
Forces to invade the Kingdom; for which being brought to his Trial, he was
found guilty by his Peers, and accordingly beheaded.

The Parliament being assembled upon this occasion, it was Enacted amongst
other Laws, that if any man should go about to free any Person imprisoned by
the Queens Commandment, for Treason or Suspicion of Treason, and not yet
arraigned, he shall lose all his Goods, for his life time, and be Imprisoned
during the Queens Pleasure, if the said Person having been Arraigned, the
Rescuer shall forfeit his Life; if Condemned, he shall be guilty of Rebellion.

Presently after the Dissolution of the Parliament, a Consultation was had
whether John Story, Doctor of the Laws, the Duke of Alva's Searcher, who some
time before having been engaged to go on Board a Ship, to search for Goods, was
by that piece of cunning brought into England, being an English Man born, and
having in Brabant consulted with a Foreign Prince, were to be held guilty of
High Treason; which being given in the affirmative, by the Learned in the Law,
he was thereupon brought to his Trial, and Accused, of having consulted with
one Preshal a Conjurer, to make away the Queen, that he had Cursed her daily,
when he said Grace at Table: that he showed a way to the Duke of Alva; how to
Invade England, of which being found guilty, he accordingly suffered Death as a
Traitor.

About this time Matthew Stuart, Earl of Lenox, Regent of Scotland, and the
King's Grandfather, was surprised unawares by the Nobility of the adverse
Faction, and having yielded himself to David Spence of Wormstone, who thereupon
lost his Life in his Defense, and they were both slain together by Bell and
Chaulder, after he had with great Pains and care governed the Kingdom for his
Grandchild above fourteen Months; and in his room was unanimously elected by
the Kings Faction, the Earl of Mar, for Regent of Scotland, but the place
being two full of troubles for a Man of his quiet Disposition, he departed this
Life after he had Governed thirteen Months.

Some few days after the Execution of the Duke of Norfolk, one Barnes and
Mather were put to Death, for Conspireing with one Herle to take away the Life
of certain Counselors, and freeing the Duke; and at the same time, suffered
one Rolph for Counterfeiting the Queens hand.

Shortly afterwhich, the Queen conferred new Honors upon several of the
Nobility concluded a League with the French King, and sent several Persons to
expostulate with the Queen of Scots, for that she had usurped the Title and
Arms of the Kingdom of England, and had not renounced the same, according to
the Agreement of the Treaty of Edenborough, that she had endeavored the
Marriage of the Duke of Norfolk, without acquainting the Queen; and had used
all forcible means to free him out of Prison; had raised the Rebellion in the
North; had releived the Rebels both in Scotland, and in the Low Countries; had
implored Aids from the Pope, the King of Spain, and others; had conspired with
certain of the English, to free her out of Prison, and declare her Queen of
England: and finally, that she had procured the Pope's Bull against the Queen,
and suffered her self to be publicly named the Queen of England, in Foreign
Countries: all which Points, she either denied, or endeavored to extenuate.
And though, as she said, she was a free Queen, and not subject to any Creature,
yet she was willing, and desired, that she might make her personal Answer at
the next Parliament.

In the mean time, Scotland was full of Civil Distractions and Dissentions, the
English countenancing the King's Party, and the French the other. And the King
of Spain having made Complaints to the Queen, by his Ambassador, that the Low
Country Rebels were entertained and harbored in England; the Queen caused a
severe Proclamation to be put forth, That all the Dutch, who could, in any
wise, be suspected of Rebellion, should immediately depart the Kingdom; which
proved rather disadvantageous than beneficial to the King of Spain; For, Count
Vander Marea and other of the Netherlanders being hereupon compelled out of
England, first seized upon the Brid, and then upon Flushing; the Surprise of
which Places, being attended by the Revolt of other Towns, the Spaniards were,
in a short time, in some kind, excluded from the Sea, and were never after able
to recover themselves in those Countries.

During these Transactions, the French Ambassador here, made Intercession in
the behalf of the Queen of Scots; and likewise, endeavored to promote the
Match between the Queen and the Duke of Anjou, but perceiving that all his
Offices were to no purpose, he returned into France, where he found that Court
very much taken up with making Preparations for the Marriage of the King of
Navarr with the Lady Margaret, the French King's Sister. To this Solemnity were
allured, by an inviting prospect of perpetual Peace and Amity, not only the
Queen of Navarr, and the Chief of all the Protestants in that Kingdom; but
likewise the Earl of Leicester, and the Lord Burleigh, the Elector Palatine's
Sons, with several of the Principal of the Reformed Party of other Nations,
were desired to be at the Celebration of that Marriage, designing at one Blow
to have cut down the Protestant Religion; And though those Blood-thirsty
Papists could not catch all they aimed at, yet as soon as the Marriage was
Solemnized, there followed that Cruel Massacre of Paris, and that terrible
Butchering of the Hugonots throughout all the Cities of France: but for the
extenuating and vindicating of this horrible Fact, Proclamations and Edicts
were immediately put forth, whereby the Protestants were accused of a
Conspiracy against the King and the whole Royal Family: But the French King
notwithstanding his mask of Piety did not escape Divine Vengeance; for before a
year was expired, he fell sick of a Bloody Flux, which brought him to his end,
after long and tedious Torments. And now came the Head of the Earl of
Northumberland to the Block, who Rebelling, and then flying into Scotland, was
by the Earl of Morton delivered for a Sum of Money to the Lord Hunsdon Governor
of Berwick, and was shortly after Executed at York.

About this time was Sir William Cecyl Lord Burleigh, promoted to be Lord High
Treasurer of England, upon the Decease of the Marquess of Winchester, who a
little before ended his days, after he had lived Ninety seven years, and had
seen the Issue of his Body, to the number of One hundred and three Persons. Not
long before which was a motion made to the Queen in favor of a Match between
her Majesty and the Duke of Alanzon, the French King's youngest Brother, which
though rejected by her, by reason he was scarce seventeen years old, and the
Queen now past eight and thirty; yet Alanzon did not cease prosecuting the
Suit. In the mean time, the Queen fell sick of the Small Pox, but recovered
again, before that it was known abroad that she was so, attending the Affairs
of Government, taking Care to suppress several fresh Rebellions in Ireland, and
sending a new Colony thither. She also repaid, with Thanks, the Money she had
borrowed of her Subjects; and put forth two Proclamations, by one of which, she
commanded the Noblemen to observe the Law, in keeping Retainers; by the other,
she restrained Informers, who under the pretense of discovering Crown Lands,
concealed by private Persons, sacrilegiously seized upon the Lands of Parish
Churches, and Almshouses, piously endowed by the Queens Ancestors. And she
likewise gained a great deal of Love and Honor, by two Acts of Justice; the
one, That she satisfied the English Merchants out of the Goods that were
detained, belonging to the Dutch, and restored the rest to the Duke of Alva,
and made a full Transaction with the Merchants of Genoua, for the Money
intercepted; the other, That she freed England, at this time, of the Debts
which her Father and her Brother had contracted in Foreign parts, and were
increased by yearly Interest; and caused the Obligations of the City of London,
which had been so often renewed, to be given in, to the great Satisfaction of
the Citizens.

The Spanish Conduct in the Low Countries, having not met with that Success
that was expected; on the contrary, several of their Towns being lost, all the
Provinces ready for a Revolt, and the Fleet they had sent to the Relief of the
English Catholics vanquished by the Zelanders; and the Duke of Alva finding
how disadvantageous the cutting off Commerce with the English, had been to his
Masters Subjects, he began to treat the English with more Kindness, and
thereupon, the Commerce was again laid open, which had been, for some Years,
prohibited between the English and Dutch, for two years, which term being
expired, the English, removed their Trade to the Confederated States.

In the mean time, comes over a French Ambassador to complain of the
assistance that the Queen gave to the Hugonots of that Kingdom, to Request her
Majesty to be Godmother to the French King's Daughter, and to use all manner of
Offices toward the promoting a Match between the Queen and Duke of Alanzon.
Whereupon her Majesty sent the Earl of Worcester into France, with a Present of
a Font of Massy Gold, and to stand as her Deputy at the Solemnity of the
Christening. And now the French use all their efforts for the advancing of this
Match, desiring that the Duke of Alanzon might have leave to come over; which
after much importunity, she consented to, upon condition, that he should not
take it for any Disgrace, should he return without obtaining his Suit: And that
he should first procure a Peace in France, and do something in favor of the
Protestants of that Kingdom. Whereupon, a Peace was concluded, and the Hugonots
allowed the Exercise of their Religion in certain Places. And the Duke of Anjou
being elected King of Poland, and resolving to go by Sea thither, the French
desired, that he might have free Passage through the British Ocean; which the
Queen not only willingly granted, but made Offer of a Fleet for the convoying
him thither.

There having been no Regent in Scotland, ever since the Earl of Marre's Death,
James Douglas, Earl of Morton, was now made Regent, by the Procurement of Queen
Elizabeth, and was continued and maintained by the Authority and Power of Queen
Elizabeth, maugre all the Practices of the Papists, and the French against him.
This Regent enacted many profitable Laws for the Defense of Religion against
Papists and Heretics, in the King's Name. But, the Protection and keeping of
the King's Person, he confirmed to Alexander Ereskin, Earl of Mar (to whom
the Custody of the Kings, in their tender years, belongs by a particular
Privilege) though he were in his Minority: And now the Regent meeting with
some Opposition through the Practices of the French, he implored Aid of Queen
Elizabeth, which she granting him, he therewith overcame his and the Kingdom's
Enemies, and brought that Realm into a very settled and quiet Posture.

About this time, the Bishop of Rosse was let out of Prison, but expelled
England; and being abroad, he continued his Solicitations to the Pope and all
Catholic Princes, in favor of the Queen of Scots, his Mistress, from all whom
he received fair Promises, but no Performances. And indeed he had lost the main
support of his Hopes in the Duke of Alva, who about that time was recalled from
his Government of the Low Countries, both for that he was grown too Great, and
that the People there had a Mortal Aversion for his Person, by reason of his
Cruelty. He was succeeded by Requesens, a man of a milder Spirit, minding his
own, not concerning himself with either English or Scottish Affairs, but
endeavored to oblige Queen Elizabeth by all manner of good Offices.

Now again broke out several new Rebellions in Ireland, but were suppressed by
the care and Industry of the Queen's Ministers and Officers there. But they had
raised a desire in Walter Devereux, Earl of Essex, to go against them, which
being opposed by Sir William Fitz-Williams, Deputy of Ireland, an Expedient was
found out by the Queen, by appointing Essex to take a Patent of the Deputy;
which having accordingly done, he went into Ireland with some Forces; but not
meeting with the Success he had promised himself, he long solicited, and at
length obtained leave to return home.

In the mean time, the King of Navarre and the Duke of Alanzon, a Pretender to
the Queen, being suspected by the Queen Mother of France, of some Designs
against her Authority, were put under Confinement: whereupon Queen Elizabeth
sent an Envoy to solicit their Reconciliation and Liberty. But now Charles the
French King dying, he was succeeded by his Brother Henry the Third; who having
left the Throne of Poland, and being returned into his own Country, my Lord
North was sent Ambassador to congratulate his Arrival, and Inauguration into
his Kingdom: who, in return, sent a Person with the same Character hither, but
whose chief Errand was to make strong Intercessions in the King's and Queen
Mothers name, in Favor of the Match between her Majesty, and the Duke of
Alanzon. But notwithstanding all the Kindness that passed between these two
Courts, and that the League of Blois was now again confirmed and ratifyed by
both Crowns, yet the French continued their Practices in Scotland, in favor of
the Queen of Scots; endeavored to have got that King over into France,
contrived how to deprive Morton the Regent, of his Authority; and the French
King having demanded, by Letters, whether the mutual Defense mentioned in the
League, was intended to comprehend the Case of Religion also? Which the Queen
answering in the Affirmative, he immediately began to prepare for War against
the Protestants; and Alanzon being engaged in the adverse Party, there was no
Talk of a Match for a long time.

During these Occurrences, Requesens the Spanish Governor of the Low
Countries, finding how much his Predecessors neglect of Marine Affairs was
prejudicial to his Master's Interests, he made his Request to Queen Elizabeth,
that he might take up Ships and Mariners, for his Majesty's Service: That the
English Fugitives, in the Low Countries, might serve the King of Spain against
the Hollanders, and have free Access to the Ports of England; and that the
Dutch, who were Rebels against the King of Spain, might be banished England.
But, for several Reasons, she thought not fit to grant any of these
Particulars; yet to preserve inviolate the old Burgundian League, she put out a
Proclamation, wherein she commanded, that the Ships of the Dutch, that were
made ready, should not go forth of the Haven; nor yet, the Dutch who had taken
up Arms against the King of Spain, enter into the Ports of England, and by
Name, the Prince of Orange, and fifty other of the principal of that Faction.
In Return of which Favor, the English Seminary at Doway was dissolved, and the
Earl of Westmerland, and other English Fugitives were Banished the Dominions of
the King of Spain.

In the mean time the Prince of Orange and the Confederated States finding
their Forces too small to oppose the King of Spain, they consulted to whose
Protection they might most securely betake themselves. The French they saw then
engaged in a Civil War, the Princes of Germany were loath to part with their
Money, could seldom agree amongst themselves, and were not altogether of a mind
with them in Religion: whereupon knowing none more powerful nor capable of
protecting them than England, they sent an Honorable Embassy of several Persons
to the Queen, offering her the Sovereignty of Holland and Zealand; forasmuch as
she was descended from the Earls of Holland, by Philippa, Wife of Edward the
Third, Daughter of William of Bavaria, Count of Hannonia and Holland: by whose
other Sister the Hereditary Right of those Provinces came to the King of Spain.
Of this Offer the Queen took time to consider, and after mature deliberation,
she made answer, after that she had thanked them for their good Intentions
toward her; that she held nothing more glorious than Justice, that as she
could not with the safety of her Honor and Conscience receive those Provinces
into her Protection, much less assume them into her Possession; yet she would
use her endeavors with the King of Spain, that a good Peace might be concluded.

Shortly after Requesens dying, the States of the several Provinces took upon
them the ancient Administration of the Government, which the King of Spain was
fain to Confirm unto them, till such time as John of Austria was arrived, whom
he designed for a Successor to Requesens. In the mean time, the Queen by her
Ministers endeavored to compose Matters in those Countries; but the minds of
the Factions were so exasperated against one another, that all her efforts in
that kind proved Abortive. Yet he continued to intercede with the King of Spain
in their behalf; and the Ambassador she sent for this purpose to that Court,
finding that that King's Ministers would not admit in the Queens Title the
Attribute of Defender of the Faith, he demanded it with that Courage and
Prudence, that he thereby gained the favor of the King of Spain himself, who
desired him that the Queen might know nothing of this Dispute, and gave severe
Command that the Title should be admitted.

About this time there happened some disorders upon the Borders of Scotland,
which having been favored by the Ministers of the Regent, Queen Elizabeth
would in no wise be satisfied until the Regent himself came into England to
make his Submissions to the Earl of Huntingdon, the English Commissioner.

Much about the same time the Earl of Essex received a great affront, for
amidst his great Exploits and Victory in Ireland, through the Practices of his
Enemies at Court; He was of a sudden recalled home, and ordered to resign his
Authority in Ulster. But Leicester being jealous of his Presence at Court,
caused him to be sent back thither with the empty Title of Earl Marshal of
Ireland; for grief whereof he fell into a Bloody Flux, and ended his days in
grievous Torments, but not without suspicion of Poison, by the Earl of
Leicester's means, for that he had married his Widow immediately after his
Death.

In the mean time, the Confusions increased in the Low Countries, which the
Queen endeavored very much to remedy, and though the States had offered
themselves to the French, yet she sent them twenty Thousand Pounds Sterling,
upon Condition, they should neither call in the French into the Low Countries,
nor change their Prince nor their Religion, nor refuse a Peace, in case it were
offered by Don John of Austria, upon reasonable Conditions. And that Governor
being now arrived, Queen Elizabeth sent a Person of Quality to congratulate his
coming thither, and to offer him her assistance, if the States called in the
French into the Low Countries.

The Seas being now extremely infested with Pirates, the Queen caused several
Men of War to put forth to scour them; which they did to that purpose, as to
take Two Hundred of them, and to put them in Prisons all along the Coast. She
likewise caused the Zelanders to make Restitution and Satisfaction of the
English Goods they had taken and confiscated. And now all the World courting
the Prosperity of England, and the prudent Conduct of it is Queen, the Portugals
requested, that the Commerce might be restored, that had been now for some time
prohibited between the two Nations; and the Conditions which they offered, and
were accepted, were as much or more to the English, as their Advantage About
the same time, Martin Forbisher* undertook a Voyage for the discovery of the
Northern passage to Cathaia but his, and that which was undertaken two years
after for the same purpose* proved in vain. And now, a great Friend and Ally of
Queen Elizabeth's, the Emperor Maximilian, being dead, she sent Sir Philip
Sidney to his Son Rodolphus* to condole his Fathers Death, and congratulate his
Succession, causing the same Offices to be done with the surviving Son of the
then newly deceased Electo^ Palatine.

In Ireland, fresh Rebellions breaking out about this time, the prudent Conduct
of the Queen and her Ministers, was such, that all those Commotions were
suddenly suppressed, and that Nation brought to a greater Subjection than it
had ever been before; but her Ministers proceeding to lay new Taxes, she gave
Order for the moderating them, ^aying, that she would have her Subjects shorn,
not devoured.

But, the Papists still continuing their Practices against her Majesty, had
persuaded Don John of Austria to endeavor the Escape of the Queen of Scots;
which, when he should have procured, he was to have married her, and thereupon,
have demanded as well England as Scotland, in Right of his Wife. But this Plot
and all the Contrivances to bring it about, being discovered by the Prince of
Orange, to Queen Elizabeth; she thereupon entered into a Defensive League with
the States of the Low Countries. After which, some Forces were sent over
thither, with whom, flocked several Volunteers of Quality. Casimir the Elector
Palatine's Son came likewise thither, with an Army of German Horse and Foot, at
the Queen's Charges. These Forces were unexpectedly attacqued by Don John, at
the Head of a great and experienced Army, assisted by the Prince of Parma, and
other the best Commanders of the Spanish Monarchy; and though they had expected
a certain Victory, yet after an obstinate Fight, they were compelled to
retreat: but rallying again, they thought to have surprised the English and
Scottish Volunteers, but were again repulsed by them, and the English and Scots
were so fiery in this Engagement, that, casting away their Garments by reason
of the hot Weather, they fought in their Shirts, which they made fast about
them.

Before this Action, Don John had sent to Queen Elizabeth, to complain of
disobedience in the States. The Spaniard himself having done the same, and
likewise the Frenchman, of his Hugonot Subjects. Thus sat this Queen as an
Heroical Princess and Umpire between the Spaniards, the French, and the States;
insomuch, that it was true what one has Written, that France and Spain were
the Scales in the balance of Europe, and England the Beam to turn them either
way: For whom she assisted, did ever play the Master.

Now though Ambassadors come from the Queen of England, the Emperor, and the
French King into the Low Countries, with Proposals of Peace, yet their
Negotiation proved to no purpose, for that Don John refused to admit the
Protestant Religion, and the Prince of Orange refused to return into Holland.
But shortly after, Don John Dyed in the flower of his Age, some say of the
Pestilence, others of grief, both for his being out of favor with the Spanish
King, and for that, his Ambition had been disappointed; first, of the Kingdom
of Tunis, and afterward of that of England.

In Scotland began again new Commotions, for the People having conceived a
great Aversion against the Lord Morton, the Regent, the Nobility unanimously
resolved to transfer the Administration of the Government upon the King, though
then but Twelve years old, appointing him a Council of twelve of the Principal
Lords, three of whom were to attend him a Month by course. Hereupon the King
sent an Ambassador to Queen Elisabeth, who was dismissed with satisfaction in
most of the Points he came about: but the Lord Morton, not being able to brook
the Disgrace of being put from the Regency, takes the Administration of all
Affairs to himself; which so provoked the Nobility of that Kingdom, that they
raised a great Army, and were ready to fight him and his Forces, when, through
the Intercession of Sir Robert Bows, the English Ambassador, things were
accommodated for the present.

And now the King of Spain and the Pope conspire the utter Ruin, as they
imagined, of Queen Elizabeth, having taken all the necessary Measures for an
Invasion of England and Ireland; But Don Sebastian, King of Portugal, being to
Head this Enterprise, was killed in the memorable Battle, wherein three Kings
were slain in Africa; whereupon the King of Spain's Thoughts and Forces were
wholly taken up how to secure the Kingdom of Portugal to himself.

In the mean time, the Duke of Alanzon renews his Suit to the Queen, sending
over several French Lords to solicit in his behalf: and amongst the rest, one
Simier, who had the Reputation of a great Courtier, and one who understood the
Art of Love, better than any one Person of his time; and indeed, he seemed to
have made such Advances in his Negotiation, as made several of the other
Pretenders jealous, and caused the Earl of Leicester to report, that this
Frenchman crept into the Queens Affections by Love Potions and unlawful Arts,
for which, and other Speeches, and his being married to the Earl of Essex his
Widow, he was confined to the Castle of Greenwich, and had it not been for the
Earl of Sussex, though his greatest Adversary, he had been committed to the
Tower: But this course so provoked the Earl of Leicester, and there were such
suspicions of a Design of murdering Simier, that the Queen put out a
Proclamation, commanding, that no Person should offer Injury to the Ambassador,
or any of his Servants. Yet it happening at that time, that the Queen going in
her Barge with Simier, and some English Noblemen to Greenwich, a young Fellow,
shooting off a Musket, shot one of the Rowers in the Barge, through the Arm
with a Bullet, for which he was immediately carried to the Gallows; yet upon
Solemn Protestation that he did it unwillingly, and with no ill intent, he was
let go, and pardoned. And notwithstanding all that was suggested to the Queen,
yet she was so far from suspecting her Subjects, that she frequently said, She
would not believe any thing against them, which a Mother would not believe
against her Children. Within a few days after which Accident, the Duke of
Alanzon himself came incognito into England, and unexpected by the Queen; with
whom, having had some private Conferences, he returned back to France; and
within a Month or two after his Departure, the Queen appointed Commissioners to
treat with Simier, concerning the Articles of the Marriage.

The King of Spain having constituted the Prince of Parma Governor of the Low
Countries, Qu. Elizabeth supplyeth the States with a great Sum of Money; for
which, William Davison brought into England the ancient precious Habiliments of
the Family of Burgundy, and their costly Vessels laid to Pawn, by Matthew of
Austria, and the States. And about this time, Sir William Drury succeeded in
the Deputiship of Ireland, to Sir Henry Sidney, who had been eleven years
Deputy of Ireland, at several times.

And Casimir, Son to the Elector Palatine of the Rhine, came into England; and
after he had been magnificentl^ entertained, he was made Knight of the Garter,
and dismissed with a yearly Pension. And the Queen, having procured of the
Grand Seignieur a full Liberty for her. Subjects to-trade in all the
Territories of Turkey, a Company of Turkey Merchants was first set up about
that time; who carried on a great and most advantageous* Trade in the several
Parts of his vast Dominions.

Hereupon, followed the Death of Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord Keeper of the Great
Seal; in whose place, succeeded Sir Thomas Bromley, with the Title of Lord
Chancellor of England. And now broke out new Rebellions in Ireland, the Natives
thereof being thereunto stirred up by the Pope and his Adherents: During which,
Sir William Drury dying, Arthur Lord Gray was made Deputy in his stead. And now
the Pope having bestowed the Kingdom of Ireland upon the King of Spain, for
that Qu. Elizabeth, forsooth, had forfeited her Right by being an Heretic;
great Forces were sent into that Kingdom; both of Spaniards and Italians, for
to assist the Rebels in driving and expelling the English from thence; and
though the Rebels and their Auxiliaries, had the advantage in some
Rencounters, yet they were at length, totally routed by the English, and the
Irish hanged, and the Spaniards and Italians put to the Sword. And no less
successful were the English in the Low Countries, where John Norris and Oliver
Temple, English Commanders, being joined with some Companies of Dutch, attacked
early one Morning, the wealthy, strong, and large City of Mecklyn, in Brabant;
and after some Opposition, took it. Not long before these Occurrences, dyed Sir
Thomas Gresham, who, besides the Royal Exchange, and other public Structures,
dedicated to the Profession - of Learning, a fair House of his in the City,
since called Gresham College; constituting therein, Lectures of Divinity,
Civil Law, Physic, Astronomy, Geometry, and Rhetoric, with reasonable
Stipends.

And now the English Seminaries abroad, who were incited to maintain and
inculcate, That the Pope has such Fullness of Power, by Divine Right, over the
whole World, both in Ecclesiastical and Divine Matters, that by virtue thereof
it is lawful for him to excommunicate Kings, absolve their Subjects from their
Oath of Allegiance, and deprive them of their Kingdoms: And now I say, those
Seminaries began to spawn out Instruments into all Parts, for the teaching and
inculcating this Doctrine; and, amongst others, came the Jesuits, Parsons and
Compian, into England, who spoke to the Papists so venemously of the Queen, and
of deposing her, that the Papists themselves did design to have discovered
them. Whereupon, for that these and several more of that wicked Tribe, lay
lurking, and in Masquerade, stirring up People to Rebellion, and using all
manner of abominable Machinations against the Queen and her Authority; her
Majesty thought fit, to put out a Proclamation, wherein she declares, That she
had attempted nothing against any Prince, but for Preservation of her own
Kingdom; nor had invaded the Provinces of any other, though she had sundry
times thereunto been provoked, by injuries, and invited by opportunities. If
any Princes do assail her, she doubts not but to be able (by the favor of
God) to defend her People, and to that purpose she had mustered her Forces both
by Sea and Land, and had now made them ready against Hostile Invasions. Her
faithful Subjects she exhorts to continue unmovable in their Allegiance and
Duty toward God and their Prince, the Minister of God. The rest which had
shaken off their Love to their Country, and their Obedience to their Prince,
she commands to carry themselves modestly, and not to provoke the severity of
Justice: For she would no longer offend in such sort, that by sparing the bad,
she should be cruel against her self and her good Subjects.

About this time it was that Captain Drake returned home from his extraordinary
Voyage round the World. He was a Person Born of mean Parentage in Devonshire,
his Father being Persecuted in King Henry the Eighth's time, for Protestantism,
changed his Abode, and lived privately in Kent, but after that Kings Death, he
procured to read Prayers among the Mariners of the Queens Navy; and bound his
Son Francis Prentice to the Master of a Ship, who traded to France, and Zeland.
Now this Master took such a liking to Francis for his Activity and readiness in
all things he took in hand, that at his Death he left him his Pinck as a
Legacy: This Vessel Drake sold, and thereupon in the Year 1567, attended Sir
John Hawkins in his Voyage to America, but with the loss of all he had in the
World in that Voyage. Some time after, having gained a considerable Sum of
Money, by Trading and Privateering, he again undertook a Voyage to America,
wherein the first Prize he made, was great store of Gold and Silver, carried
over the Mountains upon Mules, whereof he carried the Gold to his Ships, but
left and buried his Silver. After this Exploit he proceeded, took, plundered,
and fired a great place of Commerce, called the Cross, upon the River Cherarge,
and whilst he was wandering and roving about the adjacent places, he discovered
from the Mountains, the South Sea. Hereupon inflamed with Affectation of Glory
and Wealth, falling upon his knees, he craved the assistance of God, and bound
himself by a Vow to undertake the Navigating and Surveying of those Seas: And
now, having obtained great Riches, he for the present returned home:
Afterward, about the middle of November, in the Year 1577, He set Sail with
five Ships, and about 163 Seamen, from Plymouth, for the Southern Sea, and in
the space of five and twenty days came to the Cape of Cantyne in Barbary, and
then sailed along the Isle of Fogo, that casts forth Sulphury Flames; and at
his being under the Line, he caused every Person in his Ships to be let Blood,
and Arriving on the Twenty sixth of April, at the mouth of the River of Plata,
he saw an infinite number of Sea Calves; from thence sailing to the Haven of
Saint Julians, he found a Gybbet, set up, as was thought by Magellan, when he
punished certain Mutineers. In this very place John Doughty, a stout and
industrious Man, the next to Drake in Authority, was called in question for
raising Sedition in the Navy, and was condemned to Death, which he suffered
very undauntedly, after having received the Communion with Drake. On the
twentieth of August, he set Sail with three Ships, for the two lesser he had
before left to the Waves, shipping the Men and Ammunition into the rest, to the
Straight of Magellan; the sixth of September entering into the wide Southern
Ocean, called the Pacifique Sea, he found it extreme Tempestuous, insomuch,
that his Ships were dispersed by Storm; in the one of which John Winter was
Master, who returned back into England. Drake himself, with only one Ship,
Coasted along the Shore, until he came to Mouch Island. And setting Sail from
thence, he found a Barbarian fishing in a small Boat, who taking our Men to be
Spaniards, gave them notice, that there rode at Anchor, a great Spanish Ship,
at Villa Parizo, and directed them thither: And the Spaniards supposing him to
be their own Countryman, invited him on Board, where he presently shut the
Spaniards, not being above eight Persons, under Hatches, and took the Ship,
wherein was four hundred pound weight of Gold. Then went he on Land at
Taurapasa, where he found a Spaniard sleeping on the Sea Shore, and lying by
him thirteen Bars and Wedges of Silver, to the value of four hundred thousand
Ducats; which he commanded to be carried away, not so much as once waking the
Man. Afterward entering the Haven of Africa, he found there three Ships without
any Seamen in them; wherein, besides other Commodities, were seven and fifty
Silver Bricks, each of which weighed twenty pound; from whence he sailed to
Lima, where he found twelve Ships in one Road, and in them great store of
Silks, and a Chest full of Money ready Coined, but not so much as a Boy aboard;
so secure they think themselves on that Coast: And then making all the Sail he
could, he followed the rich Ship called the Cacofogo, and by the way met with a
small Ship without Canon or other Arms, out of which he took fourscore pound
weight of Gold, a Golden Crucifix, and some Emeraulds of a fingers length. On
the first of March, he overtook the Cacofogo, and having shot down the Foremast
with the shot of a great Piece of Ordnance, he set upon her and soon took her;
and in her, besides Jewels, fourscore pound weight of Gold, thirteen Chests of
Silver ready Coined, and as much Silver, as would balance a Ship. And now
thinking himself sufficiently rich, he resolved to make Sail for England; and
soon the third of November 1580, he arrived at Plymouth, having sailed round
about the World in the space of three Years, to his Eternal Renown, and the
great admiration of all Men.

He was graciously received by the Queen, who yet sequestered his Goods, that
they might be forth coming if the King of Spain demanded them: And her Majesty
having given order for his Ship to be drawn on shore near Deptford, whereto,
and where it does remain for a Monument; and in it being consecrated for a
Memorial with great solemnity; and having been there treated with great
Magnificence, her Majesty conferred the Honor of Knighthood upon Captain
Drake. But the Spanish Ambassador in England began to bluster, and re-demanded
the Goods that had been taken by Drake, and made Complaints of the English
sailing in the American Seas: To whom the Queen replied, That she had caused
the Goods to be sequestered, and that they were forthcoming, for the King of
Spain's satisfaction; notwithstanding that the Queen had been at greater
Expenses in suppressing the Rebellions that had been raised by the Spaniard's
Instigations in England and Ireland, than all the Money that Drake had brought
with him: And as for sailing on the American Sea, that it was as lawful for her
Majesty's, and and other Princes Subjects, as the King of Spain's; and that she
could not acknowledge any Right in the Pope to appropriate those or any other
Countries to any Person. However, the King of Spain's Agent in this Business,
had a great Sum of Money repayed him, which, instead of being restored to the
Owners, was employed against the Queen, and the Protestants in the Low
Countries; where the English did extraordinary Exploits in behalf of the
confederated States, General Norris raising the Siege of Fenwick, that was
besieged by the Forces of the King of Spain, and shortly after fought another
Spanish Army, but, being overpowered with Numbers, made a gallant Retreat. In
the mean time, new Troubles were raised in Scotland, some envying the Duke of
Lenox his great Favor with the King, accused him of endeavoring to pervert
the King to Popery, and allure him into France, which suspicions he endeavored
to dissipate; and thinking those Rumors were promoted by Morton, and that he
was not secure as long as Morton lived, he caused him to be beheaded, as
accessory to the Death of the King's Father.

During these Transactions, the Match with the Duke of Alanzon was prosecuted
afresh, several of the Principal Lords of France coming over for that end, and
shortly after that Duke himself came over hither. In the mean time, the
Articles of Marriage were agreed upon by the Commissioners on both sides, but
with some Reservations, that were disclaimed by the French King, who refused to
enter into an Offensive and Defensive League, until such time as the Marriage
was consummated. Yet the French Duke's Presence here seemed to have so promoted
his Business, that the Queen, having one day given him publicly a Ring, this
was looked upon as a Contract, by all the standers by; and thereupon public
Rejoicing was made in several Places abroad, as for a thing concluded, but not
so at home, when the innate Aversion the English have for the French, broke out
into public Murmurs, and Libells against this Match, which occasioned the
Queen to put forth Proclamations to stifle them, and the Authors and Dispersers
of those Seditious Pamphlets to be punished according to Law. About the same
time, a Jesuit and several Popish Priests were convicted of having plotted the
Ruin of the Queen and Kingdom; of adhering to the Pope, the Queens Enemy; and
of coming into England to raise Forces against the State; for which they were
condemned, and accordingly executed: Shortly after whom, several Papists
suffered Death likewise for the same Crimes.

In the mean time, the Duke of Alanzon, suspecting that he had only been lured
with empty hopes of a Crown here in England, having the Government of the Low
Countries conferred upon him by the States, he prepared for his Journey
thither, and was accompanied by the Queen as far as Canterbury; where they
parting, her Majesty ordered some of the Principal Courtiers to attend him to
Antwerp; where, finding his Commission so limited, that he had only the Name of
Authority, he made a rash Attempt upon Antwerp, for which he was forced to
leave the Low Countries, with the Aversion and Scorn of those People.

But during these Occurences, the King of Spain subdued all Portugal in Seventy
days time: which being a great Addition to the vast Dominions he before had,
put all Europe in mind of uniting for their common Security. In the mean time,
the English continued their Bravery in the Low Countries, and with great
Success and Advantage to the States. And the Queen, to procure the Amity of the
King of Denmark, and an Abatement of the Customs in the Sound, sent him the
Order of the Carter, which he accordingly received with all acknowledgment. And
now broke out again new Commotions in Scotland, the King being surprised and
detained by the Earls of Goury, Lindsey, Mar, and others, who caused Arran to
be imprisoned, Lenox to be banished out of Scotland, and the Earl of Arguse to
be called home from Exile. But shortly after, the King being then about
eighteen years old, made his Escape out of their Hands; whereupon, Sir Francis
Walsingham was sent to him by Queen Elizabeth, for the giving him good Counsel,
and the endeavoring to compose the Distractions of that Kingdom: During which,
the famous Irish Rebel Gyrald Fitz Gyrald, the eleventh Earl of Desmond of
this Family, having a long time kept himself outof the hands of the English, by
lurking in private places, was about this time found out, and slain by a Common
Soldier, in a poor Cottage. This great Lord was descended from Maurice, the
Son of Gyrald of Windsor, an English man, famous among those who first invaded
Ireland in the Year 1170. He possessed whole Counties together, with the County
Palatine of Kerry, and had of his own Name and Race, at least five hundred
Gentlemen at his Command; all whom, and his own Life also, he lost within the
space of three years, very few of his Family being left alive. This Misfortune
was brought upon him by his Disloyalty to his Prince, through the Instigation
of Popish Priests.

But Ireland and Scotland, (where lately the Earl of Gowry was beheaded, as
convicted of several Treasons) were not the only Scenes of Plots and
Conspiracies, but England it self was again filled with Popish Practices
against the Queen's Life, and in favor of the Queen of Scots. But being
discovered, some of the Nobility and Ringleaders of the Faction, were taken
into Custody, others confined to their Houses, and others made their Escape
into France.

In the mean time, some Disputes happening between the Czar of Muscovy and the
King of Sweden, this King not finding himself able to oppose that Emperor,
sends a Royal Ambassy to request the Queen's Intercession in his Behalf,
which accordingly her Majesty immediately performed; and, by her Ambassador
accommodated matters between those two Princes, upon very reasonable Terms. At
the same time, the Queens Ambassador obtained of the Czar, the Confirmation of
the Privileges of the English Merchants in Russia, maugre she had denied him
Satisfaction in several points, and one of her Subjects to be his Wife and
Empress, which he had extremely solicited.

Mendora, the Spanish Ambassador at this time in England, was put out of the
Kingdom, for joining with the English Rebels, and stirring up the People to
Rebellion; and an Ambassador sent into Spain, to justify this Conduct, who not
being admitted to Audiency of the King, but referred to the Counselors, he
disdained to open himself to them, and returned home without declaring the
Cause of his Embassy. The Papists printed and dispersed Books to exhort the
Queens Women to commit the like against the Queen, as Judith had done with
Commendations against Holofernes: The Bookseller for whom these seditious
Libels were printed, was executed; but the Author could not be found out. And
now farther Discoveries were made of the Practices of the Papists against the
Queen and State, of a Design of invading England by the Catholic Princes, and
of the measures that had been taken by the Papists, for that purpose; which
Discoveries being confirmed by the Confessions of some of the Papists
themselves, all possible Precautions were taken for the preventing the
Execution of any such pernicous Designs; and amongst other Expedients, for the
better providing for the Safety of the Queen's Person, a number of her
Subjects, headed by the Earl of Leicester, men of all Ranks and Conditions,
bound themselves mutually to each other, by their Oaths and Subscriptions, to
persecute all those to Death, that should attempt any thing against the Queen;
which League of theirs, was called the Association.

The several Treaties that had been held with the Queen of Scots, having proved
abortive, she fearing that this Association was designed for her Destruction,
made this Proposition by Nave her Secretary, to the Queen and Council; That if
she might be set at Liberty, and be assured of the Queen's Affection, she would
enter into a strict League and Amity with her; and passing by all matters of
Offense, most officiously love and observe her, above all other Princes of
Christendom; and enter also into the Association aforesaid, for the Queens
Security, and into a League Defensive (saving that Ancient League between
France and Scotland.) This seemed to give great Delight and Satisfaction to
Queen Elizabeth; and she was thought at that time to be really inclined to
grant her her Liberty. But her Majesty being continually alarmed with
apprehensions from the adverse Party, both of Scots and English, who exclamed,
that the Queens Life was in no wise secure while the Queen of Scots was living,
o^ at least, at liberty; insomuch that this Treaty was likewise broken off; and
upon the Queen of Scots Adversaries suggestions, she was taken from the Earl of
Shrewsbury, and committed to the Custody of Sir Amias Paulet, and Sir Drue
Drury, which rendered her so desperate, that she grew the more importunate with
the Pope and the King of Spain to put their Designs in execution.

And now there ran a Report, that the Catholics had entered into a Combination,
for the depriving Queen Elizabeth of her Crown, for the disinheriting the King
of Scots of the Kingdom of England, as being both of them detected of Heresy;
the Queen of Scots to be married to some Catholic English Nobleman; that this
Nobleman should be elected King of England, by the English Catholics, the
Election confirmed by the Bishop of Rome; that his Children by the Queen of
Scots, should be proclaimed Lawful Successors to the Crown; and all this was
affirmed by one Heart a Priest. About this time, dyed in France the Duke of
Alanzon, for grief; and in Holland, the Prince of Orange was treacherously shot
with three Bullets, by one Bethazar Gerard, a Burgundian.

And now the French King being elected by Queen Elizabeth into the Order of the
Garter, Her Majesty sent the Earl of Derby to invest him therewith, with all
the usual Solemnity.

There being a Parliament assembled at Westminster, one Parry, a Member of the
Lower House, was first imprisoned for opposing and exclaming against a Bill
that was preferred against the Jesuits, but being set at Liberty upon his
Submission, he was immediately after accused by one Edward Nevil, of the Earl
of Westmerland's Family, of having held secret Consultations about taking away
the Queens Life; which upon his Examination being confessed by him, with all
the Particulars thereof; and being brought to his Trial, and still confessing
the same, he was accordingly condemned and executed. Whereupon, the Parliament
then sitting, made several seasonable Laws for the Security of the Queens
Person. Thereupon, the Earl of Arundel was committed to the Tower. In the same
Place, and at the same time, the Earl of Northumberland, a man of a lofty
Spirit and Courage, who had been committed thither upon Suspicion of a secret
Consultation with Throckmorton, the Lord Paget, and the Guises, for invading of
England, and setting the Queen of Scots at Liberty, was found dead in his Bed,
being shot with three Bullets, under his left Pap, his Chamber Door being
barred on the inside. The Coroners Inquest having examined the matter, and all
other lawful Scrutinies being made, it was found and declared; how that for
Fear of the Law, he had laid violent hands upon himself.

The Practices of the Papists against the Queen and the reformed Religion,
being thus daily more and more discovered, the Queen resolved to endeavor the
contracting an Offensive and Defensive League with the King of Denmark, the
Protestant Princes and States of Germany, and the Low Countries, and with the
King of Scotland: to which purpose she sent Ministers to their respective
Courts, but it was delayed in Scotland by some new Commotions, which occasioned
a change of Ministers and Officers of that Crown; till at length all being
quieted and accommodated, it was unanimously voted by all, that a Treaty of a
League with the Queen of England, should be agreed upon, and Delegates
nominated to that purpose. During these Transactions, new Rebellions broke
forth in Ireland, the Mutineers calling into their aid the Hebridian Scots, who
together with the Irish were utterly defeated by the English, above three
thousand of them, (being all except fourscore) killed upon the Place. Which
Victory was famous and advantageous both for the present and future times, for
hereby the name of the Mac-Williams in Connaught, was utterly extinct, and the
insolent Attempts of the Scottish Islanders absolutely crushed.

About this time the States of the Low Countries being brought very low, and
unable to secure themselves any longer against the ruin that was threatened
them by the vast power of the Spaniards, they implored Queen Elizabeth's
Protection, and offered her the sovereignty of their Provinces, which for the
present, after much debate in her Council, she refused; but was willing to
supply them with four Thousand Soldiers, in case the Town of Sluice with the
Ordnance belonging to it, were delivered to her for caution. But afterward,
upon their farther representations of the sad condition they were reduced to,
and commiserating the doleful estate of so great a Branch of the reformed
Religion, she at last resolves to take them into her Protection, promising to
supply them with five Thousand Foot, and a Thousand Horse, under a sufficient
General, and paying them during the War, upon condition, that they should by
way of Pledge, deliver to her Flushing, the Fort of Ramekin, and the Brill: And
her Majesty immediately caused to be put forth a large Declaration in
justification of ^his her Conduct. And thereupon, that the War might not be
brought to her own Doors by the King of Spain, she sent Sir Francis Drake
Admiral of her Fleet, and Christopher Carlisle, General of her Land Forces into
America, with a Fleet of Twenty one ships, wherein were two Thousand three
Hundred Volunteers and Saylors, for to make a Division thereby, who after they
had taken and plundered several places in those parts of the World, and lost
seven hundred of their men, most of whom dyed of the Calenture, they returned
home, with a Booty valued at six Thousand Pounds sterling, and two hundred and
forty of the Enemies great Brass and Iron Guns; and with Tobacco, being the
first time it was brought into England.

During these Transactions in America, John Davies, with two ships, set forth
at the Charges of the Citizens of London, first discovered and found a passage
by the Northern parts of America to the East Indies.

About this time, the Earl of Leicester was sent by the Queen, as General of
her Forces into Holland, being accompanied by the Earl of Essex, and several
Persons of Quality, with a choice Band of five hundred Gentlemen. The Earl of
Leicester's Reception was attended with all the Pomp and Magnificence
imaginable: And at his Arrival at the Hague, the chief Government and absolute
Authority over the confederated Provinces, was committed to him by Instrument
in Writing, by the States General, with the Title of Governor and Captain
General of Holland, Zeland, the United and the confederated Provinces. Which he
accepted of, and also the Title of excellency. All which severely displeased
the Queen, and she made both him and the States sensible of her anger by her
Letters to them, desiring the latter to divest Leicester of that absolute
Authority they had devolved upon him. The States let the Queen know how much
they were grieved for having incurred her displeasure by having devolved that
Authority upon the Earl, without her Previty, and desire her to be pacifyed,
considering the necessity they were in so do.

Upon these Letters and those of Leicester's, that were Written with all the
Submission, Respect, and Repentance imaginable, the Queen was reconciled and
satisfied. But Leicester's* Arbitrary way of Government, imposing new Customs
upon Merchandises, and introducing Martial Laws, quickly raised an Aversion to
him in the People.

His first Warlike Exploit was the undertaking to Relieve Grave, a Town in
Brabant, then besieged by the Prince of Parma: but notwithstanding all the
great Efforts of the English, the Town was at length taken, through the
Cowardice of the Governor, who was thereupon executed.

After which, the Prince of Parma laid Siege unto Venlo in Guelderland, where
one Roger Williams a Welchman, performed great Service, yet the Spaniards took
that Town also, while the Earl of Leicester was beating the Spaniard out of the
Betou, a River Island lying* between the Rhine and the Waul, and near the
Tolhuis, built a strong Sconce. After which, the Lord Willoughby, Governor of
Bergen-op-zoom, cut off the Enemies* Convoys, and took away their Provisions.
And Sir Philip Sidney, with Maurice the Prince of Orange's Son, took in Axill a
Town in Flanders; and Doesburgh was likewise besieged, and taken by the Earl of
Leicester. But in a Rencounter before Zutphen, was the renowned Sir Philip
Sidney slain, being the greatest Ornament of the Age he lived in: he was
honored with an Epitaph by the King of Scotland, and both Universities
celebrated his Memory with Elegies, and his Funerals were solemnized with great
Ceremony, in St. Paul's Church in London. The Earl of Leicester laid siege to
Zutphen, but the Winter Season being far advanced, he was forced to quit the
farther Prosecution of it, leaving it only blocked up, and returned to the
Hague, where the States entertained him with Complaints of his Conduct, and the
ill Circumstances he had thereby brought them into; whereupon, he took away the
Jurisdiction of the States Council, and Presidents of the Provinces, and then
returned into England.

About this time was concluded the League of strict Amity between the Queen of
England and the King of Scotland; being chiefly designed for the maintenance of
the Reformed Religion. Shortly after the Conclusion of which League, was
discovered a new dangerous Conspiracy against the Queen; one John Savage,
having been persuaded by some Popish Priests, that it was a meritorious Work,
to take away the Lives of excommunicated Princes. Hereupon was a Combination
made of English Catholics, and Correspondence held with the Queen of Scots,
the Pope, the Guises, the Spaniard, and the other Enemies of the Queen and the
Protestant Religion; but was first discovered by one of the Plotters
themselves, and confessed by the rest, both before and at their Executions:
whereupon, long Debates and Consultations were held, what was to be done with
the Queen of Scots: and at length those Voices prevailed, that were for the
bringing her to her Trial: insomuch, that the Queen was persuaded to sign a
Patent for the constituting the Archbishop of Canterbury, the principal
Officers of the Crown, the chief Nobility of the Kingdom, and the Privy Counsel
her Commissioners, to hear and try that Queens Cause. But the Queen of Scots
for some time, refused to plead, as being an absolute Princess, and therefore
exempted from any Jurisdiction: But, at length consenting, she was charged with
having been privy to all the forementioned Conspiracies; consenting to the
Invasion of England, and the Queens Destruction by the confession of her
Secretaries, and the rest of the Traitors, and which were confirmed by Letters
of her own hand writing: And having little to say in her own Defense, the
Commissioners pronounced Sentence against her in the Star Chamber. And, in a
few days after, the Parliament being convened at Westminster, the Lords
petitioned the Queen, that the Sentence against the Queen of Scots might be
published: But the Queen made Answer, That she could wish that that Sentence
might deterr the Queen of Scots from such like Contrivances for the future, and
that some Expedient might be found out, for the saving her Life, and yet secure
England and it is Queen from further Attempts and Dangers of that kind. But,
both Houses replied, That neither her Majesty, nor themselves, were safe, as
long as the Queen of Scots was living; and pressed her so hard, that the
Sentence might be put in Execution, that Commissioners were appointed to
admonish her to prepare for Death; which News, she received without any change
of Countenance, or show of Passion. And having that Night made her Will, she,
with great Courage and Devotion, prepared her self to dye the next day, and was
then accordingly beheaded, in the six and fortieth of her Age, and seventeenth
year of her Imprisonment in England.

But what most persuaded Queen Elizabeth to suffer the Sentence to be put in
Execution, was the French and Scottish Ambassadors finding their Solicitations
in the behalf of the Queen of Scots, to be to no purpose, the French Ambassador
had hired and excited some persons to kill Queen Elizabeth; but being
discovered both by the Confession of the Parties, and the French Ambassador
himself, and several Rumors spread abroad, that the Spanish Fleet was already
arrived at Milford Haven; that the Scots were broken into England; that the
Duke of Guise was landed in Sussex, with a strong Army; that the Queen of Scots
was escaped out of Prison, and levied an armed Power; that the Northern men had
raised a Rebellion; that there was a new Conspiracy to kill the Queen, and set
the City of London on Fire; nay, and that the Queen was dead. Insomuch, that
some Change being apprehended, the Queen was, after much Importunity, prevailed
with, to sign the Sentence of Death. And the Scots report, that one of the
principal Perswaders was Patrick Gray, who was sent from the King of Scots, to
persuade the Queen from putting his Mother to Death.

Queen Elizabeth was so grieved when she received the News of her Death, that
she commanded her Counselors from her Presence, caused Davison to be cited in
the Star Chamber, and fined ten thousand pounds. She likewise sent one to
pacify the King of Scots, assuring that it was done against her Meaning and
Privity, giving him reasons why he should not break out into the revenge he
threatened, and signed an instrument, attested with the Great Seal, and with the
hands of all the Judges of England, that the Sentence against the Queen of
Scots, could in no wise prejudice his Right to the Succession.

In the mean time, the Queen had supplied the King of Navarr and the
Protestants of France, with a great sum of Money. And for a Diversion to the
Spaniard, she sent Sir Francis Drake to the Court of Spain, with four Men of
War, where he chased six Galleys in the Port of Cales, took, sunk, and burnt,
above a hundred ships, set upon their Forts, and compelled them to yield, took
a vast rich Carrack, called the St. Philip. Thomas Cavendish, with three ships,
ravaged the West Indies at the same time, took and pillaged nineteen great
ships, burnt and plundered a great number of the Spanish Towns, and then
returned home; after having been the third, after Magellan, that had sailed
round the World.

During these successes of the English, the Officers of the Earl of Leicester
had employed, having proved Treacherous in several instances, the States
accused the Earl to the Queen, who thereupon called him home, and he resigned
the Government to the States, Maurice of Nassaw, Son to the Prince of Orange,
succeeding in his room at the Age of Twenty Years, and the Lord Willoughby was
made General of the English Forces in the Low Countries, with orders from the
Queen to reduce the English Factions into obedience of the States, which he
accordingly performed, with the help of Prince Maurice: and was in the Year
1588, which by the German Chronologers was presaged to be the Climacterical
Year of the World, and indeed the Rumors of War, and the extraordinary
preparations that the Spaniards were making for an Invasion of England by their
Invincible Armado, seemed to justify their Predictions. At this time there was
a Treaty of Peace held near Ostend, between the English and Spanish
Commissioners, but designed by the Spaniards only to lull the English asleep,
till their Navy was arrived upon the Coast of England. This Invincible Armado
consisted of one hundred and thirty ships, whereof Galleasses and Galleons
seventy two, in which were nineteen Thousand two hundred and ninety Soldiers;
eight Thousand and fifty Mariners; two Thousand and eighty Gally Slaves; and
two Thousand six hundred and thirty Pieces of great Canon. Twelve of their main
ships being christened with the Names of the Twelve Apostles; Alphorozo Per^z de
Gusman, being made principal Commander thereof. Besides extraordinary
Preparations were making in Flanders, and the Prince of Parma had orders to
join them with fifty Thousand Men.

In the mean time, Queen Elizabeth was preparing with all diligence, as good a
Fleet as she could, making the Lord Howard of Effingham Admiral thereof, and
Sir Francis Drake Vice Admiral. The Lord Henry Seymour, second Son to the Duke
of Somerset, was appointed to lie upon the Coasts of the Low Countries, with
forty English and Dutch ships, for the hind'ring the Prince of Parma's coming
forth with his Forces. At home along the Coasts were disposed twenty Tousand
Men, and besides two Armies of the choicest and expertest Men were raised, the
one under the Command of the Earl of Leicester, consisting of a Thousand Horse,
and two and twenty Thousand Foot, which encamped at Tilbury; the Enemy being
resolved to make their first Attack upon London; the other under the Conduct of
the Lord Hunsdon, consisting of thirty four Thousand Foot, and two Thousand
Horse, for the Guard of the Queens Person. A Council of War was likewise
established of prudent and experienced Officers. All Sea Ports were likewise
fortified and provided with all things necessary, trusty and prudent Persons
put into all Offices of Trust, the most suspected Papists committed to custody,
the King of Scots persuaded to declare in favor of the Queen, which he
accordingly did with great Alacrity. And now at length, after several false
Rumors and Alarums, the two Fleets meet and engage, and after several days
Fight, the Spaniards were utterly defeated: Insomuch, that of one hundred
thirty four ships that set Sail out of Lisbon, only fifty three returned into
Spain: Of the four Galleasses of Naples, but one: of ninety one Gallions, and
great Hulks from diverse Provinces, only thirty three returned, fifty eight
being lost. In short, the Spaniards lost in this Expedition, fourscore and one
ships, thirteen thousand five hundred and odd Soldiers. Prisoners taken in
Ireland, Zeland, and the Low Countries, were above two Thousand; insomuch, that
there was no Famous or Noble Family in all Spain, but what lost a Son, Brother,
or Kinsman in this Expedition.

During these Transactions at Sea, the Queen went in Person to Tilbury, to view
the Army and Camp there, which she did with a Leaders Truncheon in her hand;
and with such a Resolution, that it strangely animated the Courages of them
all. And thus was that Invincible Armado utterly defeated, that so many
Countries had been so many Years preparing, that had been sanctified and
blessed by the Pope, with all the Superstitions of the Church of Rome, and
though Pope Sixtus Quintus had likewise sent Cardinal Allen, an English Man,
into the Low Countries, and renewed the Bulls and Declarations of his
Predecessors, excommunicating the Queen, dethroning her, absolving her
Subjects from all Allegiance, and publishing his Croisado in Print, as against
Heathens and Infidels, giving plenary Indulgences to all that should offer
their Assistance. For this extraordinary Victory, the Queen caused public
Thansgivings to be made to God throughout all England, assisting thereat her
self with all Humility, Acknowledgment, and Ceremony imaginable. Her Majesty
likewise rewarded those who had signalized themselves in this Occasion.

Shortly after this Success, dyed the great Earl of Leicester, of a Fever; and
the Prince of Parma for the regaining again some of the Honor the Spaniards
had lost in this Expedition, undertook the siege of Bergen-op-zoom; but that
Place being garrisoned with English, he was beaten from before it, and forced
to raise his siege.

About this time, the Earl of Arundel was brought to his Trial, for conspiring
with the Pope, against the Queen; and was found guilty, and condemned by his
Peers, but reprived by the Queen. In the mean time, Sir John Norris and Sir
Francis Drake, undertook an Expedition into Portugal, for the establishing Don
Antonio, a natural Son of a King of that Realm, upon the Throne thereof; but,
though they joined with the Earl of Essex, who was put to Sea, without the
Queen's Leave, and advanced to the Gates of Lisbon, yet they returned without
having effected their Design.

About this time, the Popish Princes of France entered into a new Combination,
for the extirpating the Reformed Religion of that Kingdom, calling this their
Association, the holy League. The Head of this League was the Duke of Guise,
who finding his Party much the strongest, and being above measure extolled by
the Catholics of all Parties, it inspired him with the Vanity of aiming at the
Crown for himself; which the King being sensible of, caused him to be put to
Death, at the Assembly of Blois, in the midst of all his Hopes. Hereupon,
extraordinary Combustions and Distractions followed; and at length, the King
himself was most impiously murdered by a Monk; after which, the Popish Faction
proclaimed the Cardinal of Bouillon King of France, but the King of Navarr,
being the next Heir, proclaimed King at the same time by all true Subjects, and
supplied with Men and Money by Queen Elizabeth, he not only maintained his
Cause against his Enemies, but vanquished them upon all Occasions. It was now,
that the King of Scots contracted Marriage with Ann Daughter of the King of
Denmark, with Queen Elizabeth's Consent; and which was afterward consummated
by him in Norway.

In the mean time, the Queen continued her Preparations against all Surprises
of her Enemies; she likewise soon quashed and quieted the Commotions that were
then in Ireland, composed and reconciled the Differences that were amongst the
States of the Low Countries, took care to assist them against their Enemies;
restrained Pirates, and upon the Desire of the French King, sent the Earl of
Essex with an Army to his Assistance, wherein the English performed
extraordinary things; and Sir Roger Williams, in Honor of his Nation, sent a
Challenge to the Spaniards, to encounter two hundred Pike-men of the English,
and a hundred Musqeteers, with as many Spaniards, in open Field; for which, and
several other courageous Exploits, the French King highly extolled him, in his
Letters to the Queen. The King of Poland and Prince of Moldavia, being under
ill Circumstances with the Great Turk, implored Queen Elizabeth's Intercession
in their behalf; which she readily granted, and obtained a Peace for them upon
very advantageous Terms.

At this time, Brian O Rorl, an Irish Potentate, was convicted at Westminster,
and hanged for High Treason; as likewise, one Hacket, with his Adherents, for
their blasphemous Carriage and Expressions. A new Proclamation came out
likewise against the Papists, and for the Preservation of the Church of
England, as established. Sir John Perrot was likewise about this time, tried
and condemned for Treason, but reprieved by the Queen. About this time, the
College of Dublin was constituted an University; and then broke out some new
Troubles in Scotland, through the Instigations of the Lord Bothwell, for which
he was proclaimed a Traitor. In the mean time dyed the Prince of Parma, a
Person of extraordinary Accomplishments, and admired by his very Enemies. Just
before whose Death, the Earl of Essex was recalled home out of France, after
very great performances, and having challenged the Governor of Roan, one of
the most considerable Lords of France, who thought it not safe to answer him.
In the mean while Sir Walter Rawleigh was sent into America, with a
considerable Fleet, for the intercepting the Spanish Navy, but receiving
intelligence, that it would not come out that Year, he divided his Fleet to see
what other Prizes they could get, and thereupon took a great Coraque, called,
The Mother of God, the Prize being valued at above an hundred and fifty
thousand Pounds sterling, besides what the Officers and Soldiers had pilfred
for themselves.

At this time the French King being turned Catholic, and having by an
Ambassador acquainted Queen Elizabeth with the necessity there was so for him
to do, the Queen endeavored to divert him from that resolution, and reduce him
into Rebels Assascinating the Queen.
The Spanish Invasion in 1588.
The burning of Cadez by the Earl of Essex.
the Bosom of the true Church; Writing to him in these very Terms. Alas! what
Grief, what Anxiety of Mind has befallen me, since I heard this News? Was it
possible that worldly respects should make you lay aside the Fear of God? Could
you think that he who has hitherto upheld and kept you, would now at the last
leave you? It is a dangerous thing to do evil that good may come thereof. But I
hope your mind may alter. In the mean while I will pray for you, and beg of
God, that the hands of Esau may not hinder the Blessing of Jacob. To which that
King replied, That though he had done this of his own Person out of necessity,
yet he would never be wanting to those of the reformed Religion, but would take
them into his special Care and Protection.

About this time, was executed one Hacket, for endeavoring to persuade the
Earl of Derby to take upon him the Title of England, in Right of Descent from a
Daughter of King Henry the Seventh, which the Earl refused to do, and likewise
dyed shortly after.

At this time broke out several fresh Rebellions in Ireland, which were
suddenly suppressed through the Queens Prudent Care and Conduct; as likewise
several Questions were started about the Succession, some framing a Right in
the Earl of Essex, others in the Infanta of Spain; and Books were likewise
printed in favor of their Titles, by the Catholic Party. During these
Disputes, was born Henry Prince of Scotland, to whom the Queen was Godmother;
and now the Papists renew their Attempts against the Queens Life, having by a
great Sum of Money persuaded one Roderick Lopez, a Jew, and Physician to the
Queen, to Poison her; and had likewise engaged several Portugals in the same
Design; but this Plot of theirs being discovered by intercepted Letters, and
afterward confirmed by their own Confessions, they were accordingly executed,
as likewise one Patrick Cullen an Irish Man, who had been sent by the English
Fugitives to kill the Queen.

Amongst other Expeditions and Voyages of the English into America, was that of
James Lancaster, who returned home about this time, after having took nine and
thirty Spanish ships, and loaded fifteen more with the Wealth of an Indian
Caraque.

About this time, William Russel, youngest Son of the Earl of Bedford, was sent
Deputy into Ireland, in the room of Sir William Fitz Williams, who was called
home; and this new Deputy quickly brought the Rebels there to submission.
There was likewise a new, but false rumor, spread abroad, that the Spaniards
were equipping a Fleet for the invading of England again. At which time two
Papists were executed for having designed the Death of the Queen. The King of
Scots was now making Levies all over Scotland, for the joining with Queen
Elizabeth, and resisting the Spaniard. Sir Walter Rawleigh being now under some
Disgrace at Court, undertook a Voyage to Guyana, and though he did considerable
damage to the Spaniard, yet this Expedition was of little advantage to the
English or himself. Sir Francis Drake and Sir John Hawkins, with several
others, went again into America, but not meeting with the success they had
promised themselves, they dyed, what of Grief, what of sickness, and the Fleet
returned home without having done any great Exploits. During these Expeditions
abroad, the Combustions in Ireland being grown to a considerable height, and
those Rebels having craved the assistance of the King of Spain, Sir John
Norris was sent over thither with new Forces to aid the Deputy.

The Arch Duke and Cardinal of Austria being now made Governor of the Spanish
Netherlands, he unexpectedly attacqued and took in Cales. Whereupon the Queen
sent supplies of Money to the French King, and gave order for the immediate
raising a choice Army, whereof she made the Earl of Essex General, and fitted
out a Fleet under the Command of Charles Howard, Lord High Admiral of England:
these Forces (amongst whom were several Volunteers of the Principal Nobility
and Gentry) being put on Board the ships, they set Sail under the Conduct of
the foresaid Lords, under Sir Walter Rawleigh, Sir Francis Vere, and other the
Principal Commanders of the Realm, and arrived before Cales; and having before
received intelligence that there lay at Anchor in that Haven, several Galleys,
Men of War, and a number of Merchants, it was resolved in the Council of War,
that they should be attacked. Whereupon the Earl of Essex flung up his Hat for
joy. The English thereupon first engaged the Spanish Ships and Gallions, which
they did with that Vehemence, that some were burnt by them, others by the
Spaniards themselves, but the Galleys made their escape by creeping along the
shore. When the Sea engagement was at an end, the Earl of Essex landed with
eight hundred Soldiers at Puntal, about a League from the Town of Cales, and
the Spanish Forces that were there abouts, being drawn up between the Town and
them, with design to have intercepted them, the English attacqued them with
that fury, that they put them to rout, but upon consideration, they thought fit
to make a feigned Retreat, that the Fugitives might rally and join the Troops
of Cales, which such a Stratagem was hoped might entice out of the Town. Which
succeeding accordingly, they fell upon them again with that English Fury and
Courage, that great numbers of them were slain, and the rest were forced to
take refuge in the Town, where the English quickly overtook them; for the Gate
being broke by Sir Francis Vere, and other parts of the Town scaled by the
English, insomuch, that that wealthy Town was taken by Assault, and the Castle
upon Condition, that the Inhabitants might depart with Clothes on their Back,
the rest left for Plunder; the Castle being to be redeemed for five hundred and
fourscore thousand Ducats; forty of the Principal Citizens being sent
Hostages for the payment into England, a vast quantity of Money and Ammunition
being found in the Town. The Spaniards likewise proffered Sir Walter Rawleigh
two Millions of Ducats to exempt their ships from firing, which he would not
hearken to; saying, That he was sent to destroy ships, not to dismiss them upon
Composition. And it was generally calculated and acknowledged by all People,
that the Spaniard was damnified by this Expedition, twenty Millions of Ducats.
The Fleet being returned home after this Glorious Victory, the Queen made Sir
Francis Vere Governor of the Briel, and rewarded all the rest according to
their Deserts.

The Spaniard in the mean time, to repair the Honor he had lost at Cales, set
forth a new great Fleet for the Invasion of England and Ireland, but were most
of them castaway by Storm, before the News of their fitting out came into
England.

In the mean while, the Queen fortified her Ports, and provided her self
against any farther Attempts of that kind. She likewise entered into a League
Offensive and Defensive, with the French King, hearing that the Spaniards were
preparing a new Navy against Ireland. Whereupon, the Queen caused a
considerable Fleet, under the Command of the Earl of Essex, to put forth to the
Coast of Spain. After they had taken and plundered some Towns, and likewise,
made a Prize of some of their India Ships, they returned home, but not with all
the Success they had promised themselves at their setting out, by reason of the
contrary Winds and Tempests they had met with in their Voyage. Essex, at his
coming to Court, was something disgusted to find that some of his Competitors
to the Queens Favors, had been raised to new Honors, Dignities and Places
during his Absence; but was something pacified by the Queens creating him Earl
Marshal of England. But, during these Transactions, the English did
extraordinary Performances in France, in behalf of that King, which he
acknowledged in his Letters to the Queen; and craved farther* Assistance from
her Majesty, upon the Spaniards having gained some Advantage over him, which
was accordingly granted. But the French, a while after, upon the Instigation of
the Pope, concluded Peace with Spain, notwithstanding the Instances that were
made to him by the Queen and the States General, to the contrary. Hereupon
followed a Consultation, whether a Treaty of Peace was to be held with the
Spaniard; which being opposed by the Earl of Essex, was laid aside for some
time; but then again revived, through the Mediation of the French, and the
Commissioners met accordingly at Bulloign; but upon Dispute of Precedence, was
broken off altogether.

In the mean time, Tir-Oen breaking out into open Rebellion in Ireland, and
having gained a greater Victory of the English than the Irish had ever done
before, after some debate, the Earl of Essex was sent thither, with ample
Authority; but not meeting with that Success he had promised, and having
Intelligence, that his Conduct was become suspected at Court, he returns into
England without the Queens Permission; whereupon, he was committed to Custody,
and brought to a private Trial; but, upon his Submission and Repentance, was
again set at Liberty: yet, being reproached with pusillanimity by some of his
Cabal, he turned Malcontent, used all means to gain the Peoples Love,
resolves to sieze on the Queen; but being disappointed, he retired into the
City, endeavoring to engage the Citizrns on his side; which not being able to
effect^ he yielded himself up at length to the Lord Admiral, and was sent to
the Tower, with his great Friend, the Earl of Southampton; both whom, being
brought to their Trial, were found guilty by their Peers; and Essex accordingly
beheaded: but the Earl of Southampton, the Queen was graciously pleased to
reprieve. But others of his Adherents, as Sir Charles Dorves, Sir Christopher
Blunt, one Cuffe and Merrick suffered likewise Death; the two former being
beheaded, and the two latter executed at Tyburn.

In the mean time, happened the famous Battle of Newport, under the Conduct of
Prince Maurice of Nassaw, where the Dutch gained a great Victory by the English
Valor, who were led by Sir Francis Vere, and his Brother Horatio; they slew
nine thousand of the Spaniards, the English being but fifteen hundred, had
eight hundred slain and mortally wounded, eight Captains killed, every man of
the rest hurt.

During these Occurrences, dyed Philip King of Spain, and the Earl of
Cumberland returned home from an Expedition he had undertook against the
Spaniard; wherein he did great Damage to them, but gained little profit to
himself. About this time, was executed one Edward Squire for attempting to kill
and poison the Queen, and some of her chief Ministers, having been excited
thereunto by the Jesuits and Popish Priests. Shortly after which, was founded
the Company of the East India Merchants, the Queen allowing them very large
Privileges. Some time after, Sir Richard Levison and Sir William Monson, with
eight men of War, and some smaller Ships, were sent out by the Queen to attempt
something upon the Spaniard, who a little before had sent considerable Forces
to the Assistance of the Rebels in Ireland; who being joined with them, made
an Army of above twelve thousand men: and now, thinking themselves secure of
Victory, as being double the number of the English, they resolved to fight, but
were utterly defeated by the English, twelve hundred being slain, and most of
the rest taken Prisoners, the Spanish General, with most of the Officers, being
of the Number; and the other Spanish Commanders were forced to deliver up the
Forts they held in that Kingdom, and depart; whereupon, Tir-Oen, and the rest
of the Rebels, submitted themselves, without any Condition, to the Queen. Now,
though the Dutch had failed of the promised Assistance to Levison and Monson,
yet they first attacked the Spanish Navy, to which, they did great Damage; and
at length, took an Indian Carraque of sixteen hundred Tun, and worth a Million
of Ducats; though it lay under the shelter of one of their Forts, and guarded
by eleven Galleys; and returned home, having lost but five men in their Voyage.

At this time, there happening some Dispute in England, between the Jesuits and
Secular Priests, the Queen, by Proclamation, commanded them to depart the Realm
immediately. She likewise interceeded with the French King, in Favor of some
Princes of the Protestant profession in France. And now in the Year 1602. the
Queen finding the Infirmities of old Age coming upon her, having lived
threescore and nine Years, six Months, and seven days; reigned four and forty
years, four Months, and seven Days, she retired to Richmond, where she dyed, on
the twenty fourth day of March, being the last day of the Year, 1602. having a
little before her Death, supplied the States of Geneva with a considerable Sum
of Money, upon the notice she had of the Duke of Savoy's practicing against, and
oppressing his Neighbors and Subjects of the Reformed Religion.

FINIS.

