THE LIFE and DEATH OF THE Valiant, and Renowned Sir Francis Drake, His Voyages
and Discoveries in the West Indies, and about the World, WITH His Noble and
Heroic Acts. By Samuel Clark Late Minister of Bennet Fink, London.

LONDON, Printed for Simon Miller, at the Star, at the West End of S. Paul's,
1671.

The Life and Death of Sir FRANCIS DRAKE, with his Voyages into the
West Indies, and about the World; And other his Valiant Actions. He Died, Anno
Christi. 1595.
THIS Francis Drake was born near unto South Tavistock in Devonshire of mean
Parents. His birth, and Parentage.
His Godfather was Francis Russel, afterward Earl of Bedford, who gave him his
Name of Francis. His Father in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, was called
in question for Religion, by reason of the six Articles set forth by the King
against the Protestants, whereby he was feign to shift his habitation, and to
retire into Kent. But after the death of King Henry, in the time of King Edward
the sixth, he obtained a place in the Navy Royal to read Divine Service: and
after a while he was ordained Deacon, and made Vicar of the Church of Vpnor
upon the River of Medway.

Yet continuing poor (the place being of small value) he put forth this his Son
to serve a neighbor Mariner that traded with a small Bark into France and
Zeland, His Education.
who brought him up in the Mariners Art, and by reason of his Ingenuity, and
Activity, took such liking to him, that (being a Bachelor) when he died, he
bequeathed unto him his Bark.

Shortly after, this Francis Drake, hearing of the preparations which were made
by Sir John Hawkins* for a Voyage, Anno Christi* 1567. He sold his Bark, and
joined himself with him, which voyage proving disasterous, at S. John de Vllva,
he lost all he had, and hardly brought himself back.

His first voyage into the West Indies.
Our Drake hereupon was forced to betake himself to his Mariners practice to
repair his losses, by which, serving in a Man of War, he got good store of
money, whereupon he made a second voyage into the Spanish West Indies to recover
there what he had formerly lost, and with the ship of war, called the Dragon,
and another ship, none knowing his intentions but his own Consorts, in the year
1572, on Whitsunday Eve, being May 24th. himself being Captain of the Admiral,
a ship of seventy Tuns, and his brother John Drake Captain of the Vice Admiral
called the Swan, of twenty five Tuns, having in both of them of men and boys
seventy three, all Volunteers, he so divided them that they were forty seven in
one ship, and twenty six in the other.

These ships he furnished excellently with victuals, and apparel for a whole
year; Providing also store of all manner of Ammunition, Artillery, Artificers
stuff, and Tools, and whatsoever was requisite for such a man of war, in such
an attempt: But especially he had provided five nimble Pinnaces, made at
Plymouth, which being taken asunder, were stored aboard his ships, and ready to
be set up as occasion served; with these he set sail from the sound of
Plymouth, intending for Nombre de Dios in the West Indies.

The wind was fair and favorable, so that within twelve days they had sight
of the Madara, and Canary Islands, yet they never cast Anchor, nor made any
stay for twenty five days after their setting forth; at which time they saw the
Island of Guadalupe, one of the West Indie Islands, and the next morning they
entered between Dominica and Guadalupe, and landed on the South side of
Dominica, where they remained three Days to refresh their men, and to take in
fresh water, whereof there was plenty.

The third Day in the afternoon they set sail for the Continent, or Terra
firma; and the fifth day after they had fight of Sancta Martha, from which they
steared their course toward Port Phesant (so named by Captain Drake in his
former Voyage, by reason of the great store of those Fowls in that place) and
within six days after they safely arrived in that bay. Here did Captain Drake
give order to his brother what to do in his absence, and well manning his
Boats, went to the shore, where, upon a great Oak he found a plate of lead
nailed, having in it this Inscription.

Captain Drake, if you happen to come to this Port, make have away. For the
Spaniards you here met with the last year have betrayed this place, and taken
away all that you left here, etc. Your loving friend John Garret of Plymouth.
But notwithstanding this advertisment Captain Drake meant not to depart from
this Port (which was so fit for his purpose) till he had set his Pinnaces
together which he brought with him in his ships. And for his own, and his men's
security, whilst the Carpenters were employed about that work, he made a kind
of a Fort by the water side, by felling great Trees, and laying them one upon
another.

The next day after their arrival, came in also into that Port an English Bark
of the Isle of Wight of Sir Edward Horseys, whereof James Rawse was Captain,
and John Overy Master, with thirty men; These brought in with them a Spanish
Carvel of Sivil, being sent with Advise to Nombre de Dios, and also a Shallop,
both which they had taken by the way. And Captain Rawse, understanding the
design of Captain Drake, desired to join with them, and upon Articles agreed
on, he was admitted.

Within seven days the Pinnaces were fitted, and furnished for service, and
other businesses dispatched, so that setting sail in the morning toward Nombre
de Dios, they held on their course till they came to the Isles of Pines upon
the third day; at which place they found two Frigates of Nombre de Dios, lading
Planks and timber from thence. The Negroes in those Frigates informed them of
the state of the Town; and told them that some soldiers were daily looked for
from the Governor of Panama to defend the Town of Nombre de dios against the
Symerons, who were Blacks that formerly had fled from their Spanish masters by
reason of their cruelty, and were by this time grown to a nation under two
Kings, who had almost surprised it about six weeks before.

Captain Drake, having learned what he could of them, set these Negroes on
shore, that they might go to their Contrymen the Symerons, and to prevent
any notice that they might give to Nombre de dios of his approach; and so
hasted his going thither. For which end he disposed of all his companies,
leaving the three ships and Carvel with Captain Rawse, and chose into his
Pinnaces (making the Shallop one) fifty three of his own company, and twenty of
Captain Rawse's: Providing fit arms for them: viz. six Targets, six Firepikes,
twelve Pikes, twenty four Muskets and Calievers, sixteen Bows, six Partisans,
two Drums, and two Trumpets.

Then leaving their company, they arrived at the Island of Catavaas, where
landing early in the morning, Captain Drake there trained his men, and
delivered them their several Arms, which hitherto he had kept safe in good casks,
encouraging them to the enterprise by setting before them the weakness of the
Town, being unwalled, the unexpectedness of their coming and the great Richer,
and honor that was to be gained if they effected it. And in the afternoon he
set sail for Nombre de Dios, and before Sunset, He comes to Nombre de Dios.
gat as far as Rio Francisco: from whence, keeping close to the shore that they
might not be discovered by the Watch-house, they came within two leagues of the
Point of the Bay, where he caused them to strike a Hull, and to cast out their
graplers, till it was dark; when night was coming, setting sail, and rowing
hard and silently, they recovered the Point of the Harbor, purposing not to
attempt the Town till Day-breake. But Captain Drake hearing that some of his
men began to talk of the difficulty and danger of the enterprise, to put by
these conceits, he took the opportunity of the rising Moon to persuade them
that it was Day, so that they got to the Town an hour before the Day brake.

In the Harbor they found a Spanish Ship of sixty Tuns, newly come in, laden
with Canary Wines and other Commodities, which spying so many Pinnaces, sent
his Boat presently a shore to give the Town warning; which Captain Drake
perceiving, cut betwixt her and the Town, and forced her to go to the other
side of the Bay: so that he landed his men without impeachment. Upon the
Platform they found six Pieces of Ordnance ready mounted, some half, some
whole Culverines. These they presently dismounted, and the Town took the
Alarm, which they were the readier to do, because they were often disquieted by
the Symerons, who caused the Great Bell to be rung out, and Drums run up and
down the Town.

Captain Drake, according to the directions he had given before, left twelve
men to keep the Pinnaces, that he might assure a safe retreat, if need should
be, and before he would enter the Town he thought fit to view the mount, on the
east side, where, as he was informed, they had planted Ordnance to scower all
about the Town; therefore leaving half his men at the foot of the mount,
himself with the other half, speedily marched up to the top, where finding no
Guns, they as speedily descended; and appointing his Brother, with John
Oxenham, and sixteen of his men to go about behind the Kings Treasure-house, to
enter the east end of the marketplace, himself with the rest, passed up the
broad-street with sound of Drum, and Trumpet.

and takes it.
The Fire-pikes in both the companies affrighted the enemy, and gave light to
the English, whilst the Inhabitants stood amazed at the strange sight, and
hearing Drums and Trumpets sounding in sundry places, judged the English to be
far more than they were. Yet by reason of the time spent in marching up and
down the Mount, the Souldi^rs and Inhabitants of the Town had put themselves in
Arms near to the Governors house, and not far from the gate of the town, which
was only one, leading toward Panama, meaning (as it seemed) either to show
their valor in the Governors sight, or, if need were, to have the better
opportunity for their flight.

And to make show of a greater number of shot than they had, they had hung
lines with lighted matches overthwart the end of the Marketplace, and at the
approach of the English they gave them a Volley of shot, yet levelling so low
that the Bullets often grazed on the ground. The English stood not to answer them
in the same kind; but having once discharged their Guns, and feathered with
their Arrows, they came to the push of Pike, and their Fire-pikes being well
armed did them notable service: And with the Butt ends of their Guns, and other
short weapons (Captain Drakes Brother and his Company entering at the same time
another way) they charged them so furiously, that the Spaniards threw down
their weapons and ran away. And in the pursuit, and return of the English, many
of them were wounded by the enemies weapons which lay very thick and cross one
another.

At their return they made a stand near the midst of the Marketplace, whence
Captain Drake sent some of his men to stay the Ringing of the Bell: But the
Church being strongly built and fast shut, they could not get in without firing
it, which Captain Drake would not suffer, and having taken two or three
Spaniards in their flight, he commanded them to conduct them to the Governors
House, where they ordinarily unladed their Mules that brought the treasure from
Panama. But though the silver was kept there, yet the gold, pearl, and jewels
was from thence carried to the King treasure-house which stood not far off.

At the coming of the English to the Governors house, The vast treasure found
there.
they found the gate open, a candle lighted upon the top of the stairs, and a
fair Gennet ready sadled for the Governor; by means of which light, they saw a
huge heap of silver in that nether Room, being a pile of silver bars of about
70 foot in length, 10 foot in breadth, and 12 foot in height, each bar being
near 40 pound in weight. Yet did Captain Drake straightly command his men not to
meddle with any of it, but to stand to their Arms, because the town was full of
people, and in the Kings treasure-house, nearer the water, there was more gold
and jewels than all their 4 pinnaces could carry, All cover, all loose.
which he intended they should presently break open.

No sooner were the English returned to their Guard but a report was brought
them that their Pinnaces were in danger of being taken, and that if they stayed
till day they would be oppressed with multitudes both of Soldiers and townsmen:
wherefore Captain Drake sent his brother, and John Oxenham to the water side to
know the truth, who indeed found their men much affrighted by reason that they
saw great companies of the Spaniards running up and down the town (which was as
big as Plymouth) with lighted matches, which also sometimes shot at them.

Presently after a violent shower of rain powered down so vehemently that before
the English could get the shelter of a Penthouse, some of their Bow-strings
were wet, and their match and powder spoiled, which before they could renew,
some of them were muttering about the strength of the enemy, which Captain
Drake overhearing, said, I have brought you to the very mouth of the treasure
of the world, and if you go away without it, you can blame no body but your
selves.

The storm (which lasted about half an hour) being ended, Captain Drake,
desiring to put these fears out of his men's heads, and to allow the enemy no
longer respite to gather themselves together, stepped forward, commanding his
brother and some others to break open the Kings treasure-house, and the rest to
guard the marketplace till the business was dispatched. But as he stepped
forward his strength and fight, Captain Drake Swoons.
and speech failed him by reason of abundance of blood which he had lost out of
a wound received in his leg at the first encounter, which indeed was so much,
when they looked after it, that they thought it impossible for one man to
loose. Insomuch as they which were before most forward, began now to prefer
their Captains life before that vast Treasure: and therefore having recovered
him with some hot water, and bound up his wound with a Scarf that stopped the
bleeding, they entreated him to be content to go with them aboard, that his
wound might be better searched and dressed.

This he would by no means be persuaded to, knowing that it would be
impossible, after such a respite to return to effect the work they came for,
thinking it more honorable for himself there to die than to leave so high an
enterprise unperformed. Yet some of them having already gotten some good booty,
by force mingled with fair words, carried him away to his Pinnace, judging that
by his Life they might recover wealth sufficient, but if they lost him, He is
carried away
they should hardly recover their own home.

Thus embarquing by break of day, having (besides the Captain) many men
wounded, though none slain but one Trumpeter, whilst the Chyrurgeons were busy
in dressing them, before they departed the Harbor, they took the said ship of
wines to cheer up their men: but before they had got her out of the haven, the
Spaniards had remounted one of their Culverins, and made a shot at them, which
yet hindered them not from carrying away the ship to the Isle of Victuals, which
lies without the Bay Westward about a League off the Town, where they staid two
Days to cure their wounded and to refresh themselves in those pleasant Gardens,
abounding with all sort of dainty Roots, and Fruits, besides great plenty of
Poultrey, and other Fowls, no less strange than delicate.

Presently after their arrival there, came a proper, and well spoken Gentleman
to Captain Drake, indeed to view in what state they were, but protesting that
he came of his mere good will to see the Captain for that he had undertaken so
incredible an enterprise with so few men: Adding, that at first they suspected
them to be French, from whom they could expect no mercy; but when they
perceived by their Arrows that they were English, their fears were the less,
because they knew that though they took their treasure, yet they would not be
cruel to their persons. He told him also that the Governor had consented to his
coming; yea, had directly sent him, because there were some in Town that said,
they knew the English Captain, who the two last years had been upon their
Coast, and had always used their persons civily. He therefore desired to know
whether it was the same Captain Drake or no? Whether the English Arrows were
poisoned with which their men were wounded? How their wounds might be cured?
And lastly, whether they wanted Victuals, or other necessaries, with which the
Governor was ready to furnish them so far as he durst? Captain Drake (though he
took him for a Spy) yet used him courteously, and answered to his demands, That
he was the same Drake, that they meant. That it was never his manner to poison
his Arrows. That their wounded might be cured by ordinary Chyrurgery: And that
he could sufficiently supply all his wants in that Island. Adding, that he
wanted nothing but some of that special commodity, which that country yielded,
to satisfy himself and his company. He advised the Governor therefore to be
vigilant, for that before he departed, he would (by Gods leave, and assistance)
share with them in some of their Treasure.

To this the Gentleman replied, that if he might move the question without
offense, what was the reason that being possessed of the town they should so
soon leave it wherein there was above 360 tun of silver, and much more gold in
value, in the Kings treasure-house; Capt. Drake told him the true cause of
their retreat, and how unwillingly he was carried aboard. The Gentleman
acknowledged that he had no less cause in departing than he had showed valor in
attempting. Thus after fair entertaiment, and some gifts bestowed upon him by
Captain Drake, after dinner he was dismissed, and protesting that he was never
so much honored by any in his life.

After his departure, a Negro that had fled to them, being examined, informed
them how they might have gold and silver enough, by means of the Symerons, to
whom though himself was hateful because he had betrayed them to the Spaniards,
yet if Captain Drake would protect him, he would adventure his life to serve
him therein. This gave cause of further consultation, and because the Island
where they were was neither safe nor healthy, the next morning they set sail
for the Isle of Pinos (or Port Plenty) where they had left their ships. By the
way Captain Drake sent his Brother, and one Ellis Hixon to the westward to
search the river Cagro, which he had discovered the year before, desiring to
have further knowledge of it, because it tended Southward within six leagues of
Panama, upon which river, at a town called Venta Cruz* they used to imbark
their treasures that by Mules was brought from Panama, and so to send it by
water to Nombre de Dios. This cost them three days rowing to get as far as
Venta Cruz, but they came back in a day and a night.

When Captain Drake came to his ships, Capt. Rawse suspecting that they could
not now safely continue upon that coast being thus discovered, was willing to
depart, and Capt. Drake was as willing to dismiss him; wherefore Aug. 7. taking
his leave, he left them in the aforesaid Isle, where they had remained five or
6 days. After which, having put all things in readiness, Capt. Drake resolved
with his two ships, and three Pinnaces to go to Carthagena, and six days after
he came to Anchor with his ships between the Islands of Charestra, and S.
Bernards, and himself led the three Pinnaces about the Island into the harbor
of Carthagena, where they found a Frigate at Anchor, aboard which was only one
old man, who told them that the rest of his company was gone a shore to fight
about a Mistress, telling Capt. Drake also that a little before, there speedily
passed by a Pinnace, calling to him and asking whether there had not lately
been there some English, and Frenchmen? and being told that there had not, he
hasted away; after which he saw diverse small ships, bringing themselves under
the Castle.

Capt. Drake, farther learned by him that within the next point, rode a great
ship of Syvil, that being unloaden, was the next morning bound for S. Domingo:
wherefore taking this old man with him, he rowed to that ship and with his
Pinnaces presently boarded her, though with some difficulty by reason of her
height. As soon as they had entered they threw down their gates, and Spardecks
to prevent the Spaniards from hurting them with their close fights; who seeing
the English possessed of their ship, stowed themselves all in hold, except 2 or
3 that were before the Beete; then seeing no further danger, they cut her Cable
at half, and with their Pinnaces towed her out from the Island, right before
the town, yet without danger of their great shot.

The town taking the Alarm, rung out their Bells, shot off 30 great guns, and
drew their horse and foot, with their shot, if they could, to hinder their
going out. The next morning Capt. Drakes ships took two frigates, who came from
Nombre de Dios to Carthagena with letters of advise, to certify them what
Captain Drake had done there, and therefore to wish them to stand upon their
Guard.

Capt. Drake now considering that he was discovered in two of the chiefest
places of all that coast, yet resolved not to depart till he had found the
Symerons, and made a good voyage: But this requiring length of time, he
resolved to burn one of his ships, and to make the other his storehouse, that
so his Pinnaces might be thoroughly manned. But knowing how loath his company
would be to part with either of their ships, being both so good Sailors, and so
well furnished, he sent for the Carpenter out of the Swan, and taking him into
his Cabin, he charged him privately to go down into the well of the ship, and
to bore three holes as near to the Keel as he could, and then to set something
before the holes, that the issuing in of the water might not be heard. The
Carpenter being dismayed with this Command, desired to know the cause why he
would sink so good a ship, new, and strong: Adding that if his brother, Master,
and other Company should know it, they would surely kill him. Then did Captain
Drake tell him his reasons for it, promising that it should not be known till
all of them were glad of it: and so he did it accordingly.

The next morning Capt. Drake would in his Pinnace go a Fishing, and calling
for his brother in the Swan, would have him go with him, who rising suddenly,
said that he would follow him presently. Capt. Drake perceiving that the work
was done, asked why their Bark was so deep? whereupon his brother sent one down
to know whether there were any water in the ship? the steward going down, was
up to the wast in water, and cried out that the ship was full of water.
Hereupon some ran to the Pump, and others to search out the Leak. But
notwithstanding all their pains and diligence they could neither clear her of
water, nor find the leak. Then Capt. Drake advised that she should be burnt
that the enemy might never recover her, and to satisfy them (who were very
unwilling) he made his brother Captain of the Admiral, and placed the Master of
the Swan with him, and himself would go in his Pinnace: then did every one take
out what they lacked, and liked, and Captain Drake had what he desired, He
burns one of his Ships.
and men enough for his Pinnaces.

The next morning they set sail for the sound of Darrien, which in 5 days they
recovered, and then retiring into a place out of all trade, they reposed
themselves privately for 15 days, that the enemy might think them quite gone
from the coast. During which time some built them houses: others exercised
themselves to shoot at Buts: others trimmed the Pinnaces to make them the
sitter for sailing, and rowing: others provided fresh victuals of Fish, Fowl,
Hogs, Deer, Conies, etc. whereof there was great plenty. Then Captain Drake
leaving his ship with his brother, took two of the Pinnaces to go to Rio Grand.
By the way, seeing on the Land great store of Cattle, Captain Drake contenting
them for their pains, the Indians furnished him with as much provision of them
as he desired.

The same day about three a clock, they entered Rio Grand, rowing up the stream
till dark night, but the current was so strong that they gat but two leagues
all that time; that night they had a terrible storm with thunder and lightning,
after which they were extremely troubled with Muskitos (like our Gnats) that
they could get little rest. The next morning early they passed up the river,
meeting none till three in the afternoon, and then they spied a Canow with two
Indians fishing: and about five a clock, they spied some houses of the
Spaniards, to which when they came, the Inhabitants were fled, where they found
store of Bacon, Cheese, Sweetmeats, Conserves, and Sugar; with these they
loaded their Pinnaces, and so returned back again down the River; at the mouth
whereof, they cleansed their Pinnaces, and steered Westward till they came to
their ship, and company, and by the way they took two frigates well stored with
live Hogs, Hens, and Maiz, which (dismissing the men) they kept for their own
provision. Yea their store which then, and afterward they took was such, that
they relieved the Symerons, and two French ships that were in extreme want.

During their absence, Captain John Drake in his Pinnace went into the Main,
and espying some Symerons, had dealt so effectually with them, that leaving two
of his men with their Captain, he gave him two Symerons, agreeing to meet again
the next day. These two being intelligent men, declared to Captain Drake, how
glad they were of his coming, knowing him to be an enemy to the Spaniards, and
that their Captain and company would stay for him at the mouth of Rio Diego.
Captain Drake having consulted about the business, resolved to take his
brother, and the two Symerons and with his two Pinnaces to go to the said
river, giving order that the rest of his fleet should follow him the next
morning, because there was a place both of great safety and plenty.

When they arrived there they found the Symerons according as they had
promised, where after mutual kindnesses, they took in two more of the Symerons,
appointing to meet them and others of their countrymen at Rio Guana. In the
mean time Captain Drakes ship was pitifully shaken with a great tempest; but
having trimed her, they brought her safe into the Channel, and there moored
her. The Symerons coming (as they had appointed) Captain Drake asked them how
they could furnish him with some of the Spaniards gold, and silver, they
answered, that they had taken store from the Spaniards not for love of it, but
to despite them, which they had sunk in Rivers, which they could not now
recover because the Rivers were high: and the Spaniards in these rainy months
used not to carry their treasure by Land.

Captain Drake to entertain his company for these five months, commanded all
his Ordnance and Provisions a shore, making a fort for their safety, and by the
help of the Symerons, raised two large houses for all his company. In the mean
time, Captain Drake leaving his brother to look to those affairs, with three
Pinnaces went again for Carthagena, where when they arrived they let fall
their Grappers between the Island of Gardens, and the main. The Governor sent
to know why he stayed so long upon their coast? He answered, to traffic with
them, having Tin, Pewter, Cloth, etc. which they needed. The Governor replied,
that the King had forbidden them to trade with any, except for powder and shot
of which if he had store, he would be his Merchant? Captain Drake answered that
he came to exchange his Commodities for Silver and Gold, and meant not to
return without it. Here he took two Frigates, whereof he sunk the one, and
burned the other, not being able to man them And after a while, being out of
hope of any purchase there, much of their Victuals being spent, and spoiled,
they put forth to Sea though the weather was very stormy. Many days they sailed
and could get no provision, the Westernly winds not suffering them to return to
their ship: At last when all their provisions were almost spent, and they
hopeless, they espied a Frigate, which proved Spanish; Her they pursued, and so
soon as the weather would suffer them, boarded and took, wherein they found
store of provision, which they took, as sent them by God: After this they
landed on the Main, and by setting the Spaniards lately taken at liberty, they
procured more provisions from some Indians that were under a Spanish Governor.

Presently after many of Capt. Drakes men fell sick, yet it pleased God that
none died but only a Quarter Master, he was also a very good Mariner, and so
at last they returned to their ship, where they were entertained with the heavy
news of the death of Captain John Drake, and another, both slain as they
attempted the boarding of a Frigate, presently after the departing of the
Pinnaces from them. Here did Captain Drake continue for a month, keeping close
that they might not be discovered, during which time there fell a sickness
amongst his men whereof Joseph Drake, another of his Brothers, died, and some
others,

At last the Symerons brought him word that for certain the Spanish Fleet was
come to Nombre de Dios: He marches toward Panama.
yet did he send forth the Lion to make further discovery, which soon took a
Frigate laden with Maiz, Hens, and Pompions, which assured them of their
arrival. Then did he after advice taken prepare all things for his journey by
land to Panama, and having now buried twenty eight of his men, he left Ellis
Hixon with his ship and other Company, giving charge that they should not
believe any messenger that should come in his name, except they saw his hand
writing. And so upon Shrove-Teusday, accompanied with 48 men, whereof 18 only
were English, the rest Symerons, he began his journey, every one besides his
Arms, carrying much victuals, and what was wanting by the way, the Symerons
with their Arrows provided from time to time.

About the midst of his journey they came to a very high Mountain, Sees the
south sea.
upon the top whereof was a goodly Tree which when he had ascended, he saw from
thence the South Sea, whereupon he besought of God that of his goodness he
would give him life and leave once to sail in an English ship in those Seas,
with which resolution he acquainted John Oxenham, who presently protested that
unless he beat him from his company, he (by Gods grace) would attend him in
that Voyage. At last they came into a Champion Country where, as they passed
over some Hills, they saw Panama five or six times a day, and the last day they
saw the ships riding in the Road. Coming within a League of Panama they went
into a Grove wherein they might lie safely undiscovered near the highway that
leads from thence to Nombre de Dios.

Thence he sent a Symeron, apparelled like the Blacks of Panama to learn the
certain night, and time of the night, when the Treasure was to come by. He
quickly brought back word that the treasurer of Lima was that night to come by
with 14 Mules, whereof 8 were laden with gold, one with jewels, and the rest
with silver; upon this notice they presently marched till they came within two
Leagues of Venta Cruz; and here Captain Drake disposed his men, half of one
side of the way with himself, and half on the other side with John Oxenham.
They had not lain there above an hour before they heard the Recoes coming. And
though all were charged not to stir till a fit time, yet one Robert pike,
having drunk Aqua vita too freely, hearing a Cavalier ride by, starts up to see
who it was, whereby discovering himself, the Cavalier galloped away to inform
the Recoes of some danger which he apprehended, and persuaded them to stop
their Mules, and to send before them those which were laden only with victuals,
which accordingly was done: and when these came, they seized on them, amongst
which they found only two horse-load of silver, and were told, Misseth the
treasure.
that being discovered, before day they would have all the forces of City, and
Country come upon them: whereupon Capt. Drake being thus disappointed of his
hopes, resolved rather to march by the way of Venta Cruz, though it was
dangerous, than to return by so long and tedious a way as he came, the Symerons
promising to stand by him in all dangers. So having refreshed his men with
victuals, whereof they had plenty, they took their journey toward Venta Cruz,
and when they came near, they were encountered by a Company of Soldiers, who
having discharged a full Volley of shot upon them, wherein they hurt some, and
wounded one mortally, the English returned them the like both with their shot
and arrows, and so ran upon them with intent to come to handy blows: but the
Spaniards fled most of them into a wood by, from whence they shot at them,
wounding some, and killing a Symeron; then did Capt. Drake with his men enter
the Town; where some got some good pillage, and so hastened away, Venta Cruz
taken.
the Spaniards not daring to pursue them: they passed on through many dangers
and difficulties to their ship and company, where they were received with great
joy, though many were much troubled for loss of the Gold.

Then, taking further counsel, he sent John Oxenham in the Bear to the Eastward
to take some ships laden with Victuals, which at that time used to go to Nombre
de Dios, and himself in the Minion went Westward to see if he could light upon
any ships carrying treasure toward the fleet. The Minion about the Cabezas met
with a Frigate wherein was some gold, and had a Genoway Pilate in her, who,
being well entreated by Capt. Drake, informed him that there was a Frigate in
Veragua (whence they came) ready to come forth in which there was above a
Million of gold, profering himself to conduct them thorovv the flats into the
harbor where she lay: But when they came thither they found that they were
discovered, and the vvind changing from East to West, they were forced to turn
back, and shortly after they met with the Bear which had taken a Frigate
with some store of provisions in her: which being a new ship, Capt. Drake
made her a man of War, and with her and the Bear sailed toward Cativaas --
Not far from whence they met with a French man of War which was in great
distress for want of water, and victuals, whom he supplied; after which he
took 20 of the French men, 15 English, and some Symerons, and leaving both his
ships in a safe Road he manned his Frigate and two Pinnaces, and went tovvard
Rio Francisco, where for want of water he left his Frigate commanded by
Robert Doble, requiring that they should not attempt any chase till his return.

In Rio Francisco he landed his men, charging them in the Pinnaces to be there
the fourth day after without fail, and so with his men he marched with great
silence toward the high way which leads betvveen Panama, He returns
toward Panama.
and Nombre de Dios: and coming within a mile of it, they staid and refreshed
themselves: and the next morning there came by three Recoes laden with near 30
Tun of gold and silver: These they seized on though guarded with Soldiers, so
that there was some shot exchanged, by which the French Capt. was wounded, and
one Symeron slain: And takes much gold and silver.
then did the Spaniards fly, and the other loaded themselves with gold, and
buried about 15 tun of silver, and so retired the same way they came: but a
French man being overloaden with gold and wine, lost himself in the woods, and
being taken by the Spaniards, discovered to them where the silver was hid.

When Capt. Drake came back to the river of Francisco where (according to
order) he expected to meet with his Pinnaces, instead of them he discovered
seven Spanish Pinnaces which had been searching all the coast for him: This made
him suspect that they had taken and spoiled his Pinnaces, whereupon he resolved
with 3 or 4 others to make a Raft of Trees upon which they would adventure to
put to Sea to seek their ship: by the way they sat up to the middle in water,
by reason of which, A dangerous attempt.
and the parching heat of the Sun their skins were much fretted. But it pleased
God that after six hours, they spied their two Pinnaces coming toward them to
their no small joy. But the Pinnaces not seeing the Raft, ran under a covert
behind the Point, whereupon the Captain and company gat ashore, and ran over
land to them, who received them with great rejoycings; and so they rowed to Rio
Francisco where he took in the rest of his company and all their treasure, and
so hasted back to his Frigate, and then to his ship, where he divided the
silver in even portions between the French and English.

A while after, having set all things in a readiness, they went out to Sea in
the Frigate, together with the French ship, and Capt. Drake ordered 12 of his
own men, and 16 of the Symerons, to go back and see what was become of the
French Captain, and what of the hid treasure they could recover. These he set
on shore at Rio Francisco, where he met with one of the two French men that
staid with their Captain, who told them that presently after their departure
the Spaniards overtook them, and seized upon the Captain and the other, himself
escaping by flight, and throwing away his camag, and a Box of Jewels that he
might run the faster: He told them also that the Spaniards had searched so
narrowly for the Treasure that was hidden that he belived all was gone. Yet
Captain Drake would needs have the men go, who coming thither, found that all
the earth for a mile compass had been turned up, yet lost they not all their
labor, but returned safe bringing with them thirteen bars of silver, and some
Quoits of gold, with which they embarked and returned with joy to their Frigate.

Their return for England.
Now did they think of returning home having made their voyage, but they wanted
a ship to carry their victuals in their return, wherefore going toward
Carthagena they met with a Frigate, which they took, laden with Maiz, Hens,
Hogs, and Honey: the men they set on shore, and took the Bark with them, and so
returned to the Cabezas, where they fitted their Frigates, and stored them,
burning the Pinnaces and giving the Iron-work to the Symerons; He also looked
up some silk and linen which he sent to their wives. Pedro seeing him take out
of a trunk a rich Cymeter which the French Captain had given him, he so fell in
love with it, that he would needs give four Quoits of gold for it, and another
to one Francis Tucker, who was to move the business. Captain Drake yielded
though something unwillingly: yet the gold he would not take to himself but
cast it into the General Adventure, and so returned home-words.

By the way they touched at Cape S. Anthony, where in one night they took 250
Turtles, Arrive in safety.
and many of their Eggs which did them good service, and so with a prosperous
voyage, through Gods mercy, they came safe to Plymouth on a Sabbath in the
forenoon, just at Sermon time, Aug. 9. 1573. and the news of his coming being
carried to his friends in the Church did so prevail with them, that few were
left with the Preacher, all hasting to see him, and Gods goodness in his safe
return.

Of his Voyage about the World.
Captain Drake having in his former Voyage had a sight of the South Sea, he was
restless in his desires to sail in an English bottom upon it: yet was he for
some years hindered, partly through envy of some at home, and partly through
employment abroad into Ireland under Walter Earl of Essex, to whom he did much
Noble service both by Sea and Land. Yet against the year 1577, he procured a
Commission from the Queen, His preparations
and with the help of diverse Friends, Adventurers, he fitted himself with five
ships. The Pelican, Admiral: of 100 Tun burden: himself the Captain. The
Elizabeth, Vice Admiral, of 80 Tuns: Captain John Winter. The Marigold, of 30
Tun: John Thomas Captain. The Swan, of 50 Tun: John Chester Captain. The
Christopher, a Pinnace of 15 Tun: Thomas Moon Captain.

These ships had in them 264 able men, and were well furnished with all
necessary provisions: and had some Pinnaces ready framed, stowed abroad, ready
to be set up when occasion served. He had also skilful Musicians, Rich
Furniture, the Vessels for his Table, and some for his Kitchen of pure Silver,
and diverse other sorts of Curious Workmanship, to show the Riches and
Magnificence of His Country.

Being thus furnished, they set sail from Plymouth, Nov. 15. 1577. but the wind
coming contrary, they were forced to put into Falmouth: and to repair damages,
they were forced to stay till December. 13. The first place they touched at, was
the Isle of Mogadore within the Dominion of the King of Fess. From whence they
departed, December. 31. to Cape Barbas, and after they had refreshed themselves
there for six days and stored themselves with fish, they set sail for Cape
Verde, and touched at the Isle of Maio, a very fruitful place, where they found
store of Figs, Coco-nuts, Plantanes, great herds of Goats, and flocks of wild
Hens. From hence they passed by the Isle of S. Jago, and came to the Isle of
Fogo, in which is a steep hill of about 18 miles to the top, wherein is a fiery
furnace, which four times a day sends forth flames and abundance of
Pumice-stones, the rest of the Island is fruitful and inhabited by Portugals.
Two Leagues off is another Island called Brava abounding with trees, ever
green, fruits, and other Commodities: as figs, cocoes, plantans, oranges,
lemons, citrons, etc But the sea is so deep about it that there is no
Anchoring. At Cape Verde they took in fresh water, and Feb. the second, set
forwards for the Straights to pass into the South Sea.

By the way they came to the coast of Brasile, and passed on southward to the
river of Plate, where they all met, and not finding a convenient Harbor there,
they passed on till May 18. 1578. where, in another Bay they came to an Anchor.
Here Captain Drake unloaded the Swan, and brake her to pieces that he might
bring his men into a nearer compass, and near hereto were some Islands upon
which they took as many Sea-calves, and several sorts of Fowl as they pleased:
and so having taken in such provisions as they needed, June 3. they set sail
from thence, and June 12. came into another Bay, where they discharged the
Christopher and laid her up. June 19. they found here the ship which they had
lost long before in a storm: and so they entered Port S. Jalian to refresh their
wearied men, and to cherish them who in their absence had sustained much
misery. Here Captain Drake and some others going a shore were assaulted by the
Natives, called Pentagons from their huge stature: these slew two of his men,
but one of them being slain, the rest fled, and Captain Drake returned to his
ships.

Whilst they remained here, A conspiracy discovered.
there was a conspiracy discovered, a gentleman in the company having designed
to murder the General, and to overthrow the Voyage: This being proved against
him before a Council of war, he at last confessed it, and being therefore
condemned to die, he was put to his choice, whether he would be set ashore
amongst the Natives, or sent into England to answer it before the Queen and
Council, or whether he would be executed there: He chose the last, and having
prepared himself for death, had his head cut off.

Here the General discharged the Mary, a Portugal Prize, because she was leaky,
and so having wooded, watered and trimmed his ships, having now only three
ships remaining, Aug. 17. they departed setting their course for the Straights,
and changed the name of his own ship from the Pelicane to the Golden Hind. And
in their passage through the Straights they came to a fair and fruitful Island,
where some of them going a shore with the General they took possession of it in
Her Majesty's name, and called it Elizabeth Island. He comes to the straights.
Here they found on other Islands, many Penguins, of which in one day they
killed 3000, which they found to be good and wholesome food. This passage was
very difficult in regard of many turnings, and various Winds.

Sept. 6. They entered into the South Sea, the Straight being about 150 Leagues
in length, in some places broader, and in other narrower: Their entrance into
this sea was Sept. 7. presently after which, they met with a terrible Tempest
which continued long, insomuch as Sept. 30. the Marigold was separated from
them whereof John Thomas was Captain, He loses two of his ships.
which they could never after meet with. And October. 7. in a sore storm the lost
their Vice Admiral, the Elizabeth, which being weary of these troubles,
returned through the Straights, and went for England whither they came the year
following.

His many dangers.
The Admiral, now left alone, was driven to the fifty fifth degree of South
Latitude, where amongst Islands, they refreshed themselves for two days, and by
the means of some herbs they found there, they recovered their health.
Presently after they encountered with another dreadful storm which made them
despair of safety, or rather the former renewed, which lasted full 52 days: in
which time the men were so tired out, and decayed in health, as made them run
again amongst those Islands, where they met with three days breathing, and
provided such things as they wanted.

October. 30. The storm (through Gods mercy) being turned into a calm, they shaped
their course toward the Coast of Peru, which proved very Mountainous and
barren, without water and wood except some places inhabited by the Spaniards,
wherefore they ran off again to an Island called Mucho, which they found to be
fruitful and well stored with Maiz, Sheep, and other Cattle. Here he intended
to water, and take in Provision, but the treacherous Indians killed two of his
men on shore, and with their Arrows wounded all the men that were with him in
the Boat, and himself was very dangerously wounded under the eye. Hereupon the
General set sail again for the Main to get water, and fresh victuals for his
weak and wounded men, and they came to an Anchor in Philips Bay, whence he sent
a Boat for discovery, which brought back an Indian whom they took as he was
fishing: By his means they gat some small relief, but that would not serve
turn, wherefore a Captain of the Indians, being pleased with their gifts, and
courteous usage, conducted them to another place where they had a plentiful
supply of what their necessities required. There also they met with a Spanish
ship wherein they found some fine gold of Baldivia, and a great Cross of gold
beset with Emeralds, and a God of the same metal nailed to it: of this burden
they eased the ship.

Then being very desirous to meet with their lost ships, they sought out an
harbor where they might trim their ship, and set up their shallop, to enable
them to search every creek for them. From the first place they came to they
were driven by the Spaniards with the death of one of their men: But December.
20. they met with a place wherein they did their intended work. And after the
Pinnace was fitted, himself with some others went to seek for their ships, till
the wind forced them back again, and then with their ship they proceeded in
their voyage.

As they sailed along, His booties of treasure.
they came to a place called Tarapaca, where landing to seek fresh water, they
found a Spaniard asleep, with 13 Bars of silver lying by him, weighing about
4000 Spanish Ducats: Of these they eased him, and returned to their Boat.
Landing in another place they met a Spaniard driving eight Peruvian sheep that
carried in Bags about 800 weight of fine silver, which they also took along
with them. A little farther they traded with some Indians to whom they gave
knives, beads, and such trifles, and received by exchange many good things that
they stood in need of; and amongst others some of those Peruvian sheep, whose
height and length was equal to a pretty Cow, and their strength exceeding
their stature. They have necks like Camels; their wool is exceeding fine, their
flesh good meat; and they supply the room of horses both for burden, and
travel. In the Province of Cusco, the common ground, wheresoever it is taken
up,in every hundred pound weight of earth, yields 25 s. of pure silver, after
the rate of five shillings an ounce.

From thence Feb. 7. They came to the Port town of Arica, where, in two Barks,
they found forty and odd bars of silver, each weighing 20 pounds, of which they
eased them. And as they passed on they met with another Bark laden with linen,
some of which they took for their own use. Feb. 15. They came to Lima, in which
Port were 30 Spanish ships, yet they entered and cast Anchor all night in the
midst of them. Here they heard of a ship wherein were 1500 bars of silver,
besides silks, linen, and a chest full of Royals of Plate: As also of another
ship laden with gold, and silver for Panama: Hence therefore they hasted next
morning endeavoring to overtake that gallant ship, called Cacafuego, which was
gone from Lima 14 days before them.

March first, They fell with Cape Francisco, where about midday they descried a
ship a head of them, which was that they looked for: but by the way, they had
taken a ship, laden with wine: and another, laden with tacklings, The Cacafuego
taken*
wherein they found 80 l. weight of gold. This Cacafuego (or evil sailer) they
took, and before they left her, a boy of her own, named her Cacaplata. In her
they found store of fruits, conserves, sugars, meal, etc. besides a quantity of
jewels and precious stones: 13 chests of Royals of Plate; 8 pound-weight of
gold: 26 tuns of uncoined silver, 2 large silver and gilt bowls, valued in all
to 360 thousand Pezoes, which was the cause of her slow sailing: For these
commodities they gave the Master a little linen, and such other things, and so
dismissed him, to go on his Voyage with more speed.

March 16. Being now quite out of hope of meeting with their lost ships, they
came to the Isle of Caines, and Anchored in a fresh river, where they spent
some days in taking in wood, water, and other necessaries: and in their passage
they met with another ship laden with China silk, China dishes, and a Falcon of
gold with a great Emerald set in his breast. April 15. Anno 1578. They came
into the harbor of Guatuleo, inhabited with Spaniards, with whom they had some
trading, and received of them many things which they needed, especially bread:
and so being sufficiently provided of necessaries, they left the coast of
America, yet not forgeting to take with them a pot of about a bushel in
bigness, full of Royals of Plate, and a chain of gold, and some jewels which
they met with in the Town.

April 16. They set their course directly into the sea, which they continued to
June third till they came into the forty second degree of North latitude, where
they met with such a strange change from heat to cold that much impaired the
health of many of them. This much discouraged many of them, and made them
despair of finding any passage that way; yet would not the General be
disheartened, but cheered them up by comfortable speeches of the Divine
Providence, and of Gods care over his children out of the Scriptures: adding
thereto his own cheerful example, stirring them up to endure some short
extremity to have the speedier comfort, and a little trouble to have the
greater glory, which made them resolve to see the uttermost of what good was to
be done that way.

June 5. They were forced to run in with the shore by reason of contrary winds;
the Road was bad, and dangerous by reason of extreme gusts, and flawes that
beat upon them: Hereupon not staying long there, in regard of the extremity of
cold they were forced to turn Southward: and June 17. they came to an Anchor in
a fit Harbor, where yet they met with much cold; then some of their men went a
shore to set up tents, and to make a fortress wherein to secure their goods
whilst they trimmed their ship: The people of the country came in multitudes to
them, wondering at every thing they saw, and esteeming them to be Gods, though
they did what they could to undeceive them: They gave them shirts, linen
cloths, etc. wherewith to cover their nakedness and to hide their shame, and
they returned feathers, cawls of network: their Quivers for their Arrows made
of Fawns-skins, etc. Presently after came there King whom they called Hioh, and
set his Crown upon the Generals Head, enriched his neck with chains, and by
signs resigned to him his right and title in that whole Land; wherefore in the
Name, and to the use of Her Majesty, he took the Scepter, Crown, and Dignity of
the said Country into his hand, wishing that it had lain fit for Her Majesty to
enjoy, and that the riches, and treasure wherewith the Inland part abounds,
might be conveniently transported into England, and that the Gospel might be
propagated to these Ignorant and harmless people.

The General and his Gentlemen marched farther up into the land, which they
found very fruitful, and saw infinite numbers of large and fat Deer: multitudes
of Conies of a strange kind. This Country Captain Drake named Nova Albion: Nova
Albion.
and nailed fast to a tree a Plate of brass whereon was engraven Queen
Elizabeth's name: the day, and year of their arrival, and of the resignation of
that Kingdom by the King and People into her Majesty's hands, etc.

July 23. They took a sorrowful leave of the English, and ran to the tops of
Mountains to keep a sight of them as long as they could. Near to this Country
lie the Islands of S. James in one of which they stayed, July 24. where they
found store of Seals, Birds and such other provision as served their turns.
After which they bent their course to run directly with the Islands of the
Moluecos: and Sept. 30. They came within the sight of certain Islands, from
whence they brought to them in their Canowe, Cocos, Fish, Pottatos, and some
Fruit, which for a while they exchanged for other things: But the General smelt
their design to make a prey of him and his, which they discerning began to
throw stones at the English: But a great Gun being discharged over them so
affrighted them, that they fled and returned no more. Yet others resorted to
them, offering to deal more fairly with them, but cunningly fell to stealing
what they could get, which made the General to leave them, and called it the
Island of Thieves.

October. 21. They came within the sight of other Islands, They come into the
East- Indies.
and Anchored in one of them called Mindanas: From thence they came to the
Moluccas Islands, the chief whereof are called Terenate, Tidore, Matchan, and
Batchan, all very fruitful, and yielding abundance of Cloves, whereof they had
as many as they desired at a cheap rate. As they directed their course to
Tidore, the Viceroy of the King of Terenate came boldly aboard them,
entreating the General by all means to go to Terenate, assuring him that their
King would be very glad of his coming, and ready to do for him what in reason
he could require, whereas if he went to their enemies the Portugals in Tidore,
he would have nothing to do with him. Upon these persuasions the General ran
with Terenate, and presently sent a messenger to the King with a velvet Cloak,
as a present, requiring nothing but Provisions in exchange for such things they
wanted, and whereof he had store: the King sent back the Viceroy and some
others of his Nobles to the General to signify that seeing he came from so
mighty a Princess, he would willingly entertain amity with her, and would
reserve the Commodities and Traffic of his whole Island, to trade with her
Subjects if they would embrace it. In token whereof he sent the General his
Signet, promising that himself with his Nobles would come to his ship, and
bring her into a safer Harbor.

Whilst they were delivering this errand the Generals Messenger was come to the
Court, and by the way was met by some Nobles, who conducted him to the Kings
presence, to whom he delivered his Message, and Present. The King received it
very graciously, and presently prepared himself to go in great State to the
General, the rather to do Honor to our Queen from whom they came. The General
received him answerable to his Dignity: His Ordnance thundered, mixed with small
shot, and his Trumpets and other Instruments sounded to the great delight of
the King and his company. He sent him also into his Canow such presents as he
thought would be most acceptable, and work in him a confirmation of the
Friendship already begun.

The King as soon as he had brought their Ship to an Anchor, left them,
promising to send them necessary Victuals, and provision: and accordingly they
had by way of traffic Rice, Hens, Sugarcanes, Plantanes, Cocos, and Meal:
and some Cloves, and more they might have had if they had pleased. November. 9.
They departed, seeking out a place where they might trim their ship, and
provide other necessaries; and November. 14. They came to an Island uninhabited,
where they abode 26 days. There they set up their tents, raised a fort for
their goods, set up a Smiths forg, trimmed their ship, and dispatched their
other businesses to their content, finding in the Island diverse sorts of
excellent provisions, so that in that space they grew lusty, strong, and
healthful, and gained rare experience of Gods wonderful wisdom in many strange,
and admirable Creatures that they saw there. It was full of wood, the trees
large, and straight, without boughs save only at the top: Amongst which every
night they saw great swarms of fiery-worms flying in the air, whose bodies gave
such a light as if every twig had been a lighted Candle, and the whole place
the starry Sphere. Here also were store of Reer-mice as big, or bigger than
Hens: and multitudes of Cray-fish where of one would satisfy four hungry men
at dinner: they live always on the Land in holes like Cony-Berries.

Being thus well furnished with all necessaries, December. 12. They put to Sea,
and December. 16. Had sight of the Celibes Islands, where, amongst those Islands
they were entangled till, Jan. 9. at which time apprehending themselves past
all danger, passing on with full Sails, in the beginning of the night, their
ship was laid fast up upon a desperate shoal, Their great danger.
where was no probability of saving any thing, nor of escaping with life: and
the more they looked about the less they hoped of geting clear off it again.
Hereupon they presently fell to prayer expecting nothing but present Death. Yet
that they might not seem to tempt God by leaving any means unattempted that he
afforded, presently after their Prayers were ended, the General (exhorting them
to have the chiefest care of the better part, the soul, and adding many
comfortable speeches of the life to come, which now alone they looked for)
encouraged them all to bestir themselves showing the way thereto by his own
Example: And first of all the pump was well plied, and the ship freed of water,
whereby they found their Leakes to be nothing increased, which, though it gave
them no hopes of deliverance, yet it gave them some hope of respite, in as much
as it assured them that the bulk was sound, which they acknowledged to be the
immediate providence of God alone, for that no strength of wood, and Iron could
possibly have born so hard and violent a shock as their ship met with, dashing
her self under full sail against the Rocks, except the extraordinary hand of
God's had preserved the same.

Their next assay was for good ground and Anchor-hold to Sea-ward of them
(whereon to hale;) by which means, if by any, the General put them in comfort
that there was yet some hope left to clear themselves: He therefore in his own
Person undertook the charge of sounding, which when he had done he found that
even but a boats length from the ship, there was no bottom to be found by any
length of Line whatsoever: So that the beginnings of hope which they were
willing to have conceived before, were now quite dashed again. Yea, their
misery seemed to be increased, for that their expectation was now turned into
awaiting for a lingering death, of the two, the far more fearful to be chosen.
Yet one thing fell out happily, that the most of their men did not apprehend
that danger, which if they had done, they would probably have been so much
discouraged, that their sorrow would have disabled them from looking after a
remedy. But the General, and those few others, that could judge of the event
wisely, dissembled the same, and gave encouraging speeches to the rest.

For now it seemed a clear case, that whilst the ship lay so fast moored that
she could not stir, either they were there to remain on the place with her, or
else leaving her to commit themselves in a most poor, and helpless estate to
seek some other place of refuge, the better of which choices carried with it
the appearance of worse than a thousand Deaths. For as touching their ship this
was the only comfort that she could give them, that lying there confined
already upon the hard and pinching Rocks, they could not but continually expect
her speedy ruin, as soon as the sea and winds should come to be the severe
Executioners of that heavy judgment, by the appointment of the Eternal Judge
already given upon her, who had bound her there, as with Adamantine chains to a
most narrow prison, against their coming for that purpose: So that if they
stayed with her, they must perish with her: or if by any means yet
undiscovered, any of them there should chance to be delivered, their escape
must needs be a perpetual misery: It being far better to perish together, than
with the loss of their friends to live in a strange Land: whether a solitary
life (the better choice) amongst wild Beasts (as Birds on the mountains
without all comfort) or amongst the barbarous heathens in intolerable bondage
both of body and mind.

But put the case that the day of the ships destruction should be deferred,
longer than either reason could persuade or in any likelihood could seem
possible (it being not in the power of any ship whatsoever to suffer what she
had already endured) yet could their abode there profit them nothing, but
increase their wretchedness, and enlarge their sorrows. For as her Store and
Victuals were not much (sufficient to sustain them only for some few days,
without hope of having any new supplies, no not so much as a cup of cold water)
so must it inevitably come to pass, that they should be driven to eat the flesh
of their own Arms; and how intolerable a thing this would have proved may
easily be judged.

And if they had departed from her whither should they have gone to seek
relief? Nay, the impossibility of going seemed to be no less than those other
before mentioned. Their Boat was not able at once to carry above twenty
Persons, and they were fifty eight in all: The nearest Land was eighteen miles
from them, and the wind from the shore directly beat against them; Or if they
had thought of setting some a shore, and then fetching the rest, there being no
place thereabout without Inhabitants, the first that had Landed must first have
fallen into the hand of the Enemy,and so the rest in order as they came: And
suppose they should escape the Sword, yet would their lives be worse than
Death, not only in respect of their woeful Captivity, and bodily miseries; but
most of all in respect of their Christian Liberty, being to be deprived of all
public means of serving the true God, and continually grieved with the
horrible Impieties, and Devilish Idolatries of the Heathen.

Their misery being thus manifest, the consideration thereof must needs have
caused trembling to flesh and blood, if Faith in Gods Promises had not mightily
sustained them. The night they passed with earnest longings that the Day would
appear: the time they spent in frequent Prayer, and other Godly Exercises,
thereby comforting themselves and reviving their hearts: striving to bring
themselves to an holy submission under the hand of God, and to refer themselves
wholly to his good will, and pleasure.

The Day at length appearing, and it being then almost ful-sea, after they had
given thanks to God for his forbearing them so long, and had with tears called
upon him to bless their labors, they again renewed their travel to see if now
they could possibly find any Anchor-hold which they had formerly sought in
vain. But this second attempt proved as fruitless as the former, and left them
nothing to trust to but Prayers, and Tears, seeing it appeared now impossible
that the prudence, policy,or power of man could ever effect the delivery of
their ship, except the Lord miraculously should effect the same.

Then was it motioned, and by general voice determined to commend and commit
their case to God alone, leaving themselves wholly in his hand, to destroy or
save them as it should seem best to his gracious wisdom: and that their Faith
might be the better strengthened, and their comfortable apprehension of Gods
mercy in Christ be more clearly felt, they had a Sermon Preached by their
Minister, Master Fletcher, and the Sacrament of the Lords Supper administered to
them.

After which sweet repast, and other holy exercises adjoining to it, ended,
left they should in any respect seem guilty of neglecting of any lawful means
that might conduce to their safety, they resolved to lighten their Ship by
casting forth her Goods into the Sea, which accordingly in a very short time
they dispatched with much alacrity. So that even those things which before they
judged most necessary, considering their condition, they now despised, neither
sparing their Ammunition for defense, nor the Food for the sustentation of
their lives, but every thing as it first came to hand went overboard, assuring
themselves that if it pleased God to deliver them out of that desperate strait,
he would both fight for them against their enemies, and not suffer them to
perish for want of Bread. But when they had done all they could, it was not
their endeavor but Gods immediate hand, and good Providence that wrought their
deliverance. It was he alone that having brought them to the shadow of
Death,set them at liberty again, after they had remained in that desperate
condition full 20 hours, for the magnifying of his Almighty power and mercy.

The manner of their delivery was thus; The place where their Ship fate so fast
was a firm Rock: the Ship struck on the Larboard side: at low water there was
not above six foot depth in all, on the Starboard-side, and yet within a very
little distance there was no bottom to be found. The Brieze during all the time
that they were thus stayed, blew stiffly against their broad side, and so kept
the ship upright. But it pleased God in the beginning of the Tide; while the
water was yet almost at the lowest, to slack the stiffness of the wind, and
then their ship that required thirteen foot water to make her float, and had
not at this time on one side about seven at most, wanting her prop on the other
side, which had already too long kept her up, A wonderful deliverance.
fell a heeling toward the deep water, and by that means freed her Kneel, and
made them all glad men.

This, of all their other dangers in the whole Voyage was the greatest, yet not
the last. For of a long season they could not free themselves, from the care
and fear of those shallows: nor could they possibly come to any convenient
Anchoring amongst them: But were continually tossed amongst those many Islands
and Shoals of the Celibes, till the eighth day of the following month.

Jan. 12. Being not able to bear any Sails by reason of a Tempest, and fearing
their many dangers, they let fall an Anchor upon a shoal. And Jan. 14. being
got a little farther South, they again cast Anchor at an Island, where they
spent a day in taking in water, and wood. After which they met with foul
weather, and dangerous shoals for many days together, which occasioned them to
leave these coasts, and to bear for Timor, the most Southerly Cape of the
Celibes: Yet could they not so easily clear themselves as they expected: So
that Jan. 20. They were forced to run with a small Island not far from thence;
and while they were with their Boat at a good distance searching for a
convenient place wherein to Anchor, they were suddenly environed with no small
extremities. For there arose a most violent, and intolerable flaw, and storm
from the south-west against them, making them (who were on a Lee-shoar, amongst
most dangerous Rocks, and Shelves) extremely to fear, not only the loss of
their Boat and Men; but of themselves, their Ship, and Goods: or the casting of
those men whom God should spare amongst Infidels; which misery could not by any
Power or Industry of theirs have been prevented, had not the present goodness
of God (by staying the outrageous extremities wherewith they were environed)
wrought their present delivery: By whose unspeakable goodness, their Boat and
men also, were unexpectedly brought to them in safety.

January, 26. With much ado they gat clear from this place, yet the Wind
turning strong against them, they could bear no sail to the end of that month.
February the first, They saw a very high Land, and would faign have born to it
to have got some succor, but they could find no safe Harbor. February the
third, They saw a small Island, but being still unable to bear any sail, they
were carried away by the storm, and were not able to fetch it. February the
sixth, They came to another Island, where they cast Anchor, and furnished
themselves with water and wood.

February the eighth, Departing thence they spied two Canows coming toward
them, which talked with them, and conducted them to their Town called Barativa.
The People were Gentiles, of handsome Bodies, comely Stature, Civil demeanor,
very just in their dealings, and courteous to strangers: were glad of their
coming, and relieved their wants with what the Country could afford. Their
Island is rich, and fruitful, having Gold, Silver, Copper, Tin, Sulpher, etc.
And they are very skilful in working these Metals. Their Fruits are Nutmegs,
Ginger, Long pepper, Limons, Cocos, with diverse others, of each of which they
had from them, whatsoever they desired for their need: Having here spent two
days, they departed very well refreshed.

After this they passed within sight of many Islands, but they neither needed
nor desired to visit them, only they took in some fresh water at one of them,
where they found two Turtles. March the tenth, They came to an Anchor under a
high Land where they took in water, They come to Java Major.
and then sent their Boat to traffic with the Inhabitants: and the next day
the General sent his man with a Present to the King of Cloth, both Linen and
Woollen, and some Silk, which he gladly accepted, and thankfully received, and
returned Rice, Cocos, Hens, and other Victuals. This was the Isle of Java: And
March, the thirteenth, The General himself with his Gentlemen, and some others
went a shore, and Presented the King with his Music (who entertained him
joyfully) and showed him the manner of the use of their Arms, by training of
his men before him: and so they were dismissed with a promise that more
victuals should be sent them.

In this Island there is one chief King and under him many petty Governors whom
they call Raias, who live in great friendship one with another. March, the
fourteenth, They received more victuals from them, and the day after, three of
these Raias came to see the General and his ship, and warlike Ammunition,
wherewith they were very much pleased: and relating it to the King, he went to
see them himself carrying some victuals with him. The Raias came daily to them,
whom the General entertained Courteously: and one of them brought an Ox, for
which the General requited him with some Silks. Here they trimmed and washed
their Ship of which she had great need, being in this long Voyage overgrown
with a kind of shelfish which much hindered her sailing, They traded with this
People for Hens, Goats, Cocos, Plantanes, and other things whereof they had
great plenty.

March, the six and twentieth, An. Dom. One thousand five hundred and eighty,
They departed shaping their course for the Cape of Good Hope: And June the
fifteenth, They passed by that: And July the two and twentieth, They came to
Sierra Leona, where they took in freshwater, and met with some Oisters, and
plenty of Lemons which much refreshed them. And September the six and
twentieth, (Which was Monday in the account of those that had stayed at home,
but by their computation was the Lords Day) they safely, with joyful minds,
and thankful hearts to God for his wonderful goodness to them, Their return
home.
arrived at Plymouth, having spent two years, ten months, and some odd Days in
seeing the wonders of the Lord in the Deep, in discovering very many admirable
things, in going through with so many strange adventures, in escaping out of so
many dangers, and overcoming so many difficulties in encompassing the World.

Queen Elizabeth going aboard this Ship, was therein Feasted by Captain Drake,
at which time She Knighted him. The Ship was laid up at Deptford where the
Carcass of it lay very many years after.

The Voyage of Sir Francis Drake into the West Indies.
QUeen Elizabeth finding the restless malice of the King of Spain against Her,
Another Voyage into the West Indies.
to the end that War might not first be brought home to Her own doors, set
forth a Fleet to find her enemies work abroad, under the command of Sir
Francis Drake, who having prepared his Fleet and gotten them together to
Plymouth to the number of five and twenty sails of ships, and Pinnaces: and
having of Soldiers and Mariners Two thousand three hundred in the whole,
embarked himself and them September the twelfth, Anno Christi, One thousand
five hundred eighty five, being accompanied with these worthies.

Master Christopher Carleil, Lieutenant General. Anthony Powel, Sergeant Major.
Captain Matthew Morgan, and Captain John Sampson, Corporals of the Field. And
these Officers after named had command over the rest of the Land Captains.
Captain Anthony Plot. Captain Edward Winter; Captain John Goring; Captain
Robert Pew; Captain George Barton; Captain John Merchant; Captain William
Cecil; Captain Walter Bigs; Captain John Hannam; and Captain Richard Stanton.

The Commanders at Sea under him were, Martin Forbusher, Vice Admiral in the
Primrose; Francis Knowls in the Gallion Lecester, Reer-Admiral; Thomas Venner,
Captain in the Elizabeth Bonadventure, under the General; Edward Winter,
Captain in the Aid; Christopher Carliel, Leiutenant General, Captain in the
Tiger; Henry White, Captain in the Sea-Dragon; Thomas Drake, Captain in the
Thomas; Thomas Seely, Captain in the Minion; Baily, Captain in the Bark Talbot;
Rob. Cross, Capt. in the Bark Bond; George Fortescue, Captain in the Bark
Bonner; Edward Careless, Captain in the Hope; James Erizo, Captain in the White
Lion; Thomas Moon, Captain in the Francis; John Rivers, Captain in the Vantage;
John Vaughan, Captain in the Drake; John Verney, Captain in the George; John
Martin, Captain in the Benjamin; Edward Gilman, Captain in the Scout; Richard
Hawkins, Captain in the Galliot called the Duck; Bitfield, Captain in the
Swallow.

When they were gotten out, they took their course toward Spain. And when they
came near that Coast they spied diverse Sails, whereupon the General sent some
Pinnaces to see what they were; who upon the sight of them, abandoned most of
their Ships (being French men laden with Salt.) Amongst them there was one so
well liked, which had no man in her, as being brought to the General he made
stay of her for their service, intending to pay for her, which he accordingly
performed at his return, and called her the Drake, the rest were dismissed in
safety.

The day following, standing in again with the shore they espied a tall ship of
about two hundred and forty Tun, which was chased by the Leiutenant General in
the Tiger, and when he had forced her to strike sail, upon examination finding
her to be a Spanish ship of Saint Sebastian, laden with Poor John from Newfound
Land, they juged her to be lawful prize; and therefore distributed her lading
amongst the Fleet, which afterward stood them in good stead.

A day or two after they put into the Isles of Bayon, where they had no sooner
Anchored, but they manned forth all their Pinnaces with an intent to surpise
the City, upon sight of whom the Governor and People were much amazed; there
they landed, and quartered themselves to their best advantage: but in the night
there arose such a storm, that they thought fit to return to their ships, which
they did with some difficulty, many of their ships being driven from their
Anchors. The tempest continued three days, which scattered the Fleet, and the
Speedwell was driven into England, the rest came together again when the storm
was ended.

Then the Lieutenant General was sent to see what they might do about Vigo,
where he took many Boats, and Carvels, diverse being laden with household stuff:
and amongst other Church ornaments, they found a great Cross of Silver, of
fair and embossed work, and double gilt, which was of good value. The Spaniards
complained that here they lost goods worth above three thousand Ducats. A
little from thence they landed, and by consent of the Governor of Galizia,
quietly furnished themselves with fresh water, and all other necessaries paying
for the same.

From thence they went to the Canaries purposing to have refreshed and stored
themselves with necessaries in the Isle of Palma: but the Sea going high, and
the landing place (whereof there was but one) being naught, they left it, and
went to the Isle of Ferro, but finding that extreme poor they left it, and
steered toward the coast of Barbary: And November the thirteenth they fell
with Cape Blank, where they caught store of fish, and from thence went to the
Isles of Cape Verde: And November the sixteenth, they discovered the Isle of
Saint Jago, They come to St. Jago.
where they came to an Anchor, and landed a thousand men under the leading of
the Lieutenant General Carliel; the way proved mavelous stony and troublesome
in their march, yet they rested not till they came to a fair plain two miles
from the Town: There having rested themselves for a while, they advanced hard
to the wall of the City, And take ^^.
finding no enemy to resist them, all being fled, whereupon he sent two
Captains with sixty men to quarter out the City for his Army, and to erect
Saint George's Cross upon the enemies Fortress that it might be seen by our
Navy, which was done accordingly; And it being November the seventeenth, the
day of our Queens coming to the Crown, they discharged all the Ordnance, being
about fifty Pieces which they found in the Town, ready mounted and charged,
which also was answered by the Ordnance out of all our ships, which were now
come near.

Here they continued fourteen days taking such spoils as the place afforded, as
Wine, Oil, Meal, Vinegar, Olives, etc. but found no treasure at all in it. This
City is finely seated, having a River running by it, and a Valley full of
Gardens and Orchards well replenished with Fruits, Herbs, and Trees, as
Lemons, Oranges, Sugarcanes, Coco's, Plantans, etc. November the four and
twentieth, the General, and Lieutenant General with six hundred men marched to
St. Domingo, twelve miles within Land, which they found empty also, Saint
Domingo taken.
the Inhabitants being fled into the mountains, from whence they returned to
St. Jago: And November the six and twentieth, they embarked their Forces, and
went to the Play, where they found two pieces of Ordnance hid in the ground,
and so they burned the town, and departed.

Hence putting over to the West Indies, within a few days began a great
mortality amongst their men, so that within a small time there died two or
three hundred of them of burning Fevers and some of the Plague. In eighteen
days space they came within sight of Saint Dominica, inhabited by savage people
that go all naked, and paint their bodies: These helped our men to fill and
carry fresh water from the River upon their bare shoulders to their Boats, and
brought them store of Tobacco, and Bread made of the Cassavy root, very white,
and savory, for which they gave them some Glass Beads to their great content.

From thence they went to S. Christophers Island, where they cleansed and aired
their ships, and refreshed their sick People: From hence they resolved to go to
Hispaniola: and by the way they met with a small Frigate, bound for S. Domingo,
the chiefest and ancientest City in that Island; and the men of her being
examined, one assured them that the haven of it was a barred haven, the Shore
well fortified, so that there was no convenient landing within ten English
miles of the City, whither this man undertook to conduct them.

They come to Hispaniola
January the first, They landed ten miles from that brave City, and under the
command of the Lieutenant General marched toward the City whither they came
about one a clock in the afternoon; When they came near, above a hundred and
fifty Gentlemen well mounted presented themselves against them; but the small
shot playing upon them, they departed, and the English proceeded toward the
two gates of the City that lay toward the Sea; both which the Spaniards had
manned, and planted their Ordnance without the gates, and some small shot in an
ambush by the way side. The English being above twelve hundred men divided
themselves: the Lieutenant General leading the one half to one gate, and
Captain Powel the other half to the other gate, vowing that with God's
assistance they would not rest till they met in the market place.

No sooner had the Spaniards discharged their Ordnance, doing some little
execution, but the Lieutenant General hasted or rather ran upon them to prevent
their charging again, Saint Domingo taken.
and notwithstanding their ambush, entered Pell Mell with them into the gate not
staying till he came into the Market place, unto whom shortly after came
Captain Powel with his Companies. This place they strengthened with Baricadoes,
the City being too large to be guarded by so small, and weary an Army. And
after midnight, they in the Castle, hearing some of the English busy about the
Gate of it, quitted it, some being taken Prisoners, and others escaping by
Boats.

The next day the English enlarged their Quarters, and fortified themselves,
and held the Town for a months space. During this time the General sent a Negro
Boy with a Flag of Truce to the Spaniards, who by the way was met by some
Officers of the Galley which the English had taken, together with the City, who
furiously thrust the poor Boy through the Body, who returning to the General,
having declared how barbarously they had used him, fell down, and died in his
presence. The General being much moved herewith, commanded the Provest Martial,
to take two Friars, and to carry them to the same place with a sufficient
guard, and there to hang them; and withal he sent one of the Prisoners to
inform the Spaniards why he did it, and to tell them that till the party who
had thus murdered his messenger were delivered to him, there should no day
pass wherein he would not hang two Prisoners till all were consumed.

Hereupon the day following, the murderer was brought, and an offer made to
deliver him to the General, who yet thought it more Honorable to make them
perform the Execution themselves in the sight of the English, which was done
accordingly.

During their abode here Commissioners often passed between the Spaniards and
them about the ransom of the City, but not agreeing, the English spent every
morning till the heat of the day, in firing, and destroying the houses in the
outward part of the City, two hundred Mariners being employed therein for
diverse days: Yet were the Houses built so magnificenlty, and strongly of stone,
that they could not consume one third part of the Town all that time, whereupon
the General was contented to accept of twenty five thousand Ducats, Domingo
partly burnt, and partly ransomed.
of 5 s. 6. a piece, to spare the rest.

Here our Soldiers met with good pillage, especially of rich Apparel; but
treasure they found none: For the Spaniards by their Cruelties had so destroyed
the Natives, which used to work in the Mines of Gold and Silver, that they were
wholly given over, and in that Island they were forced to use Copper Money. Yet
they found store of Wine, Oil, Vinegar Wheat, Meal, Woollen and Linen Cloth,
some Silks, etc. which much relieved them: there was but little Plate found but
good store of Porcellaws, or China Dishes: yet some Plate they found, and very
costly household furniture.

From Saint Domingo they put over toward the Main, They come to Carthagena.
and at last came within sight of Carthagena, who had notice of their coming
twenty days before from Hispaniola, so that they were fully provided for them.
The mouth of the Harbor lay about three miles Westward from the City, where
they entered without opposition: and in the Evening some of them landed under
the conduct of the Lieutenant General, who about midnight began their march
toward the City, keeping close by the Sea-wash for their greater safety. When
they came within two miles of the town, about one hundred of their Horse met
them, but upon the first Volley of shot that was given them, they retreated.

Coming within half a mile of the town, the way grew narrow between the Sea,
and an Arm of it, which was Fortified with a stone wall and ditch: the wall
built with very good Flankers: there was only a little place left open which
was made up with very good Baricadoes of Wine-pipes filled with Earth standing
very close together. This place was furnished with six Demiculverins, and
Sakers, which shot directly in Front upon them as they approached: They had
brought also two great Galleys with their Prowes to the Shore with eleven
Pieces of Ordnance; which flanked their coming on: In those Galleys also were
three or four hundred small shot placed: and on the Land to guard that narrow
Pass three hundred shot, and Pikes.

These spared not their shot either great or small; but the English, taking the
advantage of the dark, still keeping the Sea-wash Shore escaped all pretty
well, themselves forbearing to shoot till they were come to the very Wall side,
then running upon the Barricadoes, down went the Pipes of Earth, and after a
Volley of shot in their faces they came to it with Pikes and Swords, wherein
they proved too hard for the Spaniards, and forced them to flee. Here the
Lieutenant General with his own hands killed the chiefest Ensign Bearer of the
Spaniards, who yet fought very stoutly. Then pursuing them, they entered Pell
Mell with them into the Town and wan the Marketplace, Carthagena taken.
the Spaniards flying to the Mountains, whither before they had carried their
Wives and Children.

At every streets end they had made Barricadoes and Trenches excellently well,
and had placed many Indians in corners of advantage, with Arrows so impoisoned
that if they did but break the skin the wounded party died: by these some of
our men were slain: They had also stuck in the ground against the coming of the
English abundance of sticks with sharp ends villainously impoisoned, most of
which they yet escaped by keeping the Sea-wash-shoar.

Here they stayed six weeks, the aforenamed mortality continuing still amongst
them, though not so violent as at first. This the Spaniards call a Galenture,
which such as were touched with, if they escaped Death continued long very weak
both in mind and body. This forced them to give over their intended enterprise
for Nombre de Dios, and so overland to Panama, where they should have met with
store of treasure: and here they resolved to return home-ward.

During their abode in this place there passed diverse courtesies between the
Spaniards and them; and the Governor of Carthagena, and the Bishop of it, with
diverse Gentlemen came to visit the General: Yet because they could not agree
about ransoming the City, they burned the out-parts of it, and at last they
agreed to give the General one hundred and ten thousand Ducats for the ransom
of the rest, this being a far richer place than S. Domingo: and afterward they
gave him a thousand crowns to spare an Abbey that stood a quarter of a mile from
the town, and because they professed that they were not able to ransom the
Castle, it was blown up with Gunpowder. The Island has in it many pleasant
Fruits, and Orange Trees set in walks of a great length: the whole Island being
cast into Gardens and Orchards.

They return homeward.
After six weeks abode, having taken in fresh water, and other provisions, they
put to Sea, March 31, where, after two or three days, a great ship which they
had taken at S. Domingo, called by them the New-years-gift, sprung a Leak,
being laden with Ordnance, Hides, and other Plunder, whereupon they returned
with the whole fleet to Carthagena, where they stayed ten days more, unlading
her, and bestowing her Men and Goods in other Ships, and so departed, directing
their course to Cape S. Anthony, in the Easterly part of Cuba: and because they
could not presently find any fresh water, they departed, thinking to recover
the Mattances, Eastward of Havana: But for want of wind they were after
fourteen days, brought back to Cape S. Anthony, where, upon a more diligent
search, they found water enough.

After three days spent in watering they departed, May 13. and proceeding about
the Cape of Florida, and keeping along the coast, they went on till May 28. at
which time they espied a Beacon on Land, unto which they went with their
Pinnaces well manned, and marching up the Riverside, at last they saw a fort,
newly built by the Spaniards: whereupon the Leiutenant General took four
Companies, and marched toward it: and though he went as covertly as he could,
yet the enemy took the Alarm, and thinking that the whole force of the English
was coming against them, they discharged their Pieces, and ran away. Their
flight was discovered to the English by a French man, who had been a Prisoner
with them, whereupon the General himself with many others went to the place,
and found it empty. On the Platform they found thirteen or fourteen pieces of
Brass Ordnance, and a chest having in it about two thousand pound Sterling,
lately sent from the King of Spain's treasurer to pay the Soldiers of that
place.

From hence they went to their town about a mile off, standing upon the River
of S. Augustine, and when they landed, the Spaniards made some few shot at
them, and ran away. The Sergeant Major finding one of their horses ready sadled
and bridled, gat up and followed the chase: but by one that lay behind a bush,
he was shot through the head and slain: His death was much lamented, being a
Soldier of great experience, and courage.

Here they resolved to go to Virginia to seek out the English sent thither the
year before by Sir Walter Rawleigh under Master Ralph Lane, their Governor,
whither they came, and at their request carried them back with them to England:
Their safe arrival.
where they safely arrived at Portsmouth, July 28. Anno Christi. 1586.

The total value which they got in this Voyage was estimated at sixty thousand
pounds, whereof they that went the Voyage had twenty thousand pounds, and the
Aventerers the other forty. In the Voyage they lost seven hundred and fifty
men. Amongst whom were eight Captains: four Lieutenants; six Gentlemen, and
others.

The Ordnance gotten of all sorts were two hundred and forty: whereof above two
hundred were Brass, the rest Iron.

Of Sir Francis Drakes service against the Spaniard in Eighty eight.
ANno Christi, His brave service in eighty eight.
One thousand five hundred eighty eight, the King of Spain having gotten
together a huge Navy, which they termed Invincible, came for England, and
Queen Elizabeth of famous Memory, for her own preservation prepared another,
which she committed to the charge of Charles Howard of Effingham, Lord Admiral,
and to our Renouned Drake her Vice Admiral, which Navy she sent into the
Western parts of England, the whole story whereof you may read in my Englands
Remembrancer; and out of which I shall collect only so much as concerns my
present purpose.

July the twentieth, about noon this terrible Fleet of the Spaniards was
discried by the English before they looked for it; whereupon (the Fleet lying
in the Road of Plymouth) with much difficulty they towed out their ships: and
being forth, they saw the Spanish ships with lofty Towers, like Castles,
seeming at first to make for Plymouth, but seeing the English ships got out of
the Harbor, they steered by toward Calis, which the English willingly suffered
them to do, that they might the more commodiously chase them in the Rear with a
fore-right Wind.

July the one and twentieth, Our Lord Admiral sent before him a Pinnace, called
the Defiance, to denounce War by discharging her Ordnance, and himself
following in the Ark-Royal, set upon the Spanish Admiral (as he thought) though
it proved to be the ship of Alonzo de Levas, where fire, smoke, and Loud
thundering Cannons began the Parley: and rending Bullets (freely interchanged)
were the fiery messengers of each others minds.

Soon after came up Drake, Haukins, and Forbusher, incessantly playing with
their Ordnance upon the hind most Squadron of the Enemies which was Commanded
by Recalde, whose Ship was soon so battered as that it was made unserviceable,
and thereupon was with much difficulty drawn into the main Fleet.

In this medly, a great Gallion, wherein was Don Pedro de Valdez, and some
other Noblemen being sore battered by the English shot, to avoid the same, fell
foul upon another ship, whereby her foremast was broken off, and she made
unable to follow the rest of the Fleet. But the night coming on, our Lord
Admiral, supposing that they had left nothing aboard in her, and fearing to
loose sight of the Spaniards, passed by her, and followed the Lanthorn, which
he supposed to be carried by Sir Francis Drake, as was agreed. But this brave
Kinght was eagerly pursuing five great Hulks which he judged to be Spaniards;
yet when he haled them they proved to be Easterlings, and friends, and so were
dismissed.

July the two and twentieth, Sir Francis Drake espied the aforementioned
lagging Gallion, whereupon he sent forth a Pinnace commanding them to yield,
otherwise his Bullets, without any delay, should force them to it: Valdez, to
seem valorous, answered, that they were four hundred and fifty strong: that
himself was Don Pedro, and stood upon his Honor, and therefore propounded
certain conditions: Drake replied, that he had no leisure to Parley. If he
would immediately yield, well and good: If not, he should soon find that Drake
was no dastard. Pedro hearing that it was the fiery Drake (whose very name was
dreadful to the Spaniards) that had him in close, presently yielded, and with
forty of his Companions, came aboard Sir Francis his ship; where, first giving
him the Conge, he Protested that he and all his, were resolved to have died
fighting, had they not fallen into such Noble hands, whose valor and felicity
was so great, that Mars, and Neptune seemed to wait on him in all his
enterprises, and whose Noble, and generous mind toward the vanquished, had
often been experienced even of his greatest Foes. Sir Francis, to requite his
Spanish Complements with English Courtesy, placed him at his own Table, and
lodged him in his own Cabin: and the rest of that Company he sent Prisoners to
Plymouth, where they remained for the space of eighteen months, till by payment
of their ransoms they obtained their liberty.

But Sir Francis Drake's men paid themselves well by the Plunder of the ship,
wherein they found fifty thousand Ducats of Gold, which they merrily shared
amongst them. July the three and twentieth, was the greatest fight between
these two Fleets: And July the four and twentieth, the English Fleet was
divided into four Squadrons, whereof the Lord Admiral in the Ark-Royal, led the
first: Sir Francis Drake, in the Revenge led the second: Captain Hawkins the
third: And Captain Forbusher the fourth. What notable service these gallant men
did perform against that Invincible Armado, may be seen in my Book before
mentioned.

The Voyage of Sir Francis Drake into Portugal.
ANno Christi, See more of this in the Life of the Earl of Essex.
One thousand five hundred eighty nine, Don Antonio, who laid claim to the
Kingdom of Portugal, came into England to crave aid of Queen Elizabeth against
the King of Spain, who had seized upon that Kingdom for himself, and forced the
other to fly. Queen Elizabeth at his Importunate suit, and to find the
Spaniards work at home sent a Fleet with him under the Command of Sir John
Norris for the Land-service, and Sir Francis Drake for the sea: In which Voyage
they both performed much Noble service both by sea and land, and returned in
safety unto Plymouth.

The Last Voyage of Sir Francis Drake into the West Indies.
His last Voyage into the West Indies.
ANno Christi, One thousand five hundred ninety five, He undertook another
Voyage to the West Indies, wherein himself, and Sir John Hawkins were Generals,
Sir Thomas Baskervile Colonel General: Sir Nicholas Clifford Lieutenant
General: Arnold Baskervile Sergeant Major: And Nicholas Baskervile, Barkley,
Grimston, Rush, Boswel, Plat, Chichester, Stanton, and Fenton were Captains.

August the eight and twentieth, Anno Christi, One thousand five hundred ninety
five, They embarked at Plymouth, and sailed toward the Grand Canados, meeting
with nothing in the way worth mentioning: And September the six and twentieth,
They arrived at the Port of Canados, otherwise called Saint John de Cruz,
where, in Boats, and Pinnaces they attempted to Land: But the Enemy, who waited
for their coming, had so entrenched themselves in the very place where they
should have put ashore, so plied them both with their small and great shot,
from the Castle Town, and this intrenchment, that with the loss of some of
their men, they were forced again to their Ships.

From thence they departed to a place where they watered, in which place, some
of their men, straying into the Country from their friends, were met with and
slain by those Barbarous People, and torn with dogs they keep on purpose, to
destroy men that come to water there. This Island yields store of Wine Wheat,
and other Grain; Conies, Partridges etc. From thence, passing toward the West
Indies, they saild by the Island called Martinino, inhabited by Barbarous
People called Canibals: From thence to Dominica where they had store of Tobacco
for Hatchets and Knives, etc. November the twelvth, they cast anchor against a
great Fort, within three or four miles of Porte-Richo, from whence they were
plied with great shot. Here died that brave Sea Captain, Sir John Hawkins, to
the great grief of all the rest.

The same day also Sir Nicholas Clifford, Captain Stratford, and Captain Brown
were wounded with a great piece of Ordinance, as they sat at Supper with Sir
Francis Drake whose stool also was struck from under him, as he was drinking a
Cup of Beer; yet, by Gods Providence he, and all the rest escaped. And that
night Sir Nicholas Clifford died of that wound: and Captain Brute Brown, a day
or two after. The Spaniards had barred up the Harbor by sinking a great Ship
therein, from which they had drawn long masts on both sides to the Forts, which
defended the Passage: within which were there five Spanish Ships, filled with
Muskitiers, and stored with Ordnance; yet Captain Baskerville, putting his men
into boats, and Pinnaces, attempted to enter by force, and fired one or two of
those Ships, but with a shower of small shot was beaten back, with the loss of
many of his men.

From hence sailing to the Continent they burnt Rio de la Haak, the inhabitants
whereof offered thirty four thousand Ducats to redeem the same, but over prising
the Pearls they brought, it was refused; they also burnt down some other
Villages thereabout. Here in a religious House they found some treasure, Pearl
and Merchandise, which they carried away. In this Country was great store of
Beeves, Goats, Sheep, Horses, Asses etc, and also Store of Fowl, as Pellicans,
Red Sea Fowls, like unto Crane.

December the nineteenth, They came to Santa Martha, out of which all the
inhabitants were fled: But the English following them into the Woods, found
some treasure, and other things of some value; when they departed they set the
Town on fire. December the five and twentieth, Nombre de Dios taken.
They came to Nombre de Dios, and the same Day Captain Arnold Baskervile died.
They landed about a mile from the Town, and when they came to it the enemy gave
them a bravado of shot and then ran away. Having before conveyed away all
their treasure and goods. Yet something they found in the woods, as Oil, Wine,
Vinegar, Meal, and Linen Cloth.

On Monday after Sir Thomas Baskervile with six hundred men began their journey
by Land toward Panama, hoping there to furnish themselves with the Spanish
Treasure: They march toward Panama.
But when they had labored a day or two, and encountered with many
difficulties, through narrow, dirty, and most cumbersomways, being assailed on
both sides with many Volleys of shot out of the Woods, they came to a Fort in a
very narrow passage where only one man could pass a breast, where the enemy
slew their men as fast as they came, and hearing that there were two more such
Forts betwixt that and Panama, Are forced to return.
they were constrained with the loss of many of their best men, and much grief,
to return to their ships, and set fire upon Nombre de Dios.

January the tenth they came to Scoday, and took a Spanish Frigate that was
sent to give Intelligence of their being upon the Coast, but found nothing of
worth in her. Then the General caused his sick men to be carried a shore and to
have the best comfort they were able to give them: Also there they built four
Pinnaces, and took in fresh water. Here were great store of Wild-beasts in this
Island but no Inhabitants.

January the eight and twentienth, Anno Christi, His death and burial
One thousand five hundred ninety five, Died this famous, and renowned Captain
Sir Francis Drake, of a Flux, and grief for his bad successes in this Voyage.
His Death was exceedingly lamented by all the Company. His Corpse being put into
a Coffin of Lead was let down into the Sea, the Trumpets in a doleful manner
Ecchoing out their lamentations for so great a loss, and all the Cannons in the
Fleet were discharged according to the Customs of Sea-Funeral Obsequies.

The rest of the Fleet came safe to their desired haven in their Native Country
of England. April One thousand five hundred and ninety six.

Sir Francis Drakes father when he fled into Kent (as you read in the beginning
of this Life) was fain to shelter himself in the Hull of a ship, where many of
his younger sons were born. He had twelve in all, and as it pleased God to give
to most of them their first being upon the Water, so the greatest part of them
died at Sea; only the youngest, though he was as far as any of the other, yet
died at home, whose Posterity yet inherits that which by himself and this Noble
Sir Francis, the Eldest Brother, was hardly, yet worthily gotten.

Soli Deo Triuni Gloria.
Among other Verses made in his Commendation, I have long since Read these,
GReat God of Prowess, Thunderbolt of War:
Bellona's darling: Mars of Chivalry:
Bloody Enyo's Champion, Foe-mens fear.
Fames stately Pharos, Mapp of Dignity:
Joves Pearl, Pearls pride, Prides foe, Foes enemy:
Spains shaking Fever, Regent of Wars Thunder:
Undaunted Drake, a name importing Wonder.
Books Printed for, or Sold by Simon Miller, at the Star, at the Westend of S.
Paul's.
Quarto.
PHysical Experiments, being a plain description of the causes, signs and cures
of most diseases incident to the body of man; with a discourse of Witchcraft:
By William Drage Practitioner of Physic, at Hitchin in Hartfordshire.

Bishop White upon the Sabbath.

The Artificial Changeling.

The Life of Tamerlane the Great.

The Pragmatical Jesuit, a Play; by Richard Carpenter.

The Life and Death of the Valiant and Renouned Sir Francis Drake, with his
Voyages and discoveries about the world and his valniat acts.

Large Octavo.
Master Shepherd on the Sabbath.

The Rights of the Crown of England as it is Established by Law; by E Bagshaw
of the Inner Temple.

An Enchiridion of Fortification, or, a handful of knowledge, In Martial
Affairs. Demonstrating both by Rule, and Figure, (as well Mathematically by
exact Calculations, as Practically,) to fortify any body, either Regular or
Irregular. How to run Approaches to pierce through a Counterscarf, to make a
Gallery over a Mote, to spring a Mine etc. With many other notable matters
belonging to War, useful and necessary for all Officers, to enrich their
knowledge and practice.

The Life and Adventures of Buscan, the witty Spaniard.

Epicurus's Morals.

Small Octavo.
Daphins and Cloe, a Romance.

Merry Drollery, Complete; or a Collection of Jovial Poems, Merry Songs, Witty
Drolleries intermixed with pleasant Catches: Collected by W. N. L. B. R. S. J.
G. Lovers of Wit.

Bubler of War.

Tractatus de Veneris, or a Treatise of poisoning their sundry sorts, names,
natures, and virtues with their Symptoms, Signs, diagnostick and prognostic,
and antidotes. Wherein are diverse necessary questions discussed; The Truth by
the most Learned confirmed; By many instances, examples, and Stories
illustrated; And both Philosophically, and Medicinally handled; By William
Rainsay.

The Vrinal of Physic, By Robt. Record, Doctor of Physic. Whereunto is added
an Ingenuous Treatise concerning Physicians, Apothecaries, Chyrurgions, set
forth by a Doctor of Queen Elizabeth's days; with a translation of Papius
Ahalsossa, concerning Apothecarys Confecting their Medicines; worthy perusing
and following.

Large Twelues.
The Moral Practice of the Jesuits: Demonstrated, by many remarkable Histories
of their Actions in all parts of the World, Collected either from Books of the
greatest Authority or most certain and unquestionable Records and Memorials, by
the Doctors of the Sorbonne.

Artimedorus of Dreams.

Oxford Jests, refined, now in the Press.

The Third Part of the Bible and New Testament.

A Complete Practice of Physic. Wheren is plainly described, the Nature,
Causes, Differences, and Signs of all diseases in the Body of man With the
choicest cures for the same, By John Smith, Dr. in Physic.

The Duty of every one that will be saved, being Rules, Precepts, Promises and
Examples, directing all persons, of what degree soever, how to govern those
Passions, and to live virtuously and soberly in the World.

The Spiritual Chorist, or Six Decads of Divine Meditations on several
Subjects; with a short account of the Authors Life; By Wm. Spurstow, D. D.
sometime Minister of the Gospel at Hackney near London.

Small Twelues.
The understanding Christians Duty

A help to Prayer.

A new method of preserving and restoring Health, by the virtue of Coral and
Steel.

David's Song.

FINIS.

