LICENSED,

April 24th. 1688.
A DISCOURSE OF THE Saving Grace OF GOD.

By the late Reverend and Learned DAVID CLARKSON, Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed by J. Astwood, for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and three
Crowns, at the lower end of Cheap Side, near Mercers-Chappel, 1688.

A PREFACE.
THE very Title Page, mentioning the Subject, and the Author of the following
Discourse, leaves little need of a Recommendatory Preface.

For what Subject can be supposed more inviting than this of the Grace of God?
represented to such as were lost, and designing their Salvation? If we were the
Inhabitants of some other World, never lost, or in which Sin, and Vindictive
Justice had no place; 'twere a grateful Contemplation to us, if from thence, we
had the opportunity to view the Methods of Grace for the saving of miserable
perishing Creatures in such a World is this. As the kindness, and benignity of
the unfal'n Angels makes them stoop down (...).
, and pry, with earnest desire 1 Pet. 1. 12.
, and no doubt high pleasure, to observe what was doing to this purpose in this
wretched World of ours.

But who can consider himself as lost, and not apprehend the name of saving
grace to carry with it a pleasant, joyful sound? It too plainly argues a
strange complication of stupidity, and lightness of mind, when to any, who are
themselves of that lost race, the Grace of God, by which only they can be
saved, is unsavory, and without relish. And it is not less strange if they can
expect to be saved without it.

There are so many sensible Miseries continually urging Mankind, that if they
be compared with what obtains in the common belief of the most (of whatsoever
Religion,) and whereof few profess any doubt, that one would wonder all should
not be much taken up in meditating some way of escape, and how they may be
saved out of such a Gulf as this. For, setting aside the inward evils that
infest men's minds, (which carry most of Sting and Pungency in them, to those of
an awakened mental sense) it is obvious to their duller outward senses, that
they are encompassed, and often seized with innumerable Calamities, Sicknesses,
Pains, Violences from one another, and other disasters, from which they cannot
be certain to be safe one moment, and that they are all mortal, and after a
little time must certainly die. The most profess themselves to believe they have
about them somewhat immortal, and that this World will at length have an end.
Diverse Pagans have agreed with Christians in the apprehension that* it will end
by Fire, an universal Conflagration, and of an after Felicity to be had
somewhere else.

Now what Power of Nature can they think of, that should save them out of so
common a Ruin? Or what is left them to think of besides, unless they will
yield themselves to perish without remedy (which the Nature of man abhorrs
from) but of being saved by Grace.

They that have any Notion of God, cannot think Grace unworthy of him. Some of
the Epicurean Faith, that thought it unsuitable to the Nature of God to be
touched with Anger (and who might therefore think our Infelicities to befall us
of course, without being any effects of divine displeasure) yet were less
averse to think he might be touched with Grace, (as De Ira Dei.
Lactantius takes notice,) and so left themselves room for the apprehension,
that our Felicity should be owing to the Benignity and Favor of God. But what
thoughts of Him can be more unworthy, or less agreeing with themselves, than,
while he is acknowledged to be a Mind, a Spirit, the first, eternal Mind, and
the Father of Spirits, to suppose he should be less kind, benign, and gracious
to our Minds, and Spirits, than to our baser Flesh? Or that they who expect
from his favor a state of future freedom from bodily pains, diseases, and
death, should not expect from it much more a Felicity suitable to their Nobler
part? and seek thence what is of so apparent necessity, beforehand, to prepare
and form their Minds and spirits for such a Felicity?

And one would think, that as they who are better instructed in the Affairs of
Gods Government over men, and that know how to ascribe to him a just
displeasure, and anger for their common Apostasy, and revolt from him, that
shall be no way unbecoming, but most agreeable to an infinitely perfect Being;
should be most apt to approve, and admire the Methods, which the Grace of God
has pitched upon, for expiating the guilt of Sin by a Redeemer* so they should
not be unapt to apprehend the Necessity of gracious Operations upon the spirits
of men, to deliver them from such distempers and disaffections, as are plainly
inconsistent with their final Salvation, and Blessedness; and give them such
dispositions as are requisite thereto.

Can any thing be more suitable to the Grace of God, than, when he has found
out a way, wherein he might, upon terms not injurious to the dignity of his
Government, pardon their sins, he should also inwardly apply himself to them,
cure the blindness, carnality, and aversion of their Minds, incline, and enable
them to know, trust, love, obey, and converse with him, without which an
Atonement, and pardon would avail them nothing, and in which of themselves they
can effect nothing?

It Is easy to frame abstract Discourses, and general Ideas of what might be
performed by those noble Powers, a man's own Understanding, and Will: but what
can actually be effected, in particular, and circumstantiated cases, against
the stream of sensual Inclination, either to the engaging of intense thoughts,
or by thinking, they perhaps are most apt to pronounce confidently, who have
least tried.

Nor is any thing more congruous to the notion of Grace, than that it be at
liberty herein. Unfree Grace were to every man's understanding a plain
contradiction. Neither can any inconvenient or ill Consequence follow upon its
being apprehended most sovereignly free. Or any thing that is not most suitable
to God, and to us. It naturally follows that He be not neglected, that He be
supplicated, and sought unto, that we absolutely, and with great reverence, and
hope, surrender, resign, and commit our selves to Him. Which how majestic,
august, great, and God-like is it, on his part! how correspondent to his very
Nature! Whereupon we are told, (Psalm 147. 11.) The Lord takes pleasure in
them that fear him; in those that hope in his mercy. And how suitable is it to
the condition of wretched and impotent creatures that are perishing, and cannot
save themselves! And to such one would think no subject should be more
acceptable than this of the saving Grace of God: Nor therefore a Discourse upon
it unacceptable.

Especially from such an Author, who tho his great Humility, and remoteness
from all Ostentation of himself, did as much vail him, as was possible to him;
yet his singular Worth could not be hid, and indeed the less, by how much the
more he endeavored it. His clear and comprehensive Mind, his excellent
Learning, his reasoning argumentative Skill, his solid, most discerning
Judgment, his indefatigable Industry, his large Knowledge, and great Moderation
in the matters of our unhappy Ecclesiastical differences, his calm
dispassionate Temper, his pleasant and most amiable Conversation did carry so
great a luster with them, as that, notwithstanding his most beloved
Retiredness, they could not, in his Circumstances, but make him be much known,
and much esteemed, and loved by all that had the happiness to know him; and
make the loss of him be much lamented. But he was by the things that made his
continuance so desirable in this World, the fitter for a better, and more
suitable World. He lived here as one that was more akin to that other World
than this; and who had no other business here, but to help in making this
better. From such an hand one may reasonably expect a Treatise very highly
valuable upon such a Subject. Which I do with so great confidence, that, tho I
have not as yet (wanting Opportunity) thoroughly perused it, I make no doubt to
invite such to the reading of it, as apprehend the value of the Grace of God,
and their own Salvation, earnestly desiring that, as their Satisfaction herein
may be, in its completion, alike early; so it may be equally great with that,
which is with much assurance expected by

One very desirous any way to promote the common Salvation, John How.

THE CONTENTS OF THE Ensuing DISCOURSE.
THat Salvation is wholly and only from Grace, proved, Page 1, 2. Grace free in
respect of 1. Constraint, 2. Merit, 3. Motive, p. 3, 4. That Salvation is by
Grace, demonstrated from God, from Man, p. 5, 6. 1. From Man, in several
particulars, 7, 8, etc. 2. From God, demonstrated in several particulars, p.
17, etc. Use. Those condemned who will have us saved by Free Will, and not by
Free Grace, 27. The Doctrine of Free Will, displayed, in four particulars: 1.
What Grace the Patrons of Free Will do own, and count sufficient. 2. What they
ascribe to Free Will. 3. What is the Tendency of their Principles. 4. What they
Object against the Doctrine of Free Grace, p. 28. 1. What Grace by them is
counted sufficient, p. 28, etc. 2. What they ascribe to Free Will, p. 33. 3.
The Import and dangerous Tendency of the Doctrine of Free Will, in twenty
particulars, p. 39, 40, etc. 4. Objections against the Doctrine of Grace,
answered, and Prejudices removed, p. 112. Some Practical Inferences from the
Doctrine of Free Grace, p. 147.
Books written and published by the Author of this ensuing Treatise, and sold
by Tho. Farkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns at the lower end of Cheap Side,
near Mercers-Chappel.
NO Evidence for Diocesan Churches, nor any Bishops without the Choice or
Consent of the People, in the Primitive Times. Or an Answer to the Allegations
out of Antiquity for such Churches, and against Popular Elections of Bishops:
In a late Volume, Entitled, The unreasonableness of Separation: Showing that
they do not serve the Design for which they are produced.

Diocesan Churches not yet discovered in the Primitive Times. Or a Defense of
the Answer to Dr. Stillingfleets Allegations out of Antiquity for such
Churches. Against the Exceptions offered in the Preface to a late Treatise
called A Vindication of the Primitive Church.

A DISCOURSE OF Free Grace.
EPHESIANS. II. 8. By Grace ye are saved.
THE Apostle, the great Asserter of Free Grace, in the 20th Verse, compares the
Church to a Temple: And it is his design in this Epistle to show the Influence
Grace has to the raising of this Building. He undertakes to prove, that the
whole Structure of Salvation is to be attributed alone to Grace.

The Foundation was laid from Eternity by Grace in Election, Chap. 1. 4, 5. The
polishing and disposing of each particular Stone in the Building, by
Justification and Sanctification, were all acts of Grace; Chap. 1. 7. and 2. 5.
and 4. 13, 14. And it is Grace that lays on the Top-stone in Glory; Chap. 2. 6.
So that we may honor this Temple with the same Acclamations, which they used
to theirs, Zach. 4. 7. and cry Grace, grace, unto it. The sum of the whole
Discourse is propounded in the Text, By Grace ye are saved.

We will not divide what God from Eternity has joined together, Grace and
Salvation: But from them entirely taken, offer you this

Observation, Salvation is wholly and only to be attributed to Grace. We need
go no further for divine Testimony to this Truth, than these two Chapters.
Election, Chap. 1. 4, 5. Redemption, ver. 7. Vocation, ver. 16. Justification,
Chap. 2. ver. 3, 4. Sanctification, ver. 5. Glorification, ver. 6. What he
speaks of the whole here, he affirms of every part thereof in those places. The
whole and all the parcels are of Grace.

For Explication. By Salvation, understand both the Decree of God, by which the
Elect were ordained to Salvation, and the Execution of that Decree, begun here,
and consummated in glory.

That we may know what Grace means, take notice of three words, used
promiscuously in Scripture, which yet admit of some distinction; the knowledge
whereof will lead us to the distinct knowledge of this term. These are Love,
Mercy, Grace.

To Love, is velle bonum, to will the Happiness of the Object loved. It is not
in God such an affection as in us, though in effect it proves affectus unionis,
and brings God and his People together.

Mercy does velle bonum miseris. So it adds a Limitation to the Object, which
Love leaves indefinite. It is for those that are miserable.

Grace does velle bonum libere. So this limits not the Object, as the former,
but qualifies the Act. It acts freely.

So that Mercy is Love to those that are miserable. Grace is Love in him that
is unobliged. Unobliged, I say, either by Necessity, Merit, or Motive. Grace
then, in God, is nothing but free Love.

1. Free in respect of Constraint; when there is no necessity he should fix his
Love upon this Object at all, or upon this rather than another. This is
spontaneum.

2. Free in respect of Merit; when there is nothing in the Object that deserves
Love, either absolutely or comparatively, this is gratuitum.

3. Free in respect of Motive; when there is nothing in the Object to move this
Affection to pitch upon it at all, or upon it rather than another. This is
liberum, though it express it not fully.

In all these respects, the Grace of God in bestowing Salvation upon any of the
Sons of men, is free Love.

1. There Is no Necessity God should save men. He is a most free Agent, whose
liberty is inconsistent with every degree of Necessity ab extra. It was in his
choice either to have created no man, or to have condemned all men, or to have
saved those who are now condemned.

2. There is nothing in Man that can merit Salvation: for there is no good
thing in him that he can call his own. All is of Gift; and the best thing in
man bears no proportion to Salvation: but where there is Merit, there must be
both Propriety and Proportion.

3. There is nothing in Man can move God to save him. If any thing, his Misery;
but this is no Motive absolutely, because* it is wilful. Man willingly
involved himself in it, and is unwilling to be delivered from it upon the terms
propounded in the Gospel. Nor can it be a Motive comparatively, to save one man
rather than another, because all are by nature equally miserable.

So then Salvation is by Grace, because it is a gift of free Love to such in
whom there* can be nothing to enforce it, nothing to deserve it, nor any thing
to move him to bestow it.

The Demonstrations are drawn from God, from Man.

From Man. The Impotency, Deformity, Enmity of man against God, makes it
evident, that Salvation must be wholly, only from Grace.

1. Impotency. What a poor despicable creature is Man! the best of men! What a
wonder the great God should think of saving him! His rise was from the Earth.
He is but at best Dust and Ashes, a poor piece of Clay. He dwells in houses of
Clay. His Foundation is in the dust, and is crushed by the Moth, Job 4. 19. A
stately thing sure which the very Moth can crush, and crumble into his first
principle, Dust.

The most potent victorious King, that ever Israel had, puts a Worm amongst his
titles, Ps. 22. 6. I am a Worm. The greatest man in the East derives his
Pedigree no higher; I have said to corruption, thou art my Father, and to the
Worm thou art my Mother and my Sister, Job 17. 14. And if the greatest men on
earth, who best understood themselves, were no greater in their own account;
what do we think men are in Gods account? The numerous posterity of Jacob have
no greater Title, Isa. 41. 14. Fear not, worm Jacob: and if that vast
multitude, which was like the Stars of the Heavens, and the Sands on the
Seashore, which cannot be numbered, be but as one Worm in his eye; what do we
think is one Man?

But we are too high yet. Men in the account of God, compared with him, are not
so much as Worms. Absolutely, in themselves, they are more; but compared with
him not so much, Isa. 40. 22. It is he that sits upon the Circle of the
Earth, and the Inhabitants thereof are as Grass-hoppers; this is something less
than Worms; yet less in his eye, than these in ours.

But we yet go lower. Worms and Grass-hoppers, though most despicable, are yet
animate Beings; and the soul of the least Creature, in Augustins account, is
more excellent than the Body of the Sun. This is too high yet; What then are
men in Gods esteem? see ver. 15. The Nations are as the drop of a Bucket, and
are accounted as the small dust of the Balance: behold he takes up the Isles
as a very little thing. What? all the Nations of the Earth as one drop? As an
Atom? What proportion then do ye think we bear to this drop, to this Atom, who
are but as drops and Atoms in comparison of all the Nations of the Earth.

Sure now we are low enough. Our thoughts can scarce go lower. I, but stay, we
are not in Gods account thus much. A drop, an Atom is something, tho a very
little thing. But Ver. 17. All Nations before him are as nothing. Alas, where
are we then, so near the low condition of Nonentity? Yes, and lower too; for
it follows, and they are accounted to him less than nothing.

See then what Man is in Gods account, as less than that which is less than
nothing. And can you imagine any thing in this Nothing, man, that should oblige
the great God to save him? O, sure it is Grace, free Love; and such as may
astonish Heaven and Earth; that the great God, who measures the Seas in the
hollow of his Hand, who spans the Heavens, and weighs the Mountains, should
condescend to do thus much for any of these poor despicable nothings: should
contrive their Salvation from Eternity, and send his Son, the Son of his Love,
of his delight, to procure it with his Blood, and then admit them to an eternal
enjoyment of himself in Glory.

2. The Deformity of man as he is sinful. We showed before, man was Nothing,
less than nothing, in the sight of God. Now we will show, he is worse than
nothing; even a deformed nothing, or rather nothing but Deformity.

It Is true, by Creation he was a beautiful Creature, mo^lded after the Image of
the first Beauty, bearing the superscription of God. He was then as a bright
Morning Star, when he first appeared in the World. But he forthwith fell from
his primitive station, the Orb of Innocence: He fell from thence into the
Puddle of sin, into thick mire and clay, as the Psalmist. Psalm. 40. 2. And
being drenched in sin, he became more deformed and abominable in the eye of
God, than that which is most loathsome to us. The vail of Light and Holiness,
wherewith he was Beautified, being torn off the Soul, Sin besmeared it with
ugly filthiness and pollution. The divine Light and Holiness, which shined in
his Soul, is vanished; and Darkness and Deformity has seized on him, and
overspread him. Holiness was the moral Form of the Soul; but now sin gives it
morally both its being and denomination. So that, what may be said of sin in
the abstract, as that it is Deformity, Pollution, Filthiness, may be said of
man in the concrete, he is deformed, filthy, polluted. We have cause to
complain of this woeful change, in the words, of the Prophet, with a little
variation, Isa. 3. 24. Instead of a sweet smell, there is a stink, instead of
well-set hair baldness, and Deformity instead of Beauty.

Sin has left neither (...) nor (...) in the Souls of sinners, neither
Proportion nor good Complexion. The Fall put all out of joint, and left the
Soul blind, lame, crooked, diseased, nay dead in sins, etc. These are the
familiar Epithets which Scripture gives our sinful state.

The Visage of the Soul is loathsomly bespotted. Nor has Sin brought upon it
simple Deformity alone; but, which is worse, Uncleanness, such as is compared
to that of a removed Woman, Ezekiel. 36. 17. Nay the best thing that is in it, or
proceeds from it, is but as a menstruous rag, Isa. 54.

I, but tho this be noisome and unpleasing, yet there is no danger, no Infection
in it. O but sin is a contagious Pollution, it is like a Plague-fore in the
heart, an infectious Leprosy; it will diffuse its malignity like the poison of
Asps.

I, but if a man be visited with the Plague or Leprosy, he seems rather an
object of compassion, than detestation; rather to be pitied than loathed. Go
yet one step further.

Sin is not only contagious, but a loathsome noisome Filthiness. The Holy Ghost
compares it to the stench of an open Sepulcher, to the Vomit of a Dog, to the
corrupted matter of a putrified Ulcer. Such is the temper of a Soul by sin.

I Will go no further. It may be the hearing of these is offensive; how much more
to see, smell, or touch them. Yet a sinful man is more ugly in the Eye, more
offensive to the Nostrils, more loathsome to the Lord, than any of these can be
to the quickest or most delicate of our Senses.

Alas, wretched Man! how justly may thou or I speak, what Mephibosheth uses
in complement to David, 2 Samuel 9. 8. What is thy servant, that thou should
look on such a dead Dog as I am?

Can any Soul expect, that such a Monster as this should be the Object of any
ones Love, much less of Gods? How hopeless may man's Salvation seem, if we look
on him in this state! What! is the eternal Love of God, the precious Blood of
Christ, for such a Wretch as this! Is there any thing in him, in us, to merit,
to move Love? Who would not rather think, every son of Adam should with
indignation be kicked out of the presence of so holy a God? Sure if there be any
hopes, it must be from Grace, free Love, and such as could no where be
entertained but in the breast of infinite Goodness.

3. The Enmity of sinners against God, this makes it evident beyond all
exception. The Impotency and Deformity of man, in the state of sin, shows there
is nothing lovely in him; but if there were not, yet if he had any love for
God, this love, without any other consideration, might be some inducement to
move the Lord to love him; and so his love might seem less free, as having some
motive from without.

But the case is otherwise. As there is nothing Lovely in him, so neither is
there any Love to God; nay there is a high degree of Hatred and Enmity.

The Wisdom of the Flesh, the very best thing in man, is Enmity to God, Romans 8.
7. And this Enmity is manifested in contradicting the Will of God, and running
cross to his Commands: for if this be our love to God, as the Apostle says,
that we keep his Commands, 1 John 5. 3. then this is Hatred of God, that we
will not keep them.

And this Disobedience of a Sinner proceeds from his Hatred of the God that
commands, and not only of that which is commanded, yea rather from that than
this. For what Sinner is there, who does not believe, that what the Law commnds
is Just in it self and good for us?

So that the Enmity reaches God himself. Who is the Lord, says the sinner in
his heart, that I should obey him?

Further, Sinners revolt from God, and conspire with his greatest Enemy, join
in confederacy with Satan. They, (as those in Isa. 28. 15.) have made a
Covenant with Hell; and with Death are they at agreement. They give up their
members as Weapons of Unrighteousness, to fight against God, Romans 6. 19. It is
the condition of all, by nature. Every Sinner, before the Lord conquer him by
his Grace, is at open enmity with God, and does in effect bid defiance to the
Almighty. The acts of his life are acts of Hostility against God. Nor is it a
defensive war only, that would be more excuseable; but the design is, not to
secure himself only, but to put down God, and divest him of his Sovereignty.
This is the voice of their Hearts and Lives, We will not have this God to rule
over us. Sin, where it reigns, does as much as is in its power to depose the
Sovereign Lord of the World. It denies in effect that he is God: For that which
denies his essential Perfections and Attributes, does deny him to be God. He
that gives up himself to sin, denies in a manner all his divine Excellencies,
his Goodness, Wisdom, Power, Justice, Mercy, Immensity, Psalm. 50. 21. He would
not go on in sin, if he did not say in his heart that he is not the Chief Good;
because sin deprives him of this Good, cuts him off from the Enjoyment of it:
or else he believes not that it will deprive him of the chief Good, and so
denies his Truth, who has affirmed and declared it; and not believing him
herein makes him a Liar.

He durst not sin, but that he thinks God is not present to see him; and if so,
he denies his Immensity. Or if he see him, he thinks he cannot punish him; and
so denies his Power. Or if he be able, yet he thinks he will not punish him;
and so denies his Justice. He would not turn aside to other ways than he
prescribes, but that he thinks he either cannot direct him in the best way, and
so denies his Wisdom; or that he will not direct him to the best, and so denies
his Mercy. And thus much we might show of the other Divine Perfections, how it
tends to deface them all.

Lo here the horrid Enmity of Sin and Sinners against God. They deny he is God;
call him, constructively and in effect, a finite, a weak, a foolish, a false,
an unjust and unmercifull thing.

It Is true, Sinners cannot do what they say and wish in their hearts. They have
not Power to undeifie God, or to deprive him of his Divine Perfections; but
this does not lessen nor excuse their Enmity against him: For it is true in
evil, as well as in good, Where there is a willing mind, it is accounted as if
it were done.

O the horrid nature of Sin! Be astonished, O Heavens, and be ye horribly
afraid at this Prodigious Enmity, which is in the Hearts of Sinners against
God. Why is thy wrath restrained? O Lord; Why does not thy Indignation break
forth, and destroy all Sinners from off the face of the Earth? Nay, why was not
Heaven and Earth annihilated at the first appearance of such horrid Treason, of
such desperate Enmity?

But we have not yet discovered the height of this Enmity. What is the reason,
that a Sinner should thus set himself against God? It may be, he despairs of
Salvation, while the Almighty rules; and therefore the desire of his own
Happiness may be the cause of this opposition; and so it will not be pure
Enmity, but some Principle of self-love, that may make him so desperate.

It is no such matter; it is not Salvation that he cares for. He sets himself
against God; not out of any respect to secure his own well-being. For whom
would he advance into the place of God? It Is the great enemy of his Salvation,
Satan, 2 Cor. 4. 4. It Is he, who by the consent of Sinners is the God of this
world; it is he they would have to rule in and over them, Ephesians. 2. 2. They are
Children of obedience to him, but of disobedience to God, and will be so, though
they perish for it.

Here then is the height of the Sinners Enmity against God. They had rather
perish Eternally under the Sovereignty of Satan, than be happy in subjection to
the Scepter of God. Nay, sinners would persist in the height of this Enmity,
and therefore reject all motions of Reconciliation, though the Lord condescend to
beseech them, with all moving arguments, to be reconciled, 2 Cor. 5. 20. They
despise Salvation, and the means that tend to it. They manifested it, by
crucifying the Lord of Life, when he came on purpose into the world to bring
Salvation. Come, say they, this is the Heir, Mat. 21. 38. We cannot reach the
Father, he is too far above us; but we have a fair occasion to show how well we
wish him. This is the Heir, here is his Son, his only Son, the Son of his Love
and Delight, come let us kill him: and so they did; and so would other Sinners
do, if they were in the same circumstances with those that did it. And there
are those, who Crucify again the Lord of Life. And what do we less in
venturing upon ways of sin? since this is it which first crucified him. This is
the desperate disposition of all Sinners in the state of nature. We had so
continued to Eternity, if the power of Grace had not broke in upon us, and
drawn us to terms of Reconciliation.

And this being our State and temper naturally, can you think there was any
thing in us, that could have moved the Lord to save us? What? can Hatred, such
desperate Enmity, such prodigious Malice against the Lord, move him to love us?
O, if free Grace had not moved it self, we had persisted in our opposition
against the Lord; and had been eternally miserable, as those deserve to be, who
are found fighters against God, and open Enemies to him.

There are other Demonstrations, that Salvation is of Grace only, which may be
drawn from God himself; the consideration of his Allsufficiency, Sovereignty.

(1.) The Allsufficiency and independency of God. He stood in no need at all of
man, either for Happiness or Glory, the least degree of either. He had been
eternally as happy, as glorious, if man had never been, or been ever miserable.

1. In respect of Happiness. He was perfectly, infinitely happy without us. He
did not expect, he could not have the least Degree of it from us. All degrees,
all Fullness of it was in himself, before we had a being. The Divine
Understanding was infinitely pleased and satisfied in the Contemplation of
himself, the first Truth. The divine Will took infinite contentment and
complacency in the enjoyment of himself, the chief Good. The Object here was
infinite and glorious Excellencies; and the Acts were infinitely perfect; and
the Issue thereof must needs be infinite Happiness, both formal and objective.
Christ, the Eternal Wisdom of the Father, thus expresses it, Prove. 8* 22. 30.
Here are the mutual delights of the Father and the Son; those enjoyments, which
hold forth the highest degree of Happiness, before any creature had being. The
Son was the Fathers Delights (...) daily, every moment, without the least
intermission; and rejoiced, the word is (...) was laughing before his face.
Those happy souls, who are already admitted into the glorious Presence, may
guess, tho not comprehend, what happiness there is in those delights: we are in
the dark, and can neither express nor conceive how much it is; but tho we
cannot conceive how great that Happiness is, we may easily apprehend, that it
cannot be made greater by any creature.

Besides, Happiness must arise from Union with some good, or the enjoyment of
it. Now all Goodness in Perfection, is included in the divine Being; and
whatever good is in the creature, it is but an imperfect participation of that
Primitive Goodness, or rather but a dim resemblance of it. And shall we think
that there can be any addition to his Happiness from that which is so
imperfectly without him, when all Excellencies are perfectly, eminently,
infinitely in himself? Shall the Ocean of Blessedness seek an increase from
that which is less than a Drop? Or the Sun of Glory borrow luster from a
Glowworm, a dim Spark? Or the Universe of all Happiness greaten it self by a
Point, a Mote? No, the Lord was Blessed for ever, before man was in being; and
he had been Blessed for ever, if man had never been. And if nothing had moved
the Lord to save him, but a design to add to his own Happiness, none of the
Children of men had ever known Salvation.

2. In respect of Glory. The Lord does not depend upon man more for Glory, than
Happiness. He had been as Glorious, if we had continued in the State of
Nonentity, or if we had Perished in our Sin, and sunk into Misery. It Is true,
we say the Lord glorifies his Mercy in our Salvation; but this is such a Glory
as he might have wanted, and yet have been no less Glorious. To clear this a
little. The Glory of God is Essential or Relative. Gods Essential Glory is
those infinitely glorious Perfections and Excellencies which meet in the Divine
Essence. This is that Glory, which no mortal eye ever saw, or can see. When
Moses desired to see his Glory, the Lord says to him, Thou can not see my
face and live, Exodus 33. 18, 20. The ^ace is the Seat of Beauty, where all the
lines of Perfection do concenter, where all the rays of Glory are united. These
we can no more behold in his face, than a lump of Snow can sustain the united
vigor of the Sunbeams at noon day.

When the Queen of Sheba had seen the Glory of Solomon, it is said there was no
spirit in her, 1 King. 10. 5. The Soul, or Spirit in her (as in others) has a
strong inclination to unite with that which it apprehends to be most good; and
beholding something transcendently better without, than in the Body, seemed
willing for that time to leave the Body, that it might enjoy and close with
what was more excellent. If the Lord should unvail himself, and let us have a
clear sight of his glorious Excellencies, as they shine in himself; the Soul
would leave the Body, the Union between them would be dissolved; the spirit
would be wrapped away with such a sight, and leave the Body dead. This may be the
reason of what the Lord said to Moses; No man can see my face, i. e. my
Essential Glory, and live.

Further, the Essential Glory of God is God himself, and therefore both
Infinite and Eternal. It is Infinite as he is, and to that which is Infinite
nothing can be added, it can no way be greater than it is already. It is
Eternal too, and so before any thing was created, and consequently no way
dependant on the Creatures. By which it is manifest, that essential Glory is
not at all increased by working man's Salvation

For Relative Glory, that indeed depends on the Creatures. But the Lord had
been as glorious in himself, if this Glory had never been, as will appear from
the Nature of it. The essential Attributes of God are his divine Perfections,
absolutely existing, without respect or relation to the Creatures. Relative
Attributes are those essential Perfections, as manifested to the Creatures, or
rather the Manifestation of them. If then Essential Glory be the luster of
those essential Attributes, as shining in the divine Essence, which we showed
before, it must follow, that Relative Glory is that which results from the
Manifestation of those Perfections to the Creatures. For example, Relative
Mercy is the Manifestation of essential Goodness in the Salvation of the Elect;
and Relative Justice is the Manifestation of essential Righteousness or Justice
in the Condemnation of the Reprobate.

Now God had been as glorious in himself, if he had never made known his Mercy
or Justice to the World, if there had been no World, no Creatures made, to
manifest these to, if there had been no Men or Angels to take notice of them.
For, is the Sun made more splendid or beautiful by our beholding of it? No, it
would be as glorious, if no Eye ever saw it. Did the Israelites eating Manna
add any sweetness to that pleasant food? no sure, it had been as sweet in it
self, if no Palate had ever tasted it. Even so the Lord had been as powerful,
if he had never created the World; no less merciful in himself, if he had never
saved any, if there had been none to save; no less righteous, if there had been
none to condemn, if he had never condemned any.

But because this may seem strange, and some may stick at it, let me add a
Reason for it. The Manifestation of his Attributes to the World is a free Act,
a transient Act. It is a certain rule in Divinity, Quicquid Deus operatur ad
extra libere fit; every Act of God terminated on the Creatures, is a free Act.
A free Act is that which may be done or not done. So that it was in the choice
of the Divine Will (before it had determined it self) to manifest Mercy, or not
to show it; to save man, or not to save him, to make him, or not. But if
Salvation did add any thing to the Glory* of God, our Salvation had been a
necessary, and not a free Act; because without it the Lord had wanted some
degree of Glory, and so had not been most glorious, most perfectly so, and
consequently not himself.

Hence it is evident, that the Lord did not stand in need of our Salvation, to
make him more glorious any way. He was infinitely glorious from Eternity; but
these Manifestations of himself are in time, therefore can add nothing to his
Glory, which was infinite before all time. The reason why he revealed his Mercy
in saving man, was not because this was needful to make himself more glorious.
We must, as Christ showed us, find the reason of it in his (...), the good
pleasure of his Will, Mat. 11. 25, 26. (...); this was the reason of it, Thy
good pleasure. And to this the Apostle leads us, Ephesians. 1. 5, 9.

It Is true also, we are said to glorify God by our Services, by the Acts and
Exercises of Holiness, Psalm. 50. 23. and Joh. 15. 8. But how is this to be
understood? even as he is said to glorify him self, when he manifests to us
that he is glorious. So we are said to glorify him, when we acknowledge that
he is Glorious, when we give a testimony to his glorious Perfections by word or
deed. But neither his Manifestation, nor our Acknowledgment, does add to his
Glory. He shows it, we take notice of it, but neither of these imports any
addition to it. Hence Psalm. 16. 2. My goodness extends not to thee. If our
Apprehensions of God were as high as their Object; if our Affection to him were
more than that of the Angels; if all our Prayers and Praises were Raptures, and
all our Performances served up to the highest degree of Perfection that a
created being is capable of: yet were we in this respect unprofitable Servants;
the Lord upon this account would have no advantage by us: for as Eliphaz says
to Job, Chapter 22. 2, 3. Can a man be profitable unto God, as he that is wise may
be profitable unto himself? Is it any pleasure to the Almighty, that thou art
righteous? etc. No, the Lord may glorify us, but he gains no glory by us, that
is any advantage to him. He stands in no need of us to glorify him; he had
been as glorious if we had perished, or if we had been nothing. Therefore what
Motive can there be in or from us, to oblige him to save us?

(2.) The Soveraignity and Dominion of God over his Creatures. As in respect of
his Alsufficiency, he stands in no need of us; so in respect of his Sovereignty
he ows us nothing; he is no way engaged to us, or obliged by us: but may do
what he will with us, either to save or not to save us. So it stands with us
clearly, if we consider his Dominion over us, in antecedence to his Purpose and
Promise.

1. For he might have been satisfied in the sole enjoyment of his blessed self,
and never have vouchsafed a Being, much less Salvation and Glory, to any
Creature.

2. Or if he would manifest himself to the Creatures, he might have formed more
excellent Creatures, and more fit to be the Objects of his great and
transcendent Love: for he did not act as a natural Agent ad ultimum sui posse,
to the utmost of all his Power.

3. Or if the Divine Will would determine it self to give a Being to those very
Creatures that are now existent; yet there was no necessity that he should save
any of them. He might have annihilated them, without any show of
Unrighteousnes: For who can say unto the King of Kings, What do thou? Dan. 4.
35. might he not do with his own what he will?

4. Or if he would manifest his Love and Goodness in the Salvation of any that
he had Created; yet who would not think all the Angels (those sometimes
glorious Creatures) more capable of it, than any of the Children of men?

5. Or if unworthy Man must be the Subject of it; yet why so many men? He might
have made fewer Vessels of Mercy, than are now formed by it, to be for eve^
filled with it.

6. Or if he would pitch upon so many* yet why upon th^se who are now set apar^
for Salvation, rather than those who are past by? Why are these chosen, and the
other left? Why are these Vessels of Honor rather than the rest, when all were
of the same Clay, formed by the sam^ hand? Romans 9. 25. There Is no Reason ca^ be
given, but his good pleasure, his mee^ Grace. And, O what beams of this
glorious Grace do break forth from this Consideration! What! must Men be chose^
from all other Creatures to be the Object^ of Gods peculiar Love? Will the Lord
vouchsafe the eternal Enjoyment of Himself to none but Men alone of all lapsed
Creatures? Lord! what is Man that thou art mindful of him, or the Son of Man
that thou visitest him!

And how exceedingly does this endear Free Grace, that any of us should be
separated from the rest of perishing Sinners; that we should be Vessels of
Mercy, when others are Vessels of Wrath! Lord, what are we, or what are our
Fathers? Why have thou revealed thy self to us, and not to the World? Even so,
Lord, because it pleased thee? No other Reason can be assigned, but mere Grace.
There needs no more, to demonstrate that Salvation is to be ascribed to Grace
only.

1 Use. This condemns their Doctrine, who will have us saved rather by
Free Will, than by Grace; which will have the Text inverted, and read thus: By
Free Will are ye saved, not by Grace, but of your selves.

This has too many Patrons, and those of greatest Name and Ability amongst the
Opposers of Truth. It Is the capital Error of the Remonstrants, the Foundation
of their other Opinions that concern Grace, and with which they all stand or
fall. The Socinians, and the worst among the Papists, the Jesuits, join with
them, all following Pelagius, condemned by the ancient Church as the Enemy of
the Grace of Christ.

That we may the better understand them, and what in them is to be condemned
and avoided, let us see, (1.) What Grace they own and count sufficient: for
something they must own under this notion, who will not plainly renounce the
Gospel. (2.) What they ascribe to Freewill. (3.) What is the Tendency of their
Principles. (4.) What they object against the Doctrine of Free Grace.

I. For the first. They count no Grace necessary to bring a Sinner into a
saving State, and continue him in it; but that which they call Moral Grace or
Swasion. This consists in a presenting of the Object to the Will, with Motives
and Arguments to embrace it. Or thus, in a Proposal of our Duty, with rational
Considerations to move him to yield to it, leaving us to do as we please. For
Example, To turn from sin to God, and to Believe in Christ, are Duties
propounded in the Gospel; the advantage of yielding hereto, and the danger of
refusing, is there declared; and so it is left to the Sinners choice, whether
he will comply or no.

This is all the Grace which the Lord affords to save us. It amounts to no more
than a moral Excitement, or a rational Proposal. This Proposal is made with
some light, tending to excite Affection. If it were altogether in the dark, it
would be in effect no Proposal. Whether this Light be natural, or supernatural,
they are not agreed. Some, and those most followed, would have the Light of
natural Reason sufficient. Others would rather have it counted a Light from the
Spirit. But all agree, that it is no special Illumination, but a common Light,
vouchsafed to all under the Gospel; and so such as those have, who live and dye
in the gross Darkness of Ignorance and Wickedness, they must not by their
Principles deny to Heathens. And those, who will have it called the Light of
the Spirit, count it as weak and powerless as natural Light, i. e. of no more
power and efficacy to determine or sway the Will, than the Light of Reason; no,
nor so much as some Dictates of Reason are commonly thought to have. The
difference is so little (if there be any) as to the thing it self, that those
who call it the Light of the Spirit, seem but to give it that Name and Title,
to decline the Odium of ascribing nothing at all to the Spirit of Grace.
However a common proposal, with such light, made in the Gospel unto Sinners, is
all the Grace which they count needful.

1. They deny eternal Grace, i. e. all Free Mercy in God to any particular
persons from Eternity. According to them, he had no Mercy, no purpose of it for
any, but what he was obliged to by the foresight of the good use of Free Will.
This is no Free Mercy, and so no Grace.

2. They deny all habitual Grace, which is not of our selves. They will have no
such thing wrought in us by the Spirit of Holiness. All gracious Qualities or
Principles, planted in the Heart by the Spirit, they reject under the notion of
infused habits.

3. They deny actual Grace, i. e. any operation of the Spirit to determine the
Will. All gracious influences whatever that will or can certainly incline it to
act, or incline it any more to act than not to act. Grace, with them, only
proposes to the Will, and leaves the determination to it self; it must be left
indifferent to act, or not to act, as it likes.

No other Grace, than this of proposing; none, habitual or actual, was designed
for any Person in the eternal Counsel of God, or purchased for any by the Blood
of Christ, or administered to any by the Spirit of Grace. It is enough that it
be propounded to the Will to turn to God, and Arguments offered to that
purpose, such as the Gospel contains, and are managed in the Ministry of it. So
that all the Grace, which they count necessary, is no special, sufficient Grace.

1. It is no special, but only common Grace, afforded equally to those that are
damned, as to any that are saved. No other Grace, than that which suffers the
far greatest part of those who partake of it to perish eternally. That Grace,
wherewith any man may be damned, as soon as saved. If any be saved in their
way, it is without special Grace. It is ten to one, for any Grace the Lord
vouchsafes to Sinners, they will never be saved.

2. It is not sufficient Grace, unless Nature has Power enough for Saving Acts,
without the least access of Strength from Grace: for their Grace gives not the
least degree of Strength to the Will; but only rouses its native Power: as
Dalilahs voice gave Sampson no more strength, when she said, The Philistines are
upon thee, but only excited him to use the strength he had* When they will have
this swasive Grace to be sufficient, they commend not Grace at all, but
magnify the Power of Nature, as being great indeed, when it needs so little
help for Acts of the highest quality and importance. If any be saved in their
way, it must be without any Grace sufficient to Salvation.

3. It is not effectual Grace. This is plain by the former. There can be no
pretense that that will be effectual which is not sufficient. But suppose it
were sufficient, (as they without ground would have it accounted) yet it is not
of it self effectual. The Efficacy of it, by their Doctrine, is not from its
own Nature and Virtue, nor from the Spirit of Grace, but from the Will of Man.
If he will, it is efficacious; if he will not, it is of no Effect. So that, if
it should prove Effectual to save any; yet that is to be ascribed to Free Will,
and not to Grace; to that which makes it Effectual, when otherwise it would be
of no effect.

In short, it is not saving Grace, tak^ it in any of their Senses. As Saving
Grace is peculiar to the saved, so it is far from being saving. In this respect
it is no more saving than damning, if so much, since the most incomparably that
have it are damned.

Or if we take saving Grace for that which is sufficient for Salvation, it is
not saving, unless there be a Power in man's degenerate Nature to save it self;
Power enough in the worst for saving acts, such as needs nothing but exciting.

Or if we take it for that which is Effectual to Salvation, it has no such
Efficacy from it self or from God; it is only from the Will of man that it is
effectual to Salvation, if ever it prove so. So that in their way, either there
is no Grace at all that is saving, or none that is saving at a better rate than
the Will of man can make it so, when it has no saving virtue of it self, or
from God.

There needs no other Arguments against this Doctrine, no Artifice to engage us
against it, but a true and plain discovery of it. If we be saved by Grace, this
Doctrine tends to lead us out of the way of Salvation.

II. Let us see what they ascribe to Free Will. And that in general is a Power
to be willing or unwilling, as to any Motion that is made, any Object that is
offered to it. It has a Power of it self, and by its own natural Constitution,
either to choose or refuse, either to embrace or reject whatever Object is
propounded, however it be propounded. The Will, they say, is never determined
ad unum, never so set upon one thing good or bad, but that by rational
inducement, i. e. by Motives and Arguments, it may be led to the contrary; and
never so moved by such inducements, but that it may reject the motion. Never so
set upon Sin, but that by swasive Proposals it may be moved to leave, not only
the Acts, but the State of Sin: nor ever so moved by that, or any thing else,
but that it may repel the motion, and quite stifle it.

We may view it more distinctly in these two branches.

(1.) A Power to choose whatever good is offered. They will have it able of it
self to embrace any good Object of what Nature soever; not only natural or
moral but what is supernatural, of the highest Nature and Quality; and the
embracing of it saving, such as will pass a man into a saving State. It has a
Power to repent of sin, to believe in Christ, to turn to God, to love, fear and
delight in him. Not only a capacity, but an active Power for these, etc. Only
these things must be propounded to it with some clearness and earnestness, as
the Gospel propounds them to all under its Ministry. And that such a Proposal
is required signifies no inability in the Will it self for these great things:
for the most sufficient Faculty imaginable cannot act upon an object that it
discovers not; and the Faculty of greatest Power may, in some cases, need
exciting. And so it is requisite the will have Light to discover its Object,
and some Arguments to commend it, at least when the Soul is under the
disadvantage of rooted prejudices, or habitual and inveterate wickedness.

However, all the help they think needful for the Will, is so far from denying
its Power and Sufficiency for those great concerns of Salvation; that it
supposes the Will to have it in and of it self, if saving things be but
represented to it as necessary and worthy of its choice and embraces.

(2.) A Power to refuse any Object, however it be offered, with what advantage
soever it be propounded by the Spirit of God, or the Ministry of man. For the
Liberty, they make essential to the Will, consists, they say, in an
indifferency, either to choose or refuse, either to act or not to act. And it
must be left indifferent in all cases; so that nothing in Heaven or Earth can
determine it, but it self. God himself they say cannot without fail determine
it to the choice of this or the other without destroying it. Voluntas hominis
ad actus suos motione irresistibili determinari non potest ne ab ipso Deo
quidem. (Syn. Dor. 212.) He cannot Vid. Ames rescript. p. 129.
incline the will irresistably, he cannot by any Divine Motion of unwilling
make it willing. Whatever Power he does or can put forth for this purpose, the
Will may and can resist it and render it of no effect. If the Lord do desire
and intend to Convert a Sinner, and do what can be done by the Power of his
Grace in order thereto; yet the Will may hinder him. Take it in their own
words, A man may hinder his own regeneration, when God has a mind to have him
regenerated, and it is his will to regenerate him, Coll. Hag. 282. Corvinus
(the most subtle and cautious of their writers) says expressly, Positis omnibus
ad agendum Vid. Hickm. p. 33.
requisitis, etc. when all the Operations of Grace in order to Conversion are
past upon the Will; yet it is still in the free power of the Will to convert or
not to convert it self. So that, when God has done his utmost to bring a Sinner
into a saving State; yet it is in the power of the Will to defeat and hinder
him. In plain terms, when God has done what he can, the Will may do what it
list. They will have the Will to be so free, as that it can be under no
necessity of any sort, not only such as is natural, or compulsive, or absolute,
which is granted; but such as is only respective* and that in reference to God
himself. So that ^f it be needful in respect of the Decree and Purpose of God,
or in respect of his Will and Desire, or in respect of his Word and Engagement,
or in respect of his Design and Intention, that the Will should move this way
and not the other; yet it may incline and determine it self the other way; and
so may act counter to God in ^hese his Concerns, defeat him in them ^ll, and
carry it against him. The Pur^ose, the Promise, the Providence, the Grace of
God, the Undertaking of Christ, ^he Operations of the Spirit, may be fru^rated
unavoidably by man's Will. So great a Power they give it. The Lord shall not
have his Will, nor make good his Word, nor make his Grace prevalent, nor
accomplish his greatest Designs, if man's Will comply not; and it is never under
any necessity to comply, but may always resist, when the Lord has done what he
can to bring it to a compliance. This is the true Visage of their Doctrine, if
you will see it plain and naked. There needs no ill Language to render it ugly.

But as to our present Purpose. The first Branch of this Power, ascribed to the
Will* makes the Grace, which we stand in most need of, to be needless. For if
the Will can embrace any Object in order to Salvation, upon a common proposal;
there needs no Strength from Grace to enable it.

The other Branch makes all the Grace they own, to be fruitless, of no effect,
^ mere Cipher, which stands for nothing does, can do nothing but at the
descretion of Free Will. For the Will, when the Object is propounded, with what
advantage soever the Proposal be made, can always resist and reject it utterly.
So that the Grace of God comes to nothing, at the mere humor of man's Free Will.

By the former Branch of the Will's sufficiency, the Power, in matters of
Salvation, is from Free Will, and not from Grace: for their Grace gives it no
Power at all, but supposes it there already.

By the latter Branch, the Act, in the concerns of Salvation, is from the Will,
not from Grace: For Grace leaves the Will indifferent to act or not to act; and
therefore its acting is no more from Grace than its not acting; its accepting
of Christ no more from Grace than its rejecting him.

Now if both the Power and the Act, in the concerns of Salvation, be from
Free Will, and not from Grace; then it is by Free Will, not by Grace, that we
are saved.

III. Let us view the Import and dangerous Tendency of this Doctrine; and then
you will see sufficient Reason to reject it. Every particular will be an
Argument against it; and the particulars are very many.

(1.) They make no Grace needful, but what was acknowledged by those Persons
who were condemned by the Ancient Church as Enemies of the Grace of Christ.
Pelagius, the Patriarch of the Asserters of Free Will, to the prejudice of
Divine Grace, acknowledged not only a Natural, but a Doctrinal Grace, viz. the
Word of God discovering and propounding that which is good, and persuading
Sinners to embrace it; suadet omne quod bonum est, it persuades to all that is
good. Here Is the swasive Grace of his Modern followers. Nay, he went further,
and not only required an external Proposal of the Object, in the Ministry of
the Word; but acknowledged an inward Operation of the Spirit, for inlightning
the Mind, and exciting the Affections; Nos ineffabili dono gratiae coelestis
illuminat, He inlightens us with the unspeakable Gift of his heavenly Grace;
futurae gloriae magnitudine and praemiorum policitatione accendit: He inflames
us with Promise of Rewards and the greatness of the future Glory, and excites
the stupid Will, by the Revelation of Wisdom, to Desires after God. Some of his
late followers think it not fit to come short of him in this, but seem to
require some act of the Spirit to inlighten the Mind, and to stir up the
Affections. But others of them, most applauded and followed; deny all Necessity
of any immediate Illumination by the Spirit; and tell us, That every one who
has the use of Reason, may, without any special inward Light, very easily
apprehend whatever in Scripture is necessary to be known or believed. Episcop.
And that no immediate Operation of the Spirit De Perspicuit. Script. these. 1.
and 3.
upon the Mind or Will, is needful for any one that he may Believe. Id. in Syn.
Dor. p. 200. So that no Grace is needful with these men, but only an external
Proposal by the Word: for what the Word propounds may, without the Light of the
Spirit, be sufficiently understood and offered to the Will: and the Will, they
say, has unquestionably power to embrace whatever is so offered by the
Understanding. If any thing could hinder the Will from embracing the Good
proposed, it must be some Corruption in man's Soul, some strong Prejudices or
vicious Habits determining the Will unavoidably to that which is evil: but no
such thing can be admitted, as they state the Wills liberty. For, as no power
of Grace, no Operation of the Spirit can determine the Will irresistibly to
that which is good, but when it has done its utmost, the Will remains free to
the contrary evil: so no power of Corruption can determine the Will to any evil,
but it will remain free to choose the contrary good propounded to it.

The Will of fallen Man, notwithstanding any supposed Corruption in the Soul
native or acquired, still retains its primitive Power entire; only it is under
some Impediment as to the Exercise of it, there is one thing wanting which
hinders it from acting, it cannot act without an Object. And this signifies no
defect or weakness in the Will: for the most perfect Faculty of Man or Angel in
Heaven must have a^ Object that it may act. Now the Object is offered in the
Gospel, and the Proposal o^ the Object by the Gospel, with the Motives and
Arguments there contained, i^ all the Grace, all the supernatural Ai^ and
divine Assistances, which they thin^ requisite to help the Will, to believe and
turn to God. This is to ascribe less t^ Grace than the old Pelagians did, who
ye^ were branded by the Church as the capital Enemies of supernatural Grace,
an^ upon that account scarce thought worth^ to be called Christians.

(2.) By their Doctrine, Grace is give^ according to Merit. This was the most
leprous part of Pelagianism, which the ancient Church had in ^ greatest
detestation and for which Pelagius himself had been Anathematized, branded with
the highest Censure, by a Synod in Palaestin, but that he pretended to renounce
it.

Yet Merit, in the sense of that Age, was a far less thing, and much more
tolerable than the Papists merit of Condignity. It was not only a good work, of
such value and worth in it self, as that a Reward should be due to it in
Justice; but Merit, as they understood it, was any good act which a man did of
himself, upon the account of which Grace was vouchsafed. This Bellarmin himself
acknowledges, however he was concerned to deny it. The Fathers (says he)
understood Grace to be given according to Merit, when any thing is done by our
own strength, in respect whereof De Great. and libr. arbit. l. 6. c. 5.
Grace is given, although it be no Merit of Condignity.

And in this sense of Merit, the modern Asserters of Free Will would have all
Grace given, according to Merit. How universal soever they make Grace to be,
yet no man shall have it unless he merit it. That Grace may be Universal, they
will have it communicated both to those that are without the Gospel, and to
those that enjoy it. For those who have not the Gospel, he is ready to give all
of them the Grace of the Gospel, if they will use the Light of Nature well; and
he does give it actually to those, who by the good use of their Free Will, make
such an improvement of natural Light. Here the good use of natural Light is a
good act; and upon the account of that, the Grace of the Gospel is given, i. e,
this Grace is given according to Merit, in the sense of the Fathers, who
counted it so execrable to have it given according to Merit. Those (say the
Remonstrants) whom God calls, and to whom he does vouchsafe the Grace of
Preaching, we confess, for the most part, to be such men, that their Virtues do
deserve no less. Epist. contr. Walach. p. 44.

For those who have the Gospel, God is ready to give further Grace to them, if
they would be worthy Hearers, as they may be, if they would use their Free Will
well in hearing. But there are some worthy hearers of the Gospel, and some
unworthy, says Corvinus; and sufficient Grace is not given to all promiscuously
who hear, sed iis qui digni sun^ evangelii auditores, but to those In Twiss.
387.
who are worthy hearers. Which is in effect, as though he spoke out, and said, It
is given according to Merit, which is all point blank against the Apostle, 2 Timothy 1. 9. Tit. 3. 4.

This they extend to the Fountain of all, the eternal Purpose of God. All the
Grace, which is comprised in the Election of Grace, will be ordered according
to Merit. Election of particular Persons depends upon their Faith or Works
foreseen. The Lord foresees who will believe, and because they will believe,
upon the account of this good act he does elect them; so they are elected
according to Merit. But does he not purpose from Eternity to give Faith in
time? No, by no means; for if he had decreed this, they would be under some
Necessity to believe; and such Necessity is not consistent with the Liberty of
man's Will. Therefore it must be left to their Free Will whether they shall
believe or no: and when God foresees that they shall make so good use of their
Free Will as to believe, then upon that account he elects them. In plain
English, he chooses those, whom he foresees will merit the Election of Grace by
the good use of Free Will.

Nay, all the Grace, in the great and precious Promises, and in the whole
Covenant of Grace, will be according to Merit. For they will have the
accomplishment of all suspended upon some Condition; such a condition, as is to
be performed merely by the power of Free Will, assisted by no Grace at all, but
that gentle excitement which they call Swasion, which enables not the Will to
perform the Condition, but plainly speaks it able before hand. Such a condition
performed is indeed a Cause, a moving and engaging Cause, and no less Merit,
than that which the ancient Church condemned in Pelagius. For it is a good Act
performed by our own strength, upon the account of which the Grace of the
Covenant is vouchsafed, which a Jesuit will not deny to be the Merit that is
under the Curse and Execration of Synods and Fathers twelve hundred years ago.
Their other Principles overthrow the Grace of God, and lay it prostrate; but
this quite destroys it, and makes it no Grace, if the Apostles arguing be good
Reason, Romans 11. 6.

(3.) This Doctrine (which owns no more Grace, and ascribes so much to
Free Will) makes God not to be the worke^ or real Cause of the spiritual and
saving blessings of Conversion and Regeneration, nor the Author and Giver of
Faith, Repentance, Holiness. These are rather to be ascribed to Man, than unto
God. This will appear,

1. In general. Conversion, Regeneration, Sanctification, Perseverance, and
what else of this nature is required to our Salvation, is to be attributed to a
man's self, more than the Spirit of Grace; they are the Effects and
A^chievements of Free Will, rather than of Grace.

A man Converts and quickens himself, Regenerates and begets himself, Creates
himself so far as he is a New Creature, and upholds himself when he is created.
This seems strange and uncouth (not to say absurd and horrid); but there is
plain Reason for it, such as may convince any who will yield to evident Reason.

Grace, however considered, (either in Election, or Redemption, or the Holy
Spirits Operations) does no more for the quickening and Regenerating of those
who are converted, than it does for those who are never converted; therefore it
is not Grace, but something else, that does the work. If the Lord had done no
more for the making of this World, than for making of other Worlds that were
never made, the Creation of the World could never have been ascribed to him. If
Christ had done no more to raise Lazarus from the dead, than he did to raise
others who continued dead in their Graves, he could not have been said to raise
him to Life. He that does no more toward the effecting of a thing, than when
it is not done at all, he cannot be said to do it. Now Grace does no more for
the quickening of those that are alive to God, than for those who are still
dead and will be so for ever. Therefore it is not Grace that does the work; it
must be ascribed to something else, not to the Spirit of Grace, but to a man's
self, and his own Free Will.

This is evident in the Nature, visible in the very Complexion of their Moral
Grace. This (which is all the Grace they own) consists in Swasive Proposals.
Now he that only persuades or propounds the doing of a thing, does not thereby
do it at all, but would have you to do it your selves, and supposes you can if
you will. So that this is the plain Import of their Doctrine, that men can
convert and quicken themselves, and do it if it be done. However any be said to
be born of God, yet they may beget themselves. However they be said to be the
Lords Workmanship, created of Christ Jesus unto good works, ver. 10. yet they
are their own Workmanship, and make themselves new Creatures. However the
Apostle says, ver. 1. You has he quickened, yet indeed they raise themselves
to life. And since they do it themselves, to themselves they may in all reason
ascribe it, and accordingly glory in it. The Crown is not to be cast at the
seet of him who sits on the Throne. Grace is to have neither Throne nor Crown;
that is to have the Crown which does the work; Free Will does it, and this must
wear it.

2. More particularly, it is manifest, that they make not God to be the real
cause of those saving works, or the giver of those Spiritual Blessings; because
by their Doctrine neither the Power nor the Act can be ascribed to him: For
they say he does nothing to this purpose but by virtue of Moral Grace: And it
is evident, that this, or He by this, gives neither the Power nor he Act, etc.

(1.) Swasive Grace, or the Lord by swa^ive Proposals, gives no man power to
be^ieve or turn to God; it rather supposes that he has it already before or
without this Grace. The virtue of it (of all the Grace they own) is only that
of Advice or Suasion; and no man reasonably persuades or advises another to be
able, but only to be willing to use what already he has. He that holds forth a
Light to a Man lying on the ground, and moves him with Arguments to rise and
walk, does not thereby give him Legs and Strength, but supposes he has these
already, if he would use them. He that only shows another what he has to do,
and offers reason to persuade him to do it, not taking any other course to
strengthen him for it, takes it for granted that he is aforehand able for it.
Now this is all that their Moral Grace pretends to; it shows the Sinner that it
is his Duty to turn to God, etc. and uses Arguments to move him to it, but
gives no other strength for it than what this Advice includes, which as
Persuasion or Advice does indeed give none at all, but plainly supposes it in
being* They say, a Sinner, under the Influence of this Moral Grace, is able to
Convert and Regenerate himself, to beget himself to a New Life. But if he be
able, his Ability is from Nature; and the Power of his natural Faculties was
not from Grace, seeing this their Grace is not for the giving of Ability where
it is not, but only for exciting it where it is before.

(2.) As the Power for these great Concerns of Salvation is not from God or his
Grace, so neither is the Act from him. For, 1. That which gives or works the
Act, determins the Will, or causes it to determine it self; but the Lord by this
Grace (which is all they own) brings it only to the Wills choice, and leaves it
to do as it list, and so plainly leaves the Act to it self; so that if the Soul
do actually Believe, or Repent, or turn to God, this is of it self: their Grace
leaves the Will indifferent to act or not to act, and so no more works the one
than the other, and is no more the Cause that it acts, than that it acts not.
It leaves it to the Will, either to yield or refuse; if it yield, it is not
from Grace, but the Will. Grace leaves it in the Power of the Will to resist;
if it resist not, it is from the Will, not from Grace. The Lord by his Power
works not the Will to turn to God, to love, to embrace Christ, to yield to the
Spirit; but leaves it indifferent to turn to God or against him, to love God or
to hate him, to embrace Christ or reject him, to yield to the Spirit or resist
him. It must be left indifferent as to either, Grace turns not the Scales, but
leaves the Will at an equal poise, that the Will of Man, not the Grace of God,
may have the casting weight; if Grace should weigh it down, the Liberty of the
Will, they say, would be violated, and its Nature des^oyed.

(3.) Nay, their Grace is so far from working the Will to actual Faith or
Holiness, that by their account it seems to lead a man into Sin, and leave him
in it: for it is a Sin for a man to be Indifferent whether he Believe or
Believe not, whether he accept Christ or reject him, whether he love or hate
him: But all that this Grace does to the Will, is to bring it to such an
Indifferency; and so the Grace of God with them does no other, no better Office
for a Sinner, than to bring his Soul into a wicked Posture; and in that Posture
it does and must leave the Will to it self; and there left, if the Will be no
better to it self than Grace is, or can be, it shall never come into a better
Posture.

Nay further, the Lord is so far from Determining the Will, and so from causing
the Act by making it willing; that it is impossible for him to do it. They say
(as was showed before) that the Will cannot be determined by God himself
without destroying it; they will have it an Inconsistency, and to imply a
Contradiction. And thus the Lord is so far from being the Worker or real Cause
of actual Faith, Conversion, Sanctification, that it is impossible he should be
the Cause thereof; he is so far from actually working these, that he cannot do
it.

Let me but add one Argument more. This Grace is given equally to all, and
effects no more in one than another; and therefore can be no more the Cause of
actual Conversion in those that turn to God, than in those that are never
converted; works Regeneration no more in those that are sanctified, than in the
unregenerate; i. e. works it not at all, is no Cause of it. The Lord, by virtue
of this Grace, gives actual Faith and Repentance no more to those that Believe
and Repent, than to such as persevere in Impenitency and Unbelief: gave Faith
no more to Paul than to Judas, Repentance no more to Peter than to Simon Magus;
i. e. he gives it not at all.

This is the clear consequence of their Doctrine. The Lord is not the Author
and Finisher of our Faith, or of our Repentance; nor the real Cause of
Conversion or Sanctification, and other saving Blessings; and so, not the
Author of Salvation. It is not by his Grace, but of our selves, both as to the
Power and the Act, in direct opposition to the Text and the whole strain of the
Gospel. And it is as reconcilable with Scripture and the Perfections of God,
to say he is not the Creator of the World, or the Author of any thing; as to
say he is not the Author or real Cause of those great Concerns of Salvation.

(4.) This leads them to deny Original Sin. They must of necessity make little
or nothing of the Corruption of our Nature, since they will have their Swasive
Grace to be a sufficient Relief against it; as if all the Sin in man's Nature
could be argued out of him without more ado, and all the Power of Corruption,
natural and contracted too, might be effectually subdued and crucified by
rational Advice; whereas this Moral Swasion is of it self of no Efficacy at all
for this purpose, and appears to be so in that it effects no such thing in far
the greatest part of those who partake of it as much as any, but leaves them
altogether as corrupt as it found them.

I cannot discern, that they will acknowledge any corruption at all to be in
the Will, tho Scripture and Experience show that it is most of all there. The
Will seems to be now as sound (by their Doctrine) as it was in Innocence; nor
stands it in need of more help by Grace, than Adam before the Fall: for then he
had and needed Swasive Grace. In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall
dye: Here is the Duty propounded, and the Proposal enforced with a powerful
Motive by God himself; that is the sum of Swasive Grace, which the Lord seeing
needful for our first Parents, did thus administer it, as far from Corruption
as it was then. And if the Will need no more now, it is as free from Corruption
as it was then. Thus for the Affections, there must be no more Corruption in
them than in the Will, these being but the Acts and Motions of it. Or, if they
will consider them as in the Sensitive Appetite; yet common Illumination is
enough to heal it there: for thereby the Affections are sufficiently excited
and quickened. Nor is there any Depravation in the Mind, but what may be cured
by common Light, such as the most corrupt and wicked men have.

That which admits so easy a Cure must needs be slight and little; and that
little too, which they acknowledge, is with them neither Sin nor Punishment
properly, and so not evil at all, unless there be some evil which is neither.
The Depravation of our Natures by the Fall, however it be aggravated in
Scripture, is not in their account properly either our Sin or our Punishment;
but only our Infelicity; and no great Infelicity neither, since with them it
can be neither spiritual Death, nor mortal Disease, no nor very considerable
Weakness. For if it were such a Weakness, no Grace would repair it but that
which communicates an answerable Strength. But that Grace which they think
sufficient to repair all, gives not any strength at all, but supposes there is
Power enough in Nature to Recover it self, if it be but excited.

This in a manner makes Christ of none effect. The great end of his coming was
to Restore our Natures fallen from God, and made incapable of honoring and
enjoying him: Therefore he took our Nature, and performed and suffered so much
therein. But what need all this waste, if we can lick our selves whole by
virtue of a little common Light? and so little not needful with some of them.
De Peccat. Orig. c. 1^.
The great Augustine reduces the whole Christian Doctrine to two Heads, the
Knowledge of the first Adam, and the Knowledge of the Second: What we suffered
by Adam, and what we gained by Christ. But tho these be Fundamental in the
Christian Doctrine, how little they stand for in the Doctrine of Free Will, we
may hereby perceive. And it will be further manifest by another Fundamental,
which, depending on this now insisted on, falls with it.

(5.) By this Doctrine there is no need of Regeneration. To be Regenerate, is
in the Language of the Holy Ghost to be born of God, Joh. 1. 13. to be born
again, or born from above, Joh. 3. 3. and that is to receive a Principle of
Spiritual Life and Motion from God. Vid. Ham. in Joh. 1. 13. But no such
Principle is necessary in the Will, which indeed most needs it. But no Habit of
Holiness is planted there, no good Quality created in it by the Spirit; that
they say is a necessitating Act, and would be prejudicial to its Liberty. The
Image of God needs no repairing in the Heart or Will, though that be the chief
Receptacle and Subject of it; even the Schoolmen making this the principal Seat
of all Virtues. It needs no such infused Principle or Quality, to incline it to
that which is good; they will have it able of it self, by its own native Power,
to embrace any good, how supernatural soever, which the Mind offers to it. It
can produce the best Acts, without any inward Principle suitable or
proportionable to them. The Tree need not be good, that the Fruit may be good;
or rather, it is good enough already, it is so naturally. The Will or Heart of
Man (how naught soever the Scripture speaks it, representing it to be
desperately wicked, Jer. 17. 9. and the Fountain of all Wickedness, Mat. 15.
19.) seems by their Doctrine to be as good by Nature, as God can or will make
it; no worse than it was when first formed. It lost no spiritual Qualities or
Accomplishments by the Fall: for it had none before. Collat. H^g. p. 248. In
spirituali morte non separantur proprie dona spiritualia ab hominis voluntate,
etc.
So that all regenerating Grace as to the Will is clearly cashiered. Nor will
they allow any new Qualities to be infused by the Spirit of Grace into the Mind
or Affections, Syn. Dor. 196.
no more than into the Will: for that they say is repugnant to the
administration of the Means of Salvation. All that they think requisite, is
common Light, such as they deny not to the vilest men (nor can well deny to
Devils: for they discern the truth and goodness of what is proposed in the
Gospel); by the ^are help of such Light, their own Wills can regenerate them,
so far as they think any Regeneration needful. I find it no easy thing to
discern what their Regeneration is. The best I can make of it is this. The Mind
needs no new Birth or Life, but what it has from common Light; nor do the
Affections need any exciting or quickening but what that same effects. But tho
they count this sufficient quickening, they do not call it Regeneration: for
many, thus quickened, do live and dye unregenerate. It is an act of the Will
must do the work, and for that the Will must be left to it self. The Spirit of
God must not touch it, must not give it any Principle of Life, must not act it
by any special or immediate Influence; but if of its own accord it turn it self
to that which is good, the Sinner is thereby born again. So that Regeneration
is completed by a little common Light, such as the Children of Darkness have,
and an act of Free Will, without any further assistance, any other work of the
Spirit in or upon it.

Thus, by this one act of Free Will at first, they are regenerated actually;
and afterward, by repeated acts of Free Will, they may be regenerated
habitually: for, the Will, by repeated Acts, can beget gracious Habits, and so
help them to habitual Regeneration; tho they deny the Spirit of Grace can work
in them any such thing as Habits or Principles of Holiness. Now, this is to be
born again of the Will of Man, not of the Will of God, Joh. 1. 13. The
Scripture declares, that they who are Regenerate, are born of God, 1 John 3. 9.
born of the Spirit, Joh. 3. 8. but this is to be born of Free Will, not of God,
nor of the Spirit, unless Free Will be God or the Spirit. The Apostle says, of
his own Will begat he us, Jam. 1. 18. but they must say, Of their own Wills
they beget themselves. Yet, this is all the Regeneration which they count
necessary, and so make that New Birth a needless thing, which the Scripture
calls for and describes ^y other Characters, and declares all access to the
Kingdom of Heaven impossible without it.

(6.) This takes Sinners off from that which is really saving, and leads them
to ^ake up with that which falls short of Salvation. It teaches them to rest
satisfied with such a Faith, a Repentance, a Con^ersion, a Regeneration, as
common Light and rational Proposals (such as every one ^eets with in the
Ministry of the Word) ^re sufficient to effect. But these alone can ^ever
produce any saving Faith or Repen^ance, any saving Regeneration or Con^ersion

Those who persuade them, that this is enough for those saving Effects, go
about ^o delude Sinners; and if they look after ^o more, their Souls are like
to be ruined ^r ever. Moral Grace may perhaps pre^ail for some Morality; but
this alone can ^ever be effectual, to turn a Heart of stone ^to a Heart of
flesh, to turn the Enmity of the Will into Love to Christ, to turn Sinners from
the Power of Satan unto God, to raise the Soul to Life that is spiritually
dead, to make them new Creatures, etc. These are not the Effects of ^ gentle
Swasion, but of an Almighty Power. They mean something else than Scripture
intends by these Expressions, wh^ make these saving works so low, common and
easy things, and so much in the Power, and at the beck of a Sinners corrupte^
Will. Nothing more ruins Souls, tha^ resting in that as saving which is not so
and when Divines promote the Delusio^ how pernicious is it like to prove?

(7.) It destroys holy Obedience, inwa^ and outward. Leaves no place for the
exercise of Grace in the Heart, or wor^ truly good in the Conversation. It
pluc^ up these by the roots, taking away h^ bitual Regeneration which is the
root ^ them, the exercise of Grace in the acti^ of an inward gracious
Principle; but the say there is no such Principle planted ^ the Heart or Will
by the Spirit of H^liness; and where the Principle is not, ^ cannot be acted.
There can be no vit^ Acts, where there is no vital Principle that which is not
alive, cannot put for^ Acts of life. Or, to use the terms wherein Christ
expresses it, the Fruit is not good, unless the Tree be good. No good Acts can
be produced by the Heart or Will, till it self be good. It is not, it cannot be
good, when there are no good Qualities in it. It had no good, no holy Qualities
planted in it by the Spirit of Grace; that, (with them) only acts Morally, and
does no more sanctify those that are holy, than those that are profane. So
that, if the Will have any goodness, any thing that is holy in it; it has it
from it self, not from the Spirit of Holiness. Thus the Fruits of the Spirit
will be no other, than the Fruits of Free Will; of Free Will unsanctified,
unless it sanctify it self: and the acts of Obedience will be no other, than
the acts of natural Morality, such as Man's degenerate Will can produce by its
natural Power, without any assistance, but that of Moral or swasive Grace;
which begets no good Qualities, gives no inward strength, affords no help of
any kind, more to those who do most, than to those who do nothing at all.

We need not wonder, if those of this Persuasion should satisfy themselves,
and would have others satisfied with such a Morality; their Principles do
afford, and can require nothing better. But whether the Acts of it be those
gracious Acts* those Fruits of the Spirit, those good works, which the
Scripture so much calls for, and makes the Way to Salvation; let those consider
who are concerned indeed in the Way to Salvation.

T^^y charge their Opposers, for not pressing Moral Duties. If they mean
thereby Practical Christianity, there are none in the World press it more. But
we are not for a Pagan, but a Christian Morality; and think it not advisable
to press external Acts alone, without minding the Principle and Root, from
whence all that is truly Christian must spring. We count it absurd and
preposterous to look for Fruits where there is no Root, for gracious Acts where
Grace is not planted in the Heart. They may deck a May Pole with as many
Garlands as they please, and set off a Mast with Flags and Streamers; but they
will never thereby make them Fruit Trees. The Lord will condemn those who bring
not forth good Fruit; and those also who lead them in a way, where they are
never like to be truly fruitful, without better conduct.

(8.) This stifles Love to God, takes away that which is the Foundation and
Ground of a special transcendent Love to him. That which is the rise of our
Love to God, is his Love to us, 1 John 4. 19. it is this that kindles our
Affection to him, and raises Love into a Flame: But he that believes and
considers, that God had no more thoughts of Love for him from Eternity, than he
had for those who are under his everlasting Hatred; and that Christ had no more
Love for him in the work of Redemption; did Obey, Suffer, Satisfy, Purchase no
more ^or him, than he did for those who were in Hell, when he Suffered; and
that the Spirit of Grace does no more for him, in order to his Salvation, than
he does for the Vessels of Wrath, sitted for Destruction; will scarce find any
thing in the Love of God (on this Consideration) to engage his Soul to a
special Love for God: He will be in danger to Love God with no more than a
common Love, such as a carnal Man may have; who believes that the Lord loves
him no more, than he loves those who are to be tormented for ever with the
Devil and his Angels. He will ^ind a Motive from hence, to hug and love himself
rather than God: For, when that which they call Love in God, seems but an
indifferent respect, not intending more good to one than another, but as
themselves determine it; he had got no special benefit, no particular advantage
by that Love, if he had not been better to himself: The Lord, as they represent
him, (whatever is pretended concerning the greatness and universality of his
Love to Mankind) seems indifferent as to Love or Hatred, as to the Happiness or
Misery of Man. The Lord left it indifferent, in his eternal Purpose, whether
any should be Saved or no; and Christ, in the Work of Redemption, left it
indifferent whether any should be actually Redeemed or no; and the Spirit, in
Calling Sinners, leaves it indifferent whether any be effectually Called or no:
There was no Affection in all this, but what might have ended in Love or
Hatred, i. e. in the Damning of all, as soon as the Saving of any. That which
determines this indifference, and makes it prove Love, is the Sinner himself,
the good use of his Free Will: Had it not been for this, for any Love that God
had for him, for any expression of it from Father, Son, or Spirit, he had been
one of the Children of Wrath, in the same Condemnation with others. So that the
plain tendency of their Doctrine, is to lead Sinners to reflect affectionately
on themselves, but with Indifferency upon God.

Such is the general Love which they will have in God to Mankind; it is but an
indifferent respect to all; which proves Love or Hatred, as the Sinners Will
determines it. But when they ascribe any particular Love to God, it is no other
than what arises from the Sinners Love to him: He foresaw that we would
believe, and so love him, and therefore he intended Life for us: He foresaw
that we would embrace and choose Christ, and therefore did he choose us. So
that God did not Love us first, but we him, whatever the Apostle says, 1 John
4. 10, 19. He did not Choose us first, but we did Choose him, whatever Christ
says, Joh. 15. 16. Thus they stop up the Spring of our Love to God, they
destroy the reason, and raze the ground of our Love to him, if that be it which
the Apostle assigns. It is the greatness, the riches, the freeness of Divine
Love that ingages, that constrains us to Love him: But this Doctrine not only
defaces the Riches and Freeness, but in a manner takes away the true Naure and
Notion of his Love, when it makes it an Affection so indifferent to Man's
Happiness or Misery.

(9.) It destroys the Exercise of Faith, and takes them off from a continued
dependence on God, and trusting in him. It is inconsistent with that Life of
Faith, which must be the Life of every Christian.

This takes them off from depending on God, both in their spiritual Concerns,
and in common and humane Affairs.

1. For those Affairs which depend on the Wills of other Men: They cannot
depend on God for the ordering of them; for none are to depend on him for
things which are not at his disposal: But the Wills of Men, and so the Affairs
which depend thereon, are not (with them) at Gods disposal; since, by their
Principles, he cannot sway their Wills effectually one way or other; for this,
in their Account, is to destroy their natural Liberty.

2. As to spiritual Concerns, for the making of Grace, or the means of Grace
effectual. For the Promoting of Holiness, for the Growth or Exercise of it, or
for Perseverance in it, there is no need to depend on God: For it is not
necessary to depend on another for that which is in his own Power. Now these
things, and the like, are in the Power of his own Will; he is the Master of
them, if he will not be wanting to himself. Indeed it is more in their own
Power, than in the Power of God; for every Man's Will can determine it self to
these things, but God cannot, without destroying the Will: For if he determine
it, he leaves it not indifferent; and if it be not indifferent, it is not free;
and if it be not free, it is not an humane Will: And therefore they have more
reason to depend on themselves, where they believe the Power is, than on God,
where they say it is not. If there be any reason to rely on God, it is for
further continuance of that which they call sufficient Grace: But there is no
more need to depend on him for this, than the other; for this is never
withdrawn, unless they be contumacious, and obstinately resist it: But then it
is in their Power not to resist, but comply with it; and if they will not, God
cannot help it: For when he has put forth all the Operations of his Grace upon
the Soul, the Will is at liberty, and has Power to do as it list. The Power is
most in Man still; and where the Power is, there must be the Dependence, upon
themselves rather than upon God; though this Self-dependance be under the Curse
of God in Scripture, and plainly deserves his heavyest Curse.

(10.) It overthrows Humility and Selfdeni^l. One may smell from whence it
comes, by the rank Tendency of it to Pride and Self-exaltation. The design of
the Gospel is clearly to debase man, and take from him all occasion of Boasting
or Glorying in himself; or of ascribing the Praise, either of his State or
Actions, to himself, Romans 3. 9. 27. 1 Cor. 1. 29, 30. But this Doctrine obliges
a Believer to ascribe the difference, which is betwixt him and others who are
in the State of Sin and Misery, not unto Grace, but to himself; leaves him no
ground to imagine that it was Grace which made the difference.

Grace is, with them, indifferently afforded unto all Sinners under the Gospel
at lest. Others had the same Light, the same rational Proposals, with as much
Clearness and Earnestness, in the same Degree, and of no less Power and
sufficiency; it is common in all respects. That which is every way common and
indifferent, could not possibly make us to differ. But when they had it in
common, this man would make good use of it, without any other help from Grace
than the rest had; they would not. His Will complied with the Proposal; their
Wills, no less assisted than his, resisted. Grace brought it equally to the
choice of their Wills, and there left it: His Will determined it self to
comply; their Wills determined against it: that made the difference, not Grace,
which was alike in all; but Free Will, which he used better than Others. If my
Will (may he say) had not been better to me than Grace, it had been as bad with
me as them: For Grace was as good to them as me. The Apostle asks, Who made
thee to differ? 1 Cor. 4. 7. supposing none would have the Confidence to
arrogate this to himself. But he that is for Free Will must say, I made my self
to differ. Grace brought it to the choice of my Will, whether there should be
any difference or no; it does no more for any; if there be any difference made,
it is Free Will that makes it. Those of them that are so ingenuous as to use
plain dealing, speak out, and say expressly, Ego me discerno, I make the
difference my self.

The Apostle says, By the Grace of God I am what I am, 1 Cor. 15. 10. but they
must say, By the good use of Free Will I am what I am: For Grace is such a
thing (with them) as moves all, affects all, leaves all alike: If any one be
better than another, as to state or actings, it is not Grace that makes him so,
for the worst have as much of their Grace as the best; the difference must be
ascribed to Freewill. Nor can their Doctrine show them any Reason, why they
should not ascribe it to themselves, and glory in it, whatever become of the
Glory of Divine Grace.

(11.) It makes it Unnecessary or Unreasonable, to Pray for themselves or
others, for those things which we should most of all Pray for: This is evident
enough, in that it leaves not place for Faith and Dependence on God, in common
Affairs, or spiritual Concerns, as was showed before. For we are not to Pray to
God, but where we may rely and depend on him; nor seek him for what we may not
trust him, Romans 10. 14, But further, the things that Christians are principally
to Pray for, are spiritual and heavenly Blessings; these are all comprised in,
or depend upon Grace. Let us see how favorable their Principles are to Praying
for Grace, either effectual or preventing.

As to the former, they need not Pray for Efficacious Grace, for it is in their
own Power to make it effectual; and who needs beg that of another, which he has
in his own Power? Their Grace is effectual in the Soul, when it becomes
willing, (for then it has its effect;) but with them, nothing is more in their
Power and Will, than to be willing: And it is needless and senseless to Pray to
God to make them willing, i. e. to make Grace effectual, when they can do it
well enough of themselves: August. de Not. ^^ Great. c. 18.
Quid est stultius, quam or are ut facias quod in potestate habes? What more
foolish, than to Pray God thou may do that which thou have in thine own
Power? And elsewhere, Ne fallamus homines, etc. Let us not deceive Men, for we
cannot deceive God: We Pray not ^o God at all, but only feign that we Pray, ^f
we think that our selves, not He, does what we Pray for.

And as they need not, so they must not Pray, that God would make Grace
effectual, or make it work effectually in them for God cannot do it, and they
must no seek that of him which he cannot do^ To make Grace effectual, is of
unwilling to make them willing, to determine the Will to what he Proposes; but
this (the^ say) he cannot do, without invading it freedom: All that he can do,
is to Propose, and leave the Will to do as it likes if he should bow it
effectually one way o^ other, that would be a breach upon the liberty which is
essential to it; so that ^ beg this of him, would be to seek an i^possibility.
So that, unless they will ^ absurd, they must not Pray that God would
effectually bow or incline their Wills, ^ believe in Christ, to turn to God, to
lov^ him, to fear him, to walk in his way to hate Sin, or mortify it; yea, or
^ avoid it. They must not Pray, that Go^ would effectually subdue their Wills ^
his Will in any thing: For, to be so su^jected, though to God, and by a Divi^
Motion, is not consistent with that Fre^dom which the Nature of the Will
r^quires.

If their Petitions be of such Import, (a^ the best Petitions of Christians
are) the Prayers contradict their Principles; their Prayers are a Plea for the
Truth which ^hey dispute against. Whatever they argue with Men, yet they must
be for us, when they have to do with God, if they will have any thing to do
with God ^n Prayer, or Pray any thing like Chri^tians.

As for preventing or sufficient Grace, ^hey need not Pray for that; for they
^ave it already, or they will have it, tho ^hey Pray not for it; for all have
it, even those who never Pray while they live.

But if they should Pray for it, their ^etitions must bear such a sense as will
^e very harsh to any Christian or ratio^al Ear. Sufficient Grace is that which
^nables a Man to turn to God if he will. So, this must be it they Pray for:
Lord, give me such Grace, that I may Love ^hee if I will, that I may Fear thee
if I ^ist, that I may Obey thee if I please. This Grace leaves, and must leave
the Will indifferent, to choose or refuse, to act or ^ot to act, at its
Pleasure: For so far the lord may by his Grace proceed with the Will, but no
farther, without intrenching ^n its Liberty: So that it is this which they ^ray
for; Lord, give me such Grace, as will leave me Indifferent, either to Lov^ or
Hate thee; either to Turn or not t^ Turn unto thee; to Obey or Rebel again^
thee; either to Believe in Christ, or to b^ an Unbeliever: This must be the
Impo^ of their Prayers for Grace, if they b^ consistent with their Principles:
But ^ they will Pray with the sense of Christians or sober Men, they must
renounc^ their Doctrine of Free Will.

Further, They must not Pray for other more than themselves: Not for En^mies,
that God would effectually Tur^ their Hearts, that they may not Oppres^
Persecute, Obstruct the Gospel, Oppo^ Christ's Interest. They must not Pray f^
Children, Friends, Strangers; that Go^ would effectually Turn them to himself
that he would Create in them new Heart^ or Inspire their Wills with gracious
Pri^ciples; that he would conquer their r^bellious Wills, or not leave them in
a c^pacity to resist him, or reject the Spir^ of Grace. They must not Pray for
themselves or others, that God will give the^ any Grace, but what will leave it
at the choice and arbitrament of their ow^ Wills (when there is no good Qualit^
in them) as well to resist as not to r^ ^st Grace, before Conversion; as well
to ^xpel as to retain it, after Conversion.

Prayer is such an acknowledgment of God, so essential to all Religion, that
without it there can be no Religion, either Christian or Natural; therefore so
far as his Doctrine makes it unnecessary or un^easonable to Pray, so far it
tends to ex^irpate all Religion.

(12.) It is inconsistent with that Thank^ulness and Gratitude which should
make ^p the Life of a Christian; with those Praises, whereby God is glorified
in a ^pecial manner, and which must be the ^mployment of Eternity. It is the
most ^ngrateful Doctrine that ever any under ^he Name of Christians
entertained: For ^ereby, he that is in the state of Grace, ^as no more Cause on
that account to ^e thankful to God, than he that is in ^he state of Sin and
Damnation: For he ^s not obliged to be thankful for more ^han he has received;
and the best Saint, ^s such, has received no more from God, ^wes no more to his
Grace, than he that ^ontinues the worst of Sinners. That ^e is in a happier
Condition, is from himself, and the good use of his Freewill. Grace was common,
afforded him and others indifferently; it was his ow^ Free Will that made the
difference, so f^ as there is any. Nay, a Saint in Glor^ will, by their
Doctrine, have no mo^ reason to be Praising God, or Admirin^ Christ, than one
in Hell: But of the hereafter.

The recovery of Man out of the sta^ of Sin and Misery, into which he is
fal^en, either by Adam's Transgression, or h^ own Wickedness; is more to be
ascribed t^ himself, than unto God; and so he ow^ more thanks to himself for
it, than to Go^ He does more to Convert, to Quicken, ^ Sanctify, to Establish,
to Save himself, the God does by his Grace; and so he has mo^ reason to thank
himself for all. The Lo^ does very little, in comparison of wh^ Man does in
these great Concerns; a^ that little which God does, would co^ to nothing at
all, if Man himself did n^ give it efficacy, and make something ^ it: So that
there is left very little grou^ or occasion of giving Praise and Glory ^ God,
where, if for any thing, the hig^est Praise and Glory is eternally due ^ him,
and where above all he designe^ the greatest Praise and Glory to himself There
seems much more occasion to ascrib^ the Praise and Glory of Man's Salvation,
both on Earth and in Heaven, unto Man himself: Not unto thee, O Lord, must they
say, not unto thee, but unto our selves be the Praise, or at least more unto
our selves than unto thee. View this Doctrine well, and compare it with the
Doctrine and Design of the Gospel, and you will find them just as agreeable as
Light and Darkness.

(13.) It tempts men strongly to neglect God and their Souls, to live in any
Wickedness their Inclination leads them to, and not to break off a Course of
Sin by speedy Repentance: For their pretended sufficient Grace is universal,
and denied to none; that brings Repentance to every Man's power and choice, he
has Grace enough to repent if he will. And since it is in his own Power, he may
take his own time for it, and need not fear to satisfy himself with the
Pleasures or Advantages of Sin.

What is to be feared, to restrain them here from the Practice of Ungodliness
and Unrighteousness? unless they will say, that common Grace being abused, may
be withdrawn, and the Sinner by the Judgment of God given up to Obduration.
Here would be some danger indeed, if that Obduration did irresistably determine
the Sinners Will to such Wickedness: But there is no fear of that; for, by
their Principles the Will cannot be so determined, either to good or evil; it
is inconsistent with that Liberty which is essential to it, and which it cannot
want while it is a Will. Therefore no light can be withdrawn, no hardness can
be contracted; but the Will must still be at liberty, to turn to God or not to
turn, to repent or not to repent, at pleasure. They have security, from their
Principles, to go on in their evil ways, 'till they be in danger to live no
longer; and then it is not a peradventure, if God will give them Repentance;
they have enough for that in their own Power, and may repent and turn to God
when they list. Accordingly, one of the prime Asserters of this Doctrine, being
admonished of his Debauches, made this return; I am a Child of the Devil to
day, but I have Free Will, and to morrow I will make my self a Child of God.

(14.) It destroys Justification of the Gospel, all Justification of Sinners,
which the Gospel gives notice of: It will have us Justified, not by the
Righteousness of Christ, or of God, but our own Righteousness; by our own
Righteousness, in the fullest and grossest sense; by a Righteousness which is
in our selves, and of our selves, and by our selves: By our own acts or works,
not Performed by the help of any special Grace, but by the Power of Freewill.

Their Justification is thus stated: The act of Faith (or sincere Obedience, or
inherent Holiness) though it be imperfect, yet is accepted of God instead of a
perfect Righteousness; and so by it we are Justified, as if it were a perfect
Righteousness. Now those acts of Faith, or Obedience, or whatever they call it,
which they will have to be the Righteousness by which we are Justified, is not
of Grace neither: It is not the Gift of God, he never purposed or promised to
give it unto any: It is not the Purchase of Christ, he never merited it for
any: It is not the Work of the Spirit of Grace, he does no more toward it in
those that have it, than in those that never have it.

So that the Righteousness whereby they are Justified, is so far from being
that which Christ performed, that he did not so much as Merit it; so far from
being the Righteousness of God, that he does not give it; so far from being the
Issue of Gods Free Grace, that it is the Product of our Free Will. How Sinners
are Justified, the Apostle declares in the Text, and Tit. 3. 7. and Romans 3. 34.
But by this Doctrine, we are so far from being Justified freely by his Grace,
through the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus, that we are Justified without
the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus; not freely, not by his Grace, but by
acts of our own Free Will, passing for a perfect Righteousness; when they are
no such thing, nor can upon any ground be so accounted.

(15.) It tends to destroy the Covenant of Grace; to make it a Covenant without
Grace, I had almost said an ungracious Compact; such, wherein the Lord shows
himself less gracious to Men, than if they had been left under the Covenant of
Works; and under which, they are more liable to Sin and Damnation, than if it
had never been made: Which thus appears.

The Covenant of Works required perfect Obedience; and Man, being created after
the Image of God, with Holiness and Righteousness, was able to perform that
perfect Obedience which was the Condition of that Covenant; but transgressing
it by that first act of Disobedience, in eating the forbidden Fruit, he lost
the Image of God, wherein his strength for observing the Covenant consisted:
The Lord, they say, deprived him of that Holiness and Righteousness, and
thereby of ability to perform the Condition. Now they say, a Man cannot sin in
not doing that which he is not able to perform, though he be disabled by his
own fault; and so in this state of disability, he was not capable of sinning,
and consequently was not liable to Condemnation.

If things had continued in this state, none could have been Damned for actual
Sin, but Adam only; and they say, for Original Sin none are Damned.

But the Covenant of Grace made a sad alteration in Man's state and
circumstances; for therein, sufficient Grace being offered to all, whereby they
may avoid Sin if they will; they hereupon become capable of sinning, as they
were not before; and in danger of Damnation, when before they were safe. So
that their Covenant of Grace makes Man's Condition worse than it was, instead of
relieving him, so far is it from being truly gracious; even the supposed Grace
of it, brings him more within the compass of Sin and Damnation than he was
without it.

(16.) It Cashiers the Spirit of Grace, and all its special Offices and
Operations. To pass by those who ascribe nothing at all to the Spirit; those
who attribute most to it, so far as I can discern, will have us beholding to
him for nothing at all, but common Light, such as the Children of Darkness
have; and so weak and powerless, that the Will needs not follow it is not
determined, nor effectually move^ or inclined by it. The Spirit of Grace (with
them) has no immediate Influenc^ upon the Will or Affections; and thi^ is all
too which the Mind has from the Spirit, it moves neither Will nor Affect^ons,
but remotely, but by virtue of thi^ Light: So that the Spirit of Grace do^
nothing in the whole Soul, Mind, Wi^ or Affections, but what this light amoun^
to. No more is needful, either for the first rise of Holiness, or for the
increas^ and growth, or the strengthening and continuance of it.

At first, the Will, by no other hel^ than that of Moral Grace, (which pr^tend
to no inward Operation of the Spirit, but only this common Illumination; for
the Proposal is by the Word without, and the enforcing of Motives and
Arguments, is by the Ministry of Man,) determines it self to turn to God; and
so, without more ado, is Converted and Regenerated. There is the rise of
Holiness; afterward by determining it self again and again, it acquires a
habit, and that is a free and permanent Quality: That the Will exercises,
Hoor^b. tom. 1. p. 316.
increases, strengthens and confirms Holiness, as it began it, by determining
it self: It has Power to do this in and of it self, and nothing else does, or
can do it. The Spirit, neither by this Light, nor by any other gracious
Influence, does, or can determine it: Nor does the Will need any thing for the
exercise of its Power, but only Light to make a sufficient discovery of the
Duty or Object propounded. Thus all the Motions, Operations, Assistances, of
the Spirit of Grace, are confined to this Light: All its healing,
strengthening, quickening and establishing Virtue, amounts to no more than
this: The Soul neither has, nor needs any spiritual Life, Health, Strength, or
Motion, either first or last, but what this does effect; and yet it effects no
such thing in far the most that have it: For those have it, no less than
others, who are, in the style of Scripture, not only in the dark, but Darkness.
And if it have any more effect upon others, than it has upon the Children of
darkness, yet this efficacy it must have from Free Will; not of it self, nor of
the Spirit, (whom they call its Author,) otherwise it would be equally
effectual in all, since all have it equally, and the Spirit is supposed to give
it equally to all. And if the Spirit of Christ give it not its Efficacy and
Virtue, but it owes this only to Free Will; it is of no worth as i^ proceeds
from the Spirit, of no more value than a fruitless and ineffectual thing; of no
Virtue, and so of no value, but what it derives from Man's Will.

Now what Honor is it to the Spirit of Christ, to ascribe to him a fruitless a
worthless thing? They seem to honor the Spirit as much, who will borrow no
light at all from him; but count the light of Reason, with the help of the
written Word, sufficient: And what great difference is there betwixt them who
ascribe nothing at all to the Spirit, and those that ascribe to him that which
is nothing worth? That which is fruitless and ineffectual, of no Virtue, of no
Value, but but what it owes to Man's Will, may as well be ascribed to humane
Reason, a^ the divine Spirit.

(17.) It tends to destroy the Mediation of Christ: That liberty, which they
make essential to Man's Will, makes Christ incapable of being the Mediator
between God and Man, and so tends to ruin all the concerns of God and Man in
Christ's Mediation. For, either the Will of Christ was undeclinably fixed upon
that which is Good and Holy, so that it could not to Disobedience and
Wickedness: And if so, it had not that indifferency to good and evil, in which
they place the liberty of Man's Will, and count it essential thereto, so that it
cannot be a humane Will without it; and then Christ, wanting that which is
essential to humane Nature, was not indeed a Man, nor did assume our Nature;
consequently could not be the Mediator between God and Man, being not the Man
Christ Jesus.

Or, if his Will was not undeclinably fixed on that which was good, but left in
a state of indifferency to that or the contrary; so that he might have observed
his Fathers Will, or not observed it; might have loved him, or not loved him;
might have fulfilled all righteousness, or not fulfilled it: And if he might
have sinned, or not sinned, then he was not God; for he that is God cannot sin.

So that as they state the freedom of Man's Will, either he was not Man, or he
was not God; and either way he could not be Mediator, who must be both. Thus
all the advantages Sinners have by his Mediation perish; and all the Glory the
Lord designed to himself thereby, is blasted by the extravagant Doctrine of
Free Will.

(18.) It defaces Redemption by Christ, and leaves little or no place, or no
necessity, either of Satisfaction or Merit, in his Obedience and Sufferings.

1. He did not merit Faith, or Regeneration, or Holiness, or Perseverance, for
all, or for any particular Persons. They declare expressly, that it is foolishly
said, that Christ procured Faith or Regeneration for any: Their Principles
engage them to maintain this; for if he merited these for any, it would have
been necessary that these should have been wrought in some of the Redeemed; it
would have been necessary, that some or other of them should be Believers,
regenerate and sanctified, and steadfast unto the end; but all such necessity
they deny, as inconsistent with that freedom of Man's Will which they contend
for. It must not be under any necessity, either from the Decree of God or the
Purchase of Christ: Faith, Repentance, Sanctification, Perseverance, must be
mere Contingencies, in respect of those former Causes; or else they could not
be free Acts in respect of the Will, their next Cause. Christ, by his Death and
Merit, must not be the Author or Cause of these, though there be no Pardon or
Life without them; so much must not be ascribed to his Merits, lest too little
be left to Free Will.

2. Upon the same Account, Christ did not Merit Pardon or Salvation for any one
certainly; and so his Death makes neither the Means nor the End certain. After
he had done and suffered so much, been obedient unto Death, made his Soul an
Offering for Sin, and obtained Eternal Redemption by his Blood; yet there was
no Necessity that any one Sinner should have Pardon and Life; no Certainty,
that any one would be Pardoned and Saved: Christ left this altogether
uncertain, and not to be determined but by Man's Freewill. After Christ had
finished the Work of Redemption, as all might have been Saved, so all might
have been Damned; There was no Value, Efficacy, Merit or Satisfaction, in
Christ's Death or Obedience, to make more sure Work: It was left at uncertainty,
as it were at hap hazard, whether Salvation or Damnation should carry it; and
Free Will alone must have the honor to determine it. Christ, they say,
procured Grevincov. in Ames. Coron. p. 142.
by his Death a Power to destroy Unbelievers: So that he no more Purchased
Salvation than Damnation; he is, by Virtue of his Death and Obedience, no more
a Redeemer than a Destroyer of Mankind: Whether he should prove a Savior of
any, or a Destroyer of all, is left to the arbitrament of Free Will. There was,
they say, Idem.
no other Necessity, nor Advantage, nor Value, in the Death of Christ, but what
might have been perfectly salved, though all the Redeemed had Perished
Eternally.

They declare for an Universal Redemption, and that equally extended to all and
every one, and so would seem to magnify it more than others: Yet indeed it is
no other Redemption of all, but such as is very well consistent with the
Damnation of all and every one. Christ loved them all, and washed them from
their Sins in his own Blood; yet for all that, every one of them might have
been Damned. Though they say, he Died and shed his Blood for the whole World;
yet there is no Value, Efficacy or Merit, in the Death of Christ, in the Blood
of God, to secure Pardon and Salvation, or any saving Advantage, to any one
Person in the World. All might have Perished, for any thing he had effected by
the Work of Redemption; and all had Perished certainly, if he had procured no
more for them, than the Doctrine of Free Will can admit of; not one of them can
ever come to Heaven, if Christ did not procure more for them, and more
effectually, than their Doctrine will suffer them to acknowledge, or give him
any thanks for.

3. If he did not purchase Pardon and Life certainly for any, nor Faith and
Holiness, or other such necessary requisites thereto, what then did he Procure?
Why, he Procured, they say, a Covenant or Promise, that all should have Pardon
and Life, if they would Believe and Obey him.

But if, antecedently to Christ's undertaking, the Lord had declared his
willingness to save such as Believe and Obey, there was no need of such a
Promise; and so Christ procured a needless thing, or nothing.

Or, if he did not purchase the Conditions of this Covenant, ( viz. Grace to
Believe and Obey) unless it was in the Power of their own Wills, without
Christ, to Perform the Conditions; still he Procured for them as good as
nothing.

But if it were otherwise, yet those who would have us to ascribe to the Death
and Obedience of Christ nothing but this, would not have us Obliged to ascribe
to it either Satisfaction or Merit. No Satisfaction, unless it be to his
Fathers Will, not to his Justice in this sense. The Obedience and Death of
Christ was so fully satisfying, so very acceptable to his Fathers Will, he was
so well pleased with it, that hereupon he entered into this Covenant. There was
no need of other Satisfaction than this; it was enough, if he did Merit it;
sufficient, if his Righteousness did deserve such a Promise for us.

Nay, there was no need of Merit: For, as the Lord was so well pleased with
Abraham's Faith and Obedience, as for his sake he vouchsafed his Posterity many
Favors, though the Patriarch did not merit so much; so the Lord might be so
well pleased with the Obedience and Sufferings of Christ, as for his sake to
make such a Promise, without any Merit obliging him to it. Thus way is made, to
strip Redemption both of Satisfaction and Merit, without which it is, it can be
no Redemption indeed; the Name may be retained, but the Thing denied; all
necessity of it, and all advantage by it too, but what is left to the
arbitrament of Freewill.

(19.) It is inconsistent with the Perfections and Attributes of God; with his
Mercy, Power, Wisdom, Truth and Faithfulness, with his Sovereignty and
Government of the World, and other Divine Excellencies. But, that I may not
stay too long on this Subject, let me insist only on these mentioned.

1. It Defaces the Mercy of God, and makes it in effect no Mercy. They pretend
indeed to represent God under such a Notion as will indear him, and render him
lovely to the World, upon the account of his Mercy and Goodness, the
Extensiveness and Universality; but when their Pretensions are strictly and
impartially examined, they prove quite of another tendency: That Mercy which
they ascribe to God, is without an Object, or without Effect, or without Grace;
a Mercy which is not an Honor to him, nor an Indearment of him to others.

1. It is a Mercy without an Object; a Mercy not for any certain Person, but
for Qualities, which are no Objects of Mercy: A Mercy for some, when it appears
not who they are, or whether there will be any such. A Mercy for no Body, which
pretends to be for all and every one, when it is not for any one. This is their
antecedent Mercy, whereby they pretend that he loves all that Believe and Obey,
before he knows who they are, and is uncertain whether ever any such will be.
It speaks a respect to those Qualities, but no Love or good Will for any
particular Person.

2. It is a Mercy without Effect: They ascribe to him a Will of Universal
Salvation; when they discern it can be no other than a mere Velleity, an
incomplete Intention, a weak ineffectual Desire, a faint and fruitless Wishing
of such general Happiness, when he knows it will never be effected, and is
resolved not to take the course to effect it. This is such a Mercy, as justles
out and clashes with his other Perfections, and is inconsistent with his
Knowledge, Power, Sincerity, Wisdom, Blessedness, and Mercy it self in the true
Notion of it.

With his Knowledge; for who will desire and design that, which he knows will
never be effected? With his Power; for who will not effect that, which he
really intends and designs, if he be able? With his Sincerity; for what
Ingenuous Person will pretend to desire and design that which he never means to
bring about? With his Wisdom; for who will Propose to himself an End, and never
intend the Means, which are proper, and alone sufficient to obtain it? With his
Blessedness; for to fall short continually of what one desires and intends, is
an Unhappiness: With the Nature of Divine Mercy and Goodness; for that is not
real goodness, which does no good, or not the good it makes show of. That is
not saving Mercy indeed, which leaves the Objects of it miserable, when it can
relieve them; that wishes them well, but lets them perish eternally. But that
which they ascribe to God, is such a Mercy, as can well digest the everlasting
Misery of all Mankind: Such a Love, such a Goodness, as could be satisfied, if
not one Person in the World should be Saved.

They decry the Doctrine of their Opposers, as that which straitens the Mercy
of God, and confines it to a few; whereas indeed it makes Salvation sure to
very many. But by their Principles, for any Mercy there is in God, all Men may
be Damned; nay, which is more, no Man can be Saved. By all the Mercy they
ascribe to God, no Man can escape Damnation; all being left to the arbitrament
and indifferency of Man's corrupt and degenerate Will; which, without other help
than Mercy in their way provides, will certainly ruin them Eternally. Mercy,
they say, will Save all that Believe, and none else: But this Mercy intends not
to work saving Faith in any; there is no Decree for that, it must be left to
Man's Will; and if that be not better to him herein than the Mercy of God, he
must unavoidably perish. All must be Damned, unless Freewill help them by its
own Power, without any effectual Assistance that Mercy prepared for them from
Eternity.

3. It is a Mercy without Grace: A Mercy which is not free and gracious, which
will not express it self to any, but such as are Worthy, such as have some
Merit, or some Motive to Oblige him to be merciful. And being a Mercy that is
not free and gracious, whatever Mercy of this Nature they ascribe to him, we
can never be saved by Grace.

Nay, since it is not Grace, it is not Mercy indeed; no Mercy that the Lord
will own, or Sinners can have any advantage by: It is Affection of their own,
not that Divine Excellency which he glories in, and glorifies upon lost
Sinners: For that which saves Sinners is free Mercy, and free Mercy is nothing
but Grace. So that if we be saved without Grace, we are saved without Mercy
too, that which is so indeed; and if they have no Salvation for Sinners, but
that which is without Grace and free Mercy, they leave them none at all.

That they admit of no free Mercy, no Grace in God for Sinners, appears, in
that they make his first Purpose of Love (the Decree, which comprizes all the
Mercy he had from Eternity for particular Persons) to have its rise from Faith
or Works foreseen. He foresees, that when it is left to the Free Will, to the
choice of all; these will of themselves, without Divine determining Power,
Believe and Love him; others will not; and therefore he will Love, and purposes
to Save these, and not others: And so he loves them not freely, but because
they Oblige him: He Loves them, i. e. He Purposes to Save them, because they
Love him first. Thus that which God foresees in Man, is the Condition of the
Mercy and Favor he intends; and such a Condition, as is indeed the Cause, the
Motive, and in the ancient sense of the Word, the Merit of his Favor and
Mercy: And so they leave no free Mercy in God for Sinners; and Sinners being
capable of no Mercy at all, but what is free, they leave in him no Mercy at all
for them. This is, in the Apostles sense, Gal. 5. 4. to fall from Grace, to
deny, to renounce all Grace, all free Mercy of God which the Gospel discovers.
The Doctrine of Free Will obliges them to disclaim all the Mercy of God, by
which any Sinner can be saved.

2. This destroys the Prescience of God: Though they be concerned to maintain
this, as well as we, and pretend to do it; yet their Doctrine is utterly
inconsistent with it, and makes it impossible for him to foreknow certainly any
thing that depends upon Man's Will: And so bereaves him of the certain
foreknowledge of those things, which are of greatest moment and consequence,
both to God and Man. For example.

He cannot certainly foresee, whether any will have the Gospel; the Preaching
of it depends on Man's Will. And so, whether any will use the Light of Nature
well; whether any will have moral Grace, any rational Advice or Excitement by
the Word: Nor whether any will Repent and Believe, whether any will be
Justified or Sanctified, whether any will Persevere to the end, whether any one
will be Saved, nor whether any would be Redeemed; whether Christ would be put
to Death, or any thing else, to which the concurrence of Man's Will is
necessary. This is plain, because by their Principles, the Will of Man is
always indifferent to act or not to act; and so before, and until it act, it
cannot but be uncertain whether it will act or not: (Nothing can make it
certain, no Decree, no Act of God, without destroying its liberty;) And being
uncertain, it cannot be certainly foreknown.

All that ever I could hear in Answer to this, was only, that Gods Knowledge is
Infinite: And though we cannot comprehend, how that which is uncertain can be
certainly known; yet an Infinite Understanding can reach it, and have the
certain Knowledge of that which is Uncertain.

But this makes it more evidently impossible: For the more perfect any
Knowledge is, the farther it is from Error and Mistake. So Infinite Knowledge
must be farthest of all from erring; but to know that as certain, which is not
certain, is not to Know, but to Err; not to apprehend things as they are, but
to mistake and misapprehend them, to have false and erroneous apprehensions of
them. As they state the Freedom of the Will, God can have no certain
foreknowledge of those things, without false and erroneous Conceptions thereof.
They leave him nothing here but Conjectures, or nothing but Mistakes and Error.

3. It Impeaches the Truth and Faithfulness of God; overthrows the Truth and
Certainty of his Word, in all the parts of it; leaves no certainty of his Truth
and Faithfulness in Prophecies, Promises, Threatenings, Assertions, contained in
Scripture. It cannot be certain, by their Principles, that the Prophecies will
be accomplished, the Promises fulfilled, or the Threatenings executed; and so it
must be uncertain, whether they are true or false: There is no certainty that
they will prove true, they may as well prove false. The same must be said of
many Assertions too; there is no Necessity, no Certainty, that they will prove
true, v. g. Can. 1. 4. Jer. 31. 18. Lam. 5. 21.

By this Doctrine, there can be no Necessity, that they will turn, whatever
Course the Lord take to turn them; or that they will run after him, what Course
soever he take to draw them: And so those Assertions are not Necessarily true,
but may prove false; and so may those, and the like to those, Psalm. 119. 33,
34. This is manifest also in those Predictions and Promises, where the
Concurrence of Man's Will is requisite: For as they state its Freedom, there can
be no Certainty, which way it will incline and determine it self, whether with
the Word, and according to the tenor of the Prediction, or against it. Nor will
they allow, that God can make sure of it, or take any Course that will so
determine it, that the accomplishment of his Word shall not be defeated. For
when he has done what he can to incline it that way which his Word requires,
that it may prove true; yet it is, and must be left free to incline the other
way, and make his Word prove false. Let us clear this by some instances, in
each of those parts of the Word, wherein the Truth and Faithfulness of God is
(if any where) eminently concerned. There is an ancient Prophecy, of the
Calling of the Gentiles, Genesis 9. 27. God shall persuade Japhet, i. e. the
Gentiles who descended from him, and they shall join themselves to the People
of God. Now by the Doctrine of Free Will, the Lord is to do nothing that can
make it certain, that Japhet's Posterity shall comply herewith: He is only to
Propose it to them by the Preaching of the Gospel, and leave their Wills in an
Indifferency, to yield hereto* or not to yield. So that it must be a mere
Contingency, whether this Prophecy would be accomplished or no, if it might
prove true, so it might prove false. The same may be said of those Expressions,
Joh. 10. 16. Act. 28. 28. Joh. 12. 32. The Truth and Faithfulness of God in
these and other Prophecies is evidently exposed, past all security their
Principles can possibly give.

So it is likewise in the Promises and the Covenant of Grace, styled
Everlasting; everlasting Truth and Faithfulness being engaged for the
Performance of it, Jer. 32. 39, 40. Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27. Every Clause of this may
prove false, and not be fulfilled to any one Person in the World: For, with
them, the Lord does nothing which will certainly change the Hearts of Men, but
only offers Arguments to move them to renew their own Hearts; and so leaves it
to the arbitrament of their own Wills, whether ever the Promise shall take
effect or not. Now, if it were possible, that it should prove true, that Man
should make himself a New Heart; yet it is more likely that it should prove
false, because Man's corrupt Will, to which it is left, is more inclined to make
it false than true. Take it at the best, to make the Truth of God in the
everlasting Covenant to depend on Man's Will, supposing it indifferent, is bad
enough: For if it be indifferent whether God shall be True or no, it must be
indifferent whether he be God or no.

Thus it will be, not only as to the Promises made to us, but also those which
are made to Christ, Isa. 49. 6, 7. and 53. 10. and 55. 5. Psalm. 2. 8. and 72.
8, 9, 10, 11. Jer. 23. 5, 6. These and the like may all prove false: Man's Will,
to which it is left, may so carry it, and this unavoidably, that not one of
them shall be made good. Nor will they allow the Lord to take any course with
Man's Will, or have any such influence on it, as will be sure to prevent this,
or make it any way certain, that his Truth herein shall not fail: He must not
determine the Will that way which is necessary to secure his Truth in
performing his Promises. Nor in the Threatening neither, Rev. 17. 16, 17.
Whatever be said of Gods putting it into their Hearts; yet they will not have
us imagine, that the Lord will effectually determine their Wills to this; but
these must be left free and indifferent, either to Love or Hate the Whore;
either to do what is foretold, or not to do it; to make it true, or to make it
false.

Now if these parts of the Word of God may prove false, or if they be not
certainly true, all the rest will be suspected, the Truth and Certainty of all
the Scripture is overthrown: If the Truth or Faithfulness of God may fail us
here, where can we be sure of it? The glory of this Divine Perfection is
uttetly defaced. The Truth and Faithfulness of God is the ground of all Divine
Faith. We believe God, because he is infallibly True, and what he says cannot
prove false: But it may prove false by their Doctrine, and so the ground of all
Christian, of all Divine Faith is quite razed, and the Foundation of all
Religion is hereby undermined, yea quite blown up.

4. It destroys the Government of God, as to the greatest Concerns of the
World. By their Hypothesis, the Will of Man is not, cannot be ruled by him: He
must not touch it immediately; it is a thing so Sacred, that a touch, even of
God* may violate it. He must not Inspire it with any new Quality, nor Move it
by any real Influence, but only make his Addresses to it at a distance, by
proposing an Object, and offering Motives and Arguments: And if this will not
do, (as it does not, nor alone ever can do, in the Concerns of Salvation,) he
must leave it to it self, to do what it list. Now that which is left to do as
it list, is not Ruled, it is not under Government.

They will have the Lord to treat it as an Orator, not as a Sovereign Ruler.
The Will (with them) seems to have a Sovereignty exempted from the Sovereignty
of God; not subordinate to it, if not above it; not subjected to the Sovereign
Government of God, further than to do what it list.

Hereby God is excluded from the Government of the World. Men are governed by
their Wills, that is the Ruling, the Commanding Faculty; therefore if the Will
be not under his Government, Men will not be under it, nor the rest of the
World, so far as it is governed by Men. If he Dispose not of that which orders
the rest, what is there left at his Disposal? All the Affairs of the World,
which depend upon humane Conduct, will be governed more by the Will of Man,
than by the Will, Power, and Providence of God: By the Will of Man
independently, as if he were God; but by the Lord of Heaven and Earth only
Precariously, and at the Pleasure of Man's Will, as if he were a Subject, an
Underling, an inferior Creature.

5. It denies the Almighty Power of God, will not admit him to be Omnipotent,
and his Power Infinite: It is not Infinite, if it be bounded and limited; yet
Man's Will bounds and limits the Divine Power. By their Principles, the Lord can
no way deal with the Will, but so that it may resist him, and render all his
Actings and Operations on it ineffectual: He cannot prevail with it in any
thing so far, but that it may at once stand out and repel his Motions, render
every Divine Attempt upon it succesless: When he has done all that can be done
by the Power of his Grace, the Will may be too hard for him; it must be always
left to do what it list. He cannot Save a Man, how much soever he intends or
desires it, unless it be the Wills Pleasure: Nor can he take any Course to make
the Will pleased with it. He can neither so Change the Faculty, nor so
represent the Object, but the Will may still reject it. He cannot work Faith in
him, nor bring him to Repentance, nor Create Holiness in his Heart; nor can he
Continue him in a state of Holiness, unless it please the Will to submit; nor
can he bring it to submit so, but that it may refuse, when all is done that his
Grace can do. He can make no particular Decrees concerning Man, that are
Positive and Peremptory, because he cannot master Man's Will: His Purposes must
be Conditional and Respective to Free Will* He cannot make good his own Word,
not verify what he Asserts, nor accomplish his own Prophecies, nor perform his
Promises, if Man's Will stand in his way: Nor can he clear his way of it in any
Method, but what the Will of Man may defeat. He cannot Accomplish his Desires
and Intentions, if Man's Will resist him, and can never put the Will out of a
Capacity of resisting and opposing, while it is a Will. It is essential to the
Will, to be always able to resist; and if they stand not to this, they yield
all: Psalm. 135. 6. No, must they say, there are innumerable which God cannot
do, unless Man pleases: Phil. 3. ult. Christ has a Power, whereby he can subdue
all things, etc. No, must they say, the things wherein he is most concerned of
all other in this World, the Wills of Men, he cannot subdue to himself. Prove.
21. 1. No, must they say, neither the Hearts of Kings, nor of any other Men,
are thus in the Lords hands: Whatever he does to turn the Current of them, they
may run in the old Channel, and keep their own Course for all that: It is not
whithersoever he will that they turn, but whithersoever they will, they run,
for all his turning.

(20.) It Idolizes Man's Will, makes it in diverse respects equal with, or above
him.

It seems to subject God, and make him an Underling to Man's Will; and that in
respect of his Will, his Word, his Grace, his Design. Some of these are
apparent by what is already said: Let me only insist on one particular. It
makes God dependant on the Will of Man, even for his Glory; where it is most
intolerable for the Majesty of Heaven to be dependant, and most inconsistent
with his Infinite Perfection and Happiness. The Lord in all the Operations of
his Grace, leaves the Will indifferent either to comply or resist. This leaves
it to the Determination and Arbitrament of Man's Will, whether God shall have
the Glory of that, by which he designs to make himself most glorious. It must
be in the Power of Man's Will to defeat God there, where he intends most of all
to glorify himself; to spoil and deface the glory of his Grace and Love, where
the Riches thereof are most displayed: And this in the greatest and most signal
Instances of it, and where each Person in the Godhead are most eminently
concerned.

Whatever Decree or Purpose of Love and Grace the Lord had from Eternity, to
Save lost Sinners, it must be at the Determination of Man's Will, whether any
one shall be saved or freed from Misery. After the Work of Redemption finished
by Christ, it must be at the Pleasure of Man's Will, whether any one shall be
actually Redeemed. After the Spirit of Grace has done what can be done, for
changing the Hearts, and renewing the Natures of Sinners; yet not one ^^Scan^^
them shall be Changed or Sanctified, u^^^ss they list.

So that, unless Man will, when he is left indifferent, to will or not to will,
electing Grace, redeeming Grace, renewing Grace, shall be of no effect, shall
never arrive at what it tends to. And if it be rendered of none effect, it is
rendered inglorious, it is defeated, defaced, and the glory of it turned into
shame. But so it must be, if Man will; all the Grace of God must be in vain,
and all the Glory of it vanish.

Thus is God evidently made dependant on Man's Will, even for his Glory, that of
his Grace; and he will as soon be subjected to the Will of Man in any thing, in
all things, as the greatest Concerns of his Glory.

The Grace of God, where it should appear in its greatest luster, and was
designed for the greatest Honor of Father, Son, and Spirit; must wait as a
Handmaid on Man's degenerate Will, and be ordered at its Arbitrament, and stand
to its Pleasure, whether it shall come to any thing or nothing; whether it
shall have any Glory or none.

Let them believe it who can, I can never believe that the Doctrine is of God,
which offers such an intolerable Indignity to him: If there were no other
Argument against it, this seems enough to me. The

IV. Fourth Head I propounded, was to give an account of the Objections they
make, and the Prejudices they have against the Doctrine of Grace; and to show,
the worst they can Object against it is as chargeable upon the Doctrine of
Freewill. So that their embracing it seems to proceed from neglect of Impartial
Consideration, and some want of the Exercise of that Reason which they so much
magnify. That uses not to be counted a rational and considerate Invention,
which serves not the turn for which it was devised, but runs them into the same
difficulties which they seek to avoid. Let us see briefly in two or three of
the chief Instances, whether this be not the Case here.

1. They Charge us with making God the Author of Sin: (Tilenus says this was
the Reason that turned him off to the Remonstrants.) We disclaim and abhor it,
and Condemn those who assert any such thing. They say, it is the Consequence of
our Doctrine, which will have things so ordered by the Decrees and Providence
of God, that Sin is thereby unavoidable. We say, if God be made the Author of
Sin on this account, their own Doctrine is to be charged with making him so, by
as good Consequence. And so they must acknowledge that they wrong us, or else
condemn themselves and their own Principles.

That they are as liable to this Charge, if it be just, does thus appear. He
that puts Men in those Circumstances, wherein he foresees that they will
certainly sin, orders things so, that Sin becomes unavoidable: But by their
Doctrine, the Lord decrees to place Men, and by his Providence disposes them in
those Circumstances, wherein he foresees they will certainly sin; e. g. The
Lord foresaw, that if Adam was Created so and so, and set in such
Circumstances, he would certainly Sin and Fall by it: Yet foreseeing this, the
Lord decreed to Create him so, and dispose of him in such Circumstances, and
actually did it. He foresees, that if Peter be put in those Circumstances
wherein he was found in the High-Priest's Hall, he would certainly deny his
Master: But he Decreed thus to dispose of him, and by his Providence actually
did it. This is the plain Import of their Doctrine concerning a Conditional
Foreknowledge in God, as will be evident to any that understand it. It was an
Invention of the Jesuits the last Age, to make good their Doctrine of Free Will
and Moral Grace, and to avoid the supposed Inconveniences of the opposite
Doctrine; and is commonly embraced by those who agree with the Jesuits in their
Opinion about the Power of the Will: But a very imprudent and unhappy Device it
was, since it involves them in those very Absurdities, which it was devised to
avoid.

2. They charge our Doctrine, as making God unmerciful, because he gives not
to the greatest part of Mankind, that Grace which is necessary to Salvation:
Whereas we deny not that God gives that Grace which they count sufficient; we
grant he gives all that Grace which is necessary by their Doctrine, even to
Reprobates. But we say, their Doctrine, how much soever it triumphs in
advancing and extending Gods Love to Mankind; yet it makes him far more
unmerciful, in that it will not have God to vouchsafe that Grace which is
necessary or sufficient for Salvation, special Grace, to any at all. Mere
swasive Grace, which leaves it to the choice of Man's unrenewed Will, whether it
will turn to God or no, which they say is all that God vouchsafes to any, did
never alone, can never of it self Save any Man: And so they will have, not only
some, but all Men to Perish, for any Grace that God gives them. Whatever
Ostentation it makes of magnifying Divine Mercy, yet what Doctrine can be more
unmerciful, than that which leaves all Men to be Damned, unless their Free Will
do something more for them than the Grace of God.

3. They say, we Impeach the Sincerity of God, when he by his Word calls such
as Perish to Repentance, that they may be Saved; and yet has Decreed no^ to
give them Repentance, but to Damn them: So that it is certain, (while those
Invitations and Offers are made in the Word) that they shall not Repent and be
Saved. This, they say, makes the Word and the Ministry of it Delusive, and no
better than Simulation, making show of that to Sinners which is never intended,
and which it is impossible they should have.

The ground of this Charge, is a certainty that such shall never Repent and be
Saved: But their own Principles make this no less certain: For they say, God
foresees from Eternity that such will never Repent, and so shall never be
Saved: And what he foresees (his Foreknowledge being Certain and Infallible)
will as certainly come to pass, and is as impossible not to be, as that which
he Decrees. Nay, they say, that the Lord, upon his Foreknowledge that such
would not Repent, did Decree from Eternity to Damn them, and never Decreed to
give them Repentance, nor any Grace or Aid that would effectually bring them to
Repentance; no, nor any, but what he certainly foresaw would be ineffectual. So
that here also they must either Justify our Doctrine, as to this Charge, or
Condemn their own.

4. They say, our Doctrine makes God Unjust and Cruel, in Exacting that from
Men which they are not able to do; and Condemning them for not doing that which
he gives them not strength to do v. g. for requiring Sinners to Believe and
Turn to God, and Condemning them for not complying with him herein; when he
knows they cannot do it of themselves and when he gives them no Grace to
empower them for it. They make large Harangues on this Subject, tending to
render their Opposites odious; and se^ them off with such Similitudes and
Illustrations as make Impression on weak Minds, which are more apt to be taken
with Words, than to weigh and consider things. Whereas after all, the plain
truth is, there is no Doctrine that I know of more chargeable with this, than
their own. For it is very evident in Scripture, and in the Nature of the thing,
that their swasive Grace does not give Sinners sufficient Power to Believe and
Turn to God; it cannot subdue the Corruption of the Heart opposing this: It
pretends not to give any new spiritual Principle of Life or Strength for these
effects; it leaves the Will in its natural Impotency and Corruption, to do as
it list. And therefore, since, by their Doctrine, he gives Sinners no more
Power but this, and yet requires them to Believe and Turn to Christ, and
Condemns them for not doing it; he Condemns them for want of that which he
gives not sufficient Power to do.

Can any one imagine, who will not offer plain Violence to a multitude of
Expressions in Scripture, that mere Moral Swasion, which does not so much as
move the Will out of its indifferent Posture, can Quicken those that are dead
in Sins and Trespasses? can take away the Heart of Stone, and give Hearts of
Flesh; or write his Laws in them; or make those Hearts that are desperately
wicked, to become holy and heavenly? Can form new Creatures of the old Man, and
make old things pass away, and all things become new? Can give Strength and
Life to those who can do nothing, are without Strength and Life?

He that cannot believe this, in opposition to an hundred of such Passages in
the Word of God, must believe that their Doctrine, concerning Free Will and
Moral Grace, makes God to Condemn more than any, for not doing that which he
gives them not Power to do.

5. They say, We destroy the Liberty of the Will, by bringing it under a
necessity of inclining one way, and not leaving it indifferent to incline the
other, or to suspend its Acts, e. g. When God intends to Convert a Sinner, and
puts forth the Power of his Grace for this purpose, it is necessary that the
Will incline no other way than his Grace moves it.

But if this destroy the Liberty of the Will, their own Doctrine overthrows it:
For they Teach, that God, from Eternity, before any Act of his Will, foresaw
which way every Man's Will, in such and such Circumstances, would incline. He
foreknows certainly and infallibly, that in those Circumstances it will incline
this way, and not the other. Now if he know that certainly, it must be Certain
and of Necessity: For to know that as certain, which is not certain, is not to
know but to mistake, to apprehend a thing otherwise than it is. And if the Will
might or could incline otherwise than he foresaw, his Foreknowledge would not
be Infallible: For that excludes, not only actual Error, but a possibility of
it.

If then it be true from Eternity, that the Will must incline this one way, it
is not indifferent to incline that way or another; and so its indifferency, its
freedom from a necessity to incline but this one way, is gone by their own
Principles. They must either grant, that the Liberty of Man's Will is consistent
with a Necessity of inclining one way and not another, or yield that their own
Doctrine destroys its liberty.

Whether they will be so ingenuous or no, it is very certain that some
Necessity may very well consist with Liberty in the freest Agents. God is
Necessarily good, and yet Freely: So are the Saints and Angels in Heaven; they
cannot but be Holy, and act holily, yet they are so, and do so freely. The
Devils and Damned in Hell are necessarily Wicked, they cannot be other; and yet
they are so, and act Wickedness freely: Wicked men on Earth, that are
habitually and judicially hardened in Wickedness, they are necessarily evil,
and cannot but sin, and yet they sin freely. So that this Conceit, though it be
a fundamental Doctrine with them, and the main weight of their Cause lies on
it, that Liberty is inconsistent with Necessity; is against the sense, reason
and experience of Heaven, and Earth, and Hell.

Obj. If Salvation be of Grace, it must be a free Gift, offered and given
freely: But we see in Scripture (and the Promises of saving Mercy make it
plain) that it is offered, and so given upon Terms and Conditions required of
those that will be Saved. The Promises are many of of them expressly
Conditional; and so will the Covenant of Grace be, of which the Promises are
but several Articles. Now that which is not Given or Promised, but upon Terms
and Conditions, seems not to be given or offered freely; the more Conditional,
the less Free and Gracious.

Answ. The Offers of Salvation, the Promises of saving Mercies, notwithstanding
any Conditionalness in them, any Terms annexed, are free and gracious, upon a
manifold account: for in many cases, Conditions or Terms do not hinder a Grant
or Promise from being free.

1. If the Condition be so only in respect of outward Form and Manner of
Proposal, not properly and really: For then it seems to be a Condition, but is
not strictly. So here: Gospel Promises are Conditional (...), not (...), quoad
externam formam and modum proponendi, not proprie and quoad rigorem: as to
manner of proposal they seem Conditional; but examine them by the Laws of
Conditions, and they will be found rather Absolute. If the denomination must be
taken a majori, or a potiori, if the Number or Weight will carry it, bring them
to the Test, examine why they should be counted Conditional or Absolute; and it
will be found, that in more respects, and for more weighty Considerations they
ought to pass for Absolute, rather than Conditional, in the Pelagian sense; so
no reason to question their Freeness.

2. If the Condition be our Duty. If such, as when we perform it we do nothing
but what we owe, and the Promiser owes nothing to us for doing it; then, if he
promise any thing, he promises freely. It is promissio indebita pro opere
debito, that is gratuita. That which is not ex debito is gratuito. These are
opposed, Romans 4. 4. That which is no way due, if promised, is freely promised.
Now all that is required, is our Duty, we owe it; and for all that we can do,
God owes us nothing. Debitum non redit in Deum: Praemium non est divini juris
naturalis; his Nature engages him not to reward his Creatures. That which he
does this way is of free Will. Deus ad praemium nemini est obligatus. Romans 11.
35. Eternal Life had not been due to Adam, if he had performed perfect
Obedience; it was only the Promise entitled him to it. If not due to him, much
less to us; he might vouchsafe no more Reward to us than to the inferior
Creatures. And since nothing is due from God, what he bestows or promises, he
does it freely. When we have done all, we are but unprofitable Servants, we
have but done our Duty, we can Challenge no Reward: There is none due, therefore
when he Promises any, he does it freely. The Condition being but our Duty,
makes nothing due; no more than Reward is due to him that pays his Debts.

3. If the Condition be Inconsiderable, compared with what is promised: Suppose
one should Promise his Tenant a Thousand Pound per annum, if he will pay him a
Pepper Corn; would any say, this Promise is not free, because of such a
Condition? Whatever the Lord requires of us, is no more than this, compared
with what he Promises to us. Believing and active Obeying is not so much as
Suffering; yet if the Lord should have made Sufferings the Conditions of
Promises, they would have been free in this respect: Because the greatest
Sufferings (such as Paul's, and those in the Primitive times) would be small
and inconsiderable, compared with the Glory Promised, Romans 8. 18. 2 Cor. 4. 17.
Now if the hardest Conditions be so inconsiderable, what are the smallest? even
nothing compared with what is Promised, Grace, Glory, God himself, etc.

4. If the Condition be not so much for the Advantage of the Promiser, as to
make us capable of the thing Promised. That which is not so much for the
Advantage of the Promiser, as for his to whom the Promise is made, must needs
be from free bounty; the Promiser herein more respecting the good of another,
than his own: What can be more of Grace? Or if the Favor promised be not
feisable, without that which is propounded as a Condition of the Proposal: If
it be necessary to make Capable of that which is Promised, then it is rather a
Direction how the Favor may be attained, than a strict Condition. It does no
way Prejudice the freedom of the Promise, but rather renders it more Free and
Gracious. But such are many of those things, which the Lord prescribes as
Conditions, they are more for our Advantage than his; he expects, he gets
little or nothing by our Performance of them, Psalm. 16. 2. Job. 22. 2. Job 35.
7, 8. What Advantage has the Lord by our Mourning, Sense of our lost Condition,
Apprehensions of the burden of Sin, Hungerings and Thirstings after
Righteousness? Why then does he annex these to the Promises; but because
without them we are not capable of those Mercies which he is willing to bestow?
Christ comes to seek and Save what was lost, Mat. 18. 11. Luke 19. 10. Why is
this Condition added? those that are lost, sensible of their lost Condition;
but because Sinners are not capable of this Favor till then? they will not be
found of Christ, 'till they feel themselves lost. Why Hunger and Thirst before
be Satisfied? Matthew. 5. Because the Soul is till then closed, shut up, not
capable of Satisfaction, Psalm. 81. 10. How can it be filled, except first
opened? so himself, Mat. 11. 28. Why Labor? because not till then capable of
rest. When the Lord offers a Favor, and withal shows how it may be attained;
he deals more Freely, more Graciously, than if he should barely Propound it,
and leave us to our own selves to find out the Way and Means how it might be
effected.

Conditions of this Nature are so far from making Promises less free, as they
are rendered hereby more Gracious: There is as much of Free Grace in
prescribing these, as in Promising to them, because without these the Promise
might be of no effect, the Favor not feisable, the Sinner not capable of it.

5. If the Condition be easy, no Cost, Charge, Trouble or Hazard attend it: He
that Offers upon such easy Terms, Offers freely. If one should Promise to
Entertain his Friend, if he will but come to him; or Visit him, if he will but
let him in; or Advance him, if he be willing; or give him a Jewel that will
enrich him for ever, if he will but receive it; or supply him with all his
Heart can desire, if he will but ask it: Would any Man have the Face to say,
such Offers were not Free and Gracious? are they not as Free as Heart can
desire? If a Man might choose his own Terms, could he Imagine, Invent, any more
Easy?

Such are the Promises of the Gospel: The Lord will Entertain Sinners, if they
will but Come, Isa. 55. 1. Ease, Mat. 11. Satisfy, Joh. 6. 35. Or as if it
were too much for Sinners to Come to him; he will Come to them, if they but
Open to him, Rev. 3. 20. Give himself, the Pearl of great Price, if but Receive
him: Marry, if but Consent to him, Joh. 1. 12. Mat. 22. 2, 3. Give Eternal
Life, if but Willing, Rev. 22. 17. Give all Heart can desire, if but Ask it,
Joh. 16. 23. Open the Treasures of Grace and Glory, if but Knock, Mat. 7. 7. Be
your Friend for ever, if but Love him, Joh. 14. 21. Bear the Weight and Burden
of all your Cares, if but lay them on him, Psalm. 55. 22. Never fail you in Life
or Death, if but Trust him, Psalm. 34. 22. Psalm. 125. 1.

O! how Free are these Offers! how Easy these Terms! It would be intolerable
Impudence, to desire these upon any Terms more Free. Would you have Christ your
Friend, and not Love him? Marry you without your Consent? or take Care for you,
and not Trust him? who can be so unreasonable? The Conditions here are of such
a Nature, that it is even all one as if they were absolute: No Promise of this
Nature can be more Free, more absolute; for the Nature of what is Promised,
will admit of no other Terms, they are as free as can be. Can Christ Come to
you, if you will not let him in? or Entertain you, if not Come to him? or Give
himself, if not receive him? Nor need you say, these are not easy, we cannot
do them of our selves. Christ prevents this; they are easy, if he Concur and
Assist; and he engages to assist all those who have Interest in the Promises,
all that Come to him.

6. If the Condition be Promised: He that annexes a Condition to a Promise, and
withal Promises to give that Condition, does all one as if he Promised
absolutely. Suppose Hiram had Promised Solomon Cedars to build the Temple, upon
Condition they were Cut down; if Hiram had also Promised to Cut them down, his
former Promise had hereby become absolute. Or suppose Pharaoh had Promised
Jacob that he should come and be Entertained in Egypt, upon Condition that
Wagons were provided to carry him; if Pharaoh should also send him Wagons (as
he did by Joseph, Genesis 45. 19.) it is all one, as if the former Promise had
been absolute.

So it is here: And this is enough, if there were no more, to make this Truth
evident, and to prove it unanswerably. That which the Lord seems to make a
Condition in one place, he Promises absolutely in another: For the Promises of
Regeneration are absolute: The Lord freely engages himself to implant all
Spiritual Graces and Holy Affections in the Soul. Now to these, either in habit
or exercise, are all the Promises made, which we count Conditional. So that the
Condition of them being absolutely Promised, they are in effect absolute; e. g.
The Lord Promises Salvation to Perseverance, Mat. 24. 15. He promises
Perseverance to Faith, Psalm. 125. 1. 1 Pet. 1. 5. and Faith is Promised
absolutely, Ezekiel. 36. 26. A new Heart is a believing Heart; so that the two
former, their Conditions being Promised, are absolute. He promises Life to
those that have Christ, 1 John 5. 1^. He promises Christ to those that Fear
him, Mal. 4. 2. and he promises Fear absolutely, Jer. 32. 40. So wherever you
find any thing annexed to a Promise, as a Condition, in another place you may
find it, either expressly or implicitly Promised: And therefore all the Promises
are, in this respect, as good as Absolute; and if Absolute, no reason to
question their Freedom.

If the Terms or Conditions be such, as it is not possible in the Nature of the
thing, that the Mercy offered should be effected without them; then the offers
of Saving Mercies are as Free and Gracious as can be, as there is any
possibility they should be; and no more can be desired.

Let me clear this in one of those Terms, which is comprehensive of all the
rest. It is required of those, who will partake of saving Mercies, that they
leave sin, forsake their evil ways, Prove. 28. 13. Isa. 55. 7. 2 Timothy 2. 19.

This is the Sum of all Conditions; and whatever is required in other Terms,
is included in this, or may be resolved into it. Now it is not possible, that
saving Mercies should otherwise be had, that they should be received or enjoyed
but upon these Terms; not only because the Lord would have it so, but because
the Nature of the thing does so require it, that it is not otherwise feisible.

For Sin is our Impotency: Now can we possibly have Strength in the inner Man,
if we will not part with our Weakness? Sin is our Deformity, that which renders
our Souls loathsome and ugly in the Eye of God. Now can our Souls be made
Lovely, if we will not part with that which is our Defilement and Ugliness? Can
we be made Clean, if we will not part with our Leprosy? Sin is our Enmity
against God, therein it consists; Now can we possibly be Reconciled, if we will
not lay aside our Enmity? Sin is the Poverty of the Soul, that which robs and
spoils, and utterly impoverishes the Soul: Now can you be made Rich, if you
will not part with your Poverty? Sin is the Souls restraint, the Dungeon where
it is imprisoned, the Bonds and Fetters wherewith it is laden: Now is it
possible you should have Liberty, if you will not leave your Dungeon, and part
with your Fetters? Sin is the Wound, the Mortal Disease of the Soul; and can
you be healed, if you will not part with your Disease? Sin is your Misery; can
you be Happy, if not part with Misery? Happiness consists in the Enjoyment of
God; but adhering ^o Sin, and the Enjoyment of a Holy God, are utterly
inconsistent: And can you be Happy without Happiness, or by retaining that
which is inconsistent with it?

So that you see, there is an utter impossibility that Salvation should be had,
but upon these Terms: There is an Inconsistency, a plain Contradiction, in any
other Supposition. It is an Impossibility, not only to us, but to the Almighty;
and therefore the Terms are as free and gracious, as possibly could be;
Omnipotent Grace it self could not make them more gracious.

To clear this, several things are to be observed*

(1.) The first Blessings of the Covenant are Promised absolutely; Effectual
Calling, Faith, Repentance, Conversion, Regeneration, are Offered, are Promised
without any Conditions. The Promises of these Mercies are absolute, Ezekiel. 36.
26. Jer. 32. 39, 40. Under the Notions of a New Heart, a New Spirit, putting
his Spirit, his Fear within them, etc. the Blessings forementioned, called the
first Grace, are Promised absolutely; and so are the same things in other
terms, Jer. 31. 31, 32, 33. repeated by the Apostle, Heb. 8. 8. There can be no
Instance given in Scripture, where these things are Promised upon Condition.
Indeed if they were promised upon Condition, Grace would be Promised to
something Natural: For this being the first Grace, there can be nothing before
it to be the Condition of it, but what is Natural; and to make that which is
Natural the Condition of Grace, is gross Pelagianism. If there were any
Conditions of those first gracious Favors, they must be those things, which
are Previous to, and Preparations for them, viz. Diligent Attendance on the
Word and Means of Grace, Convictions of Sin, legal Sorrow for it, Sense of
Wrath and Misery, which often go before Conversion, and are counted
Dispositions or Preparations for Faith. But these previous Works are not
Conditions of Conversion, or the other Blessings included therein, nor are they
promised upon such Terms: For the Condition is never separated from the Favor
promised to it; where the Condition is performed, the Promise is always
accomplished: But these preparatory Acts have been in many, who were never
truly Converted and Regenerated, never had a New Heart and a New Spirit given
them: So that these Preparations are no Conditions of Faith or Regeneration;
much less is there any thing of congruous Merit in them. Our Divines, that
insist on such Preparations for Christ, decryed the Conceit of Merit, though in
the lowest form. This Merit of the Papists inferrs a Dueness of the thing so
deserved; a Dueness in Congruity, tho not in Justice: And what is due from the
Lord any way, he will infallibly bestow: But there may be these previous
Dispositions, where Faith is never given. There is not so much as a Conditional
Connection between such Preparations and those Blessings; they are Promised
absolutely without any Condition expressed or implied.

(2.) The subsequent Blessings of the Covenant, those that follow the first,
are in some sense Conditional, and so Offered and Promised in a Conditional
Form, and yet are never the less Gracious. There are Terms and Conditions,
taking the word Conditions in a latitude, as comprizing Qualifications,
Adjuncts, and necessary Antecedents, which do no way derogate from Grace;
neither detract from its Freeness, nor obscure, but rather illustrate it, Romans
10. 8, 9, 10. Rev. 3. Upon such Terms are Justification, Adoption, Salvation
offered, and not Offered but upon Terms, and yet most Freely and Graciously,
Romans 3. Freely by his Grace, and yet through Faith, no otherwise but upon such
Terms, Joh. 3. 18. Upon the same Terms we are Adopted, Joh. 1. 12. We are saved
by Grace, but through Faith, Ephesians. 2. And not only Faith, but Holiness of Heart
and Life, and Perseverance therein, are the Terms upon which Salvation is
Promised, Mat. 5. Heb. 12. 14. Rev. 2. 10. Mark 13. 13. It is all one as if
they were expressed Conditionally. This is not because the Lord makes a
Conditional Bargain with us, leaving the Condition to our own Wills, being
uncertain whether it will be made good or no: But the reason is, because Divine
Wisdom has made a Connection betwixt these Blessings, so that they shall never
be separated; one of them shall not be had without the other: No Justification
without Faith, no Salvation without Holiness, no Glory without Perseverance:
And has Constituted an Order amongst them, so that one of them must go before
the other: We must Believe before we be Justified, and be Holy before we can
see God. And has appointed one of them to be the Means or way to obtain the
other: We are Justi^ied by Faith, we are Created unto good Works, that we
should walk in them. Acts of Holy Obedience are the way wherein we must walk to
Salvation: So that here is an Antecedence of some Duty, and that necessary by
Divine Appointment and Command, and this tending to obtain a Favor freely
offered.

And by this we may understand what a Condition is, in a sense very innocent,
and no way injurious to Grace. It is an Antecedent necessarily required, as the
way to attain or arrive at what is Promised.

And in this Sense it must not be denied that there are Conditions in the
Gospel, and its Promises; unless we will deny that there are Duties necessary
to Salvation, and made necessary by Divine Command: For such a Condition is
nothing but something of a Command joined with a Promise in a conditional Form;
and Divine Commands must be no more questioned, when they are joined with
Promises, than when they are delivered apart. He Commands all to Repent, and he
promises Pardon: Put this Promise and that Command together, and it becomes a
Conditional Promise; if you Repent, you shall have Pardon, or as the Apostle
delivers it, 1 John 1. 9. If we Confess our Sins, he is faithful and just to
forgive us our Sins, and to cleanse us from all our Unrighteousness.

(3.) There are Conditions that are Injurious to Grace, and Inconsistent with
it: None such are annexed to any Promise of the Gospel, none such must be
admitted by those who will reserve to the Lord the Honor of his Grace, or have
our Salvation entirely ascribed to it.

1. Meritorious Conditions, when the Condition is presumed to deserve what is
Promised: There is no such Condition of Salvation as this, but in the proud
Fancies of Presumptuous Sinners. For, 1. There must be a Disproportion between
that which is procured, and the Condition that deserves it: It is of Favor,
not of Merit, if the promised Blessing exceed the worth of the Condition. To
make this plain; suppose the worth of a days Work be twelve Pence, a Man
Promises another a thousand Crowns for a days Labor; it cannot in any reason
be imagined that his days Labor deserves so much; if he receive so much, he
has it of Favor not of Merit. Now the Disproportion is far greater betwixt
Salvation, and all that is required of us in order thereto: Sufferings for
Christ are more considerable on this account than holy Actings; but all the
Sufferings of this Life, such as those of the Apostle and the Primitive
Christians, bear not the sleightest Proportion to the Glory Promised, Romans 8.
18. there is no Proportion betwixt them; the Glory offered does infinitely
exceed them; it is the Eternal Enjoyment of God himself; and between that which
is finite and infinite there is no Proportion, 2 Cor. 4. 17. If Glory were
Promised on these Terms, as it seems to be, 2 Timothy 2. 12. yet Suffering would
be far from Deserving the Crown; there is no correspondent worth in them to so
vast a Crown. Merit quite excludes Grace; for tha^ which is deserved is due in
Justice, it is a just Debt; but that which is of Debt, is not, cannot be of
Grace, if the Apostle understood these things, Romans 4. 4. He makes a plain
Opposition between Grace and Debt. And therefore, if by the Performance of any
Condition we can deserve Salvation, it will be of Debt, and we must expunge the
Text, and conclude we are not saved by Grace.

2. Natural Conditions, such as may be Performed by the Power of Nature,
without the concurrence of Omnipotent or Special Grace. All that is required to
Salvation, under the notion of Conditions, must be of this Nature, by that
Doctrine which will have nothing necessary for the Performance thereof, but
Suasive Grace: For this gives no Power sufficient for Performance; and
therefore if there be any Performance, it must be by the Power of Nature. Their
Grace gives not the Power, but supposes it in the Will already: All that it can
justly pretend to, is to Excite what it sinds, not what it gives. It does not,
it cannot subdue the Wills Corruptions, natural and contracted, which is its
Moral Impotency: And that which leaves it Impotent, as it found it, gives it
not Power; it plants no Principle of Spiritual Life and Strength in the Will,
but disclaims these expressly. And as it does not give the Power, so neither
does it give the Act; it determins not the Will, nor causes it to Act; but
leaves it to incline as it list, when there is no Principle in it to incline it
toward that which is Saving, and Corruption enough to incline it the other way.

The Case standing thus, if the Will comply with the Terms of Salvation, it
must be by its own Power, since it has no more from above: And then, in
Opposition to the Text, Salvation will be of our selves, by our own Strength,
not by Grace; nor will Grace which is Saving, be the Gift of God: For if he
give neither the Power, nor the Act, who can imagine how it can be counted his
Gift? They may as well say, we are Saved by the Power of Nature, as that the
Conditions of Salvation are to be Performed by such a Power, without any other
Assistance of Grace.

3. No Legal Conditions, no Conditions performed by us, nor our Righteousness.
The Righteousness by which we are justified, the Righteousness by which we have
Pardon, or by which we have Right and Title to Salvation. Neither Faith, nor
sincere Obedience, are required of us for this end; nor can they, when
Performed by us, be any such Righteousness. It is Christ, and he alone, that is
our Righteousness; it is by his Righteousness, and that alone, that we are
Justified: It was he, who by his Obedience to Death satisfied Divine Justice,
and procured Title to Eternal Life. It is not pretended that any Performances
of ours do or can satisfy Divine Justice; nor can it with more reason be
pretended, that our Performances give us Title to Life. Those that say he did
not both, may as well say he did neither. Our Performances may evidence our
Title, but they give it not, nor are the Ground of it. It is Christ, his
Righteousness, that is the only Foundation of our Title, Romans 10. 4. The End of
the Law, i. e. of the Covenant of Works, was, that Man, by the Righteousness of
Perfect Obedience, might have Title to Eternal Life; this being rendered
Impossible in Man's fallen and sinful State, how shall the End of the Law, which
the Lord aimed at, be attained? Why, Christ attains the End of the Law by his
Righteousness, giving Title to Life to those who believe.

Faith and Obedience are not our Righteousness; now, as Perfect Obedience was
to be in the State of Innocence, they are not in the stead of it, they have not
the Virtue and Office of it, they are not Conditions of the Covenant of Grace,
as that was of the Covenant of Works; i. e. They are not the Righteousness by
which we are Justified, and have Title to Life: It is Christ that is the End of
the Law for Righteousness to those Purposes; and to ascribe that to our
Performances, which is proper to him, is injurious to the Grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

And how is it of Grace upon these Terms? how is the Covenant of the Gospel
more Gracious than that of Works? It cannot be said that it is more Gracious,
because it requires and accepts less, sincere Obedience being not so much as
that which is Perfect: For sincere Obedience may be counted as much to Man in
his present State of Sin and Impotency, as Perfect Obedience in the State of
Innocence and Perfection. But the transcendent Graciousness of the Gospel
Covenant, consists not in requiring less Righteousness to give Title to Life,
than was due at first; but in not requiring a Perfect Righteousness of us
Personally for that end, but providing and accepting that of a surety,
according to that of the Apostle, Romans 8. 3, 4. The Law could not give us Life,
because being weakened by sin, we could not Perform the Perfect Righteousness
which is required; but what the Law could not do, Christ has done, giving us
Title to Life, fulfilling the Righteousness of it in our behalf. But does not
the Scripture declare, that our Obedience is the Obedience which gives Title to
Life? Rev. 22. 14. I Answer, There is a double Right, Jus: ad rem, and Jus in
re; a Right of Title, and a Right of Possession: Holy Obedience gives us not
the Title, but leads us into Possession. It gives not the Title, for that we
have in Justification, Romans 5. 18. Now Obedience is after Justification, and so
cannot give that which is before it self, and does not give that which is given
already. But it leads us into Possession, it is the Way by which we enter; so
the Word immediately sollowing will have it understood. When the Apostle had
declared that we are Saved by Grace, Ephesians. 2. 8. and so excluded Works, Verse. 9.
that we may count this to be our Title to Salvation, yet he adds, Ver. 10. We
are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has
before ordained that we should walk in them. These are the Ways wherein we must
walk, if we will arrive at Salvation; but they are not our Title to it, as
Perfect Obedience would have been in the first Covenant, the Law of Works; they
are not such Conditions, they are not our Righteousness, (upon which our Title
is Founded) as that was designed to be: They are not Legal Conditions.

4. Obliging Conditions. There is no performance of ours, that can of it self
oblige the Lord to perform any Promise; the reason, because it is defective,
and falls short of what is required: And amongst men, he that promises upon
Conditions is not obliged, if the Terms be not duly observed. The Law of our
Creation required of us perfect Performance; and no less than perfect Obedience
to God will be due from us, while we are Creatures. It is true, Man now wants
Power to answer his Engagements, but that was through his own fault; and the
Lord does not lose his due, because Man sins against him. Now being defective,
and falling short of his Duty, it is sinful; and that which is sinful, is to
be punished, not rewarded, as such it has not a Moral fitness for promised
Reward; that which is sinful, brings the performer under the Curse, Gal. 3. it
deserves eternal Death, Romans 6. and so cannot oblige the Lord to reward it.

Upon this account, the best performance of any supposed Condition, is so far
of it self from making any promised Blessing to be due in point of Justice,
that it cannot make it due in point of Faithfulness. That which needs Pardon
cannot of it self make any thing due to us, but Punishment. Our Faith, our
Repentance, our Obedience, being sinfully defective, cannot as such make any
thing due ^o us, but Punishment; and so cannot oblige the Lord to perform the
Promises, to justify, pardon, or save us: For that which obliges the Lord to
execute the Threatening, cannot oblige him to fulfill his Promise. How then is
the Lord obliged? How come the Promises to be accomplished? Why, not upon the
account of our defective Performances, but for Christ's sake, and so through
Grace.

Christ has satisfied for the sins of his People, for the sinful defects of
their Performances: Upon his account they are pardoned and accepted, and so for
his sake they are rewarded, and the Promises performed. Thus, as 2 Cor. 1. 20.
all the Promises are performed with unvariable Faithfulness; he engages the
Faithfulness of God to fulfill all the Promises, when as our Performances,
considered in themselves, do oblige him and would rather engage him against it.

5. Uncertain Conditions. When it is uncertain whether the Condition will be
performed or no. Such Conditions have place amongst Men, and Men only, such as
suspend the Affair in eventum incertum, and leave it at uncertainty as to the
Event; it is uncertain whether the Condition will be performed or not, and so
uncertain whether the Promise will be performed. The Reason why Man proposes
such Conditions, is his Weakness and Imperfection, for want of Power or
Foresight. He has not the Wills of others in his Power, cannot make them comply
with his Will, and so cannot tell what they will do. So that it is also for
want of certain Foreknowledge or Foresight, when we will not bestow a Favor on
another, but upon Terms. If we were certain that the Terms would be observed,
we would promise Absolutely; if we were certain the Condition would not be
observed, we would not promise at all; but because we are uncertain, therefore
we promise Conditionally. Now the Ground of these Conditions being Weakness,
they must in no wise be ascribed unto God. It derogates from his infinite
Wisdom, and infallible Foreknowledge; it derogates from his Power and
Providence over man's Will and human Affairs: it derogates from the Efficacy of
his Grace, as tho this could not determine man's Will, or prevail with it
certainly and infallibly to comply with his Proposals; but must leave it
indifferent, and in suspense, and so at uncertainty, whether it will comply or
not comply with what he propounds.

For USE.
(1.) Acknowledge this Grace? How? By getting high Apprehensions of it, and
entertaining frequent Thoughts about it. Say, How precious are thy Thoughts to
me, O God! how great is the sum of them! Let the Meditation hereof be sweeter
than the Honey and the Honey-combe. (2.) Let this beget suitable Affections,
Love, Joy, Admiration, Delight, both in the Fountain and Streams of Free Grace.
(3.) Let it be a Motive to all Holiness and Obedience. Let the Grace of God,
the Love of Christ constrain you to an Obsequiousness to him, and
Affectionateness to one another. If God so loved us, how ought we love one
another! (4.) Let it strengthen our Faith in Afflictions, and Temptations, from
the Power of Sin and sense of unworthiness. (5.) Hold it forth to others: Take
all Occasions to magnify it; oppose every Practice and Opinion that obscures
the Luster of it. Use it as a Touchstone, to discover what Persons are most
holy, what Tenants are most true, even those which most illustrate Free Grace.
(6.) By glorying in the Lord; using it to make us and keep us humble. We had
nothing to merit, nothing to move, for Salvation: what we are, or have, we are
by, and have from this Grace. Let no man boast, Romans 9. If you have any
laudable, amiable Accomplishments, give the glory to God.


For Motives.
1. Consider, how thankful Gods ancient People were for Temporal Salvation;
what sweet Strains of grateful Hearts appear in those Songs of Praises which
we find Recorded usually after any Deliverance. And have we not much more
reason to be thankful for Eternal Salvation? 2. Consider what a comprehensive
Blessing Salvation is, and take an Estimate thereof, by comparing it with the
Temporal Deliverances of the Israelites: Those proceeded from a Common ordinary
Love, these from a Peculiar distinguishing Affection. Their Deliverances were
effected, not without the Hazard of of their Persons; our Salvation is Effected
only by the Blood of Christ: The Issue of theirs was not much more than Civil
Tranquillity, sitting under their Vines and Figgtrees; the Issue of ours is
Grace, Glory, Joy, and those things that Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor
have entered into the Heart of Man to conceive. 3. This is the End of all God
does in the World, even to Glorify himself; as Romans 9. in showing the
Exceeding Riches of his Grace, in his Kindness toward us through Jesus Christ:
Now we have no other way to Glorify him, but by an active affectionate
Acknowledgment of his Grace. 4. This is the Employment of gloryfied Spirits in
Heaven, to Praise, Admire and Adore this Grace: This is the Subject of those
Seraphick Praises. The thoughts of this stupendous Love transports Angels and
Men into an eternal Rapture. This is the way to be in Heaven upon Earth, to
anticipate Glory, to enter into our Masters Joy before we come at it: Nay, this
is the way by which our Masters Joy enters into us. Never are our Souls filled
with such Ravishing Pleasures, as when we are taken up with such heavenly
Employment. Never do we rise higher above the World, than when these Thoughts
wing our Souls: Nay, sometimes they will steal into Heaven, as the Israelites
Spies into Canaan, and bring from thence into our Souls, Grapes, and Figgs, and
Pomgranates, some taste of what we shall fully enjoy in the Land of Promise.


Salvation is a comprehensive Blessing; it includes the Eternal Love of God;
that is its Foundation: Which Eternal Love broke forht in time into such high
Expressions, as to send his Son, to live miserably, and dye shamefully for us,
and interest us in all the Merits of his Death. This was the Purchase of
Salvation, and it is the Conclusion; as tho unwilling those whom he loves so
well, should be at such a distance from him, takes us to Himself, to see his
Glory, to Bathe our selves in that Stream of Bliss, in those Rivers of Pleasure
that are at his Right Hand. This is the Accomplishment of Salvation; sure this
deserves to be Acknowledged.

FINIS.
Books written and published by Mr. John How Minister of the Gospel, and sold
by Tho. Parkhust at the Bible and three Crowns at the lower end of Cheapside,
near Mercers Chapel.
1 THe Blessedness of the Righteous, opened: And further Recommended from the
Consideration of the Vanity of this Mortal Life: In two Treatises, on Psalm. 17.
15. and Psalm. 89. 47.

2. Of Thoughtfulness for the Morrow. With an Appendix concerning the
Immoderate Desire of fore knowing things to come.

3. The Redeemers Tears wept over Lost Souls. A Treatise on Luke 19. 41, 42.
with an Appendix, wherein somewhat is discoursed concerning the Blasphemy
against the holy Ghost, and how God is said to will the Salvation of them that
perish.

4. Of Charity in reference to other men's Sins.


