A Serious and Brief DISCOURSE Touching the Sabbath Day: Intended to decide and
determine all CONTROVERSIES Respecting that SUBJECT.

BY THOMAS CLEADON, Rector of Radwinter in the County of Essex.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Edward Brewster, at the sign of the Crane in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1674.

OF THE SABBATH.
THAT we may be truly and clearly informed of the Doctrine of the Sabbath, we
must consider and receive these following Truths.

First, That Adam so long as he continued in the estate of Innocence in which
he was created of God, nor was, nor could be under the obligation of the ten
Commandments, and so not under the obedience of the fourth Commandment: for can
it rationally be supposed, that Adam being created perfectly holy, Genesis 1. 26,
27, made after the Image of God, which was perfect in Adam; his Understanding
was as full of concreated light of the knowledge of God and of his works, as was
necessary to his present happiness; and he was suitably perfect in his will and
affections; and therefore while he continued in this perfect holy estate, what
need had he of the Ten Commandments? or of what use could they be unto him? He
knew not what it was to worship an Image, or to take Gods Name in vain; nor
could he know any of the sins forbidden, nor any of the duties commanded in the
second Table of the Law; nor was of it any use to him, who was perfectly holy;
nor did he know that God would set apart one day in seven to be more holy than
the rest; for had he continued in the estate of Innocence more days than that
in which he was created, the eight day, and the ninth, and the tenth day, and
every had been alike holy to him, and as much a Sabbath to him as the Seventh
day; for he would have been still perfectly holy, and therefore not subject to
bodily weariness, and so needed not bodily rest; nor would he then have needed
any of those outward duties and ordinances of worship required of us in the
second or fourth Commandments, for our spiritual edification and comfort; for
he needed not either spiritual information or spiritual comfort, or spiritual
growth, as we do since the fall; a perfect estate of grace and holiness has no
need of any of these spiritual helps and means, no more than the holy Saints in
Heaven have now need or use of them. And hence two things must necessarily be
inferred.

1. That man was fallen from his Innocence before he was commanded to observe
the seventh day as the time of the Sabbath or holy Rest, as it was afterward
expressed in the fourth Commandment; and it is evident, that Gods great design
in creating man, was not his continuance in the estate of innocence for one
day;, and therefore as soon as man was created and put into Paradise God made a
Covenant with him for himself and all his posterity, That if he did eat first
of the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, he and all his posterity
should presently dye, that is, a spiritual death, by being stripped of that holy
image of God in which he was created; but if he did eat first of the tree of
Life, which stood next to the other, then he and all his posterity should
continue for ever in their present holy and happy estate. Now the Devil hearing
and knowing that God had made this Covenant with him, and fearing lest Adam
should eat first of the tree of Life, and so he and all his posterity should
live for ever; he being full of envy, and malice, and subtilty, he presently
entered into the Serpent, and in and by the Serpent persuaded and prevailed with
Eve, and by Eve persuades and prevailed with Adam to eat of the fruit of the
forbidden tree; and so they both, and all their posterity, were deprived of
that innocent and holy estate in which they were created; therefore Gods great
design in creating man, was, that by his fall he might take occasion to
glorify both his Mercy and Justice in sending his Son into the world to be a
Redeemer and Savior, which he did in promise immediately upon man's fall, Genesis
3. 15; and by actual exhibition, when the fullness of time was come, Gal. 4. 4:
And therefore Adam's continuance in the estate of innocence for so short a
time, was most suitable to Gods great design in man's creation.

2. This also must necessarily be inferred, That Adam being created perfectly
innocent and holy, could not fall from that holy and happy estate by any other
way, but only by doing some outward act, in its own nature lawful, which God
should forbid him to do; and God forbad him to eat of the fruit of the tree of
knowledge of good and evil, which was in it self lawful, but became unlawful for
him to eat of that fruit, by a positive negative precept from God, Genesis 2. 17.
For God never made with man but two Covenants essentially differing one from
the other; the first was made with man in the estate of innocence, before his
fall, expressed in Genesis 2. 16, 17; and this, if you will, you may call a
Covenant of Works; and this Covenant he brake, Genesis 3. 6. And the second
Covenant God made with man in his lapsed or fallen estate, being devoid of all
spiritual good, overspread with original sin, and under the guilt of eternal
death; and this was a Covenant of Grace, touching the redemption and salvation
of man, a sinner, by the death and sufferings of Christ, both God and Man; and
this Covenant of Grace God did reveal and express to Adam immediately upon his
fall, in Genesis 3. 15. and what God has revealed to be his will in reference to
man a sinner, ever since he made that promise, has been but an explication and
amplification of that Covenant-promise made in Christ. Now this Covenant of
Grace (since that first promise made to man in his lapsed estate) God has
revealed to man a sinner, or rather to his Church and people by such degrees
and means as he pleased; for as for the first two thousand years after that
promise, God revealed his will and mind to his people, not by writing, but
either by visions, or dreams, or by audible voice, and the like; but at the end
of two thousand years, when God brought his people out of Egypt, they being
grown to a great Nation, in their passage through the Wilderness, God
established the Covenant of Grace with them in a more public way, and after a
more solemn manner, upon Mount Sinai; and then, and not before, he spoke the
Ten Commandments to them with his own mouth; and also he wrote them in two
Tables of stone with his own hand, to be unto them, and to all succeeding
Churches, in covenant with him, a rule to walk by, Exodus 31. 18. Now these Ten
Words, or Ten Commandments, are no where in the Scripture called the Moral Law;
but by Divine Writers they are so called a morando, because they were and are
to continue a rule of righteousness and obedience to the Church and people of
God to the end of the world; and they are said to be moral, not simply and
absolutely, but synecdochically, or in some respect only; and therefore in the
Ten Commandments rightly to understand them, we must consider two things:
First, The substance of every Commandment: And Secondly, The circumstances of
every Commandment. Now the substance of every Commandment is moral, of
perpetual Equity, and knowable by the Light of Nature or Reason in man fallen;
but the circumstances are positive, and depend upon Revelation, or Gods
positive Commands expressed in the Scripture. This is true of every one of the
Ten Commandments; I shall instance only in two of them, which will give light
to all the rest: I shall instance in the Second and Fourth Commandments. First,
The Second Commandment concerns the outward Worship of God; now the morality
or substance of this Second Commandment is this, Thou shall outwardly worship
the Lord thy God only by such ways and duties as he shall command and appoint.
And this may be known to fallen man by the light of Reason; for that does
dictate to him, that there is a God, and that God is to be worshipped, and that
he is to be worshipped only by such duties, ways and means, as he shall command
and appoint: but for the circumstances of this Commandment, namely, the
particular duties and ordinances by which God will be outwardly worshipped,
they depend wholly upon Revelation, and the positive Commands of God; for all
the duties of worship commanded of God both in the Old and New Testament, are
to be referred to the Second Commandment. So the substance or morality of the
Fourth Commandment, is contained in these words only, Remember the Sabbath Day
to keep it holy; that is, Thou shall keep holy that day of Rest which I do
appoint; and this also the light of Reason may dictate, That it belongs to
God only to set apart and appoint to his people a day of holy Rest; and all the
other words expressed in this Commandment, are but circumstantial, and depend
upon Revelation; as the appointing the Seventh day from the Creation to be the
day of holy Rest to the people of God before Christ, was by positive command of
God; for Adam in the estate of innocence could not know by his concreated
light, that God would finish his work of Creation in six days; and yet God does
make that the ground of his instituting the Seventh day to be the day of holy
Rest, Genesis 2. 3. much less could it be known by the light of Nature or Reason
in man fallen: We read of Aristotle, that great Philospher, who did excel in
the light of Reason, that he affirmed that the World had no beginning; and the
Scripture says expressly, Heb. 11. 3, By faith we understand that the worlds
were framed by the word of God; and that which we understand by faith, we know
by revelation only, which is the ground of faith; and the Seventh day being a
created time as well as the other six days, could not be a holy time to fallen
man, but by Gods special and positive Command and Institution.

2. A second thing to be considered for the right understanding of the Doctrine
of the Sabbath, is this, That the Seventh day from the Creation appointed of
God to be the Sabbath or day of holy Rest to the people of God before Christ's
incarnation, being but the positive part of the Fourth Commandment, did cease
and end as a holy Sabbath at the time of Christ's resurrection from the dead;
the reason is, Because though it was primarily commanded of God to be so
observed; yet afterward a typical sense and use was by Moses from God added to
it; as Circumcision and the Passover, they were instituted to be the ordinary
Sacraments belonging to the Church of the Jews and were both seals of the
Covenant of Grace; the first of Initiation, the other of confirmation and
growth; yet being also used as typical during the legal administration, they
both ceased with the Ceremonial Law; and in the room of them Christ ordained
Baptism and the Lords Supper to be the only Sacraments to all Christian
Churches in time of the Gospel. So the Seventh day from the Creation it was
primarily by a positive command of God set apart to be the Jews weekly holy
Sabbath; yet it came to be used also as typical, to signify to the faithful
their spiritual rest in Christ in this ^ife, and their eternal rest by and with
Christ in Heaven, as Exodus 31. 13, Verily my Sabbaths ye shall keep; for it is
a sign betwixt me and you throughout your generations; which is meant also of
the Seventh-day Sabbath, as is evident in ver. 14, 15, 16; and in ver. 17, It
is a sign between me and the children of Israel for ever: and it is reckoned up
amongst the other Jewish Festival Sabbaths in Levit. 23. 2, and in Col. 2. 16,
17, which are a shadow of things to come, but the body is Christ. And Heb. 4.
3, 4, 5, 9. There remains therefore a Sabbatism to the people of God; and it
is evident that this Sabbatism was typified by the Seventh-day Sabbath in ver.
4. And from these Scriptures it must be granted, That God appointed the Rest of
the Seventh-day not only as a sanctified time of his Worship public and
private, but also as a sanctified sign of man's resting on the Seed of the
Woman, and of his eternal Rest in Heaven; and therefore as soon as the Seed of
the Woman had finished his Sacrifice, and was risen from the dead, the holy
Rest of the Seventh-day ceased, as did all the other types of Moses his Law,
Gal. 4. 9, 10, 11; and in the room of it was appointed by Christ the First day
of the week. For to deny that God has instituted another day to be the day of
holy Rest to Christians in the time of the Gospel, is to deny the Moral part of
the Fourth Commandment.

3. A third thing therefore to be considered for the right understanding of the
Doctrine of the Sabbath is this, That upon the Resurrection of Christ from the
dead, God did appoint the First day of the week to be the day of holy Rest to
the Churches of Christ to the end of the world; which yet in his great wisdom
is so contrived, that the weekly return of it is but one day in seven, that
still man may have six days for his labor, and God may have the Seventh-day to
be his holy Sabbath, and this by virtue of the moral part of the Fourth
Commandment, and that expressed in these words, Remember thou keep holy the
Sabbath Day; that is, the day that I shall appoint by posi^ive Command to be my
holy Sabbath Day: Now that God has appointed the First day of the week, it
being the Eight from the Creation, and the Seventh day from the Resurrection of
Christ, to be the Christian Sabbath, has been, and may be made evident to any
one, who can but so far deny himself, as to think that he may err and be
mistaken in his opinion, and is resolved to receive the truth whenever and by
whomsoever it shall be made manifest to him from the holy Scriptures.

Now for the proof of this Third particular, consider, that the Seventh day
from the Creation being appointed of God by positive command the day of holy
Rest to the Jews; and that day being also made typical, and so ceased, as has
been already proved; it was necessary from the moral part of the Fourth
Commandment, that God should appoint another day for his holy Sabbath, instead
of the Seventh day from the Creation; for God only can so set apart and
sanctify a Sabbath day as to bind the inward as well as the outward man to be
holily exercised all that day, as it is expressed in Isa. 58. 13, 14. Now that
the First day of the week is appointed and ordained of God to be the Christians
holy Sabbath Day, is sufficiently evidenced by these things.

1. That the eight day from the Creation, being the day of Christ's resurrection
from the dead, is very eminent and famous in the Old Testament before the time
of Christ his incarnation; as* 1. No creature was allowed for sacrifice until
it was eight days old, Exodus 22. 27, 30. 2. The Law of Circumcision was
strictly tied to the eight day, Genesis 17. 12, and in diverse other places* 3. The
persons of the Priests were not perfectly consecrated to minister in their
Office, until the eighth day, Levit. 8. 33, and 9. 1. 4. The leprous person was
not perfectly cleansed until the eight day, Lev. 14. 10; nor the polluted
Nazarite, Numb. 6. 10. 5. The last and great day of the Feast of Tabernacles,
was on the eight day, which was a Sabbath Day, Joh. 7. 37: and all this to
typifie the eminency of the Resurrection-day of Christ, even above the Seventh
from the Creation; and all this did clearly intimate and imply, that God would
at Christ's resurrection take off the Crown of honor from the Seventh day, and
set it upon the head of the Eight day, the day of his Son's resurrection from
the dead, having then finished the great work of man's Redemption.

2. It is evident by Scripture, that it has been Gods frequent practice to set
a character or mark of remembrance and honor upon his most considerable works
and actions, by setting apart a set and solemn time to be piously observed and
kept upon that account: As for his other great works, he commanded only an
yearly solemnity, as in Exodus 12. 42, and chap. 13. 3* and in Hest. 9. 20. But
the great work of the Creation God would have to be remembered and honored by a
weekly solemnity, by setting apart and sanctifying the Seventh day from the
Creation to be observed in the weekly return of it, as his holy Sabbath, or day
of Holy Rest, Genesis 2. 3. And can we reasonably imagine, that Gods Pleasure,
Acquiescence and Rest, in raising his Son, his only begotten Son, from the
dead, having finished the great work of Redemption, a greater and a more
glorious work than that of the Creation, and of a more dear and precious
resentment to God the Father; that yet this wonderful and blessed work, the
very admiration of Angels, should not be honored with a day of remembrance, as
frequent, as solemn, as sacred, and by Gods own appointment, as the other was,
how can it but seem very strange to a considerate, believing, and redeemed
Christian.

3. The Lord Jesus himself began to celebrate and solemnize the individual day
of his Resurrection, by an holy and heavenly conference with two of his
Disciples as they were going from Jerusalem to Emaus, Luke 24. 30; And behold
two of them went the same day; the Evangelist gives special notice of the day:
and the same day he did administer the Sacrament of the Supper to them: Ver.
30, And it came to pass as he sat at meat with them, etc. You see that they
were then eating; and then he took the bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and
gave it to them; these words he uses only in the administration of the Holy
Supper. Now the same hour says the Evangelist) they returned again to
Jerusalem, and found the eleven gathered together, and them that were with
them, ver. 33, etc. and ver. 36, etc. Now why did the Holy Ghost give such
particular notice of the day, to be the same day, the eight day, the first day
of the week, the day of his resurrection from the dead, ver. 1, but to signify
that Christ on that day began to sanctify the day of his resurrection in
religious exercises, to lead the way to all that should believe in him to do
the like. Now beside this, Christ made two other appearances, and each of them
was on the first day of the week, the day in which he rose again from the dead,
not mentioning any thing spoken or done by him the six days between; and why
all this, but to put a mark of special remembrance and honor on this day, the
first day of the week, it being now to become the holy Sabbath Day to all
Christian Churches to the end of the world; and it is very observable, that
after Christ's resurrection, and before his ascension, he spoke to his Disciples
of the things pertaining to the Kingdom of God, Acts 1. 3, that is, what the
Apostles were afterward to do in the Church of God, both in respect of
Government, and Preaching, and Writing; and then commands them that they should
not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the Father, ver. 4;
which they did, as in Acts 2. 1, 2, 3, 4. Now the day on which the Holy Ghost
was sent from Heaven, and fell upon the Apostles in that miraculous manner, was
the first day of the week, as is evident from the computation of the days of
Pentecost, which are here said to have been fully come (or fulfilled), Lev. 23.
15, 16.

4. It was afterward the practice of the Saints in the Apostles days, to
solemnize the First day of the week in a religious assembling of themselves for
Sabbath duties and exercises; as Acts 20. 7. And upon the first day of the
week, when the Disciples came together to break bread (meaning, after their
usual and accustomed manner) Paul preached unto them, etc. and in 1 Cor 16. 1,
2, Upon the first day of the week, when ye are met together; namely, according
to your usual custom: and in both these places, the exact notation of the day,
the first day of the week, did denote to them, that this was and ought to be
the day to be kept by Christians for their weekly Sabbath; for the Apostles had
greatly sinned, and caused the Christian Churches to have sinned, if they had
not direction and command from Christ to observe that day of the week holy, as
being now the Christian Sabbath, 1 Cor 14. 37, and the other abolished by
Christ, as has been already proved.

5. In Rev. 1. 10, says the Apostle John, I was in the spirit on the Lords
day, this cannot be meant of the Seventh-day Sabbath, for it was above fifty
years after Christ's resurrection when the Apostle John wrote to the Seven
Churches of Asia, and then the Seventh-day Sabbath was generally laid aside by
Christians, and the first day of the week, the day of Christ's Resurrection, was
generally observed and kept by them instead of it; and therefore this title was
by the Apostle John given to that day, without any circumstance, as that which
was familiarly known, and grown in frequent use and practice in all the
Christian Churches. And as Christ ordained the Holy Supper instead of the
Passover, and therefore styled by the Apostle Paul, The Lords Supper; so
because Christ ordained the day of his Resurrection to be the Christians day of
Holy Rest, instead of the Jewish Seventh-day Sabbath; therefore it is styled by
the Apostle John, The Lords Day.

6. Ever since the Apostles time, the First day of the week, being the day of
Christ's Resurrection has been generally observed and kept as the Christian
Sabbath in all Christian Churches throughout all succeeding Ages, unto this
day. Now that they all should live and dye in an erroneous and sinful practice,
without repentance, so much controverted, and an inconsiderable party of them,
much inferior to multitudes of them both in Learning, Parts, Gifts, and
Spiritual Grace and Holiness, should yet only be in the right, who hold the
Jewish Sabbath, the Seventh day from the Creation, to be still in force, and
accordingly do observe and keep it, contrary to the declared judgment and
practice of all other Christians, cannot be thought but to proceed either from
ignorance, or from pride, or from both, one or both of these having been the
root and cause of all the Schisms, and Errors, and Heresies, which do, or ever
have disquieted and disturbed the Churches of Jesus Christ.

FINIS.

