Mr. CLAVDE's ANSWER TO Monsieur de MEAVX's BOOK, ENTITLED, A Conference with
Mr. CLAUDE.

WITH HIS LETTER to a FRIEND.

WHEREIN He Answers a Discourse of M. de Condom, now Bishop of Meaux,
concerning the Church.

IMPRIMATUR,

Junii 18. 1687. GVIL. NEEDHAM.



LONDON: Printed for T. Dring, at the Harrow in Fleetstreet, at
Chancery-Lane-end. MDCLXXXVII.

THE Author's Preface.
AMONG all the Points in Controversy betwixt us, and the Gentlemen of the
Romish Communion, it is plain there is not any one wherein they think better of
their Cause than this, which has been started since our Reformation,
Concerning the Church; and yet, perhaps there is not any one wherein they have
less reason to think so. Were this groundless confidence observed to be
predominant among the Vulgar only, who seldom look beyond the prejudices of
their Infancy; or among the busy men of intrigue in the Age, who are ever
raising their worldly Advantages, as a Bulwark against the Truth; there would
be no great reason to be surprised at it. But the most amazing thing of all is,
that we continually meet with the same Opinion in persons that want neither
Understanding, nor sound Sense and Judgment; and which otherwise seem men of
Integrity and Sincerity; so that there is scarce any question to be made, but
that they are verily persuaded of the thing, as a certain undoubted Truth.

Now for the undeceiving these Persons, it will, in my opinion, be convenient,
not only to set their own Conceptions before them; but also to go back as far
as the ground and original of those Conceptions, that so they themselves may
plese to make such Reflections upon them, as they shall judge fit and necessary.
The ground then of all this mistake is, that upon pretense of the Churches
being a Society, they immediately suffer themselves to be possessed at first with
an Opinion, That we are to judge of it almost in the same manner, that we do of
a Civil Society; and so never give themselves the trouble of enquiring into the
differences by which these two are distinguished from one another. Hence they
have fancied, that the Essence of the Church consists entirely in something
External; and that as a man need do no more to become a true Member of a Civil
Society, than only live in an outward observance of the Laws; so to become a
true Member of the Church, no more was required, than barely an outward
Profession of the Faith and Religion; and that there was no necessity at all of
any inward Virtues, such as Faith, Hope, and Charity. This is the very thing
that has made the Definitions of, most of their modern Divines, who place it
in a mere outward Profession, be entertained with Approbation and Applause. And
when once these Definitions are received, they are under a necessity of looking
upon, not any one part of these Professors, to be the true Church of Jesus
Christ; but in general, the whole Body of Professors, whether they be good or
bad men, just or unjust, hypocrites or sincere Believers.

From hence, by another unavoidable consequence, they are forced to conceive of
the Church, not only as an exterior and visible Body, but as a Body distinctly,
and certainly visible, to such a degree I mean, that a man might point out,
without any danger of mistake, the particular men of whom it is composed; as
plainly and distinctly, as you can point the Persons that make up any other
Society; and declare without the least fear of mistaking your men, such and
such are members of it. Such a visibility of the Church as this it is, that
Bellarmin has explained thus: Ecclesia est ^e^us homi^^m ita visibi^^, and
palpa^lis, ut est cae^^s populi Ro^ani, vel Reg^um Galliae, (...) Respubli^
Venetorum. ^ellarmin. de ^ccles. Lib. 3. cap. 2. Edit. ^ugdum. 1587.
The Church is a company of Men as visible, and as palpable, as the Citizens of
Rome, the Kingdom of France, or the Republic of Venice. So that his meaning
is, that as the French, the Romans and Venetians, may plainly and particularly
be singled out; so likewise may the Persons that make the Body of the Church
be, as particularly, and with the same degree of certainty that they were.
Indeed, if there be nothing besides a bare outward Profession required, to make
men truly Members of the Church, This Profession is a thing discernable by the
eye, in every single person; and thus the Church will be visible, so as that
particular men may be plainly distinguished to be of it.

By another necessary and unavoidable Consequence, they were constrained to
apply all the Promises made by God to his Church, whether in the Old or New
Testament, to this visible and exterior Body. And being these Promises include
the Churches perpetuity, that they might keep as close to their first Notions
as they could, there was a necessity of explaining the Churches subsistence in
this sense: That the Church must always subsist after the manner of a sensible
and palpable body, so as to be the object of our sight, and discernable by all
the World, even to a plain and positive distinction of particular persons.
Hence it is, that they have drawn their so much boasted Succession, and which
all their disputes run so much upon. Whereby they understand a continued train
of Priests, one after another, in the same Episcopal Sees, and a continued
train of people, making up the same Congregations; so as that both People and
Priests always make profession of the same Religion, without any change or
alteration, except it be perhaps in matters of Discipline, which are things
that may very well admit of a change, without making the Church to differ from
what it was before.

Then carrying these Conceptions of theirs still further, they fancied, that as
in order to the preservation of the Civil Society, an absolute Supreme
Authority, to which all must bend, is necessary, because without such a one
there would be no possible means of composing differences, or preventing
Domestic quarrels; the same was likewise necessary in the Church: That in
this, one Supreme and Absolute Tribunal must be acknowledged upon Earth; that
without this and an entire obedience paid to it, even in matters of Conscience,
Dispute would never be ended, nor Unity preserved, but at last things would
come to such a pass that there would start up as many Churches, and different
Religions, as Families. And this gave birth to their pretentions to
Infallibility, and a blind implicit obedience to the determinations of
Councils, without presuming to examine them at all.

Lastly, It is by all these prejudicate opinions, that the Gentlemen of the
Romish Communion suppose themselves able to overthrow the Protestant-Cause, and
make that of their own Church impregnable. The pretended Reformed Church, say
they, cannot be this exterior body, always visible, and palpable, which must
have continued in this state of visibility, and that without any alteration,
ever since Jesus Christ, and the Apostles time, down to ours; because this is
not above a hundred or sixscore years old, Therefore it is not the Church of
Christ. This cannot show a continued succession of Priests and People,
Assemblies and Episcopal Sees, nor a profession of one and the same Religion
without any variation, which is exactly what Christ promised. Therefore this is
not the Church of Jesus Christ. This Church has forsaken the Supreme Authority
and Infallibility of the Church of Rome, and refused to pay obedience to her
decisions; on the contrary the has taken upon her to examine those Decisions,
and has done all that in her lay utterly to subvert this Tribunal, which is so
necessary to the subsistence of the true Church: Therefore she is not the
Church of Jesus Christ.

Of these Objections especially has M. de Meaux made his Book to consist; and
because this of mine is made public only with a design to answer that, it is
not fit I should prevent the reading of it in this Preface, nor forestal the
judgment men may make of my Answers, when they see them at large. I shall think
it therefore sufficient to say in general, by way of preparation, That all
these pretended Principles which the Gentlemen of the Romish Communion take the
freedom to suppose, are every one of them false and sophistical, and capable of
being confuted more ways than one, because all built upon a false and vain
foundation. For in truth what greater vanity can there be, than to go about to
form an Idea of the Church, after the pattern of a Civil Society? The Civil
Society is a humane contrivance, that owes its birth to natural instinct, under
the Government of a General Providence, and is kept up and preserved by Rules
of Justice and humane Policy. The Church is a Divine and Supernatural work,
born only of the Blood of the Son of God, and animated only by his Spirit. His
hands have made it, and his particular Providence watches over it, and
preserves it. The Laws of the Civil Society do not properly respect any more
than the outward man, they never make it any part of their End or business to
regulate men's hearts, or alter the inclinations, or inward motions there; all
within, they leave perfectly free, and are satisfied with an outward
observation, which comes within the reach of man's power. The Laws of the
Church do chiefly regard the inward man, their design is to sanctify the
heart, and fix themselves especially in the soul, which are effects above any
power of man, and can belong to none but God only.

The matters in which the Civil Society is employed, are merely temporal, such
as we call the Goods of Fortune, Honor, Trade, the Exercise of Arts and
Sciences, and other things of this kind, which may be cognisable by men, and
brought under their Jurisdiction. But the matters in which the Society of the
Church is concerned, consist in Mysteries conveyed to us by a Supernatural
Revelation; in Laws imposed upon the Conscience; in the internal and external
practice of Christian Virtues. Now all these things are Heavenly, Spiritual,
unchangeable, having no dependence upon the will, authority, or declaration of
men, but solely and immediately upon the will of God, and his declaring them to
be such. To make a man a true member of the Civil Society, there is no more
required than to seem so in the eyes of the world, who can pass a judgment only
on the outward appearance, without being able to dive into the heart. To be a
member of the Church, it is required that a man be so, not in the eyes of men
only, but of God too, who a^ the Scripture expresses it, tries the very hearts
and reins, and will not be satisfied with a pare outside. The design of Civil
Societies, is, that every man may according to his quality and station, enjoy
the public Privileges, that his Personal Rights and Properties may be
preserved entire, that each particular person may live quietly and peaceably
under the protection of the whole Body; and these are Advantages not out of the
power of men to give. The end for which the Church is designed, is everlasting
Salvation, a Heavenly Paradise, the happiness of a life to come, which are all
Advantages not within the power of men to confer. In the Civil Society, private
men ought rather to suffer injuries that are put upon them, than disturb the
peace of the whole Body, because such injuries may be endured, and yet not
approved; and besides if they do it, the evil is not past all redress; for God
who protects the innocent and oppressed, is able to right them, and recompense
their losses with interest: In the Church it is far otherwise, where the
Conscience must acquiesce, and a quiet submission cannot be given to a lie, an
error, or an unjust thing, without approving it; and when it is approved, the
evil is past redress, for God will avenge that fault, and nothing can make us
amends for the loss of our Eternal Salvation: Besides, that the peace we hereby
allow the whole Body, is so far from a Blessing, that it is the worst of Evils,
being, in truth, no better than a War against God. I repeat it therefore once
again, That there is not in the World a greater falsity, nor a more sophistical
imposture, than the framing such a notion of the Church, after the model of
Civil Societies.

The case standing thus, who does not perceive that all the conclusions from
this false supposition fall to the ground, and utterly vanish? A man must not
after this, fancy the Church to be a Body merely external, nor that all its
essence consists in a bare Profession; nor that these Definitions given us of
it, which run upon an outward profession of the same Faith, a participation of
the same Sacraments, a submission to the same Pope, without allowing internal
Graces any share, are good and valid definitions; nor that wicked men,
worldlings and hypocrites, are Members of Jesus Christ's true Church. All this
would do, if the question were concerning a Body, or contrivance merely humane,
as the Civil Society is. But when we discourse of a thing that is the work and
contrivance of God, and must bear some proportion to the excellency of its
Author, we must affirm that Faith, Hope and Charity, and in one word, all the
parts of true Regeneration are essential to it; and that this consists of the
Faithful and Elect only, excluding thence the Hypocrites and Reprobate. We must
not afterward fancy the Church so be a body or company of men, visible at the
same rate that Kingdoms and Commonwealths are; Li^^an, so as to distinguish
plainly, and without danger of mistake, the very persons whereof it is
composed. This were allowable, provided the Church consisted in an outward
appearance, and bare profession only. But we must affirm it to be visible in
the midst of dissemblers, as honest men are visible, when mixed with those that
act otherwise; or to make use of a Scripture instance, as the good Corn is
visible, tho mingled in the same field with Tares that look like it. The
Promises of Jesus Christ must no longer be applied to all the exterior Body
made up of a mere profession, nor must the perpetuity of the Church be imagined
to mean a continuance of this exterior Body in the same condition, without
undergoing any alteration; or a constant equal succession of Priests, People,
Sees and Councils. This might be admitted, if all this exterior body were the
true Church of Jesus Christ, if that were not mixed with worldlings and wicked
men, who change the Church as to outward appearances; or if it is Ministry were
sure to be always entrusted in the hands of good men. But the case being
otherwise, these Promises must be confined to the true Believers, and the
Church conceived to subsist for ever in this mixture of wicked persons, and
consequently, that it shall subsist sometimes among the public corruptions of
the Ministry, to which Almighty God sets bounds, as his wisdom sees fit for the
preservation of his Children. We must not any longer believe a supreme,
visible, and speaking authority in the Church, to be necessary for putting an
end to differences and disputes; nor upon this pretense allow Ecclesiastical
Assemblies to be infallible, or forbid the faithful to examine their
determinations. This might pass, if the Church were I reserved, as Civil
Societies are, by rules of humane policy; or if some temporal advantages were
the only thing enquired after; or if the matters so determined, required only
an outward compliance, as those in Civil Societies do. But now, that the Church
is under a protection infinitely more effectual than all the wisdom of Man; now
that Salvation is the thing in question, and a submission of Conscience the
thing required, it must be confessed, that since Divine Revelation ceased, there
is no further need of any other supreme infallible: Authority, besides that of
the Scripture, which is the Churches Law, its Oracle, and perpetual Rule; a
Rule plain and clear in what it expresses in all things necessary to be
believed; plain and clear in its silence with relation to other things not
necessary to be believed: It must be owned, that since God does not call men to
Ministerial functions immediately, and by himself, it may happen that these
Functions may generally be exercised by Reprobates; and to suppose that such
people as these, who can challenge no share in God's Promises to his Church,
are infallible, would be the most palpable absurdity in the World. We must
acknowledge, that since it is so uncertain, whether the men that make up these
Assemblies, are themselves really of Jesus Christ's Church, it would be not
only rash, but wicked, to receive their Decrees implicitly, and submit to them
without any Examination at all; because this were really to put our Salvation
upon the venture, which ought to be infinitely dearer to us than any thing in
the World, and which, if once lost, can never be made amends for again. Lastly,
we must not upon these pretended Principles take up Prejudices against the
Protestant Churches, nor tax them with Novelty, because they are not united to
this visible, exterior Body, which was before the Reformation; or because they
do not show that uniform succession of Sees, and Councils, and the profession
of the same Religion, without any alteration at all, and every thing as was
practiced before; nor pretend they have subverted a Tribunal necessary for the
subsistence of the true Church, because they refuse to acknowledge the Church of
Rome's Authority, and to comply with her determinations. These several charges
upon us might be tolerably well laid, if a man could assert that the Church
consists of all this exterior body, as it might be asserted, if a Civil Society
were the matter in question. But being that body must be distinguished into two
parts, the one consisting of good, the other of ill men; the one of good Corn,
the other of Tares; the Protestant Church cannot be called new, if it only
oppose this latter part, which had gotten possession of all the outward
advantages, to wit, the Ministry, the Sees, the Churches, the Councils, the
Schools, and in one word, the Exterior Profession, and which had changed and
corrupted all these. For is there any necessity that a Church should groan
under the same oppression, in order to being the same with a Church that was
before? Is there a necessity of lying under the Tares that choked and
encompassed the Corn, in order to being of the Corn? And are not men the same
Children of Jacob, without being among the same strangers among whom that
Family has been? The Protestants have not one jot the less really, and truly,
a succession of Sees, of Councils, and the profession of Religion, for not
having that part of them which was earthly and unclean. I acknowledge they have
given quite another aspect and appearance to the House of God, by this
cleansing; but still there is the same Ministry, the same Sees, the same
Assemblies, the same Profession, not with respect to the corruptions that
appeared in them, but in regard of the Christian Order which still continued
under all this filth and nastiness. The vessels of the Temple are still the
same, only they are washed, made clean, and restored to their natural use. And
as for that pretended Tribunal of the Romish Church, which the Reformation has
subverted, it never having any more foundation than what was imaginary, and
merely humane, there is no reason to complain of the Protestants, for not
submitting to it, because they would thereby have done wrong to that of the
Scripture, which is Jesus Christ's true Tribunal, fixed, and to continue for
ever, in the midst of his people.

But this showing the many differences between the Church and Civil Societies,
is not the only method of confuting these Gentlemen's Principles. Take which
way you will, their falsity and weakness is easily discovered, and they are
likewise attended with this inconvenience, that as soon as one of them is
overthrown, all the rest fall with it. Overthrow for instance but that one
principle, that the true Church must be an exterior visible Body, even to the
pointing out of the particular persons whereof it is composed, and at the same
time you overthrow all those definitions. they give of it, which include bad
men as well as good, and make reprobates to be no less members than the Elect;
you overthrow their application of God's Promises to this whole Body; you
overthrow its perpetuity in this Condition, by virtue of those Promises; you
overthrow the necessity of this pretended external Succession, upon which they
lay such mighty stress; you evacuate the supreme Authority, and Infallibility
of Church Assemblies, and the blind obedience required to their determinations.
The case is the same with all their other principles particularly, which must
of necessity, either all stand, or all fall together.

I might truly say, that you can no where observe a Systeme more effectually
destroyed in the several parts of it, than this is in the Book now published by
me: For there is not any one of the propositions that help to make that
Systeme, but I have confuted it substantially, by Arguments that amount even to
a Demonstration. Which way can any one maintain that Definition of the Church
which goes upon a bare outward profession, and makes it consist of bad as well
as good men; and which Stapleton, Bellarmin, Cardinal du Perron, and some other
Controversial Divines look upon as a principal point, after having observed
what I have written on this subject, in the second question of the Letter to my
Friend, and the Examination of M. de Meaux's ninth Reflection? What pretense
can men have for carrying on the Churches visibility so far, as to a plain,
particular, and constant designation of men's persons that help to make up that
Body, after having considered what is said to this purpose in my Third
Question, and in the Examination of M. de Meaux's Eleventh Reflection? How can
men fancy that Jesus Christ's Promises belong to this exterior Body composed of
good and bad men promiscuously, after what I have written to this purpose upon
the fourth Question, and the Examination of the Twelfth Reflection? Which way
can the External Succession be defended, in the sense these Gentlemen
understand it, after having weighed my answer to the Second Part of M. de
Condom 's Discourse, and compared it with my Examination of the Eighth and
Thirteenth Reflection? What can be s^^d in behalf of the Supreme Authority
Church Assemblies pretend to, and the ready Obedience to them, without any
trying their decisions, which these Gentlemen would make us believe ought to be
paid them, after having compared the Relation of our Conference, with what I
have written on the Six first Reflections? I must confess the strength of my
Reasons may possibly receive some disadvantage from the manner of my delivering
them; and that it required a more skilful hand than mine, which might have
spoke with all the elegance, and address of my renowned Adversary. But yet I
dare aver, that even in my plain way, and in the midst of all my bluntness,
there will be found enough to satisfy and convince my Readers, That the Systeme
treated of is upon many accounts quite destroyed, both as to the whole, and as
to each of its parts.

I am sensible, this Systeme is a thing contrived with abundance of cunning and
skill, that it was never the invention of one single Brain; that they have made
it look as specious as the thing could possibly bear; But all the skill and
cunning in the World can never give a thing so great a luster as Truth; and it
is plain, that That Systeme can never be true, which is repugnant to the
evidence both of Scripture and Reason. I may add too, that notwithstanding all
the pains taken to contrive it as strong as might be, they are forced to leave
it with many weaknesses, which it was impossible for them to conceal. Nay, such
a Systeme particularly is This, which contradicts experience, and contradicts
it so far too, that were the Church of Rome it self, for whose advantage it was
first established, to be tried by these Principles that compose it, she could
not make her party good. Let us, if you please, venture an experiment upon that
principle which asserts the perpetuity of the same Exterior Body. Will you take
the confidence to call that of the three first Ages, the same Body with the
modern Church of Rome, where there is not the least tittle to be found of
direct Invocation of Saints and Angels in the public service of the Church;
where there is not the least addressing to Images and Pictures in their
worship; where there is no prohibition of the Cup to the Laity; nor of the use
of Scripture in the vulgar Tongue, without leave granted by the Ordinary; nor
of Praying in a Language which the people do not understand; where we find
nothing to the contrary, but that the Scripture is the only, and the sufficient
Rule of Faith, in all things necessary to Salvation; where we meet with no such
number of Sacraments as seven, no use made of Papal Indulgences, no necessity
of Auricular Confession, no Elevation of the Host that the people may prostrate
themselves in adoration to it; no Transubstantiation, nor Real presence made
Doctrines; no mention of the Church of Rome's being the Mother and Mistress of
all other Churches, nor of I know not how many things besides which are of very
considerable importance? Will you call the Church of Rome, as it stands at this
day, as it looks upon the opinion of the M^llenaries to be erroneous, as it
prohibits giving the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper to little Children, as it
believes the beatifick vision of God antecedent to the last Judgment, as it
forbids the Clergy to Marry; will you call this, I say, the same Exterior Body
with the Primitive Church, which believed and practiced directly the contrary?
To call this the same Body, is like Theseus his Ship, which was always called
the same Ship, tho there was scarce a Plank in it all, that had not been
changed.

A Second experiment may be made in that Principle which relates to the
Succession in Episcopal Sees, as these Gentlemen are pleased to understand it:
For how can they ever maintain this Succession in the Sea of Rome, which they
look upon as the very Original and Center of Church-Unity, while they agree, as
they do, that many of those Popes were intruders against all Law and Custom,
and consequently false Popes, such as Baronius calls Baronius, ad Ann. 900 de
Stephano septimo. Stephanus Apostolcae sedis invaso -- and paulo post,
facinorosus homo, quique ut fur, and latro ingressus est in o^^le ovium. -- Ad
ann. 908. (de Sergio primo) Perpetrata sunt ista ab invasoribus, and intrusis
in Apostolicam sedem, Pontificis nomen usurpantibus, and illegitime thronum
Apostolicum invadentibus. -- ad Ann 912. (de Joanne decimo, qui post Landonem
Petri cathedram ascendit, Theodorae, scorti tunc temporis potentissimi
auspiciis) Quae tunc facies Ecclesiae Romanae? Cum darentur Episcopi,
intruderentur in sedem Petri meretricum amasii Pseudopontifices, qui non sint
nisi ad consignanda tantum tempora in Catalogo Romanorum Pontificum scripti.
Annal. Tom. 10. Edit. Antverp.
Violent seizers of the Apostolic See, unlawful Usurpers of the Papal Name and
Chair, False Popes which only served to make the times they lived in notorious?
And now seeing this intrusion continued for almost one whole Age, and the call
to all Ecclesiastical Functions depends upon the Sea of Rome, what must we
think of those which proceeded from these false Popes, and those that followed
after them? How can they make good this Succession in the person of Vigilius,
who by their own confession was an Usurper of the Sea over Sylverius, and a
Schismatic, excommunicated, he and all his party that adhered to him, by
Sylverius the rightful Pope? Which adherents were not only all the Clergy of
Rome, but all the Archbishops and Bishops of the Empire, excepting only four
Bishops that were banished with Sylverius, and joined with him in signing the
sentence of Excommunication; Sylverius dyed, Vigilius kept the Papacy still,
and yet the Excommunication was not taken off. It is acknowledged to be a just
and valid sentence, and yet from these excommunicated persons are all the
Popes, Patriarchs, Primates, Archbishops and Bishops descended ever since.

Baronius ad Ann. 540. Se a Pontificatu abdicasse Vigilium, ex spatio
vacationis sedis Silverii dicendum omnino est; nam quomodo potuit, secundum
Anastasium, seeds vacasse sex dies, si Vigilius, ipso vivente Silverio,
intrusus semel, sedere post ejus obitum perseverasset? Annal. Tom. 7. Page 301.
Edit. Antverp.
Baronius in the relation of this Accident, endeavors all he can, to deprive
us of the Conclusions we draw from it. He tells us therefore, that he guesses
Vigilius acted a part all that while, and that being informed of Sylverius his
death, he of his own accord resigned the Popedom usurped by him before, and at
the same time got the Clergy of Rome to choose him into it again. This
conjecture he grounds upon four words in Anastasius, that the Sea was vacant
six days. But this is a very idle story: There is not any Author mentions this
voluntary resignation of Vigilius, nor his being chosen in again by the Clergy
of Rome, as is pretended; it is all a pure fancy of Baronius, without any manner
of probability for it; and the five or six days which the Sea continued vacant,
are to be understood to follow, not Sylverius his death, but the time of his
being deposed by Belisarius illegally and by force, who took away his Pallium,
and compelled him to resume a Monks habit. He lived after that a year in exile
in the Island of Palmenia; there he excommunicated Vigilius and his faction, to
wit, the Clergy of Rome, that very Clergy which chose Vigilius to succeed him;
so that the Excommunication being just and valid, as Baronius owns it was, we
cannot look upon Vigilius and his Clergy, and all the Bishops in the World
then, any otherwise than as men degraded, and cut off from the Church: And then
according to M. de Meaux's principles, there was no way left, but for Christ to
come into the World once more, to re-establish the call to the Ministry. The
truth of what I assert, may be tried a third way, in that Principle of the
supreme Authority, and Infallibility of Councils, and the blind implicit
obedience they pretend is due to them. For supposing this Principle to take
place, the Church of Rome has ceased to be a true Church long ago. I shall not
here produce all those Councils heretofore that decreed in favor of Arrianism;
such as that of Antioch, of Sardica, or of Philippi, that of Milan, of Sirmium,
of Arimini, of Seleucia, or of Constantinople. I will not instance in the
second Council of Ephesus, where the Bishop of Rome's Legates assisted, which
established the Eutychian Heresy; nor that of Diospolis, which acquitted
Pelagius the Heretic. Nor will I speak of those which have at several times
determined things directly contradictory to one another, in the matter of
Images, such as the Council of Constantinople under Constantine Copronymus; the
second Council of Nice, under the Empress Irene, the Council of Franckfort
under Charlemagne, and the Council of Paris under Lewis the Debonaire. Nor will
I insist upon the Councils held in the Tenth Age, which contradicted one
another upon this question, whether Formosus could be lawfully preferred to the
Papacy, contrary to his Oath, which a Pope had dispensed with; and whether all
the persons ordained by him ought not to be reordained: Without troubling our
selves with things so far off, we need only desire these Gentlemen to tell us,
if they really and sincerely believe these few late Councils to be infallible?
That of Rome under Gregory the seventh, where Baronius says, it was determined,
Baronius ad Ann. 1076. Privilegia Apostolicae sedis, and Romani Pontificis Quod
Papae ^^eat Imperatores deponere. Quod sententia illius a nullo debeat
retractari, and ipse omnium solus retractare possit. Quod a fidelitate
iniquorum Subjectos potest absolvere. Annal. Tom. 11. Page 485. Edit. Romae
1605.
That the Pope has power to depose Emperors and Kings; That what he has once
determined, no man can afterward bring to a rehearing, but that he alone can
rehear, and alter the determinations of all other persons; That he cannot be
judged by any man whatever; That he may absolve the Subjects of wicked Princes
from their Oaths of Allegiance. That of Lateran under Alexander the Third,
which Relaxatos autem se noverint a debito fidelitatis, and hominii, ac totius
obsequii, dum in tanta iniquitate permanserint, quicunque illis aliquo peccato,
(pacto) tenentur annexi. Conc. Lateran 3. Cap. 27. Anno 1179. Collect. Labbe.
Lut. Paris. 1671. Tom. 10. Page 1523.
releases Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance, which they have sworn to
their Governors, if those Governors hold any correspondence with Heretics.
That of Lateran under Innocent the third, which enjoins, Si vero Dominus
temporalis requisitus, and monitus Ecclesia, terram suam purgare neglexerit ab
haeretica foeditate, per Metropolitanum, and caeteros comprovinciales Episcopos
Excommunicationis vinculo innodetur. Et si satisfacere contempserit infra
annum, significetur hoc summo Pontifici, ut extunc ipse Vassallos ab ejus
fidelitate denunciet absolutos, and terram exponat Catholicis occupandam, qui
eam exterminatis haereticis sine ulla contradictione possideant. Conc. Lateran.
4. Ann. 1215. Cap. 3. de Haereticis Collect. Labb. Tom. 11. Part. 1. Page 148.
That if Temporal Princes neglect to root out Heretics, there shall be notice
given of it to the Pope, that so the Pope may pronounce their Subjects absolved
from their Oaths of Allegiance, and dispose of their Countries to Catholics
who may discharge their duty better. That of Lions under Innocent the fourth
See Innocent the fourth's sentence against the Emperor Frederick, past in the
Council of Lions. It is at large in Labbe 'sCollection of Councils, Tom. 11.
part. 1. Page 640. in the Close are these words. Nos super praemissis --
memoratum Principem -- omni honor and dignitate privatum a Domino ostendimus,
denunciamus, and nihilo minus sententiando privamus. Omnes, qui ei Juramento
fidelitatis tenentur adstricti, a Juramento hujusmodi perpetuo absolventes,
autoritate Apostolica ^irmiter inhibendo, ne quisquam de caetero sibi tanquam
Imperatori, vel Regi pareat vel intendat. Et decernendo quoslibet, qui deinceps
ei, velut Imperatori* aut Regi, consilium, vel auxilium praestiterint, seu
favorem, ipso facto excommunicationis vinculo subjacere.
which deposed the Emperor. Frederick the Second, released his Subjects from
their Oaths of Allegiance, and forbid them upon penalty of being Anathematized,
to acknowledge or obey him. That of Constance, which in the Bull of Martin the
fifth Universas potestates, and dominos temporales, and Judices antedictos
exhortando requirimus, and mandamus eisdem, -- ut pro defensione fidei --
inquisitoribus Haereticae pravitatis -- pareant and intendant, praebeantque
auxilium, and favorem Labb. Collect. Council. Constant. Bulla. Inter cunctas
pastoralis Curae, etc. Tom. 12. Page 259.
containing the Clause de sacro approbante Concilio, subjects not only
Patriarchs, Archbishops, and Bishops, but even Kings and other supreme
Governors, of what quality soever they be, to the judgment of the Inquisitors,
even to a deprivation from their honors, and all other worldly possessions.
That of Lateran, under Leo the Tenth, which sets the Pope's Authority above
that of Cum solum Romanum Pontificem, pro tempore existentem tanquam
authoritatem super omnia concilia habentem, tam Conciliorum indicendorum --
plenum jus and potestatem, nedum ex sacrae Scripturae testimonio, dictis
sanctorum Patrum -- habere manifest constet. Conc. Lateran. 5. Sess. 11.
Bulla. Pastor aeternus. Labb. Collect. Tom. 14. Page 309.
Councils, directly contrary to what was defined by the Council of Constance,
with the approbation of Pope Martin the Fifth, and to the Council of Basil,
with the approbation of Pope Eugenius the Fourth.

In a word, the endeavoring to assert that Councils are infallible, and giving
them such an Authority as supercedes all examination, is so bold an
undertaking, that many eminent persons in the Church of Rome it self, thinking
it could never be effected, have not scrupled to declare for the other opinion.
Among these was the famous Abbot of Palerma, principal of the Canonists, whose
words are so very considerable, that I cannot omit repeating them. Puto tamen
quod si Papa moveretur melioribus rationibus and authoritatibus, quam
Concilium, quod standum esset sententiae suae. Nam and Concilium potest errare,
sicut alias erravit, super Matrimonium contrahendam inter raptorem and raptam.
Dictum Hieronymi melius sentientis postea praelatum fuit statuto Concilii. Nam
in concernentibus fidem etiam dictum unius privati praeferendum esset dicto
Papae, si ille moveretur melioribus rationibus novi and veteris Testamenti,
quam Papa. Nec obstat, si dicatur quod Concilium non potest errare, quia
Christus oravit pro Ecclesia sua, ut non deficeret; quare dico, quod ^icet
Concilium generale repraesentet totam Ecclesiam Universalem, tamen in veritate
ibi non est vere Universalis Ecclesia sed repraesentative: quia Universalis
Ecclesia constituitur ex collatione omnium fidelium, unde omnes fideles orbis
constituunt istam Ecclesiam Universalem, cujus caput and sponsus est ipse
Christus. Papa autem est Vicarius Christi, and non vere caput Ecclesiae. Et
ista est illa Ecclesia, quae errare non potest. Unde possibile est, quod vera
fides Christi, remanserit in uno solo, ita quod verum est dicere, quod fides
non deficit in Ecclesia, sicut jus Universitatis potest residere in uno solo,
aliis peccantibus. Panormitan. super S. Decret. Tit. de Election. Can.
Significasti. Fol. 86.
I am of opinion, (says he) that if the Pope have better reasons, and better
authorities than the Council, he ought to stick to his own judgment. For the
Council may, and sometimes actually has erred, as particularly in the case of a
Ravishers marrying with the woman on whom the Rape was committed. Saint Jerome's
opinion was preferred before the Decree of a Council, because it was really
better. For in matters of Faith, a single private man's judgment ought to be
preferred before the Pope's, if this private judgment be grounded upon better
reasons, taken out of the Old and New Testament. It signifies nothing to alledg
the Council cannot err because Jesus Christ has prayed for his Church that it
fail not. In answer to this I say, that although a General Council do indeed
represent the Church universally, yet it is plain the Universal Church is not
there really, but only by way of representation. For the Universal Church is
made up of the company of all the Faithful, so that they are the Faithful
throughout the whole world, that constitute the Church Universally, of which
Christ is the Head, and the Spouse. The Pope is Christ's Vicar, but he is not
truly the Head of the Church. And this Church it is, that cannot err. Thus then
it may so happen that the true Faith of Christ may continue entire in a single
person, and then the true Faith would not fail in the Church, as the right of a
Community may be preserved in a single member of it.

See now what the force of truth made one of the greatest Doctors of his Age
say: The Catholic Church in his opinion consists only of the Faithful, it is
of them only that Christ is the Head and the Spouse, to them alone he has
promised that they shall abide for ever. Councils may represent the Church, but
it does not follow from thence that they are the Church. They may fall into
Errors. The true Church which refuses to fall with them, may subsist in a very
few, and these few by preserving the true Faith, will also preserve all the
Privileges of Jesus Christ's Church. All this is exactly what we assert in this
case.

The Abbot of Palermo's opinion was likewise common to many of the Schools.
Occam a famous Doctor among the Schoolmen, of the fourteenth Age has composed
a Dialogue on this Subject, where among other questions he discusses these six
principal ones: 1. Occam. Dialog. Lib. 5. Quaeritur, utrum Papa canonice
electus haereticari possit. cap. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Utrum Collegium Cardinalium
possit haeretica pravitate maculari. Cap. 6. etc. Utrum Papa cum Collegio
Cardinalium simul possit heretica pravitate maculari. Cap. 10. Utrum Ecclesia
Romana se^ seeds Apostolica valeat in^ici haeretica pravitate. Cap. 11. Utrum
Concilium Generale Ecclesiae in haereticam pravitatem labi possit. Cap. 25.
Utrum tota multitudo fidelium haereticari possit. Cap. 29.
Whether a Pope that is Canonically, chosen can afterward turn Heretic? 2.
Whether the College of Cardinals may fall into Heresy? 3. Whether it be
possible for the Pope and Cardinals together to fall into it? 4. Whether it be
so, for the Church of Rome, and Apostolic See to fall into it? 5. Whether a
General Council may fall into it? 6. Whether even the Body of Christians may
fall into it? He affirms, that as many held the Negative in these Points, so
there were a great many too, that held the affirmative; and he gives you the
reasons urged by both sides for their several opinions. I know very well, that
he was engaged in that silly quarrel between John the 22 d, and the Franciscan
Friars, which took up almost the whole life of that Pope, to know whether the
Friars had any proper right to the bread they eat, or only the bare use of it;
and whether Jesus Christ and his Apostles had likewise any proper right to the
things they used. But this is no argument why such an Authors Testimony should
not be unexceptionable, when he asserts as matter of fact that the six
forementioned questions were disputed pro and con, among the Learned men of his
time.

There is likewise a testimony of John Francis Picus Mirandula, which
flourished in the beginning of the Fifteenth Age, which he gives us in his
Theoremes concerning the Faith. After having said something to their opinion,
who make either a Pope or a Council Infallible, he adds these words:
Restiterunt alii, affirmantes errare posse Concilia, and jam errasse, ut
Ariminense illud tam celebriter damnatum, Ephesinum quoque secundum, item
Constantinopolitanum, de ponendis imaginibus, sed and Aquisgranense cujus
sententiae de Matrimonio raptae Hieronymi determinatio praeponitur. Propterea,
si haec aberraverunt alia quoque errare posse dicunt. Qua de re fatentur
nonnulli, Concilia ea, sive Universales Synodos, in quibus Authoritas
Pontificis summi non praesidet, errare posse; non autem ea quibus intervenit.
Instant illi ex adverso Ephesinum secundum legitime fuisse congregatum,
praesidentibus etiam Legatis Pontificis; nihilominus in eversion^m fidei
agitatum, and in ejus correctionem a Leone Pontifice Chalcedonensem Synodum
institutam. Rursus quia dari remedia videntur, dum Concilia discrepant cui
videlicet standum adhaerendumque magis, innuitur, aiunt, and aperte etiam
significatur, aberrare Universalia Concilia posse. J. Fran. Picus Mirand. de
Fide and Ord. Credendi, Theorem. 4. Tom. 2. Page 259. Edit. Basil.
Others there are that oppose this opinion, by saying that Councils may err,
and actually bave erred, as for instance, the Council of Arimini, the second
Council of Ephesus, that of Constantinople concerning Images, and that of Aix
la Chapelle, about the marriage of Virgins that were forced. And if these (say
they) have erred, others may err as well as they; whereupon some hold, that
such General Councils as the Pope does not preside in by his Authority, may
err, but those where he does, cannot. To which others return, that the Council
of Ephesus was lawfully convened, that the Pope's Legates presided in it, and
yet the Faith was subverted there, and the regulation of this very matter was
it that moved Pope Leo to call the Council of Chalcedon. They say further, that
their pretending to find out remedies for knowing when two Councils clash,
whether of the two a man ought to hold to, is an evident sign that General
Councils may err.

It is certain then, that the Doctrine we now assert, when we affirm, that even
the most numerous Assemblies are liable to error, that they may consist of such
men as shall not be of the true Church, and consequently may fall off from
their function, is neither a new Doctrine, nor any opinion we are driven to for
the justfying our Reformation; but an old Doctrine, which the evidence of Truth
has always suggested to sincere and unbiassed men. So that if M. de Meaux had
but pleased to reflect a little upon this, he would not have said, as he did,
That it was a Monster, the birth whereof was reserved for the time of the New
Reformation. It is convenient sometimes to be a little more advised and sparing
in passing ones judgment. It would questionless be very foul to conclude form
what has been just now said against the absolute Authority and Infallibility
of Ecclesiastical Assemblies, that we quite cast off all these humane Orders,
for the external guidance and government of the Church. To six any such
opinions as this upon us, would be the unjustest thing in the world. Our
Confessions of Faith; our Discipline, and the Writings of our Authors, as well
as our constant practice in all places, are a vindication of us in this
particular, beyond all scruple or exception. First then, we hold the Ministry
to be of Divine Institution, and consequently become necessary by the necessity
of a Command; and that tho the use of it is not absolutely necessary by the
necessity of the means, for the Existence of the Church; it is however of such
excellent use and advantage in order to the preserving and propagating of the
Church, that to go about to take it away, would be a manifest impiety.
Secondly, We are of opinion, that in matters of Discipline relating to the
public, such as the manner and form of Religious Assemblies, of Administering
the Sacraments, and others of this kind, these should be left to the
determination of Ecclesiastical Assemblies, and provided they bring in no Rite
offensive to the Conscience, or contrary to the nature of the Evangelical
Worship, an absolute obedience is due to them. Further yet, We allow these
Ecclesiastical Assemblies a power of Censuring private persons, and proceeding
to the last and highest Censure, that of Excommunication. And although we make
no question at all, but this power may sometimes be abused by them, and unjust
sentences pronounced, yet we think that out of veneration for the Order, a man
ought to suffer such to be executed upon him, provided this do not engage us in
any thing that may wound a good conscience.

As for matters of Faith, Worship, and general Rules for ordering men's Manners,
we are persuaded that these Assemblies continuing the subordination to one
another, may not only attain to the knowledge of them, by the Word of God, but
that they must and ought to do so, for preventing the increase of error, and
the preserving Gods truth in its genuine purity. It is part of their office and
business to restrain the exorbitances of men's minds, to help the weak, and to
the utmost of their power, cherish and maintain public peace in the midst of
this Society. But because on one hand the persons making these Assemblies are
neither inspired, nor infallible, nor have any power over men's consciences; and
on the other hand, because no body can be sure, that they are good men, and
will discharge their duty faithfully, there being so many several sorts of
by-respects that influence men, when the Spirit of God does not guide them; we
think it a very faulty indifference, and a manifest slighting a man's own
salvation, to reveive their decisions blindfold, and upon trust, without any
trial or examination of them at all. But still, though we think this
examination highly just, and indispensably necessary, yet we think withal it is
to be used with abundance of caution. Besides, that it must be undertaken in
the fear of God, and with a disposition full of modesty, and Christian
humility; besides that we must beg for grace from above, and not presume upon
our own abilities; besides that, we must bring along with us, not only
charitable, but reverent, and respectful thoughts of such Assemblies, and judge
favorably of them, till we have manifest conviction of the contrary. Besides
all this, I say, the ignorant sort of people must not be too rash in offering
to interpose their judgments about matters which either are not plainly expressed
in Scripture, or naturally and necessarily deduced from thence. They must
satisfy themselves with using these two ways, The Scriptures being silent, And
the clear and plain instructions to be met with there. From its being silent,
they must learn to reject what it does not teach, for strange and novel
Doctrines. For whatever is not in Scripture, is not of Divine Revelation, and
nothing that is not revealed by God, can be the object of Faith. By the clear
and plain Instructions to be met with there, they must learn to embrace the
Doctrines necessary for Salvation, and to reject all things contrary to the
same, as dangerous and destructive Errors. And this is sufficient for the more
ignorant sort of people.

As for other particulars, for which no certain rule can be given, neither from
the Scriptures being silent, nor from the plain and clear instructions
contained in it, nor by natural inferences deduced from thence, before they
either receive them, or condemn them, they must endeavor to get information by
such means as God has discovered, and established in his Church; and in the
mean time entertain a good opinion of the Assemblies determinations. Thus they
will preserve their Faith incorrupt, and sufficient for Salvation; they will
pay to Assemblies their due respects, and keep themselves in the peace and
unity of the Church.

If the Gentlemen of the Romish Communion are not content with this, but still
would have us believe whatever such Assemblies may determine blindfold, we must
beg of them to consider, That to exclude thus all manner of amendment, is to
open a mighty inlet to Error and Superstition; it is an exposing believers to a
manifest danger of having their Faith corrupted, and themselves damned; in a
word, it is perfectly to ruin Christianity, unless the goodness of God
interpose with some remedy. Will not these Gentlemen, who are so ready at
exclaiming against the inconveniences that may possibly proceed from our
principle, at last open their eyes, and take a view of what their own has
actually produced already? Transubstantiation, Purgatory, Indulgences, Merit of
Good-works, worshipping of Images and Relics, Service in an unknown Tongue,
and a thousand other devotions, which have no great appearance of wisdom in
them: These are the products of their pretended Infallibility, and all this
they are forced to defend now, because they would not lose the point of an
implicit obedience.

And now if I were speaking any thing here concerning the occasion of this
dispute between the Bishop of Meaux, and me, or the Circumstances that went
before, or followed after our Conference, the world will easily perceive I do
it, because this Bishop has already been at the trouble of giving the public
a sufficient account of them. One word only I must say, which respects one of
our Auditors, Mr. Cotton, who no doubt would have received a better Character
from M. de Meaux, had he been so happy, as to be known to him more
particularly. Mr. Cotton is a Gentleman of great honor, and wants neither
apprehension, nor judgment; he understands his Religion; and though dispute be
no part of his business, is well versed in the main Controversies between us.
If his modesty, or some other considerations prevailed upon him to say
something that looked like declining to engage in dispute with M. de Meaux, I do
not think he ought to have taken his words in their strict and literal sense.

As for the difference between our two Relations, I leave it as M. de Meaux
has done, to the Reader's judgment. He has observed very wisely, that let him
say what he would of me, it was in my power to say the same of him: That all
our Auditors were interested on one side or other; and that the world has
nothing at all to do with our proceedings. To all which let me add, that I will
not give any occasion for any private quarrel with a person I honor to that
degree, that I do M. de Meaux.

The only thing I need say more, is concerning the method I have observed in
this Book. It is divided into Two Parts. The first contains an Answer to the
Instruction given Mademoiselle de Duras, by this Bishop, the day before our
Conference; together with an Examination of his Reflections upon that Answer,
beginning at the ninth, and going on to the thirteenth, inclusively. The second
part contains a Relation of what past in our Conference, with an Examination of
M. de Meaux's Reflections thereupon, which are his eight first. This method in
my opinion is very natural.

And now, as I have made it my business to be very exact, and past nothing in
his whole Book over, without giving a direct Answer to it; so I hope that when
he shall think fit to set Pen to Paper against me next, he will be as exact,
and apply himself as close to the pinch of the Question; and not imagine, as
men commonly do, that provided they can but pick up here and there some loose
passages, and from thence start a few difficulties and objections, there need
no more be done, and this must go for a full Answer. I beseech God to shed
forth his Blessing upon an undertaking, wherein the only Ends I proposed to my
self, were his Glory, and the Illustration of the Truth. Thus much I am
encouraged to hope from his mercy; and that as he has hitherto preserved his
little Ship the Church, in the midst of the billows and storms of the world, he
will still continue to preserve her, as he has promised, even to the end of
the world.

AN ADVERTISEMENT FROM THE TRANSLATOR TO THE READER.
WHEN persons of M. de Meaux's, and Mr. Claude's Character engage, and in a
Controversy so important too, as that between the Church of Rome, and those who
have separated from her; Men must naturally be desirous to know the management
and issue of such a debate. For, besides what expectations the reputation of
their Learning and Judgment might raise, This is a Cause, that scarce any body
in our part of the World can be supposed perfectly indifferent in. Every Reader
must look on These, not only as Disputants, but Advocates; and even they, who
design no more than the gratifying their curiosity by perusing such
Conferences, do yet insensibly find themselves affected with some degree of
Concern.

The particular Argument insisted upon here, is likewise of the highest
consequence; for it cannot but be a mighty help and direction, to know exactly
how far we are obliged to comply with the Churches Decisions in matters of
Faith; In what Cases we may venture to depend upon our own Collections from
Reason and Scripture; and in what we must renounce these in deference to a
higher Authority; Whether Councils and their pretended Infallibility ought to
silence all, even the most just scruples, against whatever they shall please to
determine; or whether Almighty God have not ordered the matter so, that without
some recourse had to our private Judgments, even These cannot be received as a
Rule of Faith to us; but, all imaginable care, and an impartial examination of
the thing always presupposed, the decisive voice does of necessity belong at
last to a man's own self.

M. de Meaux, we see, took a great deal of pains by a previous discourse upon
this Topic, to prepare his Proselyte for the ensuing Conference; and he was,
no doubt, in the right, to pitch upon this as the main Argument for her
Conversion: It being indeed the very foundation and support of all the points
in dispute between us; the best and most cunningly contrived expedient, to make
men first embrace, and then persevere in Error and Superstition. For
Protestants are usually apt to be squeamish, and cannot digest Opinions
contrary to Sense and Reason; they sometimes grow so bold too, as to question
their Adversaries integrity: Now what can be more satisfactory in such
Circumstances, than to be invited into the Communion of a Church, which you are
told, in all, even her most absurd Decrees, is continually assisted with the
unerring guidance of the Holy Ghost; and put under a happy impossibility of
deceiving her Members, tho illnatured people should imagine her so wicked to
desire and endeavor it. This then being fixed as a first principle, the
understanding is sufficiently subdued; for humane reasonings to interpose
afterward, would be impertinent and saucy; and so the harshest and most
unpalatable Doctrines go glibly down, by the help of this excellent Vehicle,
the Churches Authority and Infallibility.

The same method is observable among the Missionaries here in England, who
after having tried us first with general schemes of the disputable points, and
then endeavored to establish some of them particularly, to little or no
purpose; do now at last take sanctuary in the Churches Despotick power, and
begin to seem sensible, that either this or nothing must stand them in any
stead. The debate upon this Head first began to grow warm upon occasion of the
Royal Papers, which (because bad money is not privileged to pass unquestioned,
tho it have the King's stamp upon it) were considered with a Judgment and
Modesty becoming both a sincere zeal for Truth, and a dutiful honor for the
Person whose Royal Name they bore. The several Answers, Vindications, and
Replies upon this Subject, have since been followed by M. de Condom's account
of his Conference, as suiting very well the business then in hand: And when
once the World had seen That, it was so reasonable Mr. Claude should be heard
what he could say for himself, that I should not think this Translation needed
any Apology, or Introduction, were it not for some Objections which I foresee
it may be liable to. These therefore I am concerned to remove, that so the Book
may be read without prejudice, and not expose men to mistaken notions of
things, for want of a short, but necessary Advertisement.

In the first place I desire the Reader to take notice, that it is not to be
expected Mr. Claude should in every circumstance express himself, as the Church
of England would do at this day. The necessity of reforming from the
Corruptions of Rome, was easily discerned in several Countries, and each
National Church having sufficient power to reform it self, was just and wise in
asserting that rightful Authority upon so emergent an occasion. But tho all did
the thing, yet, all not conferring together, they did it not by the same
methods, nor with like moderation and prudence. It was enough that they all
agreed in the main points, and for the less material ones, that they maintained
such a Charity, as not magisterially to censure or exclude one another for
these little differences. This was the very way, whereby the Communion is still
preserved inviolable among the Protestant Churches in all Nations, and is a
mighty argument, that they retain the true spirit of Meekness and Christian
Candor. Therefore in the writings of Foreigners, we must always make
allowances for the Genius of that particular Church, whereof they are Members,
and not be extremely nice and critical, except where we find a disagreement in
some very substantial point. The Reformed Gallican Church and we are perfectly
of one Judgment in all the most considerable parts of this dispute, concerning
the Authority of the Church. As, That she has no right at all to require an
absolute and implicit obedience to her determinations; That the Scriptures are
the only and perfect Rule of Faith; That every Man is concerned and obliged to
examine by this Rule whatever is imposed upon him as an Article of Faith; and
if he finds the Doctrine conformable thereto, readily and heartily to embrace,
and adhere to it; but if evidently repugnant, by all means to reject it: That
no Councils, even the most General, are to be received any further than they
proceed in correspondence with this Diving Word; That they may, and actually
have erred in deviating from it, and consequently their Decrees ought to
undergo some Examination before a Man complies with them; But that,
notwithstanding this possibility of failing, we ought to entertain very
reverend and charitable presumptions in favor of such Assemblies; and, as not
to cast them off without the clearest evidence of their having perverted the
Truth; so, where no such evidence appears, to submit with the most respectful
humility imaginable; looking upon them as excellent means for the preservation
of the Christain Faith in its Unity and genuine Purity.

After so punctual an agreement in matters of the greatest consequence, what
can it signify, if in some few others of less consideration, and more remote
from the main business, there seem a small disparity? Men's Judgments must have
some room left to exercise freely in, and diversity of Opinions in
Circumstantials, like Divisions in Music, may very well be admitted, without
breaking the main Cords, or doing the harmony any prejudice at all. It Is
confessed, the Divines abroad have taken up some notions distinct from ours, and
particularly concerning the Church, its Visibility, Ministry, Constitution and
Discipline; and it might well seen strange, if Mr. Claude should so far forget
his Education and Country, as not to scatter some of these in his Writings. But
I hope Englishmen may enjoy the benefit of his Discourses, without being
obliged to subscribe every sentence, or espouse every punctilio contained in
them. Whether the Gentlemen of the Romish persuasion relying upon the Authority
of M. de Meaux his name, called in so potent an Auxiliary from beyond the Seas,
out of a just diffidence of their own strength here, They best can tell: This I
am sure of, that it was but Justice to Mr. Claude, and the Cause he asserts,
that he should be turned into the field too: And to let the World see, that
after all M. de Meaux's vainglorious boasts of a victory, and bold defiance of
all the Doctors in Christendom, neither the Champion, nor the Cause, however
vilified by him, are yet so feeble, that they need fear to encounter this
Goliath. As many as understand the difference between us and the Reformed
Protestants in France, are sensible, that we stand upon the fairer ground by
much for an engagement against the Church of Rome: But I was willing cur
Countrymen should have the satisfaction of seeing, that it is M. de Meaux's
misfortune to be reduced to streights, not only by a Church of England Pen, but
by a Minister of his own Nation, who lay under some disadvantages which we do
not; and that for all his Triumphant Preface before the Conference, That could
no more escape a reply at home, than his Exposition has done abroad.

Another Objection against this Translation may be, That the Conference has
appeared in our Language already. I will not say it was in such a dress, as was
by no means after the English Mode, and unworthy of so good an Original, for
fear of provoking a severer censure upon the habit I have now clothed it in, to
which I I have reason to fear it is but too obnoxious. But setting aside all
Reflections upon the defects of those who have gone before me, this single
consideration is enough to justify and recommend the present attempt, that the
Relation which was then Printed alone, is a very small part of the work. And
when M. de Meaux's Narrative had appeared in such pomp, introduced by a long
discourse upon the Church, and backed with so many smart Reflections, M. Claude's
memory might have suffered extremely, by concealing his abilities. And
particularly, that notwithstanding the strain of confidence visible through all
the Disputant's Writings of the Romish Communion, he could and did retort to as
good purpose, and with as much advantage as Modesty and Reason usually have
over Vanity. This may amuse unthinking people, who are apt to measure the
weight of an Argument by the bigness of the words, and assurance of the Arguer;
but the other only can prevail upon the Judicious and unprejudiced, and will
force a conquest by its own strength.

One thing I have augmented this Edition with, which neither the former, nor
indeed Monsieur Claude's own Original have taken care of, but it is what I
though highly necessary at this particular juncture. The unsincerity we have so
often discovered in the late Advocates for Popery, makes us wish to take as
little upon trust as may be. And therefore since our repeated complaints have
been so ineffectual, I resolved to try if example would persuade them to any
thing like Fidelity. For this reason all the Quotations from Authors have been
carefully consulted, and at large transcribed by me in the Margent; where you
will also find, if the Press do me right, the Edition of each Book, and if two
have been consulted, the difference of Chapters in each, as particularly in St.
Cyprian; so that any man may now see at the expense of a very little trouble,
whether he be imposed upon or no. The same exactness may be taken notice of in
many of our late Learned Writers; but still there are a sort of men that will
never suffer themselves to be run down for want of Recrimination, and therefore
tax us with negligence in this particular also. Whether party better deserve
this accusation, the Author of Pax Vobis, if they please, shall be the Test,
who has the impudence to repeat over and over so obvious a thing (...) an He
says Dialogue 2d, page 20. That the Church of England in the 6th Article of
their 39. says, We have no other Rule of Faith but Scripture, as each person of
sound Judgment in the Church understands it, and what is proved by it; This he
repeats, Dialog. 3. Page 30. and several times afterward: whereas the words of
the Article are these; Holy Scripture contains all things necessary to
salvation: so that whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, *
is not to be required of any man, that it should be believed as an Article of
Faith; or be thought requisite or necessary to salvation. Where you see the
Star, there was in the Form in Edward the 6th's Reign this Clause inserted,
although it be sometimes received of the Faithful, as godly and profitable for
an Order and Comeliness. But where are the expressions, or indeed the sense of
his Citation in all this? And yet the force of all his Arguments turns so much
upon this, that the very convincing him of unsincerity in this single
allegation, is in effect an Answer to his whole Book.
Article of our Church, and always by his own additionary Gloss, make it speak
quite another sense, than ever was designed for it.

As for the style of this Translation, my care has been to make it natural and
easy, rather than elaborate and fine. As I did not enslave my self to a
rendering every where Verbal, so I durst not take upon me to alter much, in
order to being elegant. See Answ. to M. Con^ Exposit. Page xxi. etc. and
Vindicat. Page 13.
Having one of the Parties engaged in this Conference for an eminent instance,
how shameful a disguise may be put upon things, and what material Changes may
be made even in the main points, only for the greater neatness of the Discourse
and Style.

I must own I have been a little bold in making this English Book to differ
from Mr. Claude's French one in the method: For he, after his Introductory
Discourse upon the Church, has subjoyned an Answer to M. de Meaux's five last
Reflections, so dispatching that Subject entirely, and at once: And likewise to
the Relation of the Conference, annexed a Reply to the other eight, which
concern That: But I designing chiefly the benefit of those, who either did not
understand, or could not procure the French, and intending it for a direct
answer to M. de Meaux in English, did rather incline to follow the method of
that Translation; consulting herein* the Readers ease, when he shall think fit
to compare them both together. And because some time has past since M. de
Meaux appeared here, I chose rather to divide This, than suffer so long a delay
as the finishing of the whole must needs have occasioned. But that men may not
be impatient for the remaining Part, that also consisting of an Answer to M. de
Meaux's Thirteen Reflections, will, I hope, be sent after this very speedily.

Lastly, Eng. Preface.
Because M. de Meaux has rightly observed, that the Authority of the Relations
will in a great measure depend upon the Relator's Credit, I think my self
obliged to give this intimation to as many as shall peruse them; That they
would do well to remember how many, and what notorious falsifications M. de
Meaux has been charged with lately, Exposit. of Church of Engl. etc. Defense
of Expos.
and that charge made good a second time, by evident proofs of the thing,
notwithstanding all the pains taken by his Vindicator to bring him off; whereas
Mr. Claude, for any thing I ever heard objected to the contrary, is rectus in
Curia, clear and unsuspected of any such sophistical indirect dealing. So that
I mightily suspect M. de Meaux would not be able to do any great feats, if both
sides were agreed to put the issue of the whole Controversy upon each Author's
Integrity and Reputation.

An Answer to Monsieur de MEAUX's Book, etc.
SIR,
I Have a long time desired a sight of what you have now sent me. It was told
me on all hands, That there was a Writing of Monsieur de Condom's abroad,
containing a relation of what past, in the Conference I had the honor to have
with him at the Countess of Roye's; and some persons did even assure me, they
had heard it read: But still I could meet with no body, capable of giving me
the satisfaction I lately received by your means. This lays upon me a double
engagement, both to return you my thanks for it, and at the same time, to
gratify the curiosity you have to see what I wrote upon the same subject, the
next day after our Interview. M. de Condom having professed it was not his
desire, that what past between him and me should be publicly talked of, I
thought my self under an obligation to confine what I had written, to my own
Study; And this has been hitherto very punctually observed by me. But now,
since he has thought fit to give out Copies of his, I have reason to believe,
that in this respect he leaves me perfectly to my liberty, and is well
satisfied I should do the same thing with mine. I have too great an opinion of
M. de Condom's Wisdom, not to follow his Example in this particular, and I
promise my self from his Equity, that he will not find fault with me, for
treading in his steps.

But because he has been pleased to impart to us that Discourse also, which he
had with Mademoiselle de Du^as in private, the day before our Conference, you
will think it convenient, that before I transcribe my Relation, I should first
make some reflections upon That. Were this a discourse of such a nature, as
common occasions or accidents are used to produce, where a man speaks without
preparation or design, and delivers himself with all the freedom imaginable, I
confess it were unjust to examine it strictly, and by rule. But seeing this was
composed by M. de Condom, with a prospect of obliging Mademoiselle de Duras to
change her Religion, and which seems a studied piece; a Discourse, which he
has joined to the account of our Conference, as a considerable part of what
past in this matter: Lastly, a Discourse, committed to Writing, upon supposal
that it may be useful to others, and, for that purpose made in some measure
public; I cannot forbear looking upon it as a work of premeditation, and
returning some answer to it accordingly. Besides, that you and I are concerned,
as to what Mademoiselle de Duras has done, to desire to know whether she had
sufficient reasons to forsake your Communion, and embrace the Romish; and the
examination of this Discourse will be a very proper means of clearing that
point to us.

Now it may be reduced to two principal Parts: In the first, M. de Condom makes
it his business to show, that the Catholic or Universal Church, which we
profess to believe in the Creed, is a Church thus defined: Conference with Mr.
Claude, Page 2, 3.
A Society making profession to believe the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, and
govern it self by his word: Whence he infers, That it is a visible Society. He
pretends also to make it appear, that to this Church, thus defined, belong all
the promises found in Scripture. In the Second, He labors to answer an
Objection, drawn from what happened to the Church of Israel heretofore, in
which we often see the true Worship of God to have been changed and corrupted,
and both the People and their Guides to have fallen into Idolatry.

These two Parts, Sir, we will prosecute in order, and by applying our selves
to what is most material in them, will endeavor, by the assistance of God's
Grace, to make the Truth so evident, as shall remove all difficulties.

The first Part of M. de Condom's discourse examined.
Instead of granting the Ministers (says M. de Condom) to believe all the
Fundamentals of the Faith, Conference, p. 2.
we show that there is one Article of the Creed they believe not, which is that
of the Universal Church. It Is true, they say with the mouth, I believe the
Catholic or Universal Church, as the Arrians, Macedonians, and Socinians say
with the mouth, I believe, in Jesus Christ, and in the Holy Ghost; But as there
is reason to accuse them of not believing these Articles, because they believe
them not as they ought, nor according to their true sense; so if we show the
Pretended Reformed, that they believe not as they ought, the Article of the
Catholic Church; we may truly say, that in effect they reject so important an
Article of the Creed.

You must know then, what is meant by this expression, The Catholic or
Universal Church; and upon this I lay for my ground, That in the Creed, which
was only a bare declaration of Faith, this Term must be taken in its most
proper and most natural signification, and such as is most used among
Christians. Conf. p. 3.
Now all Christians by the name of the Church, understand a Society, making
profession to believe the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, and govern it self by his
Word. If this Society makes this Profession, it is consequently visible, That
this is the proper and genuine signification of the word Church, such as is
known by every one, and used in common discourse; I desire no other witnesses
than the Pretended Reformed themselves.

The sequel will declare, whether the scandal of dealing with that Article of
the Universal Church, as the Arrians, Macedonians, and Socinians do, would not
better agree with the Character of such as follow M. de Condom's Opinion, than
the Reformed Ministers. This we shall presently be able to judge of; and to
that purpose four Questions must be examined.

The first is, Whether the sense of that Article in our Creed ought to be
restrained (according to M. de Condom) to the Church here on Earth, or extended
farther?

Secondly, Whether this be a good and sufficient definition of the Church upon
Earth; A Society making profession to believe the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, and
govern it self by his word.

Thirdly, Whether this Church upon Earth be visible, or invisible? or whether
it be both, considered in a different sense, and different respects?

Fourthly, To what Church the Promises of Jesus Christ do belong; whether to
that defined by M. de Condom, or to that which we are about to define? These
four Questions will include, not only all the plausible things M. de Condom
has said in this first part of his Discourse; but likewise all the other
sophistical Objections that are usually put to us upon this subject.

Quest. 1. Whether the sense of that Article in our Creed ought to be
restrained, (according to M. de Condom) to the Church here on Earth, or
extended farther?

In order to resolving the first Question, you will please, Sir, to give me
leave, to explain briefly that Article of our Creed, concerning the Catholic
or Universal Church, and how we understand it, that so you may be able to
judge, whether M. de Condom had reason to accuse us of not taking it in its
true sense: And this I shall immediately enter upon.

We think then (this being such a profession of Faith, as ought to embrace its
object entire, and in the utmost extent, and not in any one part only) that by
the Universal Church must be understood, not barely the visible body, or
company of the Faithful at present upon Earth, but that body or company of all
the Faithful, which have been, are, or at any time shall be, from the beginning
to the end of the World. Thus the Universal Church is, That which is already
triumphant in Heaven, that which is now militant on Earth, and that which is
not yet in the world, but shall be in succeeding Ages. All these three Churches
do really make but one, because united together in the eternal purpose of God,
appointed to know one and the same Word, to partake of one and the same Spirit,
and to inherit one and the same Glory. They are but one Family, for they have
the same Father, the same Rights and Privileges, the same Hopes, and are
called to the same Duties. They are but one body, under the protection and
Guidance of Jesus Christ, their only Head, who is, as the Scripture says, Heb.
13. 8.
The same yesterday, to day, and for ever. And this is our sense of the Church,
called in the Creed, Catholic, or Universal.

The Latitude we here take the Church in, has displeased M. de Condom; he says
we put a wrong sense upon the Article; and to understand it thus, is in effect
to reject it. He is of opinion it should be confined to this part upon Earth,
which he defines, A Society making profession to believe, etc.

But in the first place M. de Condom must allow us to tell him, that Saint
Augustine however has taught us to explain the Church in our Creed after this
manner. That Father indeed went farther than we do, for he has not scrupled to
include in this notion, the Angels confirmed in Grace. Here Ecclesia tota hic
accipienda est, non solum ex part, quae peregrinatur in terris, a solis ortu
ad occasum usque laudans nomen Domini, and post vetustatem captivitatis cantans
canticum novum; verum etiam ex illa quae in coelos semper ex quo condita est
adhaesit Deo. Aug. Enchir. ad Laurent. Cap. 46.
(says he, and it is in his very Exposition of the Creed, that he says it) we
must take the Church whole and entire, not only for that part of it upon earth,
which praises the name of God from the rising of the Sun, unto the going down
thereof, singing to God a new Song, since their deliverance from their former
Captivity; but also for that other part which is in Heaven, and never was
separated from the Divine presence, the Blessed and Holy Angels. Corpus ejus
est Ecclesia, non autem ista, aut illa, sed toto orb diffusa. Nec ea quae nunc
est in hominibus qui praesentem vitam agunt, sed ad eam pertinentibus etiam
his, qui fuerunt ante nos, and his qui futuri sunt post nos usque in finem
saeculi: Tota enim Ecclesia constans ex omnibus fidelibus, quia fideles omnes
membra sunt Christi, habet illud caput positum in coelestibus, quod gubernat
corpus suum. Aug. in Psalm. 56.
The Body of Christ (says he in another place) is the Church, not this, or that
Church, but which is diffused over the whole world; not that which is made up
of men now alive, but consisting of those which have been before us, and those
which shall come after us even to the end of the world. For the whole Church
being composed of all the Faithful, in as much as all the Faithful are the
Members of Jesus Christ (...) Jesus Christ for its Head, and this Head though
exalted high in the Heavens, does notwithstanding still continue to govern his
body.

M. de Condom must likewise allow us to tell him, that the Catechism of the
Council of Trent has given this sense of the Church in our Creed. Catech.
Conc. Trid. ad Paroch. Par. 1. Art. 9. Numb. 7, 8, 9. Ecciesiae autem duae
potissimum sunt parts, quarum altera Triumphans, altera Militans vocatur.
Triumphans est, coetus ille clarissimus, and faelicissimus beatorum spirituum,
and little, qui de mundo, de carne, de iniquissimo daemone triumpharunt, and ab
hujus vitae molestiis liberi, ac tuti, aeterna beatitudine fruuntur. Militans
vero Ecclesia est, coetus omnium fidel^um, qui adhuc in terris vivunt: quae
ideo Militans vocatur, quod illi cum immanissimis hostibus, mundo, carne,
Sathana perpetuum sit bellum. Neque idcirco tamen duas esse Ecclesias
censentium est, sed ejusdem Ecclesiae, ut antea diximus, parts duae sunt,
quarum una antecessit, and coelesti patria jam potitur altera indies sequitur,
donec aliquando cum Salvatore nostro conjuncta in sempiterna felicitate
conquiescat.
The Church (it says, and it is in the very Explication of this Article) has two
parts, one of which is called Triumphant, the other Militant. The Triumphant is
that illustrious assembly of the Blessed, and all those who have vanquished and
triumphed over the World, the Flesh and the Devil, and who being now delivered
from the miseries of this life, enjoy everlasting rest and felicity. The Church
Militant is the company of all the Faithful yet alive upon earth, which is
therefore called Militant, because they are engaged in a perpetual war with
these most deadly enemies, Satan, the World, and the Flesh. Yet must we not
from hence imagine that they are two distinct Churches, but as was said, two
parts of one and the same Church, one of which is gone before, and already
possessed of its Heavenly Country. The other daily following after, till at
length, being united with our Savior, it shall rest above in Eternal happiness.

Again, We must desire M. de Condom's leave to say, that the very Title of
Catholic or Universal used in the Creed, does lead us to this extended notion
of the Church. This to me seems evident for two reasons. First, that this Title
is given the Church to distinguish it from all false Churches, which do neither
exist always, nor every where, but spring up and die away in some particular
places, and at some certain times, as having no sound nor lasting principle.
Secondly, that this Title was to distinguish it from particular Churches, which
are but members of this great Body collected by Christ, and separated from the
world, that he might sanctify it to himself. Whence it follows, that when we
say the Universal or Catholic Church, by this is plainly meant the Church
entire, and at large, without exception, or limitation, either as to time or
place.

Lastly, M. de Condom must allow us to tell him, that we are brought to this
notion by what follows in the Creed, The Communion of Saints, which terms
explain this of the Catholic Church. For the Saints are not only persons now
living upon Earth; but those also that reign in Heaven, and those which shall
be to the worlds end; and it is with all these that we are in Communion. If the
Communion of Saints were to be understood of such only, as make profession to
believe in Jesus Christ, and govern themselves by his word; This could be no
other than an external Communion by living under the same Ministry, and
partaking of the same Sacraments, which good and bad men enjoy equally. And
certainly this would fall far short of so great, so Majestic an expression,
and consequently could not deserve a room in our Creed.

But (says M. de Condom) in the Creed, Conference, Page 2.
which was only a bare declaration of faith, this term must be taken in its
most proper and most natural signification, and such as is most used among
Christians. I own it must be taken in its most proper and most natural sense,
but even this supplies us with a fresh argument against him; it being certain,
that the most proper and most natural sense is to take the Universal Church for
the company of all those that are truly the faithful, separated from the world
by the Word and Holy Spirit of God, according to the purpose of his Election
from the beginning to the end of all things. I acknowledge the word Church when
used in a Civil sense, as for instance when spoken of the people of Israel,
does most properly signify an external and visible company, and so far I am of
M. de Condom's mind, both as to what he urges out of the Acts, and from the
Septuagint Translation. But still I assert, that this word when applied to a
Christian Society, does not properly denote a visible Congregation, or an
outward profession of the Faith, and no more; but chiefly an inward calling, a
spiritual communion, and such as that outward is only a consequence of, and
does depend upon. A man must be utterly ignorant of Christianity to deny this
truth. The Church then is a name for something within, and not barely to
signify what passes without; so that implying an inward communion, when the
Title of Universal is put to it, it must needs mean the whole body of true and
faithful Christians. By the same reason I affirm this to be its most natural
signification. When we say in plain terms the Universal Church, nothing can be
more natural than to understand the whole company of Gods children, as opposed
to the men of the world, and children of this generation. Nothing more natural
to Faith, and especially a Confession of Faith, than to interpret a term
expressing the object of Faith, not in a restrained sense, which gives only a
partial Idea of the thing; nor in an ambiguous sense, which gives a confused
and doubtful one; but in a sense that shall be perspicuous and full.

As to the common use of the word, M. de Condom must pardon me, if I say there
is a fallacy in his argument. For supposing it true (which really it is not)
that all Christians of this and some ages last past had confined the term
Universal Church, to the Church at present upon Earth; suppose the pretended
Reformed (to use M. de Condom's own expression) did commonly understand this
term so, yet still it is a trick to attempt to adjust the sense of the Creed, by
that which some latter ages have fixed upon it. It Is just as if I should go
about to explain the terms of our language by what will be in vogue two or
three hundred years hence. For who does not see that the acceptance alters,
and words are mightily removed from their first and genuine signification?

What I have alleged from St. Austin, and the Trent-Catechism, plainly convict
M. de Condom of a mistake either in matter of fact, or point of right. If the
matter of fact deposited before be true, That all Christians understand by the
Church, a Society making profession, etc. He is out in point of right, for St.
Austin and the Trent-Catechism show, that the Church in our Creed is to be
otherwise understood. But if this Rule hold, that the word in the Creed must be
taken in such a sense, as is most in use among Christians, he errs in matter of
fact, for St. Austin and the Catechism, taking it as we see, it is manifest the
Christians of their times did not understand it as M. de Condom does, of a
Society making profession to believe, etc.

It is questionless more reasonable to say, that the term Universal Church in
our Creed, should be interpreted in a way most agreeable to Scripture style,
but this very thing quite overthrows M. de Condom's pretensions. For the
Scripture when speaking of the Church, as the Creed does, with regard to its
Universality, does always mean the whole body of the Faithful, and not one part
only. Thus St. Paul has taken it in that excellent passage, Ephesians. 22. 23.
God has given Jesus Christ to be the Head of the Church, which is his body,
the fullness of him that fills all in all. In the fifth Chapter of that
Epistle, Chap. 5.
he repeats it no less than six times in the same sense: Ver. 23.
The husband is the head of the wife, Ver. 24.
even as Christ is the head of the Church: The Church is subject to Christ as
the wife is to her husband. Ver. 25.
Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it, Ver. 27.
that he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinkle. Ver. 29.
Christ nourishes and cherishes the Church. This is a great mystery
concerning Christ and the Church. Ver. 32.
Thus again Col. 1. Christ is the head of the body the Church, Ver. 18.
who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead. So lastly Heb. 12. Ye are
come to Mount Sion, Ver. 22.
the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable
company of Angels, Ver. 23.
to the general assembly and Church of the firstborn, which are written in
Heaven. For the Apostle does not mean the Church Triumphant only, as M. de
Condom would persuade us, but the whole body of those whom God has enrolled in
the Book of his Predestination, whether already taken up to Glory, or such as
are already justified and sanctified upon Earth, but not yet glorified, or
those whom he will call effectually hereafter, and justify, in order to their
Glorification.

I conclude this Question with one observation, which ought not to give M. de
Condom any offense, because the greatest demonstration of respect to an
adversary, is the removing every little objection made by him. I observe then
that his Argument (which contains all this part of his Discourse, neither does,
nor according to the rules of reasoning, can conclude any thing at all. He
would know the meaning of Universal Church in our Creed, We must take this term
(says he) in the most proper signification, and such as is most in use among
Christians. I grant it. Now all Christians (as he goes on) by the name of
Church understand a society, etc. and for this I desire no other witnesses,
than the Pretended Reformed themselves. Who does not perceive that this
concludes nothing? He should have said, All Christians understand by the Church
Universal, a society, etc. and of this I desire no other witnesses, etc. Thus
he should have delivered himself, if he would argue regularly. All this while
M. de Condom's proof all through the sequel of his discourse runs not upon the
term in his Proposition, The Universal Church; but on that single term the
Church, between which there is a wide difference; for the Church may well be
taken in a sense, that the Universal Church can by no means admit of. Indeed
had M. de Condom said, All Christians by the Church Universal, understand a
Society making profession, etc. and of this I desire no other witnesses than
the Pretended Reformed themselves, we should have answered him, That the
Pretended Reformed never understood by the Universal Church, a Society making
profession to believe, etc. because according to their Tenets, the Church
Universal rose a great way further than this Society making profession, etc. So
that we should immediately have put a stop to his Argument, and he could never
have effected what he hoped for from it.

Quest. 2. Whether M. de Condom's be a good and sufficient definition of the
Church upon Earth, A Society making profession to believe the Doctrine of Jesus
Christ, and govern it self by his Word.

By this decision of our first question, I think, Sir, it appears that M. de
Condom had no ground for accusing us of taking that Article of our Creed
concerning the Universal Church, in a wrong sense. Let us now proceed to the
second Enquiry, whether M. de Condom have given a good and sufficient
definition of the Church upon Earth, in calling it, A Society making profession
to believe the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, and govern it self by his Word.

Now this Question being of such mighty importance, that upon the determination
o^ it, the whole Controversy betwixt us and the Roma^^^^^ touching the Church
does entirely depend, I was amazed to see, (...) he did not think fit to clear
it, either to Mademoiselle de Duras, or (...) other Proselytes for whom the
perusal of this Discourse was (...) Methinks, when men go about to make
Converts, they ought (...) pretense of saving them a little trouble, to decline
any instructi^^^ (...) may be necessary for their satisfaction; and being
persuaded, (...) Church of Rome's pretensions are just, should not fear to have
the Grounds of them examined, but suppose they will be found strong and
impregnable. How comes it to pass then that M. de Condom was pleased to pass by
so fundamental a Question? And how could be satisfy himself with barely
propounding his definition, and saying only, that This was what all Christians
understand by the name of a Church.

However I shall be bold to say, that this is neither all, nor indeed the main
part of what Christians do, or ought to understand by it; and that his
definition is defective by at least one half; to which therefore I shall oppose
another, which I assert to be what all Christians ought to understand by the
name of Church, viz. A Society of such persons, as making profession to believe
the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, do truly and effectually believe it; and making
profession to govern themselves by his word, do really and effectually govern
themselves by it. Our business now is to know which of these two is a good and
lawful definition; whether that given us by M. de Condom in agreement with the
Doctors of his Communion, or this of mine, in agreement with all Protestants?
That is to say, we are concerned to know, whether the nature and essence of the
Church consist barely in externals and appearances; or whether something of
reality be not required? whether Hypocrisy, and superficial Cheats can make men
true members of the Church? or whether something of truth be not necessary
also, to know whether wicked men, worldlings, and reprobates, provided they
make an outward profession, and can but dissemble handsomely, are real members
of Christ's mystical body, or whether this privilege do not belong to those
that are truly the Faithful? Here lies the pinch of the Question, which in my
opinion would have resolved it self, had but M. de Condom propounded it fairly:
For methinks it is very hard to acquiesce so far in his definition. But not to
insist on this first prejudice, let us examine the matter thoroughly.

I. The Scripture represents the Church to us, as the product and execution of
God's eternal decree of Predestination, or Election; and besides it teaches us,
that God in electing and predestinating men, does it not to a mere outward
profession of Faith and Holiness, but to an effectual Faith, and true Holiness:
And consequently, effectual Faith and Holiness are of the nature and essence of
the Church, and not an outward profession only. The consequence is manifest;
For the best way to discover the nature and essence of any thing, is to take it
according to its own Author's first Idea and design; supposing that he does not
(as we are all agreed God does not) swerve at all from his design in the
execution of it. The Church then being God's own work, the surest means to
discern what that is, will be to inform our selves of God's design, if we can
but find out that. Ephesians. 1. 3, 4.
Now this we find in the Election, Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, (says St. Paul in the name of the whole Church) who has blessed
us with all spiritual blessings, in heavenly places in Christ; According as he
has chosen us in Him, before the foundation of the world. Verse. 10, 11.
And a little after, He gathers together in one all things in Christ, both
which are in heaven, and which are in earth, even in him; In whom we have
obtained an inheritance, being predestined according to the purpose of him,
etc. To this relates that saying of Christ, Joh. 17. 9.
I pray not for the world, but for them which thou have given me, for they are
thine. Where by opposing the world, for which he does not pray, to those whom
his father had given him, it is plain he understands the Church; and his meaning
is, that the Father has given them to Jesus Christ, because it was his by his
purpose of Election. This appears further, Ver. 10.
from the words that immediately follow, And all mine are thine, and thine are
mine; for this mutual reciprocation of Good between his Father and Him (if I
may so term it) is capable of no other sense but this, in the sequel of his
discourse. My Church are thine Elect, and thy Elect are my Church; they who are
mine, as my people, are thine, as thy Elect; my Communion, and thy Election,
have the same measures, the same extent, and do both comprehend the same
persons: So that the Election is nothing else but God's design and project of
the Church; and the constituting of a Church, is the putting that design of
Election in Execution. Psalm. 65. 3.
Blessed (says David) is the man whom thou chusest, and causest to approach
unto thee, that he may dwell in thy courts. These Courts are the Church of God,
and men enter into them only by virtue of God's Election. 2 Timothy 1. 9.
God has saved us (says the Apostle) and called us with an holy calling, not
according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was
given us in Christ Jesus, before the world began. We must therefore come to the
knowledge of the Church by his Eternal purpose, and to know that, Ephesians. 1. 4,
5, 6.
we must consult his Holy Word. He has chosen us (says St. Paul) that we
should be holy, and without blame before him in love. Having predestined us
to the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself; and, that we should be
to the praise of the glory of his grace. He does not say a bare profession of
Holiness, but a real Holiness; he does not say an appearance of adoption, but a
true adoption; he does not say an external conversion, but an internal; That
is, such as may illustrate the glory of God. God has predestined us to a
true Faith, and not an appearance of Faith; to a sincere and substantial
Regeneration, not to a shadow or color of it. It Is past a doubt then, that a
mere outward profession cannot give us a full definition of the Church; but
true Faith and Regeneration are necessary parts of the Idea we have of it.

II. The Scripture, when speaking of the Church with reference to God, gives it
such appellations as can by no means be restrained to a more profession, or
allow us to think it can be composed of wicked persons. It calls the Church,
Gal. 4. 26.
Jerusalem which is above, Heb. 12. 22.
the Heavenly Jerusalem, the City of the living God, Ps. 2. 6.
the Holy Hill of Sion, Gal. 6. 16.
the Israel of God, 1 Pet. 2. 9.
A Holy Nation, a peculiar people; Psalm. 28. 9.
the inheritance of God, Ephesians. 2. 22.
the habitation of God through the spirit, 1 Timothy 3. 15.
the house of God, 1 Cor. 3. 17.
the temple of God, 1 Pet. 2. 5.
His holy Priesthood, His spiritual house, Ibid v. 9.
His royal Priesthood, Ephesians. 1. 14.
His purchased possession, 1 Pet. 2. 10.
the people of God. Tell me now, I pray, if the energy of these expressions is
not admirably answered, by being reduced to a bare external profession? Would
God have sent us a new Jerusalem, a new Sion, a new City from above, and make
this up of Righteous and Wicked, Hypocrites and true Believers indifferently?
Does not the Apostle understand it so, when he says, that Gal. 4. 26, 31. 30.
25.
Jerusalem is free, that her children are not in bondage; i. e. those who are
the Children by promise, that they shall not be cast out like Children of the
bondwoman, but shall be Heirs; and that there is the same difference between
this and the other Jerusalem, that was between the two Wives of Abraham, Sarah
and Agar? Would God make him a new Tabernacle, a new House, a new Temple, and
build it of holy and profane materials indifferently? St. Peter 1 Pet. 2. 5.
did not intend it so, You (says he) as lively stones are built up a spiritual
house. Would God separate to himself a new people, a new Israel, a new Nation,
from all other Nations, and require from it no more than an outward profession,
which alone works no regeneration at all? To show that God himself never
intended this, observe how himself speaks, Jer. 31. 32.
This shall be the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel, After
those days (says the Lord) I will put my law in their inward parts, and write
it in their hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my people. We must
take notice, that all these names above mentioned, are derived from the old
figures of the Mosaical dispensation; this the very reading of them plainly
testifies. Now this very thing makes directly against M. de Condom's
definition: For as it is essential to a figure, to consist of something
External and Corporeal, so is it equally essential to the thing figured, to
consist of something Internal and Spiritual. The Church therefore is no longer
a Jerusalem, an Israel, a people linked together by outward bands only; this
would correspond well enough with the figures of the old Law; but it is a
people, an Israel, a Jerusalem, united and compacted by the inward hands of the
same Faith, and the same Sanctification. This very term [the Church] is of it
self sufficient to confirm this truth; M. de Condom acknowledges the Christians
had it from the Jews, Conf. p. 5.
which is true. He says the Jews made use of it to signify the visible Society
of God's people, the Assembly which makes profession to serve him. I agree with
him in that too. He adds, That the Christians have kept it in the same sense. I
am not of that opinion. This word, when applied to the figure, can signify no
more than a visible outward Assembly; but when to the thing figured, it must of
necessity imply something more, it must denote an inward community, a company,
not of Bodies only, but Souls too; Romans 10. 10.
for it is not enough that a confession be made with the mouth, men must also
believe with the heart unto Righteousness.

III. This will be yet more evident, if you reflect on some other applelations
given to the Church, with relation to Jesus Christ. For it is called, His
flock, his sheep, his spouse, his sister, his dove, his well-beloved, his body,
a Body whereof He is the head, a Body that is his flesh and his bones, a house
built upon him, as upon a Cornerstone, the sanctified in Jesus Christ, the
Children which God has given him, and other expressions like these. Now who
can ever imagine these glorious Titles should import no more than an outward
profession? or that profane persons and reprobates can have any share in them?
Luke 12. 32.
It is his flock, but what flock? Fear not little flock, for it is your
Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom. They are his sheep, Joh. 10.
27, 28.
but how, My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me. And I
give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any man
pluck them out of my hand. It is his Spouse, and his Sister, but in what
respect? Cant. 4. 9.
Thou have ravished my heart, my sister, my spouse, thou have ravished my
heart. Cant. 6. 9.
It is his Dove, but why his Dove? My dove, my undefiled is but one, the
daughters, saw her, and blessed her. She is his well-beloved, but Wherefore his
Well-beloved? Cant. 2. 2.
As the lilly among therns, so is my beloved among the daughters. Ephesians. 4. 12,
13.
It is his Body, but how his body? The edifying of the body of Christ; till we
all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the son of God,
unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.
Ibid. v. 16.
He is its Head, but what sort of Head? From him the whole body fitly joined
together, and compacted by that which every joint supplieth, makes increase of
the body, to the edifying of it self in love. It is his flesh and his bones,
but how these? Ephesians. 5. 29.
No man ever hates his own flesh, but nourishes, and cherishes it, even as
the Lord the Church. It is a structure built upon him, but how? In him all the
building fitly framed together, Ephesians. 2. 21.
grows into an holy temple in the Lord. They are the sanctified in Jesus
Christ, but how sanctsied? They are such as in every place call upon the name
of Jesus Christ our Lord. 1 Cor. 1. 2.
They are the Epistle of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 3. 3.
but in what regard the Epistle? Written not with Ink, but with the spirit of
the living God; not in tables of stone, but in fleshy tables of the heart. It
is his People, but what kind of people? Thy people shall be willing in the day
of thy power, Ps. 110. 3.
in the beauties of holiness. They are the Children which God has given him;
But wherefore were they given him? To exhibit them one day, Heb. 2. 13.
saying, Behold I, and the children which thou have given me. Joh. 17. 2.
Thou have given me power over all flesh, that I should give eternal life to as
many as thou have given me. Can any man after all this grant, that the Church
should be defined, A Society making profession to believe, etc. or imagine that
Hypocrites belong to this mystical Divine Body?

IV. If we search the Scripture yet further, we shall find other Arguments in
confirmation of this Truth. Among these I reckon the predictions concerning the
Church of Christ, to be met with in the Prophets. Thus it is described by
Moses; Deuteronomy. 30. 6.
The Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love
the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, Isa. 34. 8, 9.
that thou may live. There shall be (says Isaiah) a highway, and a way, it
shall be called the way of holiness, the unclean shall not pass over it, but it
shall be for those; the wayfaring men, tho fools, shall not err therein: No
lion shall be there, nor any ravenous beast shall go up thereon; it shall not
be found there, Isa. 54. 13, 14.
but the redeemed shall walk there. And in another place. All thy children
shall be taught of the Lord, and great shall be the peace of thy children, In
righteousness shall thou be established. In the same sense Jeremiah speaks of
it, They shall teach no more every man his neighbor, Jer. 31. 33.
and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord, for they shall all know me,
from the least of them unto the greatest of them, for I will forgive their
inquity, and I will remember their sin no more. Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26, 27.
Ezekiel says as much; I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be
clean. I will give you a new heart, and a new spirit will I put within you: and
I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you a heart
of flesh. And I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
statutes, Joel 3. 17.
and ye shall keep my judgments. In like manner Joel, Then (says he) shall
Jerusalem be holy, and there shall no strangers pass through it any more.
Likewise Zechariah, Zech. 14. 21.
In that day there shall be no more the Canaanite in the house of the Lord of
hosts. What can all these great and wonderful promises mean? This Circumcision
of Heart? This way of Holiness where the unclean shall not pass over? This
keeping out of Lions and ravenous beasts? This being taught of God? This
universal knowledge, joined with a pardon of sins? This pouring out of the
spirit, which shall take away the hearts of stone, and change them for hearts
of flesh? This Holiness of Jerusalem, so as to suffer no stranger, nor
Canaanite in the midst of her? I say, What signifies all this, if the form and
essence of a Church consist in a bare profession; and if this Communion can be
composed of unjust, as well as just, of Bad as well as Good men?

V. St. Paul in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, endeavors to make us
apprehend the Church aright, 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13:
by resembling it to a man's body. As the body (says he) is one, and has many
members, and all the members of that one body, being many are one body, so also
is Christ. For by one spirit are we all haptized into one body, whether we be
Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free, and have all been made to drink
into one spirit. I need not here observe, that by Christ he means the Mystical
body of Christ, That is, his Church; this is manifest of it self, Verse 27.
and he explains himself so afterward: You (says he) are the body of Christ,
and members in particular. All we have to do, is to enquire, what he makes to
be the principle and ^and of this unity here attributed to the Church, and with
respect to which he likens it to the body of a Man. And this is easily
understood; for in his opinion it is the spirit, and consequently not a bare
profession. But still it may be doubtful what Spirit this is: Is it a spirit of
direction only, that attends upon the Clergy, and prevents their giving
erroneous determinations, and publicly professing any such, how wicked sover
the persons exercising this Authority be? By no means. It is the spirit which
the faithful receive, and whereof Baptism is a sign: For (says the Apostle) we
are all haptized into one body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be
bond or free, and have all been made to drink into one spirit. Thus you see the
band and principle of the Churches Unity. The evident consequence whereof is,
that inward regeneration is essential to it, and that as many as have not been
washed by, nor made to drink into this heavenly spirit, cannot be parts of this
body.

VI. But the Apostle carries on his Argument yet further; for he takes notice,
that although God had put a difference between the members, as there is
likewise in those of the Church; yet he had so qualified this difference, That
there should be (says he) no schism, 1 Cor. 12. 25, 26.
or division in the body, but that the members should have the same care one of
another; so that whether one member suffers, all the members suffer with it; or
one member be honored, all the members rejoice with it. From hence it is
plain, that according to St. Paul, there is as real an agreement between the
members of the body of the Church, as there is between those of a humane body,
without any contrariety or discord, and that this good correspondence is
founded on that Unity which makes each part to have one and the same common
interest. Now what true agreement, or common concern can there ever be, between
the members of Christ, and members of the Devil? Or in St. Paul's own phrase,
What fellowship between light and darkness? What continual enmity on the
contrary must there needs lurk under the Covert of such an untoward seeming
Peace, as a bare outward profession may make? Every one aims at advancing his
own Master's honor, so that the sentiments, designs, and methods of the
Servants must of necessity carry as great opposition as there is between the
Masters they serve.

VII. In his Epistle to the Galatians he gives us another description of the
Church very like this: Gal. 3. 27, 28,
As many (says he) as have been baptizeed into Christ, have put on Christ.
There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is
neither male nor female, for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. Thus far respects
Communion with the same Christ, which is the very thing that constitutes the
Unity of the Church, and is the essential form of it; so that persons out of
this Communion are not of the Church, because they have no part in the Churches
Unity. If you would now Know what kind of Communion this is, V. 29.
attend to what follows. If ye be Christ's, Ye are Abraham's seed, and heirs
according to promise. So that St. Paul does not treat of a Communnion
consisting in a bare outward profession, but such a one as makes men Mystical
Children of Abraham, and heirs of God.

VIII. In his Epistle to the Romans, Romans 8. 1.
he thought it not enough to say, They that are in Christ Jesus, walk not after
the flesh, but after the spirit, which yet is intimation sufficient, V. 9.
what nature that Communion is of, that makes this Mystical Body of Christ the
Church; but he goes further, and is express afterward, If any man have not the
spirit of Christ, he is none of his. Words of such strength as will not allow
us to acknowledge wicked men belong to the Church unless we should make a Church
that is not Christ's. If the Church formally, and as such, be Christ's, this
must be true of all that are of the Church, and participate of that which
constitutes it such. Now according to M. de Condom's definition, wicked men and
reprobates may be of the Church; therefore in his opinion they may be Christ's.
Notwithstanding St. Paul avers, that they that are Christ's, live not according
to the flesh; and that as many as have not Christ's spirit, are none of his; so
that he is of a judgment different from M. de Condom's. If an outward
profession alone be the common band, and that which constitutes the Church, we
are driven to maintain one of these three things: Either that such a profession
does confer the spirit of Christ; Or, without Christ's spirit one may still be
his; Or, that the things which make it to be a Church, do not yet make it to be
Christ's. The first of these would be absurd. For what more so, than to
assert,' That a bare profession of Christianity confers the Spirit of Christ?
At this rate every Hypocrite is a partaker of that Holy Spirit. The second,
That one without Christ's Spirit may still be his, directly contradicts Saint
Paul's assertion, which positively declares, That he who has not Christ's
Spirit, is not his. And for the third, That the things which make it to be a
Church, do not yet make it to be Christ's; it may be M. de Condom may not like
this himself. I for my part look upon it as a very strange position. For can
one say, that what precisely constitutes the Church, does not make it Christ's?
This is as much as to say, that the Church is not his Body, nor his Spouse, nor
his well-beloved, nor any of all those things the Scripture calls it. In a
word, it is to say, that it is not considered in this quality any part of his
concern. If M. de Condom frame to himself such a Church as this, let him at
least give us leave to enquire why he does afterward appropriate the promises
to it. For what right can the Church have to these, if, as such, it be not
Christ's, nor has Communion with him? These two Propositions are evidently
destructive of one another. If the Church as such be not Christ's, it has no
share in his promises; if it has, then it is his, as a Church. Let him choose
which he please; if the first, our Controversy is at an end, for to what
purpose should we disspute of a Church, which he says, is Jesus Christ's; and
yet is not his, nor has any title to the promises? If the second, let him not
talk any more of a Church considered as such, being constituted by a bare
outward profession: For this not conferring Christ's Spirit, cannot make the
Church his; or if it can, St. Paul does not say true, when he tells us
expressly, That if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his.

IX. The sundry passages of Scripture concerning Hypocrites, who cloak
themselves with such an outward profession, abundantly prove them not to be of
Christ's Church. 1 John 2. 9.
He that says, he is in the light, and hates his brother, is in darkness. 1 John 3. 10.
And a little after, In this the children of God are manifest, and the children
of the Devil, whosover does not righteousness is not God, neither he that
loves not his brother. 1 John 4. 8.
Again afterward, He that loves not, knows not God, Jud. v. 12.
for God is love. St. Jude speaking of these Hypocrites, calls them, Spots in
our feasts of charity, clouds without water, trees without fruit, twice dead,
Mat. 7. 23.
plucked up by the Roots. Jesus Christ himself says, In the last day he will
profess unto them, he never knew them. What color then have we for making such
members of the Church, which is Christ's Body? But that place of St. John
removes all the difficulty, 1 John 2. 19.
They went out from us, but they were of us: for if they had been of us, they
would no doubt have continued with us, but that they might be made manifest,
that they were not all of us. What a plain difference is here made between
being among us, and being of us; being among us, is proper for Hypocrites, that
are mixed with the Faithful, and join in the same profession: Being with us, is
sincerely and truly to be of the Church; for which something more than an
outward profession is requisite.

X. We read in Scripture of a twofold Call, one by the mere Preaching of the
Word, commonly termed an outward Call; the other by the Preaching of the Word,
and the Holy Spirit both, styled an inward Call. Of the first our Savior
speaks, Mat. 22. 14.
when he says, Many are called, but few chosen. Of the second St. Paul, Whom he
did predestinate, them he also cased, and whom he called, Romans 8. 30. (...)
them he also justified. Now the Church, whose very name implies a Call, must
needs have been the effect of one of these two just mentioned. But if defined
by a bare profession, it cannot refer to one or other of these, nor can it
answer the design of either. It does not fulfill the end of the first, for the
Preaching of the Gospel does not call men to a mere Profession of believing
Jesus Christ's Doctrine. A Hypocrite is so far from complying with this Call,
that he rejects and mocks at it. It does not refer to the second Call, because
the Spirit which calls with the Word, is a Spirit of Regeneration, and not bare
profession. What Call shall we refer it to then? I know not any third, the
Scripture mentions not any, and the nature of the thing will not admit of any.
We can consider God in such a case but according to two different capacities,
either as a Lawgiver, commanding, exhorting, promising and threating, or as an
absolute disposer of Events, and so bringing to pass in us the thing he
commands us.

But whether commanding us, or whether working in to, he never stops at a bare
profession; he goes on to the truth of Holiness and Faith, his Word enjoins it,
his Spirit produces it. So that whether soever of these two Calls you suppose
the Church to obey, it must either proceed to a true Conversion, or be no
Church, for the proper and natural signification of the word is a Called
Society, but no one ever called it to an outward profession, and no more.

XI. I suppose it is a maxim among all Christians, That Jesus Christ has no
more Churches than one, and that this on Earth, together with that in Heaven,
make but that one; thus much we learn from the Trent-Catcchisin it self. A sure
method then of discovering the true nature and essence of the Church upon
Earth, would be to search into that in Heaven; for it is plain, were these of
different natures, they would be no longer one, but two Churches of a several
species. Thus much, I think, must be granted, and so likewise must the
Conclusion I deduce from it, viz. That either the nature of the Church
Triumphant, must exist in a bare profession, or that of the Church Militant
cannot. If the Churches Unity here below, be a Unity of Profession, an external
Unity only, and the internal one be but accidental, then the Unity of the
Church above must be External too, and no more, and that Internal one resulting
from the agreement of hearts and wills, no more essential to it, than to this
below. Otherwise (as was said before) they must be two different Churches. Let
them be so kind then to clear this Point, Whether we must believe that a true
Piety, true Regeneration, and true Holiness, are not really esseential parts of
the Church in Heaven, for to this hour I never heard any such thing maintained.

XII. Those who desire to be informed what the Church, and its Unity is, Joh.
17. 20, 21, 22.
need only consider what Jesus Christ says in that admirable Prayer related by
St. John, Neither pray I for these alone (his Apostles) but for them also which
shall believe on me through their word. That they may be one, as thou Father
art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us. The Glory which thou
gave me, I have given them, that they may be one, even as we are one. The
Churches Unity is formed after the pattern of that between the Father and the
Son. This is a kind of resemblance, a draught of that which has some of the
strokes, though not all the liveliness and perfection. It is therefore a Real
Internal Unity, a Unity not of outward Profession only, but in some sort of
nature and essence, a Unity of Regeneration, a Unity of the same Faith, and the
same Righteousness; and to restrain this to a mere External Union, such as is
common to both good and bad men, would not only weaken, but utterly evacuate
the force of Jesus Christ's expression.

XIII. To all that has been now alleged, might be added almost innumerable
passages of the Primitive Fathers, who whenever they spoke of the Church in its
true and genuine sense, Joh. 6. 68, 69.
did always deliver themselves as we do. I will here instance in some of them:
S. Cypr. in his 55 Ep. has this passage, Petrus ait, Domine ad quem ibimus?
verba vitae aeternae habes, and nos credimus cognovimus, quoniam tues filius
Deivivi: Significans scilicer and ostendens, eos qui a Christo recesserint
culpa sua perire. Ecclesiam tamen, quae in Christum credat, and quae semel id
quod cognoverit teneat, nunquam ab eo omnnino discedere, and eos esse
Ecclesiam, qui in domo Dei permanent. Plantationem vero plantatam a Deo patre
non esse, quos vidimus non frumenti stabilitate solidari, sed ta^quam paleas
dissipantis inimici Spiritu ventilari: De quibus and Joannes in Epistola sua
dicir, ex nobis exierunt, sed non fuerunt ex nobis, si enim fuissent ex nobis,
mansissent utique nobiscum, Cyprian. Edit. Oxon. 1682. Where this is the 59 th
Epistle.
Lord, says St. Peter, to whom shall we go, thou have the words of eternal life;
and we believe and are sure that thou art that Christ the Son of the living
God. Showing hereby that such as depart from Christ, perish through their own
default; but the Church which believes in him, and constantly perseveres in the
Truths she has received, does never depart from him; and such as continue in
the House of God are his Church. Such as want the substance and solidity of
good corn, and are scattered abroad with the breath of the Enemy, like chaff
with the wind, are not of Gods planting. With relation to whom it is, that St.
John in his Epistle says, They went out from us, but they were not of us; for
if they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us. In another
place, having said before, that the water mixed with their winc in the Eucharist
represented the people, as the wine did the Blood of Christ, he adds, Quando
autem in calice vino aqua miscetur, Christo populus adunatur, and credentium
plebs ei in quem credidit copulatur and conjungitur. Quae copulatio and
conjunctio aquae and vini sic miscetur in calice Domini, ut commixtio illa non
possit ab invicem separaj. Unde Ecclesiam, id est, plebem in Ecclesia
constitutam sideliter and firmiter in eo quod credidit perseverantem nulld res
separare poterit a Christo, quo minus haereat semper and maneat individua
dilectio. Cypr. Ep. 63. Page 154. Edit. Oxon.
When therefore the water is mixed with the wine in the Chalice, the people are
united to Jesus Christ, and the company of believers joined to him on whom they
believe. Now this water and wine are so mixed in the Cup, that they cannot be
parted any more: Whence it follows, that nothing can separate between Christ
and his Church; that is, the persons that are in the Church, constantly and
closely adhering to what they have believed; nor break off the inviolable love
they bear to one another. So that wicked men and Hypocrites are not of the Body
of the Church, seeing an outward profession is not sufficient to make men such.

St. Jerome says the very same thing: Ecclesia Christi gloriosa est, non habens
maculam, neque rugam, aut quidistinsmodi. Qui ergo peccator est, and aliqua
sorde maculatus, de Ecclesia Christi non potest appellari; nec Christo
subjectus dici. Possibile autem est, ut quomodo Ecclesia, quae prius rugam
habuerar. and maculam, in juventutem and munditiam postea restituta est, ita
and peccator currat ad Medieum, quia non habent opus sani Medico, sed male
habentes, and curentur vulnera ipsius, and fiat de Ecclesia, quae corpus est
Christi. Hieronym. in Ephesians. 5. Tom. 9. Edit. Basil. 1537.
The Church of Christ is a glorious Church, having neither spot nor wrinkle,
nor any such thing. He therefore that is a sinner, and stained with any
pollution, cannot be said to be of Christ's Church, nor in subjection to
Christ. It may happen indeed, that as the Church which had heretofare its spots
and wrinkles, was after restored to youth and purity; so a sinner may come to
the Physician, for those that be well, need not a Physician, but those that be
sick, and so having his maladies healed, be made a member of the Church, which
is Christ's Body.

St. Ambrose explaining those words of the 36 th Psalm, Let not the hand of the
ungodly cast me down; Et manus peccatorum non moveat me. Etenim sieut sancti
membra sunt Christi, ita impii membra sunt Diaholi. Manus peccatorum non moveat
me; id est, Actus eorum qui peccant non me de justitiae statione dimoveant.
Piernmque enim dum videmus peccatores prosperis abundare successibus, nutamus
affectur and qaasi quadam peccatorum manu de radice virtutis avellimur. Ambros
in Psalm. 35. Edit. Paris. 1529.
says, As the Saints are members of Jesus Christ, so wicked men are members of
the Devil. Let not the hand of the ungodly remove me; that is, Let not the
actions of Sinners tempt me to depart from the way of righteousness, for we are
apt to slip when we see the prosperity of Sinners, and so the hand of Sinners
does in some sort shake and loosen us from the root of virtue. If wicked men
are members of the Devil, there little probability that hypocrisy should be
able to make them members of Jesus Christ.

But of all the Fathers, there is not any that treats of this Subject with such
exactness and perspicuity, as St. Austin does; a Man might compile a whole
Volume of what he has written about it. This Father explaining that of St.
Jehn, They went out from us, but they were not of us. Ex nobis exierunt, ergo
plangimu^ damnum. Audi consolationem: Sed non erant ex nobis. Omnes haretici,
omnes Schismatici ex nobis exie runt, id est, ex Ecclesia exeunt. Sed non
exirent si ex nobis essent, antequam exirent ergo non erant ex nobis. Si
antequam exirent non erant ex nobis, multi intus sunt, non exierunt, and tamen
Antichristi sunt. Audemus hoc dicre? ut quid? Nisi unusquisqque cum intus est
non sit Antichristus. -- Nunc interrogare debet unusquisqque conscientiam suam,
an sit Antichristus. Latin enim Antichristus contrarius est Christo -- Eos
autem qui non sunt Christo contrarii, for as exire nullo modo posse, qui enim
non est Christo contrarius in corpore ipsius haeret, and membrum computatur.
Nunquam sibi sunt membra contraria, corporis integritas universis memberis
constat; and quid de concordia dicit Apostolns? Si patitur unum membrum,
compatiuntur omnia membra, and si glorificatur unum membrum, congaudent omnia
membra. Si ergo in glorificatione membri caetera membra congaudent, and in
passione omnia member patiuntur, concordia membrorum non habet Antichristum. Et
qui sunt intus, certe sunt in corpore Domini nostri Jesu Christi, quandoquidem
adhuc curatur corpus ipsus, and sanitas perfecta non erit, nisi in
resurrectione mortuorum. Sic sunt in corpore Christi, quomodo humores mali,
quando evomuntur, tunc relevatur corpus, sic and mali quando exeunt, tunc
Ecclesia relevatur; and dicit, quando eos evomit, atque projicit corpus, ex me
exierunt humores isti, sed non erant ex me. Quid est, non erant ex me? Non de
carne mea praecisi sunt sed pectus mihi premehant, cum inessent. Ex nobis
exierunt, sed nolite tristes esse, non erant ex nobis. Unde probas? Quod
suissent ex nobis, permansissent utique nobiscum. Hinc ergo videat Charitas
vestra, quia multi, qui non sunt ex nobis, accipiunt nobiscum Sacramenta.
Accipiunt nobiscum Baptismum, accipiunt nobiscum, quod novunt fideles se
accipere, Benedictionem, Eucharistiam, and quicquid in Sacramentis sanctis est.
Ipsius altaris communicationem accipiunt nobiscum, and non sunt ex nobis.
Tentatio probat, quia non sunt ex nobis. Quando illis tentatio venerit, velut
occasion venti volant for as, quia grana non erant. Augustine. Tom. 9. Tractar.
3. in Epist. Jonnis. Edit. Paris. 1531.
They went out from us, (says he) we lament the loss: But hear the comfort, they
were not of us. All Heretics and Schismatics go out from us; That is, depart
from the Church; but were they truly any of outs, they would not have departed.
They were not therefore out members even before they went out, and if so, then
there are many within, who, tho they have not yet gone out, are Antichrists.
May we dare to essert this? Yes, why not? Let every man consult his own
Conscience, to know if he be not Anticrist. The meaning of Anticrist is,
contrary to Christ. Whence it is clear, that none but Antichrists can go out;
for such as are not contrary to Christ, will by no means do so, for they
continue in the body, and are reckoned among the members of Christ. The Members
are never contrary to one another; The entire composition of a body consuis in
having all its members; and you know what the Apostle says upon this matual
agreement of the Members, If one member suffer, all the members suffer with it;
and if one be honored, all shall rejoice with it. Now if all the Members
suffer in the grief of one, and rejoice at the honor done to one, there is
nothing that savours of Antichrist in this mutual agreement. Those that are
within, are the body of our Lord Jesus Christ. For this body is still in a
state of healing, and will never enjoy perfect health and sandness, till the
resurrection of the dead. These Antichrists are in the body of Christ like ill
humors, the voiding of which eases the body: Thus when the wicked go out, the
Church finds refreshment; and when the body throws them out, she says, these
noxious humors are gone out of me, but they were no part of me; that is, they
were not cut away from my flesh or substance, but oppressed my stomach while they
lay there. They are gone from us then, but be not troubled at it, they were not
ours. But how do you prove this? 1 John 2. 19.
St. John says, If they had been of us, they would have continued with us. So
that you see, many people receive the Sacraments with us, which yet are not any
part of us; They have Baptism administered to them, they receive that
benediction which the saithful are sensible they receive truly and effectually,
the Eucharist, and whatever is in the Sacraments. They communicate of the same
Altar with us, and yet are no parts of us. Templation discovers them to be
none. When that arises they are carried away, as with a strong wind, because
they are not the true solid Corn. Nothing can be more express. Evil men, tho
within the pale of the Church; That is, making an outward profession, yet are
not of his Body, nor ought to be reckoned among his Members. These are
distempered humors within the Body, but not at all of the substance of the
Body, such as do but annoy the Body, and must be evacuated in order to give its
relief. So that St. Augustine's sense of the Church was, That it consisted only
of Righteous persons, and true Believers, and that inward virtues were
essential to it, and ought to make a part of its definition.

Observe again what he delivers in his Treatise of Baptism, against the
Donatists. Aug. de Bapt. contra Donar. Lib. 1. Cap. 17. ^ Itaq. sive intus
versari videantur sive aperte soris sint, quod caro est, caro est, sive in area
sua sterilitate perseveret, sive occasion tentationis tanquam vento, extra
tollatur, quod palea est, palea est: and semper ab illius Ecclesiae, quae sine
macula and raga est, unitate divisus est; etiam qui congrgatione sanctorum in
carnali obduratione miseetur. De nullo tamen desperandum est, sive qui intus
talis apparet, sive qui foris manifestius adversatur.
Whether evil men be seemingly within the Church, or evidently out of it, still
that which is flesh is flesh. Whether the barren Chaff continue in the floor,
or be scattered by the blast of temptation, it is still but Chaff. Carnal and
obdurate persons, tho they mix with the Saints in the same Assemblies, are
still separated from the Unity of that Church which is without spot or wrinkle.
Yet must we not despair of any, either such as being within the pale passes for
Friends, or such as being without, betrays a more manifest contraricty to us.
And lower in the same Treatise, Baptismus corrumpi and adulterari non potest,
etsi a corruptis and adulteris habeatur, sicut and ipsa Ecclesia incorrupta,
and casta, and pudica est, and ideo ad eam non pertinent avari, raptores,
foeneratores, quos non rantum foris, sed etiam intus esse, multis literarum
suarum locis Cyprianus ipse testatur. Aug. de Bapt. contra Donatist. Lib. 4.
Cap. 2.
Baptism it self cannot be corrupted, tho administered to corrupt persons; any
more than the church, which is incorruptible, chaste and innocent. To which
Covetous persons, Robbers, and Usurers do not belong; such as Cyprian in many
of his Epistles says, are not only without, but even within the pale. Presently
after, Nec isti Ecclesiae devoti sunt, qui videntur esse intus, and contra
Christum vivunt, id est, contra Christi mandate faciunt; nec omnino ad illam
Ecclesiam pertinere judicandi sunt, quam sie ipse mundat lavacro aquae in
verbo, ut exhibeat sibi gloriosam Ecclesium, non habentem maculam, aut rugam,
aut aliquid hujusmodi: Quod si in isti Ecclesia non sunt, ad cujus membra non
pertinent, non sunt in Ecclesia, de qua dicitur, una est columba, una est matri
suae, ipsa est enim sine macula and ruga: aut asserat qui potest, hujus
columbae membra esse, qui saeculo verbis non factis renunciant. Ibid. Cap. 3.
Such as live contrary to Christ, that is, in the breach of his Commandments,
tho they seem to be in the Church, are not really so. We must not imagine they
belong to that Church, which Jesus Christ cleanses by the washing of water, and
the word, to make of it a glorious Church, without spot or wrinkle. And if they
be not of that Church, whose members they are not, then neither are they of
that, concerning which it is said, My dove is but one, the only one of her
mother. For this is she that is without spot or wrinkle; and let them show us
how these are members of this Dove, who have renounced the World, in words
only, and not in works. And a little after that, Nos autem, secundum id quod in
praesenti est cuique hominum, quaerineus, utrum in illius Ecclesiae membris,
quae una columba dicta est, and sponsa Christi sine macula and ruga, hodie
deputandi sunt, de quibus dicit Cyprianus in Epistola sua quam commemoravi:
quod viam Domini non tenerent, nec data sibi ad salutem coelestia mandata
reservarent, quod non facerent Domini voluntatem, patrimoniorum luero
students, superbiam sectantes, aemulationi and dissenquisque vacantes,
supplicitatis and sidei negligentes, seculo solis verbis and non factis
renunciantes, unusquisque sibi placentes, a omnibus displicentes. Quod si eos
in suis membris nec illa columba cognoscit, and talibus, si in eadem
perversitate permanserint, dicturus est Deus, Non novi vos, discedite a me qui
operamini iniquitatem, videntur esse in Ecclesia, sed non sunt, imo and contra
Ecclesiam faciunt. Ibid.
I would ask with respect to every man's present condition, whether such men
are now to be reckoned for members of that Church, which is the Dove, the
Spouse without spot or wrinkle, as Cyprian describes in his Epistle. Men that
kept not to the way of the Lord, nor the Heavenly receptes given for their
Salvation, that did not perform the Will of God, but wholly addicted themselves
to worldly gain; proud, envious, contentious persons, that neglected Hoonesty
and Faith, renounced the World in words only, not in deeds; every one studying
his own pleasure, and the dissatisfaction of all others. If this Dove refuse to
own such for her Members; if God shall one day say to such wretches, that
continue in their perverse courses, I know you not, depart from me ye workers
of iniquity; tho they seem never so much to be in the Church, they are not in
truth of the Church, but act in direct contrariety to her. And in another place
of the same Treatise; Etiam si discedendi occasiones ipsis desint, qu^^ intus
videntur* abilla invisibili charitatis compage separati sunt; unde Joannes
dicit, ex nobis exierunt, sed non erant ex nobis, nam si fuissent ex nobis
man^issent utique nobiscum. Non ait quod exeundo alieni facti sunt, sed quod
alieni erant, propter hoc eos exiisse declaravit. Aug. de Bapt. contra
Donatist. Lib. 3. Cap. 19.
Such as oppose brotherly love, whether they are plainly without, or whether
seemingly within, are divided from that invisible Assembly which Charity knits
together. Therefore St. John says, They went out from us, but they were not of
us; for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us. He
does not say they alienated themselves by going out, but that they were aliens,
and that this was the reason why they went out. Thus far this Father does not
dissemble his opinion; He will by no means own any but the Saints to be Members
of the Church, he totally excludes wicked men and hypocrites; he uses no such
nice distinctions between dead and living members, as our modern Controvertists
do; in the contrary, he explains what he said, That wicked men were in the
Church, by saying, that they seem to be in it; but they only seem to be so, for
in very deed they are more foreigners, and such as the Church does not
acknowledge for hers.

In the fifth Book of the same Treatise, he says, In Cantico Canticorum
Ecclesia sic describitur, Hortus conclusus, soror, mea sponsa, fons signatus,
puteus aquae vivae, paradis^s cum fructupomorum. Hoc intelligere non audeo nisi
in sanctis and justis, non in avaris, and fraudatoribus, and raptoribus, and
foeneratoribus, and ebriosis, and invidis, quos tamen cum justis baptismum
habuisse communem, cum quibus communem non habebant utique charitatem --
docemus. Nam dicat mihi aliquis, quomodo irrepserint in hortum conclusum, and
fontem signatum, quos saeculo solis verbis, and non factis renunciasse
Cyprianus, and tamen intus fuisse testatur. Si enim intus sunt, and ipsi sponsa
Christi sunt, itane vero talis est illa sine macula and ruga, and illa speciosa
columba tali membrorum part turpatur? An istae sunt spinae in quarum medio est
illa sicut lilium, quod in eodem Cantico dicitur? In quantum ergo lilium, in
tantum and hortus conclusus, and fons signatus, in illis videlicet justis, qui
in occulto Judaei sunt circumcisione cordis: Omnis enim pulchritudo filiae
regum intrinsecus, in quibus est numerus certus Sanctorum, praedestinatus ante
mundi constitutionem. Illa vero multitudo spinarum, sive occultis, sive apertis
separationibus, forinsecus adjacet super numerum. Annunciavi inquit and locutus
sum, multiplicati sunt super numerum. Numerus ergo ille Justorum, qui secundum
propositum vocati sunt, de quibus dictum est, Novit Dominus qui sunt ejus, ipse
est hortus conclusus, fons signatus, puteus aquae vivae, paradisus cum fructu
pomorum. Aug. de Bapt. contra Donatist. Lib. 5. Cap. 27.
The Church is described in the Book of Canticles, as Christ's Garden enclosed,
his Sister, his Spouse, his sealed Fountain, his Well of living waters, his
Orchard of Pomegranates. This I dare understand of none but the Saints and
Righteous persons; not of the Covetous, the Defrauders, the Extortioners, the
Usurers, the Drunkards, and the Envious, which have indeed the same common
Baptism with the just; but not the same Charity. Let them tell me how the men
that have renounced the world in words only, and not in deeds, got in to this
enclosed Garden, this sealed Fountain: For if these men are really in it, if
these are the Spouse of Christ, how can that Spouse be without blemish or
without spot? How can she be the beautiful Dove, when stained with such a
parcel of Members as these? Are not these the Thorns in the midst of which she
as the Lilies, according to that expression in the Canticles? In what respect
then she is a Lilly, Cant. 2. 2.
in the same is she an enclosed Garden, a sealed Fountain; That is, with regard
to those just men, who are Jews inwardly, by the Circumcision of the heart.
Romans 2. 29.
For the King's daughter is all glorious within, and among these are the set
number of Saints predestined before the foundation of the World: Ps 45. 13.
But for that multitude of Thorns, whether their separation be undiscerned, or
whether it be open, they are added over and above, as the Scripture says, they
are multiplied above measure. This number therefore of the just, called
according to the Election of God, these of whom it is said, 2 Timothy 2. 19.
The Lord knows them that be his, They are his enclosed Garden, his sealed
Fountain, his Well of Living Waters. This Holy Doctor thought it not enough to
allow wicked men and hypocrites no place in his notion of the Church, and to
make it up of just men only, but he does besides show wherein the very
essential form, that Unity which constitutes a Church, does consist; to wit,
not in any thing external, but in the internal graces. In the Circumcision of
the heart, and the Glory within: He goes farther still, and makes the Church to
consist of the predestined only, The number, says he, of God's Elect, are his
enclosed Garden, and sealed Fountain, that is, the Church of Christ. How shall
we reconcile this Doctrine with M. de Condom,'s who distinguishes between the
Church of Christ, and the predestinate, as between a whole and it is part; who
counts the reprobates in too, and blames us for restraining the Church to the
number of God's Elect alone?

This being a point of consequence, and able to determine all our Controversy
concerning the Church, I hope it may not be tedious to hear what St. Augustine
says further upon it. After having recited a passage taken out of ^t. Cyprian's
Epistle to Magnus, he goes on thus. Haec verba beati Cypriani indicant eum
etiam intellenisse decorem domus Dei, quam domum ex unanimis and concordibus
constare a^^irmavit, and docuit testimonio Prophetarum, and significatione
Sacramentorum. In qua utique domo non erant illi invidi, and sine charitate
malevoli, qui tamen baptizabant. Ex quo apparet and in eis esse posse, atque ab
eis dari posse Sacramentum Christi, qui non sunt in Ecclesia Christi, in qua
non nisi unanimes and concordes habitare Cyprianus ipse testatur. Neque enim
hoc saltem dici potest, tunc baptisare posse cum latent, quoniam illi Paulum
Apostolum non latebant, quos in Epistola sua ve racissimus testis notat, and
gaudere se dicit, quoniam and ipsi Christum annunciabant. De his quippe ait,
sive occasion, sive veritate Christus annunciatur, and in hoc gaudeo, sed and
gaudebo. Quibus omnibus consideratis, puto me non temere dicere, alios ita esse
in domo Dei, ut ipsi etiam sint eadem domus Dei, quae dicitur aedisicari super
petram, quae unica columba appellatur, quae sponsa pulchra sine macula and
ruga, and hortus conclusus, fons signatus, puteus aquae vivae, paradisus cum
fructu pomorum. Quae domus etiam claves accepit, and potestatem solvendi and
ligandi: Hanc domum si quis corripientem contempserit corrigentemque, sit tibi,
inquit, tanquam Ethnicus and publicanus. De hac domo dicitur, Diliexi, Domine,
decorem domus tuae, and locum habitationis gloriae tuae. Et qui habitare facit
unanimes in domo. Et jocundatus sum in his quae dixerunt mihi, in domum Domini
ibimus. Et, beati qui habitant in domo tua, Domine, in saeculo saeculorum
laudabunt te; and innumerabilia talia. Haec domus etiam triticum dicitur, sive
tricenum, sive sexagenum, sive centenum fructum afferens cum tolerantia. Haec
domus est in vasis aureis, and argenteis, and lapidibus pretiosis, and lignis
imputribilibus. Huic dom^i dicitur, sufferentes invicem in dilectione,
students servare unitatem Spiritus in vinculo pacis. Et, templum enim sanctum
Dei estis vos. Haec quippe in bonis ^idelibus est, and Sanctis Dei servis
ubique dispersis, and Spiritali unitate devinctis, eadem communione
Sacramentorum, sive se facie noverint, sive non noverint. Alios autem ita dici
constat esse in domo, ut non pertineant ad compagem domus, nec ad societatem
fructiferae pacisicaeque Justitiae. Sed sicut palea esse dicitur in frumento,
Paulo Apostolo dicente, in magna autem domo non solum aurea vasa sunt, vel
argentea, sed and lignea, and fictilia, and alia quidem sunt in honorem, alia
vero ad contumeliam. Aug. de Bapt. contra Donatist. Lib 7. Cap. 50.
The words of blessed Cyprian show, that he rightly understood the beauty of
God's House, in that he declares, and proves both by the testimony of the
Prophets, and the signification of the Sacraments, that this House is composed
of men living in Peace, and unity of Heart. So that those envious uncharitable
Wretches were not in this House, notwithstanding they were baptized. And by
consequence Christ's Holy Sacrament may be both administered, and received by
men not in the Church of Christ; because, as appears by the Testimony of
Cyprian, none but the peaceable live in this Church. It will not serve the turn
to say, they might baptize while they were hid; they were not hidden from St.
Paul, when he said in his Epistle, Phil. 1. 18.
he rejoiced, that Christ was preached even by such; whether in pretense or in
truth (says he) Christ is preached, and I therein do rejoice, yea, and will
rejoice. Upon these considerations I do not think it reshness in me to affirm,
Mat. 16 18.
that some are in the House of God, so, as that they are themselves the very
House, Matt. 16. 19.
that which is said to be built upon a Rock, called, his Dove, his only One,
his beautiful Spouse, without spot or wrinkle, the enclosed Garden, the sealed
Fountain, the Well of living Water, the Orchard with Pomegranates, Mat. 18. 17.
and which Has received the Keys, the power of binding and loosing; this House
it is, whose corrections if any man contemptuously behave himself against, he
is ordered to be to us, as an Heathen and a Publicar. Ps 26. 8.
Of this it is said, Lord I have loved the Beauty of thy House, Ps. 68. 6.
and the place where thine Honor dwells. He makes men of one mind in an
house. Ps. 122. 1.
I was glad when they said unto me, we will go into the House of the Lord.
Psalm. 84. 4.
Blessed are they that dwell in thy House, they will be always praising Thee;
Matt. 13. 23.
and a world of such like passages. This House is called the good seed, Luke 8.
15. 2 Timothy 2. 20.
bringing forth fruit with patience, thirty, sixty, and a hundred fold. This
House consists of Vessels of gold and of silver, of precious stones, and
incorruptible wood. To this House it is said, Bear up one another in love,
endeavoring to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. Ephesians. 4. 2,
3.
And, the Holy Temple of God are ye. 1 Cor. 3. 17.
For this consists of the true Believers, and holy Servants of God dispersed
throughout the Universe, and all knit together in a spiritual Unity, by the
participation of the same Sacraments, whether personally known to one another,
or not. As for the rest, they are said to be in the House, but it is in such a
manner, that they belong not at all to the building, nor have any part of that
fellowship which brings forth the fruit of righteousness and peace. They are
here as the Chaff is among the Corn; for we cannot deny that they be contained
in the House, 2 Timothy 2. 20.
because St. Paul says, In a great house are vessels, not only of gold and
silver, but also of wood and of earth, and some to honor, and some to
dishonor.

I cannot imagine how St. Augustin'S sight came to differ so mightily from M.
de Condam'S. If we believe the latter, by the Church must be understood, a
Society composed of good and bad men; for he tells you, to such a Society only
are those passages of Scripture applicable. Conference page 5, 7, 8, 9.
Upon this rock will I build my Church. Christ loved the Church, and gave
himself for it, that he might make it a glorious Church without spot or
wrinkle, etc. If he refuse to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an
Heathen, etc. Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in Heaven, etc.
But if St. Augustine be to be believed, we must take the Church in a quite
different sense; for a Society made up of none but righteous persons, and true
Believers; because to such a one, and no other, do these passages belong. In
his Opinion the just alone are the House built upon a Rock, the Spouse without
spot or wrinkle, they only have the keys and power of binding and loosing, it is
their censures only that men ought not to despise, if they would not be looked
upon as Heathens and Publicans. M. de Condom deduces his Arguments from these
passages; St. Augustine deduces his from the very same, and yet their
Conclusions are opposite to one another: All that we have left to do then, is
either to correct St. Augustine by M. de Condom, or M. de Condom by St.
Augustine, and of the two, methinks the latter is the more reasonable.

Upon this ground then I will once more introduce that Father speaking thus:
Nec ideo putandi sunt esse in corpore Christi, quod est Ecclesia, quia
sacramentorum ejus corporaliter participes fiunt. Illa enim and in talibus
sancta sunt, and eis indigne tractantibus and sumentibus ad majus judicium
valebunt. Ipsi autem non sunt in illa Ecclesiae Christi compage quae in membris
Christi per connexum and contactum crescit in incrementum Dei. Illa quippe
Ecclesia in petra est, sicut Dominus dicit, super hanc petram aedificabo
Ecclesiam meam. Illi autem in arena aedificant, sicut idem Dominus dicit, Qui
audit verba mea, and non facit ea, assimilabo eum viro stulto, qui aedificat
domum suam super arenam. Sed ne putes Ecclesiam quae in petra est, in una part
esse terrarum, and non diffundi usque ad fines terrae, audi ejus vocem de
Psalmo gementis, inter mala peregrinationis suae. Ait enim, A finibus terrae ad
te clamavi, dum angeretur cor meum. In petra exaltasti me. Videre quemadmodum a
finibus terrae clamat. Non est ergo in sola Africa --. Videte quemadmodum in
petra exaltetur, Non ergo in ea deputandi sunt omnes qui aedificant in arena.
Aug. contra Literas Petilian. Lib. 2. Cap. 108.
We must not suppose that wicked men belong to Christ's body, i. e. the Church;
because they do partake of the Sacraments corporally. The Sacraments themselves
are holy in such persons, but they do but increase their condemnation, because
they administer and receive them unworthily. Ephesians. 4. 16.
Now they are not of that Company of Christ's Church, which consists of his
Members compacted together by bands and joints, and increases with the
increase of God. Col. 2. 19.
For this Church is built on a Rock, according to that of our Savior, Matt.
16. 16.
Upon this rock will I build my Church: But those build on the Sand, as the
same Savior said, Whosoever hears my Words, and does them not, Matt. 7. 27.
I will comapre him to a foolish man, that built his house upon the sand. Now
lest you should fancy that the Church built upon a Rock, is in any one
particular place; or that it is not extended over the whole Earth, Ps. 61. 2, 3.
observe her complaint in the Psalm, From the ends of the Earth have I cried
unto thee, when my heart was in heaviness, Thou have set me up upon a rock. She
cries from the ends of the Earth, therefore she is not in Africa and no where
else; she is set up upon a Rock, therefore those must not be esteemed of her,
who build upon the Sand. There is some probability St. Augustine knew what he
said, and yet you see a passage of Scripture, Ephesians. 4. abused by M. de Condom,
in favor of his Church, made up of a mixture of good and bad men, which this
Father explains of the Church of the Just only, as well as that other of St.
Matt. 16. Upon this Rock will I build my Church.

He teaches the same Doctrine in his Book concerning the Unity of the Church.
Haec autem Ecclesia corpus Christi est, sicut* Apostolus dicit, Pro corpore
ejus, quae est Ecclesia. Unde utique manifestum est; eum qui non est in membris
Christi, Christianam salutem habere non posse. Membra vero Christi per unitatis
charitatem sibi copulantur, and per endem capiti suo cohaerent. August. de
Unitat. Eccles. Cap. 2.
The Church is the Body of Jesus Christ, according to that of the Apostle,
Ephesians. 5.
for His body the Church; whence it is evident, that such as are not accounted
his Members, cannot obtain Salvation. Now the Members of Jesus Christ are
united by Love, both to one another, and to him their Head. A little further,
answering the Donatists Cavils against the Catholics, for having persecuted
them, for having burnt their Bibles, for having sacrificed to Idols; Breviter
respondeo quod saepe respondi, aut falsa dicitis, aut si vera sunt, non ad
frumenta Christi, sed ad eorum paleam pertinent ista quae dicitis. Non inde
perit Ecclesia, quae optimo judicio ventilata istorum omnium separatione
purgabitur. Ego ipsam Ecclesiam requiro ubi sit, quae audiendo verba Christi,
and ea faciendo, aedificat super petram, and audiendo, and faciendo tolerat
eos, qui audiendo, and non faciendo, aedi^icant super arenam. Ubi sit triti^um,
quod inter zizania crescit usque ad messem, non quid fecerint vel faciant
zizania. Ubi sit proxima Christi in medio ^iliarum malarum, sicut lilium in
medio spinarum, non quid fecerint vel faciant ipsae: spinae: Ubi sunt pisces
boni, qui donec ad littus perveniant, tolerant pisces malos pariter irretitos,
non quid fecerint vel faciant ipsi pisces mali. Ibid. Cap. 16.
I return the same answer, (says he) which I have often done already, That what
you say either is not true, or if it be, it concerns not Christ's good Corn,
but the Chaff. The Church does not perish for this, which shall be thoroughly
purged from these men at the last exact judgment. I enquire after the true
Church, That is, where she is that hears the words of Jesus Christ, and does
them; that builds upon a Rock; that thus hearing and doing, does yet bear with
those that hear and do not, and so build upon the Sand. I enquire where the
Corn is which must grow among Tares till the Harvest, Matt. 13. not what the
Tares have done, or do. I enquire where Christ's Well-beloved is, she who is
among the wicked Daughters, as the Lily among Thorns, Cant. 2. not what the
Thorns have done, or now do. I enquire where the good Fish are, Matt. 13. which
till they are drawn to shore, must be content to lie in the same Net with bad
ones, not what the bad Fish have done, or now do. Afterward again, Cum igitur
boni and mali dent and accipiant Sacramentum baptismi, nec regenerentur
spiritaliter, in corpus and membra Christi non coaedisicentur nisi boni,
profecto in bonis est illa Ecclesia, cui dicitur, sicut lilium in medio
spinarum, ita proxima mea in medio filiarum. In his est enim qui aedificant
super petram, id est, qui audiunt verba Christi, and faciunt; quia and Petro
confi^enti se Christum silium Dei sic ait, and super hanc Petram aedisicabo
Ecclesiam meam. Non est ergo in eis qui aedificant super arenam, id est, qui
audiunt verba Christi, and non faciunt. Ipse enim dixit, Qui audit verba mea,
and facit ea, similabo eum viro sapienti, qui aedificat domum suam super
petram. Ibid Cap. 18.
Seeing both good and bad administer, and receive the Sacrament of Baptism, and
the good only are spiritually regenerated, become his true Members, and make up
the building of Christ's Body, it is plain that Church consists of the good
only, to which it was said, As the lily among thorns, so is my beloved among
the daughters; Cant. 2. For it consists of those that build upon a Rock, that
is, that hear the Word of God, and do it. For this Reason, when St. Peter
acknowledged Jesus to be the Christ, the Son of God, he said unto him, Matt.
16. And upon this Rock will I build my Church. This is not therefore those who
build upon the Sand, i. e. they that hear Christ's Words, and do them not. For
the same Christ has said, Matt. 7. He that hears my words, and does them, I
will liken him to a wise man, that built his house upon a rock. And a little
before the end of the Book, Multi tales sunt in sacramentorum communione cum
Ecclesia, and tamennon jam sunt in Ecclesia Alioquin, si tune quisquam
praeciditur, cum visibiliter excommunicatur, consequens erit, ut tunc rursus
inseratur, cum visibiliter communioni restituitur. Quid si ergo fictus accedat,
atque adversus veritatem and Ecclesiam animum inimicissimum gerat, quamvis
peragatur in eo illa solennitas, nunquid reconciliatur? nunquid insertur?
Absit. Sicut ergo jam denuo communicans nondum insertus est sic and antequam
visibiliter excommunicatur, quisquis contra veritatem qua convincitur, and
arguitur, inimicum gestat animum, jam praecisus est. Ita fit, ut and semen
bonum, and semen malum utraque per agrum crescant, usque ad messem; id est, and
silii regni, and silii maligni. Ibid. sub sinem lib.
There are many who communicate with the Church in the Sacraments, yet are not
in the Church. Else if when one is excommunicated visibly, he be then only
separated from the Church, when he is restored to the Communion, we must say,
that he is actually stated in the Church again. But suppose his return be
hypocritical, That he bring a heart inveterate against the Truth, and the
Church; must we own that such a one is perfectly reconciled, and become a true
member of Jesus Christ, because the outward formalities of receiving him in,
have past upon him? God forbid. As therefore he is not really of the Church,
tho readmitted into the Communion; so if before Excommunication, he had a Soul
at enmity with the Truth, he was in truth separated even then. And thus it is,
that the good and I bad seed grow together in the same common Field until
Harvest, that is, the Children of the Kingdom, and the Children of the wicked
one. If after all this, M. de Condom shall still maintain that an outward
profession and participation of the Sacraments are sufficient to make men
members of the Church; we may take the confidence to tell him, that his
Authority is not yet advanced so far with us, as to be reckoned of equal weight
with St. Augustin's.

In his Book against Cresconi^s, Tingere ergo possunt boni and mali, abluere
autem conscientiam non nisi ille qui semper est bonus. Ac per hoc etiam
nescients Ecclesia propter malam pollutamque conscientiam damnati a Christo,
jam in corpore Christi non sunt, quod est Ecclesia; quoniam non potest Christus
habere membra damnata, proinde and ipsi extra Ecclesiam baptizant. Omnia quippe
ista monstra absit omnino ut in membris illius columbae unicae computentur.
Absit ut intrare possint limits horti conclusi, cujus ille custos est, qui non
potest falli. Aug. contra Cresconium, Lib. 2. Cap. 21.
Good and bad men (he says) may baptize, but God alone who is eternally good
can purify the conscience. The wicked are condemned of Christ without the
Churches knowledge, as having an evil and a polluted conscience, and are not
even now in Christ's body the Church. For Christ cannot have such for his
members as are condemned; and therefore they Baptize even while they are out of
the Church themselves. God forbid such monsters should be reckoned among the
members of the only Dove: God forbid such should enter into the enclosed
garden, whose keeper can never be imposed upon.

In like manner does this holy Father speak in his Book of the Christian
Doctrine. Tichonius the Donatist having busied himself in laying down some
Rules for the understanding of Scripture, St. Augustine takes them into
examination, and this is what he says to the second of them: Secunda est de
Domini corpore bipartito, quod quidem non ita debuit appellari. Non enim revera
Domini corpus est, quod cum illo non erit in aeternum. Sed dicendum fuit de
Domini corpore vero atque permixto, aut vero atque simulato, aut quid aliud.
Quia non solum in aeternum, verum etiam nunc hypocritae non cum illo esse
dicendi sunt, quamvis in ejus esse videantur Ecclesia. Unde poterat ista regula
and sic appellari, ut diceretur de permixta Ecclesia. Aug. de Doctr. Christ. L.
3. Cap. 32.
His second Rule concerns the twofold Body of Christ, that is an improper term,
for in reality none are his body, who shall not continue with him for ever. He
should rather have expressed it concerning our Lords true or mixed body, or true
and counterfeit, or some such like term. For though hypocrites seem to be of
the Church, they are so far from being with him to all eternity, that they are
really not with him now. He might then be allowed to lay down this Rule, but he
should have phrased it concerning the mixed Church.

And afterward, Septima Ticonii regula est, eademque postrema, de Diabolo and
ejus corpore. Est enim and ipse caput impiorum, qui sunt ejus quodammodo
corpus, ituri cum illo in supplicium aeterni ignis; sicut Christus caput est
Ecclesiae, quae est corpus ejus, futurum cum illo in regno and gloria
sempiterna. Sicut ergo in prima regula, quam vocat de Domino and ejus corpore,
vigilandum est ut intelligatur, cum de una eademque persona Scriptura loquitur,
quid conveniat capiti, quid corporis sic and in ista novissima aliquando in
diabolum dicitur, quod non in ipso, sed potius in ejus corpore possit agnosci,
quod habet non solum in eis, qui manifestissime foris sunt, sed in eis etiam,
qui cum ad ipsum pertineant, tamen ad tempus miscentur Ecclesiae. Ibid. Cap. 37.
Tichonius his seventh and last Rule is concerning the Devil and his body. For
the Devil is the head of the wicked, and they in some sort his members,
appointed to undergo with him the punishment of everlasting fire; as Christ is
the head of the Church, which is his body, and appointed to eternal glory with
him. As therefore in the first Rule, entitled, Of the Lord and his body, when
the Scripture speaks of one and the same person, we must distinguish carefully,
what belongs to the Head, and what to the Body; so as to this last Rule, we
shall find things spoken of the Devil, which do not so much belong to Him and
his Body. Now that Body of his is composed not only of such as are visibly
without, but those also who though in truth they belong to him, yet continue
for a time mixed with the Church.

I make no doubt but so many passages of St. Augustine, together with those
other proofs I instanced in before, for the resolving this question, may make
M. de Condom a little uneasy, though he think never so well of his own
principle. But in short, it concerns not only this Bishop, but all others that
take this dispute into consideration, to know once for all, what mighty
difficulties they must overcome, before they can establish the pretended
Authority of their Church. That is to say in one word, it is fit they know that
in order to compass this design, they must triumph over Scripture, triumph over
Reason, triumph over the Fathers, but above all they must declare open war with
St. Austin particularly. The Throne of Rome's Hierarchy is never capable of
being set up, but upon these foundations, or to speak more properly, upon these
ruins.

Qu. 3. Whether the Church upon Earth be visible, or invisible, or whether both
together, considered in a different sense, and under different respects.

Thus much I think, Sir, may suffice to give a resolution of the second
question, which was, whether the Bishop of Condom's definition of the Church
upon Earth was a good and sufficient definition, viz. A Society making
profession to believe the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, and govern it self by his
word; or whether it was defective, and required something else to be added to
it. You see the necessity of handling this subject with some exactness; for it
being our business to know what Society we must be of, to obtain Salvation, and
both sides agreeing that it is the true Church; being it concerns us to know to
what Society the Promises of Jesus Christ are to be applied, and both sides
agreeing that it is the true Church: The first thing in reason to be done, is
to form an abstracted Idea of the true Church, before it be applied to any
particular subject, that so this may serve for a Rule, and direct us to know at
least what that true Church is, which we enquire after. We know in general that
there is one true Church; we know also, that this Church is a Religious
Society; but when we come to define it particularly, every one knows his own
method of doing it. This therefore is the first thing to be determined, not
only to avoid equivocation, but to prevent a continual deviation, which may
otherwise happen through the whole dispute, by means of a mistake in the
beginning; and this having given occasion to the second question, the
dispatching that already will mightily facilitate our enquiry into the third.
The thing then to be examined is, whether the Society of true believers, who
only are the Church, be visible or invisible, or whether both in some senses
and respects.

For the resolution of this Query, I shall not say that this true Church being
a Society of men, and so a body that has its external order, as all other
Societies have, has likewise consequent to that a visibility common to it with
all other bodies. Thus much is necessarily supposed, for the Believers are not
Angels, nor invisible Spirits, but in this respect like the rest of mankind.
But this visibility being supposed, we must further enquire, Whether there be
not yet another, which gives it the Character of Jesus Christ's true Church; so
that a man may say, That the body we see, and which is the object of our
senses, as the true Church of Christ.

In this there would not be the least difficulty, had not God's design, as to
his Church, been disturbed by the enemy of our Salvation. For since God calls
true Believers only, and since, as we have already shown, such alone constitute
the Church; were it not for what happens from some other thing, there would not
be among the outward Professors of Christianity, either Hypocrites, or
Heretics, or Superstitious, or worldly, or profane persons And thus none but
such as are truly the faithful being to be found among them, this outward
profession would be a sure means, and an univocal Character to know the true
Faith and Regeneration by, and consequently to know the true Church of Jesus
Christ as such. So that we need say only thus much, That although the Church
were not immediately visible by its inward and cssential form, because none can
immediately see men's hearts but God only; yet it would be visible by its
external form, as by a sure distinguishing Character. For it might be seen by
its Ministry and profession of Faith in Christ, and known to such a degree
that a man might infallibly and positively say, That is the Church.

But we all know, that is Jesus Christ sowed his good seed in the field of the
world, Matt. 13
so to use the expressions in the Parable, the enemy has likewise sown Tares.
That is, that with the true Believers are intermixed vast numbers of men, who
(...) no more than the appearance and outside of Christianity, and so make the
outward profession to be a note subject to mighty uncertainties and
equivocation. This God has permitted for reasons known to his own wisdom, and
hence have risen on one side false Churches, and on the other false members of
the true, I mean whole Communities who have wrongfully assumed to themselves
the title of a Church; and single persons who wrongfully assumed the title of
the Faithful. So that the Church now, like all other things liable to hypocrisy
and dissimulation, cannot be truly known without much difficulty. And whereas,
according to the nature of the thing, the Churches visibility and invisibility
ought to lie here, that its essential and internal from cannot be seen
immediately, and of it self, but may by the mediation of its external form;
instead of this, they do now consist further, in a discerning between true and
false, a distinguishing betwixt that which is real and sincere, and that which
is counterfeit.

We must therefore examine, how this distinction is to be made, because in it
consists the visibility or invisibility of the true Church. Whether we must
make it between several external bodies, differing from one another, or between
several persons externally incorporated into the same Body. I b^gin with the
former, and affirm, that the discerning between several bodies, depends upon
some certain marks, or characters, whereby that body on whose side the true
Church is, may be distinguished from another where it is not. I shall not now
show what those Characters are, for this is another dispute between the Church
of Rome, and us, which we need not here engage our selves in.

It is enough we are all agreed, that such marks there are, and that by them
this distinction must be made. That which most concerns us to take notice of,
and which I desire you would observe with a very particular attention, is, that
after we have found this Body, or external Society on whose side the true
Church is, we may, and in reality do form to our selves two notions of it, one
proceeding from a mere Judgment of Charity, the other from a Judgment of
Reflection. By the Judgment of Charity, we look upon all within the Body to be
true Believers, indifferently; For the searching of hearts being not in our
power, but peculiar to God, Charity makes no distinctions, but supposes that
things are in truth what they should be; and upon this supposition, we call all
that society the visible Church, speaking simply, and absolutely. By the
Judgment of Reflection, having consulted the Rules of Scripture, and the light
of Experience, we come to know that there are Tares mixed with the Wheat, and
that it is past a doubt, that among these outward Professors, are abundance of
hypocritical, superstitious, ambitious, and profane people. Hence we correct
our first notion, and term this Society, a visible mixed Church. Thus in the
same external body, we distinguish two different Bodies, one of true Believers,
which we look upon as the true Church of Jesus Christ; the other of hypocrites
and worldlings, who have only the shadow, and shell of Faith and Regeneration,
and consequently do not belong to Jesus Christ's true Church.

This is the original of all that ambiguity betwixt the Romanists and us. M. de
Condom, according to the principles of Cardinal Bellarmin and Perron, and most
of the Doctors of his Communion, does in this Dispute judge of the true visible
Church, by that notion of Charity, which without making any difference,
includes bad and good, true and false Believers. And we judge of the true
visible Church, by that other, termed the notion of Reflection, which excludes
hypocrites and worldlings, and confines it self to true Believers only. He
supposes without offering any proof for it, that there is no other visible
Church, than this whole Body of Professors, and that That of the true Believers
is invisible; which we deny. He proves that the true Church of Christ, to whom
the promises belong, is a visible Church, which we grant. We must take leave
therefore to tell him, that he supposes, what he should prove, and proves what
he ought to suppose; which must needs entangle the matter in dispute, and
render it mighty intricate and obscure.

But what great matter is it (you will say) as to this Dispute, whether a man
judges of the true visible Church by the notion of Charity, or that of
Reflection? I answer, if the matter had concerned only the Duties incumbent on
the Church, or exhorting and instructing men in those Duties, it would signify
very little which of these two notions we followed. For the duties incumbent on
beth good and had, are much the same, they all hear the same Word, partake of
the same Sacraments, and are all under the same Obligations. But the present
controversy does not concern the duties and exhortations to them, but the
investing the Church in some particular rights and privileges allowed her, and
applying to her the promises of Jesus Christ: So that it highly concerns us in
this case, not to follow a notion which may lead us into mistakes, and give
away these privileges and promises to men that have no manner of right to
them. It nearly concerns us not to follow a notion, which may occasion our
falling into error, under pretense of that name, the Church. There is an
absolute necessity of clearing an ambiguity, which if not cleared, may
prejudice our Conscience, and put our Salvation upon a hazard.

Now, Sir, let us see I beseech you, whether of these two notions is rather to
be received in this dispute? And this will easily appear, if we consider; That
the notion followed by M. de Condom is grossly false in one of its parts, as
taking for true Believers, persons who really are not so, and can pretend to
truth no further, than as it is conformable to this second notion. That it is
not grounded upon an exact knowledge of its object, but merely upon a charitable
supposition, which if niecly looked into, is not true it self: And so there can
be no robable argument for allowing evil men and hypocrites a part in Christ's
Promises, Those false plants, which our heavenly father has not planted, Matt.
15.
Those tares which the Lord has not sown in his field, Matt. 13.
but the enemy r^se by night to cast in privily, Men not at all concerned in
that Idea of the true Church which Scripture gives us, and consequently not of
it. In a word, this will easily appear, that the notion we follow is the most
exact, the most certain, the most agreeable to the Idea's given in Scripture,
and the only one that can bear any proportion to the Promises of Jesus Christ,
and the dignity of the true Church.

But it may be said, Was not M. de Condom in the right, to say, there was not
actually any visible Church, but that which he def^^es, A Society making
profession to believe the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, and govern it self by his
word? And so no other than that which comprehends good and bad, true Believers
and Hypocrites? And was it not fair then to make use of this notion in the
Controversy? I answer, the true Church consisting of true Believers only, is
not indeed visible, by any certain and distinct sight we can have of it, so as
to affirm positively and personally, such or such are of the true Church. When
we would carry on this distinction to particular men, disguise and hypocrisy
put a stop to it, so that in this sense the true Church will always continue
invisible, till Jesus Christ come to make a full and perfect separation betwixt
his own Corn and the Enemies Tares, which shall not be done till the end of the
World. Thus it is not visible, not only immediately by its internal form in
men's hearts, but even by these external Characters, as to certain and distinct
visibility, because dissimulation and deceit often makes these marks to be
doubtful. All this I grant.

But for all this, we may and must say, that the true Church is visible, truly
visible, in other senses and respects. For first of all; it cannot be denied
that it is visible at least materially, as they say, because the true Believers
that appear visibly in public Assemblies, partake of the same Sacraments, and
live in the same external Order: The faithful do not conceal themselves, nor
decline the Holy Exercises of Religion, but on the contrary frequent them, and
show themselves more than other men, remembering that of St. Heb. 10, 25.
Paul, Not forsaking the assembling of our selves together. Besides, It is
plain, that tho the true Church be mixed with wicked men in the same profession,
Matt. 1^.
yet is it visible in this very mixture, as the wheat is visible, tho in the
same field with the tares, and the good fish in the same net with the bad,
according to the parables in the Gospel; or as true Friends are visible, tho
mixed with dissemblers and flatterers. This mixture indeed hinders us from an
exact distinction of persons, but still we may with great certainty distinguish
and discern two sorts of persons. We are not sure which particular men are true
Believers, and which Hypocrites, but we are sure that there are true Belivers
as well as Hypocrites; and this is enough to prove the Church visible,
according to the Scriptures, and t. Austin's Hypothesis. Nay, I will go further
yet; for it is true that upon some occasions Hypocrites do plainly distinguish
themselves from true Believers, and upon some other occasions true Believers do
plainly make a personal distinction of themselves from Hypocrites. For
instance, when we see men drowned in vices inconsistent with true Faith, when
we see them throw themselves into Superstitions and Errors, that are contrary
to the true Doctrine and Worship of God, tho they abide still in the same
Congregations with others, and communicate in the same Sacraments; yet this
makes a negative distinction, so as we may say, these are not the true
Believers, that is, not of the true Church. On the other side, when we see men
undergo long sharp trials, without being removed, either from the profession of
the true Doctrine and Worship, or from that of Righteousness and Holiness, in
this respect here is made a positive distinction, and such as makes us
acknowledge, that these persons are of the true Church of Jesus Christ. I
confess these distinctions are not always, either so certain as never to admit
of mistakes, nor so universal as not to confound one with another. For a man
may judge rashly of both sorts, either for want of knowing men's particular
circumstances, and the motives they went upon; or some other way; and it is
never seen, that all Hypocrites discover themselves at once. But however, there
is great use to be made of this distinction, and such a visibility of the true
Church results from it, as is in some sort personal, according to our
Hypothesis.

Now, Sir, you see, whether M. de Condom was in the right to take it for
granted, as if it were a certain truth, that there was no visible Church, but
such a one as he defined, that comprehends good and bad, true Believers and
Worldlings, contrary to the Scriptures, and St. Augustin's sense. You see too
whether he was in the right, to maintain in this first part of his discourse,
Confer. page 10.
that we deny the Churches visibility. The Pretended Reformed (says he) will
not have the visible Church to be that which is called Jesus Christ's Body.
Which is then that Body where God has established some Apostles? etc. Which is
that Body where God has placed several Members, and different Graces, Romans 12.
4.
the Grace of Ministry, the Grace of Teaching, the Grace of Exhortation and
Consolation, the Grace of Ruling? Which, I say, is that Body, if it be not the
visible Church? We never denied the visible Church upon Earth to be Christ's
Body; not the whole Body indeed, for there is one part of it collected in
Heaven, and another not yet in being, but still that part upon Earth is Jesus
Christ's Body, so the Scripture calls it, and we are so far from thinking as he
says, that quite contrary, we prove Hypocrites and Worldlings to be really no
part of the true visible Church, by this very Argument, that it is called in
Scripture the Body of Jesus Christ. For this reason the visible Church is thus
defined in the 27th Article of our Confession of Faith. I will here set down
the whole Article to give the Reader more full Satisfaction in this matter.
Credimus summo studio and prudentia discernendam esse veram Ecclesiam, cujus
nomine nimium multi abutuntur. Itaque affirmamus ex Dei verbo, Ecclesiam esse
fidelium coetum, qui in verbo Dei sequendo, and pura religione colenda
consentiunt, in qua etiam quotidie proficiunt; crescentes and confirmantes se
mutuo in Dei timore, ut qui quotidiano progressu and profectu indigeant, quos
etiam quantumcunque promoveant, oporteat tamen assidue ad remissionem
peccatorum confugere. Minime tamen inficiamur, quin fidelibus hypocritae and
reprobi multi sint permixti, sed quotum malitia Ecclesiae nomen delere non
possit. Harmonia confession. Sect. 10. Gallic. Confess. Edit. Genev. 1531.
The company of the Faithful agreeing to follow the Word of God, and that pure
Religion grounded thereon, and who constantly make proficiency therein. Now,
this Company of the Faithful thus described, is, and is called the Body of
Jesus Christ. If M. de Condom had been at the pains to read Calvin, he would
find him speaking of the visible Church, in the 4th Book of his Institutions,
Chap. 1. thus, Non vulgaris etiam laus, quod, electa, segregataque dicitur a
Christo, in sponsam, quae esset sine ruga and macula, corpus and plenitudo
ejus. Calvin Lib. 4. Institut. Cap. 1. Sect. 10. Edit. Genev. 1588.
It is no ordinary commendation the Scripture gives it, when it is said, Ephesians.
5. 26, 27. that Christ has chosen it, and separated it for his spouse, to make
her without spot and wrinkle, his body, and his fullness.

M. Mestrezzat speaking of the visible Church in the same sense, says; Les
Organes, desquels Diense sert pour l' edifier and construire, sont les Pasteurs
and Ministres de son Evangile, selon que dit S. Paul, Ephesians. 4. Il a done les
uns pour err Apotres, les autres pour etre Prophets, les autres pour etre
Evangelistes, les autres pour etre Pasteurs and Docteurs, pour l'assemblage des
Saints, pour I'oeuvre du Ministere, pour I'edifier du corpse de Christ.
Mestrezzat de I'Eglise, Livre 1. Cap. 3. Page 31. Edit. Genev. 1649.
The instruments made use of by God to build his Church, are the Pastors and
Ministers of his Gospel, Ephesians. 1. 23. according to that of St. Paul, Ephesians. 4.
He has given some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some
Pastors and Teachers, for the gathering together the Saints, for the work of
the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ.

And a little after, Ainsi un meme corpse de Christ, qui est invisible quant a
l'election de Dieu, and a la sanctification du coeur, jouit du Ministere
visible de la parole, and en recoit le fruit du Salut. Car il ne faur pas
chercher l' Eglise de Dieu horse de l'etat visible du Ministere de la parole.
Mestrezzat. Ibid. Page 33.
The same Body of Christ which is invisible as to the Election of God, and
inward sanctification of the heart, enjoys the visible Ministry of the Word,
and from it brings forth fruit unto salvation. For we must not look for the
Church of God, out of this visible state of the Ministry of the Word. The same
thing I say with relation to that other passage of St. Paul, where he says,
Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. Jesus Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it,
that he might sanctify and cleanse it, with the washing of water by the Word;
That he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinkle. They will not have it possible, (says M. de Condom, Conference, Page
5.) for this place to be understood of the visible Church, not yet of the
Church on Earth. He must pardon me if I say he is mistaken; for tho we
understand by this, the Church already in Heaven, yet do we besides understand
the visible Church upon Earth, and M. Mestrezzat speaking of this passage,
says expressly, Ainsi Ephesians. 5. il propose pour l'Eglise, un meme corpse
recevant la grace, and la gloire, and represente la gloire, comme l
'accomplissement de la grace. Mestrezzat Livre 1. Cap. 5. Page 50.
That St. Paul there sets forth the Church as one and the same Body, receiving
Grace, and Glory, and makes Glory to be the perfection and accomplishment of
Grace. It is evident then, that the visible Church is in our Opinion Jesus
Christ's Body, or which comes all to one, that the Body of Christ, which is the
true Church upon Earth, is visible.

I should now conclude my Third Enquiry, did I not think my self under an
obligation to remove some difficulties, which may be started upon it. For it
may be said, the Ministry is common to good and bad, and consequently it makes
a Church composed of good men and bad. I answer, that the Ministry and the use
of it is common both to good and bad, comes to pass only by accident, and from
the treachery of the Enemy. Of right it belongs to true Believers only, and its
genuine design was for them. Jesus Christ gave it for the assembling of the
Saints, and instituted it to increase and cultivate his good Corn. If the Tares
use it, or to speak more truly, abuse it, this is contrary to his intention.
For his hand never sowed these, but the enemy's, who rose by night for that
purpose. It is sure then that the Ministry of it self does not make up a Church
composed of good and bad men, because such only as it was intended to gather,
are to be reckoned of his visible Church. Now the Ministry is designed to
gather the true Believers, and truly Righteous, not the worldlings and
hypocrites in the least. If they thrust themselves into the Assemblies, it is
not the Ministry that calls them, but the spirit of the world that sends them
thither. An invincible argument that there is no other visible Church, but what
consists of true Believers, because they are the only persons called to
Religious Assemblies; and it is not Jesus Christ, but Jesus Christ's enemy that
thrusts others into them.

To give you yet further satisfaction as to this Point, permit me, Sir, to
interpose between M. de Condom and St. Augustine; not to set them at difference,
but endeavor to reconcile them. M. de Condom assures me, that Jesus Christ in
that passage, Confer. p. 7.
Tell it the Church, spoke of a visible Church, a Church visible by the
exercise of the Ministry; Matt. 18.
St. Augustine on the other side assu^es me, that he speaks of the Church
consisting of true Believers only; I reconcile these two by inferring, That the
Church of true Believers only is a Church made visible by the Exercise of the
Ministry. M. de Condom tells me St. Paul speaks of a Church visible by the use
of the Ministry, Conference, page 5, 6.
when he says, Christ loved it, and cleansed it, with the washing of water by
the word. Ephesians. 5.
St. Augustine tells me, The Church of true Believers only is spoken of in this
passage; I can reconcile these two no other way, than by concluding, that then
the Church of true Believers only, is a Church visible by the use of the
Ministry. Confer. p. 8, 9.
M. de Condom teaches me, that in this passage, Thou art Peter, and upon this
rock will I build my Church, Jesus Christ denotes a Church visible, by the
Exercise of an External Ministry; St. Augustine instructs me, that it denotes
the Church of true Believers; How shall these two be made agree, but by
concluding, that the Church of true Believers then is a visible Church,
exercising an external Ministry? If you still desire an Argument of more
strongth, remember that the visibility attributed to the Church in Scripture,
cannot possibly be any other than that we assign it. For as on the one hand we
are taught there, that the true Church consists of true Believers only; so do
we learn there also, that true Believers are mixed with wicked men and
hypocrites: It is there we find the similitudes, of Chaff amongst the good
Corn, of bad Fishes jumbled together with the good, of Tares sown among the
good Wheat. Now whatever we deliver concerning the Churches visibility and
invisibility, is grounded entirely upon these two principles.

The second difficulty that may be siarted is, whether the visibility we assign
to the Church, be sufficient to maintain Christian Fellowship, to comfort the
Faithful, and bring them to Salvation. I answer, that this would not be
sufficient indeed to establi^h the Church of Romes pretensions, such as
absolute authority over men's Consciences, Infallibility of Councils, a blind
obedience to their Determinations, and this very insufficiency as to that shows
us the injustice of such pretensions. But I say, that in its kind this
visibility is sufficient, either for the maintenance of external Communion, or
for the joy and consolation of the Faithful, and the bringing them to
Salvation. In order to that, we need only know ourselves to be in Communion
with the truly Faithful. For tho we know that there is a mixture of ill men
among these, yet shall we still continue in the external Communion with them,
out of respect to God's Elect: We shall still bear the disorders and offenses
given by others patiently; we shall still receive the same Sacraments, and
partake of other fruits of the Ministry with comfort, as knowing that the
efficacy of these acts does not depend upon the wicked, but are blessings that
belong to the righteous. And our not being able to make certain and personal
distinctions of men, will add to our caution, that we suffer not our selves to
be surprised into any superstitions and errors, that would insinuate themselves
under the plausible title of the Church. And thus the visibility we allow the
Church is abundantly sufficient.

It might further be demanded, whether it can so happen, that the Church may at
any time lose the visibility of its Assemblies, and so become in this respect
perfectly invisible? I answer, that although we acknowledge Almighty God can,
whenever he pleases, utterly disperse the persons of the Faithful, and still
keep them in this wretched condition by the methods of his own Providence; yet
we do not think this ever did so happen. The Christian Church has lain under
great persecutions, but tho they were never so great, she has constantly had
some where or other some Assemblies, and some exercise of the Ministry, public
or private; and however her Martyrs and Confessors have all along made her
visible, so that she cannot be said absolutely, ever to have disappeared quite
from the sight of men; Yet we must own, that in this respect there have been
several degrees of her visibility, that is, the Church has been more or less
visible, as her Assemblies have been held, and her Ministry exercised with more
or less freedom. We must own too, that not any particular Church upon Earth can
promise it self a perpetual visibility, no nor so much as a perpetual
subsistence. God removes his Candlestick from the midst of a people at his
pleasure, and he does it then, when he has no more Elect to call there. There
have been many instances of this in the World, particularly in the Churches of
Africa, once so beautiful and flourishing; but these are only the puttings out
of some particular light, and do not at all prejudice either the subsistence,
or visibility of the Christian Church in general.

The last difficulty to be urged is, whether the Church can at any time lose
the visibility of its Characters, (I mean that visibility) whereby without
descending to personal distinctions, we are enabled to conclude that there are
true Believers in this mixed Society; so far as that we can not judge whether
such be there or no? I answer, It not only may, but often has happened, that
the Characters by which we should in this respect come to know the true Church,
have been so mightily obscured, that a man could not without much trouble and
difficulty affirm, that In this particular body it was, that God nourished and
sustained his true Believers; and we shall find hereafter that M. de Condom
himself owns enough to establish the truth of this assertion. But still, tho
this be uncontestable, as proved to be plain matter of fact, we do
notwithstanding acknowledge, that the Church did never absolutely and entirely
lose their visibility in this respect; because, as was said in answer to the
Prejudices, we do not think that ever so total an Eclipse happened, that it
could not in some measure be said, This is the Society wherein God preserves
some true Believers.

And here I cannot but complain of what M. de Condom does afterward in his
Discourse accuse us of, Confer. page 10. Page 12.
saying, that the visible Church sometimes ceases to be. They are constrained
(says he) to say, that the visible Church sometimes ceases to be upon Earth.
And in another place, This is the Church, which your Ministers know not: They
teach you that this visible and exterior Church may cease to be upon Earth.
But this is urging his charge against us too far: So far are we from believing,
the visible Church ceases to be, that we do not so much as say, it ever
absolutely ceases to be visible: And yet there would be a mighty difference,
between saying she ceases to be visible, and that she ceases to be at all. The
Sun, the most visible thing in the World, is often not visible to our eyes, but
yet he ceases not to be. In the point of Real presence, M. de Condom will own,
that the Body of Jesus Christ ceases to be visible; but he would not be
well-pleased for that reason to be taxed with saying, he ceases to be there at
all. But however, let M. de Condom put what sense he please upon our words, it
is certain we acknowledge the Church to be perpetually visible, in the meaning I
explained just now: And M. de Condom could never have spent his time to less
purpose, than in taking such pains to confute an opinion which, we never held
against him.

Quest. 4. What Church the Promises of Jesus Christ belong to, whether that
defined by M. de Condom, a Society making profession to believe, etc. or that
which we define, A Society which making profession to govern it self by
Christ's Word, does really govern it self by it?

M. de Condom speaking of us in one place of his Discourse, says, They have not
the Consolation which the Catholics have, Confer. p. 8.
to see Jesus Christ's promise visibly accomplished, and maintained, during so
many Ages. They cannot show a Church which has ever been since Jesus Christ
came to build it on the Rock: and to save his word, they are obliged to have
recourse to a Church of the Predestinate, which neither themselves; nor any
else can show. After having cleared the perpetual visibility of the Church, as
you lately saw, judge you, Sir, what ground there is for his sayings we have not
the consolation of seeing Jesus Christ's Promise visibly accomplished and
maintained during so many Ages; and whether we have not more than it is
possible to have, according to the Church of Romes principle. M. de Condom
according to his Principle, sees the duration of a Church, whose whole essence
consists in an outward profession. What is there in this more than human? We
see the duration of a Church, whose essence consists in true Faith and
Regeneration, What is there in this that is not all Divine? M. de Condom sees
the duration of a Church supported by politic methods, by paying a blind
obedience to the injunctions of great men, and those perhaps Hypocrites too,
What is there in this more than human? We see the duration of a Church
preserved in spite of confusion, and all the froward malice of men: What is
there in this less than Divine? They cannot (says he) show a Church which has
ever been since Jesus Christ came to build it on the Rock. Yes, we show this
Church built on the Rock; for when we show the Body in which God nourishes and
breeds up his true Believers, we show at the same time those true Believers,
which are his Church built on the Rock, tho mixed with such as build on the
Sand. When we show the held where Jesus Christ sowed his good Seed, we show the
Wheat, tho there be Tares among it. But let M. de Condom tell us, if he think
fit, how he can show us a Church built on the Rock, making, as he does, the
essence of the Church to consist entirely in an outward profession. If he call
this a Church upon the Rock, Jesus Christ himself will reply for that such only
are built upon a Rock, who hear this word, and do it; whereas all besides are
built upon the Sand. To save Christ's Word (continues he) they are obliged to
have recourse to a Church of the Predestinate. Does M. de Condom blame us for
seeking the accomplishment of Jesus Christ's Promises, in the body of his
Elect, and true Believers? Pray where should we look for it else? In a crowd of
Hypocrites and Reprobates, that have no Faith, no Holiness, no Piety, but in
outward appearance only? Such as God never called, and Jesus Christ shall one
day tell, he never knew them? Is not this of Cardinal Bellarmin's, Perron's,
and M. de Condoms, a curious Church, to the constituting whereof no inward
virtue is necessarily required, but merely an outward profession of Faith, and
communicating in the Sacraments? A Church, whose Unity, the formal essence of
it, is that of an external Vocation, not that of Predestination, nor internal
Faith, nor a Union of Souls by the works of Love: In a word, a Church defined,
not by believing, and governing it self by God's word, but by making profession
to believe and govern it self by God's Word? Is not this putting a mighty
value upon Jesus Christ's Promises, to apply them not only to profane and
worldly men, as well as the Saints and regenerate; but to such a Church as
would remain entire, tho there were no true believers, nor righteous men in it;
and not cease to be the true Church of Christ, tho it were composed of
Hypocrites, and none else?

Thus far, Sir, there is no great perspicacity required, to discern, that the
question in hand resolves it self, there being little probability that Jesus
Christ was so lavish of his Promises. But however let us examine the matter a
little more closely. The first passage M. de Condom presents us with, Confer.
p. 5, 6.
is that of St. Paul, Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that he
might cleanse it with the washing of Water by the Word, that he might make it a
glorious Church, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. 29, 30.
having neither spot, nor wrinkle, nor any such thing, but that it might be
holy and without blemish. And a little after, No man hates his own flesh, but
nourishes and cherishes it, even as the Lord the Church; For we are members
of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. We see in these words, the
obligation Jesus Christ put himself under, to sanctify his Church, to make it a
glorious Church, without spot or wrinkle, holy and without blemish, to nourish
and cherish it, as his own flesh and bones. Our business is to know, whether
this obligation can upon any pretense whatever respect Hypocrites and wicked
men; And who will be persuaded it does? Confer. p. 6.
This Church, M. do Condom says, is glorious, because she glorifies God,
because she declares to all the Earth the Glory of Jesus Christ's Gospel and
Cross. Now as to the wicked, of whom we are here treating, there need but this
one word be added, That they glorify God and the Gospel in hypocrisy and
dissimulation, but in their hearts deny it. Then see what God himself has
spoken as to this matter. Psalm. 50. 16.
Unto the ungodly said God, why do thou preach my laws, and take my
Covenant in thy mouth? This Church (M. de Condom tells us) is holy, Conf. p. 6.
because she always, constantly, and without varying teaches the Holy Doctrine.
Add here, But as for the wicked, if they teach the holy Doctrine, this is but
with their lips, and in show only; 2 Timothy 3. 5.
then see what St. Paul says, They have a form of godliness, but deny the power
thereof, from such turn away. This Church (according to M. de Condom) has
neither spot nor wrinkle, because she has neither any evil Error, nor any evil
Maxim, and because she instructs, and contains in her bosom the Elect of God.
Add, But as for sinners, They follow Truth and Right only in pretense. Matt. 7.
22.
Then see what Jesus Christ says of such, Many will say unto me in that day,
Lord, have not we prophesied in thy name, and in thy name have cast out Devils,
and in thy name have done many wonderful works? Then will I say unto them, I
never knew you, depart from me ye workers of iniquity. And can any man after
all this allow them a propriety in the Promises of Christ?

The second passage M. de Condom makes use of, Matt. 18. 17, 18, 19, 20.
is that of Jesus Christ, which I will here set down at length. Tell the
Church; but if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as a heathen
man, and a Publican; verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall bind on earth,
shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, shall be
loosed in heaven. Again I say unto you, that if two of you shall agree on
earth, as touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them, of
my father which is in heaven; For where two or three are gathered together in
my name, there am I in the midst of them. Jesus Christ, M. de Condom says,
Conf. p. 7.
used the word Church to signify this visible Society. I agree with him, that
the Church there signifies a visible Church; I say further, that it signifies a
Church represented by the Pastors, by whom it binds and looses, by whom it asks
the Father; I am still of opinion, that those excellent Promises of Jesus
Christ, that God will ratify what they have bound and loosed, that he will
grant what they ask, and that the Lord himself will be in the midst of them,
are all made to the Church taken in this sense. But then I say withal, that
this visible Church is that of the true Believers only, and that Hypocrites
have no share at all in it. It is to the true Believers alone, that this
Ministry belongs, they are the persons represented by the Pastors, they the
only people that ask and obtain, that are gathered together in Christ's name,
and in the midst of whem he is. And yet it often happens, that the Ministers of
this Church, tho they be in this function, and do the business of it, are not
yet true Members of it themselves. Aliquando (...) tacit, ut qu^dam pertinentes
ad civitatem Babyloniam, administrent res pertinentes ad Jerusalem. Omnes de
quibus dictum est, Quae dicunt facite, quae autem faciunt, nolite facere, cives
sunt Babyloniae administrantes Remp. civitatis Jerusalem. Si enim nihil
administrarent civitatis Jerusalem, unde est, Quae dicunt facite? Unde, In
Cathedra Moysi sedent? Rursus si cives sunt ipsius Jerusalem, qui regnabunt in
aeternum cum Christo, unde Quae faciunt, facere nolite? Aug. in Psalm. 61.
It often falls out, says St. Augustine, by reason of this mixture here upon
Earth, that people really belonging to Babylon, administer the things belonging
to Jerusalem. All they, of whom it is said, whatsoever they bid you observe,
obesereveand do, Matt. 23. 3. but do not ye after their works, are Citizens of
Babylon, that rule the Commonwealth of Jerusalem. For if they had no charge
belonging to Jerusalem, why should it be said, They sit in Moses seat,
therefore what they bid you observe, that observe and do? Again, if they were
true Citizens of Jerusalem, who should reign with Christ for ever, What
occasion was there for adding, But do not ye after their works? It is not then
to the Ministers that the Promises belong, but to the Body they represent, and
whose Offices they discharge. Now this body is the New Jerusalem, which shall
reign with Christ for ever; That is, the true Believers.

M. de Cendom's third passage is this, Confer. p. 8, 9.
Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my Church, and the gates of
hell shall not prevail against it. Jesus Christ (says he) would show something
illustrious and clear, when he said, that his Church, maugre the opposition of
Hell, should be always invincible: he would, I say, show something clear and
resplendent, which might serve in all Ages, for a sensible and palpable
assurance of the immutable certainty of his Promises. He adds, The Church of
which Christ speaks, is then a confessing Church, a Church that publishes the
Faith, and consequently an exterior and visible Church. He says further, That
it is a Church, to which an exterior Ministry is given; for it is added, I will
give unto thee the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and whatsoever thou shall
bind on Earth shall be bound in Heaven, and whatsoever thou shall loose on
Earth shall be loosed in Heaven. I answer, The Church spoken of in this passage
is really a Confessing Church, a Church that publishes the Faith, a Church to
whom Christ has given an exterior Ministry; a Church that uses the Ministry
of the Keys, that binds and looses, and by Consequence an exterior and visible
Church. The Question is, whether wicked men, let them dissemble never so well,
and carry never so fair an outside, do truly belong to this Church, or whether
it consist of sincere Believers only. It Is a Church exterior and visible, I
acknowledge it, but it is also a Church interior, and real; otherwise it would
differ nothing from a Phantome, a cheating apparition. It Is a Confessing
Church, and publishes the Faith, but it is likewise a Church believing in what
it confesses and publishes. It Is a Church, to which not only St. Peter's
Confession must be attributed, but also the principle and ground of that
Confession. Matt. 16. 17.
Blessed art thou Simon Bar-jona, for flesh and blood has net revealed this
unto thee, but my Father which is in Heaven: And therefore whose Confession
proceeds not from Flesh and Blood, but from Grace and Divine Illumination. It Is
a Church built upon a Rock, and not upon the Sand, therefore not a Church that
Hypocrites are of. It Is a Church built by Jesus Christ; a Church therefore of
true Believers only, because such only are built by Christ. It Is a Church to
which this Promise of the Gates of Hell never prevailing against it, belongs;
And can we with any pretense to modesty say, that the Gates of Hell do not
prevail against the wicked ingulfed in v^ce? Can we say those admirable words
carry no stronger importance, than the preservation of a mere exterior
profession? But this is a Chruch which has, and exercises such a Ministry.
Who questions it? But does this Ministry belong to the wicked and hypocrites?
No. It belongs only to true Behevers, the rest have no part in it; only as they
sometimes exercise the external Offices, without any true right to them; or
receive them unworthily, under the covering of hypocrisy, and being intermixed
with good Christians. But M. de Condom says further, Jesus Christ promised
something illustrious and clear, which might serve in all Ages for a sensible
and palpable assurance of the immutable certainty of his Promises. These words
want a little unfolding; If they understand hereby a temporal prosperity, a
perpetual visibility promised to the Church, in pomp and luster, I deny that
Christ promised any such thing. If they understand an Earthly Dominion, a
worldly Greatness under the title of Hierarchy, I deny still that Christ ever
promised any such thing. If they understand a constant unblemisht purity in the
Ministry, in the Matters of Doctrine and Worship, of moral Rules, and orderly
Government, This again I deny that Christ ever promised. If they understand
Believers perseverance in Faith and Holiness, so far forth as is necessary to
Salvation, in despite of all temptations to the contrary, from Hell, the
World, and their own Infirmities, This I own our Lord has promised. Now this
in my opinion is a thing sufficently illustrious and clear, to serve for a
sensible and palpable assurance, of the immutable certainty of his Promises.
For when we see our Brethren dye, and do our selves dye in the bosom of Truth
and Piety, this denotes Jesus Christ's Grace sensibly enough. If they
understand over and above this, a perpetual subsistence of the Ministry, in
such a condition as is sufficient for the Salvation of God's Elect, mangre all
the oppositions of Hell, or the disorders of the Ministers themselves, this I
do likewise acknowledge to be promised by Jesus Christ, and herein we have a
sensible and palpable assurance of the immutable certainty of his Promises. For
in the midst of so many infirmities as the Faithful are liable to, in the midst
of so many Thorns as encompass and incumber the Lilies of the Son of God; in
the midst of so many superstitious, profane, heretical, designing,
worldly-minded, lukewarm and indifferent people, that are exterior Professors,
and often Officers in the Church; that God should still preserve the Ministry,
so far as is necessary for nourishing and cherishing his Elect, and true
Believers, and to bring them safe to Heaven; is a sensible indication of the
strength of our Saviors Words, That the Gates of Hell should not prevail
against it. He does not say, the Gates of Hell shall never fight against it,
nor that they shall never get any advantages over it; He supposes that they
shall encounter it, that they shall very much endamage it, that they shall
sometimes reduce it to great extremities; But he assures us, they shall not
prevail. In this the Assistance and perpetual Providence of Christ is the more
gloriously illustrated, that the Church can say of her self, Ps. 129. 2. Matt.
28.
Many a time have they vexed me from my youth up, but they have not prevailed
against me.

M. de Condom alleges next, Confer. p. 9.
those words of our Savior, Go and teach all nations, baptizing them in the
name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy ghost: Teaching them to
observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you; And to I am with you
always, even unto the end of the world. Upon which Text M. de Condom puts this
Comment. Teaching with you, Baptizing with you, Instructing with you my
Faithful, to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded, consequently
exercising with you in my Church and exterior Ministry. It Is with you, it is
with those who shall succeed you, it is with the Society assembled under their
Conduct, that I shall be from this present, even to the consummation of the
World, always, without interruption; For there shall not be any one moment in
which I will leave you, but tho absent in Body, I will be always present by my
holy Spirit. I own that Christ speaks there to his Church, that he orders it to
Baptize, to Teach, and consequently gives it a Ministry, which he commands to
be exercised therein. I acknowledge moreover, that he promises to be with it, to
Teach with it till the consummation of the World, without interruption; but
this is not the point in controversy. All our business is to know, what Church
this is; M. de Condom will have it all that Society that makes profession to
believe, etc. we think it to be that, which making profession to believe, does
so really and sincerely. He supposes his Proposition without offering Arguments
for it; but we prove ours. For no man can say, that Christ is with wicked men
and hypocrites, by the presence of his Holy Spirit, always, without
interruption; that there is never any moment when he leaves them, even to the
Consummation of the World. This can be affirmed of none but the Society of true
Believrs: Such a Society there will always be, and Jesus Christ always in the
midst of them, baptizing, and instructing with them; For tho the mouth and hand
of his enemies may often exercise the outward acts of the Ministry, and often
with abundance of impurity and disorder; yet Jesus Christ does for ever
preserve his faithful under the Ministry which is rightfully theirs, he does
ever baptize, and teach them even by wicked Ministers, so as by his wonderful
Providence, never to suffer so fatal a corruption in the Ministry, as should
render it insufficient to cherish the Faith of his Elect, even to the
conclusion of the World.

To the same purpose it is manifest St. Paul speaks of the design and duration
of the Evangelical Ministry. Ephesians. 4.
Jesus Christ has given some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints,
for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ. Till we
all come in the unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God,
Confer. p. 9, 10.
unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.
That is, says M. de Condom, the Ecclesiastical Ministry shall last without any
discontinuance till the general Resurrection.

I say once again; this is not the Point in Controversy. The Ministry shall
last to the end of the World, and in such a degree and condition too, as may
suffice for the edifying of the Body of Christ, for the conducting all his
Elect, and true Believers to that perfection St. Paul speaks of. Our concern is
to know two things, The first, whether This shall be constantly preserved from
corruption and impurity, and continue in the state wherein Christ and his
Apostles left it us; or whether the Tares sown by the Enemy in the Lord's Field
by night, shall not vitiate it? The second, whether its uninterrupted
continuance must wholly consist in being ordinarily transmitted from one
Minister to another, in the way we call exterior or personal succession; or
whether it may not happen, that the Church should sometime take away her
Ministry from them, who have palpably abused it; and commit it to others, who
she may hope will use it better? Each of these two are the matters in dispute,
and not that which M. de Condom was pleased to determine from that place of St.
Paul.

Give me leave, Sir, to run over these wonderful Promises of Jesus Christ to
his Church, and some others of the same nature once more. The Gates of Hell
shall not prevail against her. Matt. 16.
He will present her without spot or wrinkle, Ephesians. 5.
holy and without blemish. He will love and cherish her as his own flesh and
bones. Ephesians. 4.
He will bring her in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of
God, Matt. 18.
to the measure of a perfect man. He will be in the midst of her at solemn
Assemblies. Matt. 28.
He will continue with her to the end of the World. He will give his spirit to
abide with her for ever. Joh. 14.
He will redeem her from all iniquity, and purify her, Tit. 2. Ephesians. 2.
that she may be a peculiar people zealous of good works. He will build her
upon himself, to be an holy Temple, an habitation of God through the spirit.
Jev. 31.
He will wrde his laws in their hearts, and engrave them in their minds. He
will take away the heart of stone, Ezekiel. 36.
and give them an heart of flesh, a new heart, and a new spirit.

How is it possible, that nothing of all this should surprise the Doctors of
the Romish Communion, nor stagger their confidence, of finding these Promises
fulfilled, as well in the bad as the good, the just as well as unjust? For in
short, if wicked men, who have no more than external profession, become by
virtue of that profession, really and truly Members of the Church; the Promises
concern them, and they have a right to them in common with others; for
certainly they concern as many as make up the Body of Christ. Now shall we say,
that notwithstanding these are drowned in vice, Yet the Gates of Hell shall
never prevail against them, provided they can but counterfeit dexterously?
Shall we say, that tho gangrened and putrified from the crown of the head to
the sole of the foot, it matters not; They shall be without spot or wrinkle,
holy and without blemish, so they do but continue in an external profession?
Shall we say, that tho they have no Faith, no Justice, no Piety, they need not
trouble themselves, Jesus Christ will be with them always by the presence of his
Holy Spirit, provided they can but maintain a fair outside? Shall we say, that
although they prostitute themselves to all wickedness and villainy, they need
not be so much concerned, Jesus Christ will not fail to redeem them from all
iniquity, and to make of them a peculiar people, zealous of good works,
provided they be not wanting in dissimulation? Here is no invidious aggravation
in all this. The Promises of Christ are plain matters of fact, delivered
expressly in Scripture in favor of the Church. The defining of the Church by a
bare external profession, is another plain matter of fact, to be seen through
all the Writers of that Communion, and particularly this discourse of M. de
Condom. The applying these Promises to the Church thus defined, is what M. de
Condom. stitly contends for, and makes it an inducement to peoples conversion.
So that I do not in the least exaggerate, nor do I see what reply they can
make. To talk of two true Churches even in Christ's sight, one to which the
Promises belong as such, viz. That of True Believers; and another to which they
do not belong as such, viz. That, whose essence consists in the external
profession; besides that it would be advancing a notion contrary to Scripture
and Reason, which inform us but of one true Church; would be to argue to no
purpose; for wherefore should we argue about a Church to which the Promises of
Jesus Christ have no relation? Why should we invest with such glorious and
divine privileges, a Church to which Christ has promised nothing at all? Or
what reason have we with a blind obedience to submit to a Church, where it may
happen, that wicked men, and Enemies of God, may get the upper hand, and the
Spirit of Christ bear no Rule in it?

To say we ought to distinguish between two kinds of Promises, one such as
respect inward Sanctification, and Salvation, the other respecting the
perpetual Visibility of the Ministry, and its Infallibility in the external
profession of the Truth; and that the first sort are peculiar to the Elect and
true Believers in the Church, but the other belong to the whole Body of that
Society making Profession; besides that this would be to start a Division of
the Promises, which the Scripture divided not, for all made there, are made to
one and the same Body, to one and the same Church, without distinction:
besides, that this would be to frame Promises that never were given, such as a
perpetual Infallibility of the Ministry in the external Profession of the
Truth, as we lately saw: Besides this, I say, it is plainly to suppose that the
Church, as a Church, has no promises made her of Sanctification, and
Salvation, and so consequently, it is to oppose Scripture, which makes them to
her formally under the name and title of a Church. Matt. 16.
The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against my Church, says Christ. Ephesians. 5.
Christ loved the Church, says St. Paul, and gave himself for it, that he might
sanctify it, and present it to himself a glorious Church, having neither spot,
nor wrinkle, nor any such thing, but that it should be holy and without
blemish. The Lord (says the Apostle) nourishes and cherishes the Church; all
these Promises imply Sanctification and Salvation. What can we then with reason
say to this matter? except what was said upon the foregoing Question, to wit,
That we sometimes form an Idea of the Church, by a Judgment of Charity, so
looking upon all external Professors in general to be true Believers, and by
this Judgment we include in our Notion abundance of People who really and
indeed are not of the Church, and consequently have no title to the Promises of
Jesus Christ. But this Notion is rectified by a Judgment of Reflection,
Exactness, and Truths formed from the Idea's which Scripture and right Reason
give us of the true Church, restraining it to true Believers only; and that the
Promises of Scripture must be applied to it in this last, true, exact Notion
only. Add to this, that this true Church being intermixed with the counterfeit,
is not indeed so distinctly visible, that we can say with certainly, this or
that particular man is a true Believer; for this is proper to God alone; but
that it is however visible, in a sure, though indistinct manner, which will go
so far as to affirm, That there are true Pelievers in such an external
Profession: Add further, that this Church thus visible, becomes more or less
so, according as Corruptions and Disorders are more or less predominant in
their exterior Society; and that sometimes it is mightily celipsed, partly
through the prevalence of worldly, superstitious, and such like Persons; partly
through the infirmities of most true Believers; but still that it never was
absolutely invisible: Add once more, that this Church now upon Earth, together
with that in Heaven, and that which shall spring up in succeeding Ages, are all
three that Universal Church, we profess to believe in our Creed: Add, I say,
these three last Propositions to the two foregoing, and so you will comprise
all I have advanced hitherto; you will be furnished with certain uncontestable
Principles grounded upon Scripture, upon Reason, upon the Fathers, and upon
experience; by the help of which you will be able with great ease to throw off
all those difficulties usually started by the Romanists upon this Subject. This
will be further evidenced by what I am in the next place about to say.

Natural and necessary Consequences of the foregoing Principles.
THE first Consequence, Sir, to be drawn from what I said, is, that M. de
Condom has been very unjust, in upbraiding us, as if we dealt with that
Article of our Creed concerning the Universal Church, as the Arrians and
Macedonians do with those that relate to Jesus Christ and the Holy Ghost; which
is to confess them with the mouth, but in effect to reject them, by not
believing them as we ought. Those Heretics evacuate the Articles concerning
Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost, because they allow them a Divinity, which is
but a seeming, and imaginary one only; and thus they rob Jesus Christ and the
Holy Ghost of their Real Essence. Can any man say we do thus by the Church? we
make it essentially to consist in true and solid Faith, and Regeneration. Is
not this to make it real? what may be said of such as make it essentially to
consist in a bare outward Profession? Is not this to make it no better than a
Phantome, a Shadow? Is not this to confess with the mouth, but in effect to
reject it? Does not this make all those great and noble Ideas given of it in
Scripture dwindle into nothing? Judge you, Sir, if you please, to which of
these two Parties M. de Condom's reproach is most applicable.

II. By all I have said concerning the Visibility or Invisibility of the
Church, you may know what an unjust accusation they load us with daily, of
making the Church utterly invisible, upon pretense that we place it in true
Believers only; for if this accusation were true, it would fall not upon us,
but upon Scripture, upon the Fathers, and particularly upon St. Augustine,
whose Principles we follow entirely. But as St. Paul never thought of making a
Church perfectly invisible, 2 Timothy 2. 19.
though he said, The foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, the
Lord knows them that are his; and let every one that names the name of
Christ depart from iniquity; so neither do we pretend to spoil her of her
Visibility, when we say the same thing he did. As St. Augustine has not made
her invisible, though he said all that was related out of him; the same thing
must be said for us. But what can we think of this method of disputing, which
supposing the charge upon trial, to be a granted confessed thing, falls strongly
upon proving the Church's Visibility; and so Proselytes men upon this false
supposition, and those useless Arguments? Do not you look upon this, as a very
fair way of proceeding?

III. Hence likewise you may perceive, how unjustly they put that question to
us, Where our Church was before the Reformation? For if the Church consist of
true Believers alone, as we have shown, ours was then just where it is now, i.
e. in the common Field, where Jesus Christ has sown his Wheat, and the Enemy
by Night his Tares. There is only a twofold difference observable. One, that
before the Reformation, that part of the Field where the Corn was sown, was
wider, whereas now it is contracted into less room, because in many places the
Tares have driven away the Wheat, and remain alone; another, that then in the
places where Wheat and Tares grew together, the Wheat was thinner, and got less
nourishment, and the Tares quite contrary; whereas now the Wheat is thicker,
and better cultivated.

The Field is the World (as Christ says) the good Corn are true Believers, the
Tares are the Children of this World. Before the Reformation, the true
Believers were mixed with the rest in the same exterior Profession, as they are
still; but they were, if I may so say, stifled as it were with the great number
of the other sort, and the spiritual life they led had much of uneasiness, by
reason of the Corruptions in the Ministry, which stinted them in their
necessary Food, and besides mixed many such things with it, as were not only
incapable of sustaining life, but even prejudicial to it: Whereas, since the
Reformation these same Believers being separated from the rest, are by this
means much disburdened of that which oppressed them; they are more at liberty,
the Ministry allows them the Food of heavenly life in a much larger proportion,
and gives it them more pure, and free from strange mixtures; and though they
still continue among worldly men, yet now they do not find near so much
prejudice from them.

IV. Another Instance of this nature is commonly given us, and how injurious it
is, you may discern by the Principles laid down before. They bid us show them
these true Believers before the Reformation, single them out, say they, tell us
their names, were they visible or invisible? If even at this time, when things
are not near so confused, none but God only can know distinctly and infallibly,
what particular men are the true Believers; If their visibility consist only in
ones being able to say with certainty, there are true Believers, and not in
saying such or such are the men; is it not a very unjust demand to examine us
of past Ages, when things were so strangely in the dark? Would not any man of
equity think it enough, that we can show how far soever the Ministry was
corrupted, that still the true Believers might subsist under it? and is not
this very thing a visible indication of the Churches perpetual Visibility, that
God has not forsaken us?

V. Another necessary Consequence of the Principles now established, is, that in
an exterior Society carrying the name of a Church, it may so happen according
to the Notion we frame of it, from a Judgment of Charity, that the Ministry,
Ecclesiastical Dignities, and Chairs, as they are termed, may come to be filled
by Hypocrites, Superstitious, Worldly, and interested Persons, and that there
shall be a great many more such as these in Office, than good men. For seeing
God only can have a distinct and personal knowledge of true Believers, and
since he does not bestow these Offices immediately, and by his own hand; it may
without question come to pass, that both those that confer, and those that take
upon them these Offices, may be the Tares sown in the Lord's Field. A man
cannot have any absolute certainty, that this shall not be so; because there is
not any promise to the contrary; and because on the other hand, there are
instances that it has been so already. To pretend this cannot be, because it
would hinder the Churches subsisting for ever, is no Argument at all; for if
the Church consist properly of true Believers, as has been undeniably proved,
the perpetual subsistence of true Believers, does not depend on the
faithfulness of the Ministers, nor the untainted purity of the Ministry; except
we suppose the Principle of a blind Obedience to the Ministers, which is a
false Principle, and destructive of Religion, as has been made appear in the
defense of the Reformation. Part. 1. chapter 7, 8.
Indeed this ground being laid, when once the Ministry is corrupted, it must
needs follow, that the faithful are corrupted too, because bound to receive
implicitly whatever is delivered to them by their Ministry. But reject this
principle, and there is no reason why the Faithful may not separate the good
from the bad, and why they may not subsist under such a Ministry, by the help
of that distinction which the Grace of God enables them to make. And here, Sir,
allow me to wonder a little at the pleasant double which the Doctors of the
Romish Communion make when they dispute. Our first and main question is,
whether we ought to acquiesce in the Council of Trent's Determinations? Yes,
say they, you must yield an implicit obedience to the Decrees of the Prelates
assembled in a Body. But why an Implicit Obedience? Because (say they) the
Church cannot subsist without it. But why cannot it subsist without it? Cannot
it subsist by resuming the Ministry out of such hands, and putting it into
better? Cannot it, without going so far, subsist by separating between good and
bad food? No; they tell you, it cannot, because it is obliged to receive
implicitly whatever the Prelates in a Body shall deliver. What way of
disputing call you this, if it be not quite to swerve from good sense and
reason, and to be lost in an impertinent maze? For is not this a perfect round,
first to prove an Implicit Obedience, because the Church cannot otherwise
subsist; and then to prove the Church cannot otherwise subsist without this
Obedience, because men ought to obey implicitly?

VI. But let us proceed in drawing our Consequences. And being we hit upon the
point of the Implicit Obedience they exact to the decisions of Bishops, and
that Sovereign and Absolute Authority wherewith they would invest them, let us
try, if this can agree with the Principles we have established. I meddle not
now with those other reasons that might be made use of; you will find them in
part in the Book I quoted just now. All I shall say is, that since no man can
have a distinct knowledge of the True Believers, and that the True Church
consists of such alone; no man consequently can be secure, that this Body of
Prelates, whether considered single, or whether as convened in a Council, are
the true Church. Yes, but says one, they represent the true Church. I agree
with you; so far as the True Believers are still under their Ministry: But
representing the True Church does not presently endue them with its Opinions
and Affections. The true Church in conferring her Ministry upon men, does not
confer upon them withal, either true Faith, or true Regeneration, much less
perfect Infallibility. Hence, whatever determinations they give, are still
subject to an examination. If these prove confermable to God's Word, it is our
duty, not only to embrace them, but further to respect ^he Body of Ministers,
as the true Church Representative; because they have expressed her sense; and
Charity will carry us still further, and incline us to esteem them true
Believers, because they have acted as such. But when their divisions are found
to disagree with God's Word, we are to look upon them as men that have abused
their ministry. If this happen in things not plainly interesting the
Conscience, their ministry must be born with, and the liberty of separating the
clean from the unclean, natural to every Believer, made use of: If they do
interest the Conscience, we groan under their ministry, we pray to God, we
implore succors from above, still using the Liberty of Conscience to refuse the
Evil, and retain the Good. But if this Body of Prelates-proceed to violent
taking away this necessary and indispensable Liberty of Conscience, and reduce
the faithful to this hard straight, either to be damned for false Doctrine, in
slavishly following their Ministers errors, or damned for dissimulation in
pretending to follow them; Then the true Believers ought to look upon them as
men that have stripped themselves of the right of the Ministry, to oppose them,
to take it from them, and repose the trust in other hands. It is evident then,
the supreme Authority we contend about, cannot take place, because it is
continually in danger of being invested in worldly men, to whom it cannot in
any case belong. And so we should be continually in danger of mistaking That
for the Church Representative, which neither is really, nor can possibly be so.

VII. The seventh Use to be made of what we have advanced, is the right
apprehending of some expressions used by us, viz. That the Church is corrupted,
that the state of the Church has been interrupted, and the like, so as to
reconcile these with Jesus Christ's Promises: which import not only the
perpetual existence, but also the perpetual holiness and incorruption of the
Church. Now for that corruption attributed by us to the Church, I say, that
whereas the Promises of Christ concern the true Church, that is, True Believers
only; our expression on the contrary respects the Church, according to that
Idea of Charity we form of it, including all external Professors, which are
ordinarily called the Visible Church. It Is of the Church taken in this last
notion, that we say, she is corrupted; for the whole Body being made up, as we
have seen, of good and bad man, it has come to pass, that the wicked are
mightily increased, and the spirit of the World, which is a spirit of error and
superstition, showed it self in an eminent manner. But we do not understand
true Believers to be corrupted, only so far forth as they may possibly have
contracted some tincture of infirmity, by conversing with the others. And for
that interruption of the state of the Church, mentioned in our Confession of
Faith, where we say, Art 31. In the 31. Article of the Gallican confession,
speaking of an extraordinary vocation to the Ministry in times of necessity,
these words are inserted. Quoniam interdum, ut nostris etiam temporibus,
interrupto Ecclesiae statu, necesse suit, nonnullos esse qui Ecclesiae
collapsae ruinas instaurarent.
That the state of the Church being interrupted, it was necessary it should be
raised up again out of its ruins and desolation: The meaning of those
expressions is, not what M. de Condom pretends, that the true Church ceases to
exist, or that its Ministry was quite extinct in those times which we call
times of desolation and ruin, for we make a distinction between the Church,
and the state of the Church. The Church is the true Believers making profession
of Truth, and Christian Piety, and a real Holiness, under a Ministry, which
dispenses all nourishment necessary for spiritual life, without keeping back
any; Its natural and proper state is to be freed, as much as its militant
condition can admit, from the impure mixture of profane worldly men; not to be
covered over, and as it were swallowed up with this Chaff and Tares; to have a
pure Ministry, not encumbered with errors, with false worship, superstitious
customs; a Ministry in the hands of good men, who are in possession of it by
honest methods, and set a good example to others. This State is what we think
has been interrupted, having seen strange opinions brought into Religion,
Superstitious propagated, the Ministry invaded by men neither deserving, nor
capable of it, and that were advanced by scandalous and unlawful methods;
having seen vices openly predominant among Churchmen, the Pulpits more zealous
for Tales and Legends, than the Word of God; The Schools busying themselves
with ridiculous Questions and Curiosities, the Sacraments burdened with strange
Ceremonies, the instruction and edification of men's Souls wretchedly neglected;
and in a word, the Gospel liberty changed into a temporal slavery. This is what
we mean by the state of the Church being interrupted; this the ruin and
desolation we bewail. The Church has not ceased to exist, nor did she
perfectly lose her visibility, or her Ministry, God forbid: But both she and
her Ministry have seen the natural state they ought to continue in, changed and
interrupted.

VIII. Apply these principles now to our Reformation, and then, Sir, you will
discern, that granting this supposition to be true, that the Body of the
Prelates invested in the ministry of the Church in our Fathers days, and
assembled in the Trent Council, supposing, I say, that they delivered such
determinations in points of Faith, as are incompatible with Salvation; Granting
it to be true, that they took away Christian Liberty by Anathematizing all who
should refuse to believe, and submit to those determinations as they did; and
by adding to all this violence and compulsion, our Fathers had reason to look
upon them as Ministers that had justly deprived themselves of all right to
exercise their Ministry over them by such ill conduct, and to give that power
of the Ministry to others. They had reason to look upon the party that adhered
to these Prelates with such obstinate stiffness as a Body or Society of which a
man could not positively say, That is the particular Body wherein God nourishes
and cherishes his Faithful and Elect.

IX. Hence likewise it follows, that our Fathers are wrongfully charged with
making a Schism, and separating from the Church. For it being sure, that the
Church consists of the Faithful only; and besides, that we are of opinion, the
Trent Bishops themselves broke the band of external Communion with sound
Believers, and brought things to such a pass, that our Ancestors could not
possibly join with them in the same Assemblies; it is evident, They were the
Beginners of the Schism, the Authors and makers of this lamentable division.

X. It signifies nothing to alledg, that they were possessed of the Ministry by
an exterior and ordinary succession; for the Ministry is not such a thing, as
men when once possessed of, can never forfeit their right to, tho they abuse it
never so much. They enjoyed it by an external succession, it is confessed; but
this succession with respect to men's persons continues no longer than we can
say, The faithful are under their Ministry. When we cannot be sure of that any
more, from thenceforth the Prelates have lost their right; and such a
succession afterward, would be but as the succession of death to a disease, or
of night to twilight. I do not say the Ministry it self is extinct, God forbid;
but I say in such a case it devolves of right to that other part of the Society
where the Faithful are. The reason of which Truth is this: That the Ministers
are naturally the Church Representative; And all their Authority is derived
from the Body of the Faithful; When therefore it happens that they break the
band of external communion which joins them to those Faithful, it is plain they
represent them no longer; and the holding their Authority over them afterward,
is a force and usurpation.

XI. Lastly, From the Principles we have established, it appears, how vain and
ungrounded a scandal it is, which the Controvertists of the Romish Communion
are continually upbraiding us with, of setting up a new Church. For being the
Church, according to Scripture, sound sense, and the opinions of the Fathers,
is nothing else but the Society of true Believers: To have set up a new Church,
we must have brought in a new Faith, different from what Jesus Christ delivered
to the World. If they can convict us of being guilty in this point, we are
heartily content they should not only say we have formed a new Church, but that
we have formed a false, perverse, naughty Society, and draw all the
consequences against us, that can be naturally drawn from that Concession. But
if we on the contrary have only rejected new Doctrines, a worship that
Christian Religion never was acquainted with; and Errors brought into the
Church since it was first established; if we have only refined the Ministry,
and restored the Gospel to its natural luster, they ought to be just in
acknowledgment, that God has made use of us, for the preservation of his true,
Ancient, Primitive Church, and the rescuing it from oppression. If it be true,
that the Trent Council have made Articles of Faith of such Doctrines and
Practices as were never revealed to us by Christ, may we not say that That has
set up a new Religion, and consequently a new Church? Let us judge of one
another by this Rule of right reason, and conscientiously examine the truth of
what has been done on both sides; for upon such an examination the justice or
injustice of taxing us with Novelty, will depend.

THE SECOND PART OF Monsieur de CONDOM's Discourse EXAMINED.
THUS much I thought fit to say in Answer to the First part of M. de Condom's
Discourse; The Second will not detain us very long. Confer. p. 16.
They made me (says he) some Objections concerning the frequent revolts of the
people of Israel, who had so often forsaken God, the Kings, and all the people,
as the Holy Scripture speaks; during which, the public worship was so extinct,
that Elijah thought himself the only servant of God, till he learnt from God
himself, that he had reserved to himself seven thousand men which had not bowed
the knee unto Baal. To this I answered (proceeds he) that for what regarded
Elijah, there was no difficulty, since 'twas apparent from the very words, that
it concerned only Israel, where Elijah prophesied; and that the Divine Worship
was so far from being at that time extinct in Judah, that 'twas there under the
reign of Josaphat in the greatest luster it had been since Solomon's time.

I shall not say here, that the Divine Worship under the reign of Josaphat, was
not in such great luster neither, but that the Scripture informs us, The high
places were not taken away; 1 King. 2^. 43.
for the people offered still, and burnt incense in the high places, which was
a worship forbidden by God. But not to insist upon this, I say in the first
place, This instance is a very good proof, that the greatest part of this
exterior Society, professing themselves to be the people of God, that is, ten
tribes out of twelve, were corrupted to that degree, that Elijah complained he
only was left. Which shows, that we must not always conclude Truth and Purity
to be of that side where the number is most; nor suppose it impossible, for
what we call the Visible Church, to be corrupted, at least as to the greatest
part of Professors. Secondly, I could heartily have wished, that M. de Condom
would have reflected a little upon the use St. Paul made of this instance of
Israel in Elijah's time; because it is exactly the same with what the
Protestant Ministers make of it now. It was objected to the Apostle, that from
his Principles it would follow, that God had cast away his people, in as much
as the whole Body of that people had crucified Jesus Christ, and walked
contrary to his new Religion; if therefore he would undertake to maintain his
new Religion was the Right, he must at the same time own, that God had forsaken
his Church. Rom 11. 2, 5.
No, (says he) God has not cast away his people, for there is a remnant
through the election of Grace; and hereupon he alleges what happened to Israel
heretofore in Elijah's time, when God reserved to himself Seven thousand men in
secret, that had not bowed the knee to Baal. What can be more exactly parallel
than the use he makes of this passage, and that the Protestants make? It Is
objected to us, that from our Principles it follows, God has cast away his
Church, because the whole Body of that Church condemns our Reformation, and
walks contrary to our new Religion. Confer. Page 12.
They teach that this visible exterior Church may cease to be upon Earth, says
M. de Condom. No such matter, say we, God has not deserted his Church, there
is a remnant according to the Election of Grace, and in proof of this we urge
the instance of Israel heretofore, in Elijah's time. If to charge the
Protestants with unsincerity for alleging this, were at the same time to
charge St. Paul. If the exception of Judah, where the worship in Elias his time
was in great luster, were good, and to be admitted against us, the same was
also good and to be admitted against the Apostle. For what do we more than he
did? or what do we say, but what we have learnt from Him ought to be said in
this Case? Let St. Paul then acquit himself, and he shall in doing so, acquit
us. Now this is done without any difficulty, for he need only Answer, that the
exception does not make at all against him. The business is to know, which is
the true people of God, his true Church which he never forsakes. Now it is
plain by God's answer to Elijah, that this is not the Crowd, the vast Number,
not the party of greatest strength, or which makes most noise in the World, but
some persons reserved, a remnant according to the election of Grace, these are
his true people, and his true Church. Tho Judah had still maintained the Divine
Worship in its greatest luster, yet does not this detract from the truth of
God's declaration made to Elias, viz. that his true people, his true Church
consists of this Remnant, or these Persons reserved. This is all St. Paul
desires; this is likewise all the Protestants desire to make of it. Lord, says
Elijah, they have broken down thine Altars, 1 Kings 19. 14.
and slain thy Prophets with the sword, and I only am left. Had God made his
Church to consist in an exterior Body of men, who should preserve his worship
in a constant uninterrupted purity, what could have been more natural than to
return this answer, Wherefore do thou complain, have I not still my Church in
Judah? The Cardinal du Perron would have replied exactly thus, and from him it
is that M. de Condom has borrowed this shift. Yet God answers in a very
different manner, he fixes his true Church, not in the exterior Body, but in
the Persons he had reserved. The Apostle takes the advantage of an Argument
against what the Jews in his time objected, and we in like manner take the same
advantage against what is objected to us now.

Afterward M. de Condom frames to himself an Objection drawn from the Disorders
and horrible Corruptions predominant in Judah during the Reign of Ahaz, 2 King.
16. and Chapter 21.
who shut up the Temple of God, and caused Vrijah the Priest to sacrifice unto
Idols; and afterward under Manasseh, whose Impieties transcended those of Ahaz.
To which he answers, first, That Isaiah, Confer. Page 16.
who lived during all the Reign of Ahaz, for all these abominations of the
King, of the Priest Urijah, and almost all the People, never separated from the
Communion of Judah; which shows, that there is always a People of God, from
whose Communion it is never lawful to separate. Laying aside, for one minute the
business of Separation, we must in the mean time of necessity grant, that this
exterior Society, called the People of God, were prodigiously corrupted in
matters of Faith and Worship, that their Corruption was public and general,
diffused, not among some private Persons only, but through the whole Body of
the ordinary Ministry. So that the true Church, that to which the Promises of
God belong, that which must not be interrupted, nor totally fail, must be
acknowledged to consist, not in the whole Body of this exterior Society, but
merely in the Body of true Believers, who it is possible may sometimes be
reduced to a very inconsiderable number of this Society, and scarce make any
Figure at all in it. We must likewise acknowledge it possible, for such an
universal Corruption to happen in this Society, that there shall be no longer
any thing perfectly sound and entire in it, that is, nothing in the public
Worship without some tincture of impurity. For at the same time that Ahaz
Reigned in Judah, and the Corruption was general there, Pekah was King in
Isreal, 2 Kings 15. 28.
who (says the Scripture) did evil in the sight of the Lord, and departed not
from the sins of Jeroboam who made Israel to sin. So that the public Worship
was then corrupted every where, as well in Israel as Judah. What then became of
M. de Condom's exterior Church, which he says can never err in her
Determinations? Where was then that Church, which does not only maintain some
truth, but teaches and maintains all truth? Confer. Page 16.
Well, but still M. de Condom tells us, Isaiah never separated from the
Communion of this People, no more than did the rest of the Prophets. Now this
very thing strengthens our Argument, and renders it impregnable; because, from
hence it necessarily follows, that there was not in any place of the World
besides, any public Worship, nor any Exterior Body at all, little or great,
that served God in perfect Purity. So that we must inevitably allow one of
these two things; Either that the Church was at that time utterly extinct, or
that it was preserved in this Remnant, which we see God spoke of to Elijah. The
first of these destroys the Promises of God; the second establishes our
Opinion, and quite overthrows that of the Romanists.

Let us now examine how Isaiah and the other Prophets, not separating from the
Body of the People, is to be understood. Can we suppose them to have been
partakers of the Wickednesses that then prevailed in the public Worship?
Confer. Page 17.
By no means. These Prophets, M. de Condom says, reprehended and detested the
impieties of the People, but separated not from the Communion. The meaning of
which is, that they separated negatively, tho not positively; they refused to
partake of the Impieties in the public Worship; but they did not set up
another sort of public Worship distinct by themselves: I grant it. But then we
must also grant, that when the Worship is corrupted, the Church may subsist by
means of such a Negative Separation, and that this is sufficient for its
preservation. Now this is exactly what we are of Opinion was done, during the
Corruptions of the Latin Ministry all along before the Reformation. But still
it may be said, These Prophets never proceeded so far as a positive Separation,
and you have. I answer, The Reason they never separated positively, was
peculiar to themselves, as M. de Condom himself acknowledges, to wit, that over
and above the real and spiritual Covenant, God had entered into with such as
were true Believers among that People; there was besides another Exterior and
Temporal one, in which the whole Nation were concerned, founded upon their
being the Blood and Progeny of Abraham, and all bearing about them the Mark of
this Covenant (to wit, Circumcision) in their Flesh; so that the true Believers
were obliged upon this account to continue in Communion with the People, and
could not separate from them positively, by reason of that common Covenant
which they might not break. But the case is otherwise with the Christian
Church, which has but one Covenant with God, and that a real and spiritual
one, of true Faith, and sincere Regeneration; when, therefore we can no longer
maintain this Covenant, by living amongst a People, and under a Ministry which
is become contrary thereto, there lies a necessity upon us of separating by a
positive Separation.

And yet M. de Condom pretends to make some advantage of this very thing.
Confer. Page 17.
He says, The Succession of that Ancient People was kept up by carnal
Generation, -- and so, tho the Priests, and almost all the People should have
prevaricated, the State of Gods People subsisted always in an exterior Form,
whether they would or no. -- But it is not so with the new People, whose
exterior Form consists in nothing but the Profession of Jesus Christ's
Doctrine: So that if the Confession of the true Faith should be extinct for one
only moment, the Church, which has no Succession but by the Continuance of this
Profession, would be wholly extinct, without any possibility of ever rising
again, either in its People or Pastors, but by a new Mission.

I confess, That carnal Generation was in that Ancient People, enough to keep
up their Succession in Quality of Gods People, with Relation to that temporal
Covenant common to them all. Tho it be true too, that this Quality was but very
imperfectly discerned in times of general Prevarications; because, if they were
then Gods temporal People, they were a vicious and prevaricating People. But, I
say, that carnal Generation was not enough to maintain among them a Succession,
with respect to the spiritual Covenant; because the Succession here, could be
preserved no other way, but by a Participation of the same Faith, and the same
Charity. Now the Covenant in which the new People live, is not any longer a
carnal one, but purely and solely Spiritual; and consequently, the Succession
in it, can only consist in this perpetual Participation of one and the same
Faith, and one and the same Charity. In this particular, the Condition of both
old and new People are alike. As therefore in that Ancient People, there did
still continue a Succession of Faith and Charity, tho the public Worship and
ordinary Ministry were full of strange Corruptions; in like manner has such a
Succession always continued in the new, even in the midst of all Corruptions.
God had then his methods of teaching the reserved, and keeping them from
partaking in the public Prevarications; the same he has still, and uses to
the same purpose, although the Ministry and public Worship have not preserved
their Purity. I confess, should a full and perfect desertion of Christianity
ever have happened throughout all the Christian World, and not one true
Believer be left upon the face of the Earth, a man might say, the Church had
been utterly extinct. But blessed be God, it never came to that. We acknowledge
that God has all along preserved his Remnant, according to the Election of
Grace. We acknowledge too, that the public Ministry was never so totally
corrupted, but still all that was necessary for the Instruction of Believers,
was so far kept up, that the spiritual Succession was always preserved entire,
by receiving from the Ministers hands nourishment sufficient unto spiritual
Life on the one hand, and casting away all the evil and impure Mixtures of the
Ministry on the other hand; and this is that negative Separation we spoke of
before. The exterior Form of Jesus Christ's true Church, does not so absolutely
consist in the Ministries making profession of Faith pure, and void of Error,
that it cannot otherwise subsist any longer. I confess, when this is done, the
Church is in a happy Condition, and (if I may so say) a Condition of Health.
But when this is not done, the exterior Form does not presently perish upon
that account, because this consists in our being able to say, That is the Body
where God nourishes and cherishes his true Believers, as I have already shown
when treating of my second question. Could we no longer say thus, the Church
would have lost its external Form, and its Succession have ceased to be
visible. But this might at all times be said, even when the Ministry and
public Worship was most corrupted, and so the Churches visible Succession was
never quite lost. It has indeed been mightily lessened and obscured, in
Proportion to the Errors that prevailed in the Ministry; and this was the
Churches Condition of Misery, it is sick and languishing Condition, which
nevertheless went not so far, as to hinder this Succession.

M. Confer. Page 17.
de Condom goes on. I will not say the true Faith, and true Worship of God,
could be wholly abolisht in the People of Israel, so as that God had no more
any true Servants on Earth. But I find on the contrary, it is clear, that maugre
the Corruption, God still reserved to himself a sufficient number of Servants,
who participated not in the Idolarty. Herein we agree; for neither do we say,
That the true Faith, and true Worship could ever have been wholly abolisht
among Christians; but on the contrary, that maugre the Corruption, God has
always reserved to himself a sufficient number of Servants, who have not
participated in the Prevarications of the rest. So far the case is the same.
It Is not to be imagined, proceeds he, that Gods Servants, and the true Faith,
were preserved only in secret; but that in all the Succession of the Ancient
People, Confer. Page 17, 18.
the true Doctrine always shone forth. For there was a continual Succession of
Prophets, who instead of adhering to the Peoples Errors, or dissembling them,
rose up against them with force; and this Succession was so constant, 2 Chronicles.
36. 15.
that the Holy Ghost fears not to say, That God rose up Night and Morning, Jer.
11. 7. xxv. 3, 4.
and daily admonisht the People by the Mouth of his Prophets.

M. de Condom must give us leave to make some Observations upon this Passage.
The first of which is, that in the Corruptions of Israel heretofore, when the
public Worship, and ordinary Ministry, suffered such Depravation, there was
not any where in the World another public Worship, or another Ministry, that
was preserved in Purity and Perfection: So that if men must needs have looked
for the Church in the Body of the Peoples living under their ordinary Pastors,
and in the public worship (as he is of opinion we now must under the Gospel)
there could not have been any longer a Church upon Earth; because his own
Principle maintains that, Confer. Page 12.
if this visible and exterior Church composed of Pastors and People, do not
keep and teach all truth, (that is, if She teach any thing that is false) She
is not the Church.

I observe, secondly, That in the very same place, where God is said to rise up
Night and Morning, and daily admonish the People by the Mouth of his Prophets;
it is also said, That all the chief of the Priests, and the People trespassed
wonderfully, 2 Chronicles. 36. 14, 16.
according to all the Abominations of the Heathen, and polluted the House of
the Lord, which he had sanctified in Jerusalem. It is said further too, That
they mocked the Messengers of God, and despised his Words, and misused his
Prophets. Which shows that both People and Priests were generally corrupted,
and the Church reduced to a Remnant. I confess, some certain Persons of this
Remnant did not keep silence; but instead of adhering to, or dissembling the
Peoples Errors, opposed them strongly. But besides, that a great many more, no
question, sighed in secret for these things; it is manifest, that this Remnant
did not make a separate Body by themselves, nor exercise any public Worship
different from the rest. And consequently the Churches visibility, tho not
wholly extinct, yet was mightily darkened and diminished, and that is all we
would infer from hence.

My third Observation is, That there was indeed, in that Ancient People, a
continued Succession of Prophets; and as M. de Condom says, a Prophetical
Ministry ordinary with the People, Confer. Page 19.
where the Prophets made an Order always subsisting, whence God continually
drew Divine Men, by whose Mouth he spoke loudly and publicly to all his
People. But then we must say withal, that the Body of this Order of Prophets
were every whit as corrupt, as the Priests and People. This cannot be denied,
for the Scripture affirms it expressly. Jer. 2. 8.
The Priests said not, where is the Lord; and they that should Minister the Law
knew me not; the Pastors also offended against me, and the Prophets prophesied
in Baal. Jer. 5. 8.
The Prophets prohesie lies, and the Priests bear rule by their means, and my
People love to have it so. I have heard what the Prophets said, Jer. 23. 25,
26, 27.
that Prophecy lies in my Name, saying, I have dreamed. How long shall this be
in the hearts of the Prophets, that Prophecy lies? Yea, they are Prophets of
the deceit of their own heart. Which think to cause my People to forget my Name
by their Dreams, which they tell every Man to his Neighbor, as their Fathers
have forgotten my Name for Baal. And a vast number of Passages to the like
purpose. So that we cannot say, there was at that time any visible Body that
opposed the Corruptions, or maintained the Worship of God in its genuine
Purity. The Prophets, by whom God spoke so loudly and publicly, were only
looked upon as private Persons, of an Opinion different from the generality of
the Society. And therefore, how loudly and publicly soever they spoke, if in
order to the constituting a Visible Church, it be necessary to find a Body or
Society of Men, making Profession of pure Doctrine, M. de Condom must
acknowledge, that there was not then any Visible Church in the World.

And now, Sir, give me leave, I beseech you, to ask, with what pretense to
Reason men can still cavil at this instance of the Corruptions in Israel
heretofore, and not own it for a sensible Proof, that confirms most of the
Truths established in the former part of this Letter. In it you see the several
Bodies that made up the ordinary Ministry, all of them ensnared in Idolatry,
and false Worship. In it you see the whole Body of the People blindly following
the exorbitancies of their Guides. In it you see the true Church of God
subsisting, not in an exterior Society, enjoying its Ministers, Assemblies, and
public Worship peculiar to its self; but in some reserved Persons, that still
maintained their Integrity in the midst of all these Confusions. In it you see
God himself, and after him, St. Paul, making his true People to consist in
these Persons so reserved. All this proves, and proclaims to the World, That
the true Church consists of true Believers only; That this Church is not
otherwise visible, but as mixed with wicked Men and Reprobates; That this
mixture does sometimes so obscure it, that it is very difficult to come to a
knowledge of it; That it does nevertheless still subsist even in that state of
obscurity; And, that in these true Believers, and Persons whom God has
reserved, he does fulfill the Promises of Perpetuity made to the Church.

I close this Letter with sincere Protestations, That it is much to my
dissatisfaction, that I find my self obliged to put Pen to paper, in a Dispute
against M. de Condom. I have all along had, and ever shall have, not only all
the Respect for him, which is due to his Quality and Station; but more
especially, I esteem his Virtue so universally acknowedged, and admire his
Perfections, and the excellent Gifts God has imparted to him, as they really
deserve. In our Conference, I observed in him, a Wit lively and piercing, a
clear Apprehension, a proper and easy way of Expression; and especially, an
extraordinary Candor and Civility of Behavior. He maintained his Principles
with all the strength and advantage imaginable, made them look as fair and
specious, as it was possible for any man, and managed them with abundance of
Skill and Address. In a word, I was strangely taken with the Accomplishments of
his Person, and did often feel such kind Inclinations and Wishes, as Men should
do upon such Occasions. My Sentiments of Honor and Respect for him are
sincere, but the more they are so, the more frequent I must complain of one
thing, inserted by him in his Discourse with Mademoiselle de Duras, Confer.
Page 15.
and that is, That in our Religion we believe, there is a point of time when a
Christian is obliged to doubt whether the Scripture was inspired by God,
whether the Gospel is a Truth, or a Fable; whether Jesus Christ was a Deceiver,
or a Teacher of the Truth. This Discourse, I confess, was by no means agreeable
to the Character of his Temper; and I was amazed to find that a Prelate, who
desires to be thought a man of Equity toward us, could entertain such an
Opinion of us. In which of our Books has he met with such an abominable
Doctrine? I know indeed, this is a consequence he pretends to deduce from our
Principles; but I shall venture to say, His consequence can never be made out
with such evidence, as may allow him peremtorily to affirm, without any other
warrant for it, That in our Religion we believe there is a point of time when a
Christian is obliged to doubt whether the Scripture was inspired by God;
whether the Gospel is a Truth, or a Fable; whether Jesus Christ was a Deceiver,
or a Teacher of the Truth.

When he shall think fit to consult us upon this Point, we shall declare to him
with one Consent, that we do not only not believe this Proposition, but that we
have a perfect Abhorrence of it; and whenever he shall please to let us know
how he understands this to be deduced from our Principles, we shall make it
appear to him, that he is under a great mistake, and that the quite contrary
must be inferred from them.

I am, Sir, etc.
FINIS.
AN ANSWER TO M. de MEAVX's BOOK. ENTITLED, A Conference with Mr. CLAUDE.
A Relation of what past in the Conference held by the Bishop of Condom,
Preceptor to the Dauphin; and Monsieur Claude, the first of March, 1678. At the
Countess of Roye's House, the Countesses of Lorge, and Roye, Mademoiselle de
Duras, the Marquess of Miremont, Mademoiselle de Roucy, and Mr. Cotton, being
there present.
SOME Days before this Conference, Mademoiselle de Duras going to visit Mr.
Claude, let him know* that she was under some scruples upon the account of her
Religion, and took out of her pocket a Paper lately put into her hands, in
which were contained some Passages out of St. Augustine concerning the
Eucharist: To which Mr. Claude replied, and then by other Passages of the same
Father, demonstrated to her, that his opinion as to this particular, was
directly the same that is taught at Charenton: And thereupon she seemed to be
well satisfied.

The next Day after Mr. Claude seeing her at the Countess of Roye's, she after
a long Discourse told him, that she was mighty desirous he would admit of a
Conference with some Doctor of the Romish Persuasion at a time when she might
be by. Mr. Claude returned, that this was not usual; that such Conferences
might be of very ill consequence, and that she could not but be sensible that
the present Circumstances of the Reformed in France, and especially at Paris,
required they should behave themselves with much prudence and caution. But
(says she) how would you behave your self if you should light upon one of these
Gentlemen accidentally, and be put upon matters of Religion? You would not
desert your Cause? I would in such a case, says Mr. Claude, decline entering
into Disputes as much as I could; but if I were constrained to it, I would give
an account of my Faith; and upon such sudden occasions we are not used to run
away. But Madam (proceeded he) what reason is there for asking me this? We are
not going about any such thing.

Two Days after the Countess of Roye told Mr. Claude, she understood there were
some pains taken to procure a meeting that should seem accidental between him
and M. de Condom, and she thought it convenient to give him this notice. Were I
desirous to meet any man (said he) I had rather it should be M. de Condom than
another, because he is a Person of Wisdom, Honor, and Judgment, and one for
whom I have a particular Respect and Esteem; but in regard of the Public
Capacity I am in, methinks this business deserves some Consideration. A little
while after he imparted it to two of his Friends, and all three together paying
a Visit to a Person of Quality of extraordinary Merit and great Prudence, it
was generally agreed, that Mr. Claude's best way was to decline this meeting
with M. de Condom. The Reasons alleged were these, That it was already known
Mademoiselle de Duras was perfectly disposed to alter her Religion; that in all
probability she desired a Conference only for the greater Pomp and formality of
the thing, and to make use of this as a pretense; that let the issue be what it
would, she would most certainly go over, and pretend it had not given her
satisfaction, and that this would certainly be a piece of the next public News.

The Person of Quality whose advice was asked, undertook to Visit the Countess
of Roye, and make her sensible of these Reasons. She indeed showed her self
apprehensive of them, and easily saw their strength and drift. But all that
could be done was too weak to bring Mademoiselle de Duras off from her first
Design. The Lady complained extremely of her being deserted, and that this was
the very thing she had often been upbraided with, that the Reformed Ministers
durst not show their heads before the Catholic Doctors. By this, and the
addition of Tears too, she endeavored all manner of ways to move her Sister,
solemnly protesting, that, did but People know what a world of good this would
do her, they could not certainly deny her so great an act of Charity.

This engaged the Countess of Roye to concern her self for the bringing about a
meeting between Monsieur de Condom and Mr. Claude, and she did it so very well,
that Mr. Claude found himself under a necessity of consenting to it, that so he
might not expose himself to the insolence of those of a different persuasion.
She assured him M. de Condom desired this meeting should seem merely by chance,
that the World should not be acquainted with it, and that they should not make
it their business to talk of it on one side nor other.

On Tuesday the first day of March, about two in the Afternoon, Mr. Claude went
all alone to the Countess of Roye's, and a little after came in the Mareschall
de Lorge, Mademoiselle de Duras, the Marquess of Miremont, and Mr. Cotton.
About a quarter of an hour after, came in M. de Condom by himself.

When the first Complements were paid, and the Company had taken their Seats,
M. de Condom directed himself to Mr. Claude, and told him, That he had for some
time longed to see him to offer some things which were practiced by men of his
Religion, but such as he apprehended to be directly contrary to their
Principles. That these consisted, first in an Article of their Discipline,
which injoyns, that in case any difference arise in points of Doctrine, the
Question shall be decided in the Consistory, and by the Word of God: If they do
not aquiesce in the Judgment of this Court, it shall be referred to a
Provincial Synod, and from thence to a National Synod, where a full and final
resolution of the case shall be given by the Word of God; and such as refuse to
submit to this, shall be excommunicated. Secondly, he produced a formulary of a
Letter Missive to the National Synods, framed in the Synod of Vitre, and which
was to be a pattern for all the Provinces to follow for the future, by which
they promise submission to all the resolutions of that holy Assembly, to obey
and execute every particular of them, as being persuaded (says the Formulary)
that God will preside there, and lead you into all truth and equity by his Holy
Spirit, and by the Rule of his Word, Besides that, he produced an Act of the
National Synod held at Charenton in the Year 1644. where the Independents
opinion is condemned, who will not allow that particular Congregations should
depend upon the Authority of Colloquies and Synods, but that every one should
be governed by Laws within it self. Now this Act expressly declares, that that
Sect opens a door to all manner of irregularities and extravagances, that it
deprives men of all means of remedying disorders, and would, if admitted, make
as many several Religions, as Parishes. Lastly, he produced an Act of the
National Synod at Sainte-foy, by which, upon occasion of some overtures for a
reunion with those of the Ausburg Confession, the Synod assigns Deputies to go
and confer with them; to whom full power is granted, to agree upon, and
determine whatever points should be debated, whether in matters of Doctrine, or
any other thing that might concern the Good and Peace of all the Churches, even
so far as to consent, that their Decisions should be inserted in their
Confessions of Faith. From all which he inferred, That even those of Mr.
Claude's Religion, did acknowledge a necessity, that in order to the
preservation of Unity in the Church, men should submit their Judgments, and pay
an entire and absolute obedience to Ecclesiastical Assemblies, without leaving
themselves at liberty to examine their determinations, or judge whether they
were agreeable to the Word of God or no; and that upon refusal of this
Obedience, it was just to proceed to Excommunication. That this was exactly
what the Church of Rome would have, and that she desired no more; But that we
nevertheless in our disputes with her, advance a quite contrary Principle. He
therefore entreated from Mr. Claude a distinct answer to this Point, and would
quietly hear what he could say to it. Adding moreover, that Mr. Claude ought to
be the more ready to reply upon this subject, because no new thing was proposed
to him, the same Acts, and the same consequences that he now deduced from them,
being to be found in his Exposition of the Catholic Doctrine.

Mr. Claude first of all replied, That although his coming thither was not with
intentions to hold a Conference strictly, and by rule, yet he was extremely
glad that he had now an opportunity given him, of testifying to M. de Condom
how much he esteemed his person; and that having no particular worth of his
own, he thought it a great honor, that a Prelate of M. de Condom's Character
should single him out, to engage in Controversy with him. That he would
endeavor to give him satisfaction in each of the points now propounded to him;
and that, if in the following part of the Discourse any expression should
escape from him which might be offensive to M. de Condom, he protested
beforehand, that it should be much against his will and design.

To this M. de Condom replied in very civil and obliging terms; and Mr. Claude
then resuming the discourse, told him; That in general, whatever he had
alleged just before, did by no means infer such a blind and entire submission
to the determinations of Ecclesiastical Assemblies, as the Church of Rome
pretends to impose; That we must distinguish between two sorts of Authorities,
the one supreme and unlimited; the other limited and depending; to the former
we owe a full and perfect obedience; to the other a conditional one only. The
former M. de Condom was sensible, is by the Protestants attributed to God
alone, speaking to us in the Holy Scriptures; and that the second was it they
allowed the Pastors of the Church, considered either single and by themselves,
or met together in a Synod or Council. That their Authority, being only
Ministerial, is restrained two ways; one is, That they must frame their
decisions, not of their own heads, nor after their own fancies, but according
to the Word of God; the other, That they must always allow the persons under
their Jurisdiction the privilege of examining those decisions, that so they may
know, whether they be really agreeable to God's Word: Whence it follows, that
the obedience due to them ever goes upon this condition, that they have not
swerved from the Word of God; That the Authority of Pastors, and Assemblies
composed of such, cannot extend further, than that of our Parliaments in the
State of France, who are not empowered to alter old Laws, and enact new ones;
and whom we are privileged, nay, obliged to disobey, so often as their
Injunctions are prejudicial to the King's Service, and the Allegiance we owe
him: That the Authority of Church-Assembles can at most be, but as that of
Fathers over Children, because both God and Nature have invested Fathers with
it; The Fathers have a right to Act in their Childrens names, because they have
a right of Educating and Commanding them; and the Scripture frequently enjoins
to Children, a readiness to learn, and obedience to their Fathers; yet does it
not follow from hence, that Children are not privileged and obliged to examine
their Fathers Instructions and Commands, whether they be true or false, just or
unjust, and what shall appear to be false and unjust, that to reject. That
nevertheless the Authority of Pastors and their Assemblies, is really very
great, as is likewise that of Parliaments and Fathers, notwithstanding their
Authorities are under some limitations. That the Pastors are as public
Trustees for the keeping God's Word, appointed to study, and meditate upon it
continually, thence to deduce necessary truths for the peoples improvement, and
to save private men a labor, which they cannot always attend to, because
diverted and perplexed by the business of the World. That so long as the
Pastors discharged this Duty well, the people were obliged to obey and submit
to their words; but when they deviated from it, they were to be looked upon as
false and treacherous persons.

Afterward he came particularly to those Acts M. de Condom had urged, and told
him; That the Clause of Submission contained in the Letters Missive to National
Synods, must be understood according to this Principle, and under these
Limitations, because grounded upon this Supposal, That all things would be
managed there according to God's Word. For those expressions, Being persuaded,
that God will preside among you, and lead you into all Truth by his Holy
Spirit, and by the rule of his Word, do imply a persuasion of Charity and
Equity; for we ought always to presume the best of such Assemblies, and hope
that God will preside over them, and that they will acquit themselves of their
duty, till experience shows the contrary: But all this does not imply so entire
a submission, as for a Man to deprive himself of all right to examine their
Resolutions. As to that Act which condemns the Independents, it is (said he)
extremely Just. For tho Assemblies do not arrive at an Infallibility, yet are
not they presently to be utterly abolished. It Is a human Order indeed, but yet
such an Order as God himself has settled for the preservation of his Church,
and to desert it therefore is criminal. And yet we do not think it follows from
hence, that the determinations of the Assemblies exact a blind and implicit
Obedience; nor that the Synod of Charenton intended any such thing. And then
for the Synod at Saintefoy's deputing four persons to confer with those of the
Ausburg Confession, and the full power given them, you can make no advantage of
it. For those Deputies were in the nature of Ambassadors, who are sent by the
King with full Commission to offer Proposals, hold Treaties, and agree upon
Conclusions; or as Plenipotentiaries sent to negotiate a Peace. Let their power
be never so full, or call them Plenipotentiaries as long as you please, still
this condition is constantly and naturally understood, that they do nothing
against the interest of the persons that commissioned them, and to these their
Acts must of necessity return, for the obtaining their approbation and
ratification, without which their Treatings would signify nothing at all. And
this was the meaning of that full power conferred by the Synod upon their
Deputies, to hear those of the Confession of Ausburg, to hearken to their
Proposals, their Complaints, their Offers, and in return to make others to
them; to receive from them Explications of difficulties in Controversy, and to
give them back theirs; nay, to come to an agreement with them if they could,
yet not so, as either to become absolute Masters of their Faith, or blindly
receive whatever they should agree upon. For in all affairs of this kind, there
is naturally implied, a Clause of recurring to the Judgment of the persons
Commissioning, and a necessity of their ratifying them. Mr. Claude added
besides, this Consideration. Suppose the true sense of an Act of the Church of
Rome were called in Question, (a Canon of the Council of Trent for instance) M.
de Condom would think it more reasonable, that the sense should be taken from
him than Mr. Claude, because the Question is put concerning the sense of a
Church that M. de Condom is a Member of, and therefore in all probability he
must understand it better than one of another Church. Therefore, Sir, said he,
I expect the same Justice from you, in taking the sense of these Acts now in
Dispute from me, provided the sense I put upon them do not disagree with the
Doctors of my Communion, or be not manifestly false, and contradictory to the
rest of our Principles. Now if the sense I put upon these Acts be not any of
these, you have not, in my opinion, any right to refuse it, or to frame to your
self any other different from it.

M. de Condom replied, saying, that he would begin where Mr. Claude left off,
because that what he had urged just before, carried some appearance of Truth,
and made a quick impression upon the mind, but had not really any thing of
solid Argument in it. That, were the matter in hand any Explication of their
particular Rites and Ceremonies, in Preaching the Word, and Administering the
Sacraments, what Mr. Claude said might be allowed for Truth, and in that point
he would believe him, as a person better acquainted with the matter; Nay, that
he did not go about to debar him the liberty of explaining the sense of those
that compiled the Discipline and the forementioned Acts after his own way; That
he was sensible they denied an entire submission to the Church, and such as
precludes all Examination; But this he would say, that the very men who denied
this absolute submission in Speculation, were forced to own and establish it in
their practice. That so they contradicted themselves, and that this was the
thing he pretended to prove, and in which he was by no means bound to believe
Mr. Claude. For if the matter in hand now, were to demonstrate any
Contradictions in the opinions of the Catholic Church, he would not desire
that His Explications might be thought of Authority sufficient, nor deny Mr.
Claude the freedom of making what inferences he thought fit from the Council's
own words.

M. de Condom stopping there, Mr. Claude replied, That, since it was evident,
that the persons who made those Acts, denied any submission was due to the
determinations of Church Assemblies, without any Examination at all, the
advantage was thus far at least on his side, that M. de Condom himself had
acknowledged, His Explanation of those Acts was agreeable with the Principles
of the Protestants which made them, so that there was more reason for his
accepting that sense, than for the framing to himself another, and such a one
as contradicted these Principles; That, supposing the business in Controversy
to be an Act of the Romish Church, he should not scruple to admit M. de
Condom's explanation, provided the words of the Act did not oppose it, and in
that case he might be allowed to infer a Contradiction. That if M. de Condom
would proceed thus, as to the Acts before urged, he should be glad to see what
grounds he had for this pretended Contradiction.

M. de Condom said, this would easily be made appear. That he would show this
Contradiction with relation to their Discipline, which on one side ordains,
That differences in Doctrine should be decided in the Consistory by the Word of
God; that it was also her meaning, that this decision was made by the Word of
God in the Provincial Synod, as well as the National; and yet on the other
side, if men do not acquiesce in the determination of a Consistory, or a
Provincial Synod, it orders, things should continue as they were till a
National one be convened; in which it says, a full and final resolution shall
be given by the Word of God, and if they submit not to this, they shall be cut
off from the Church. Whence it is evident, that the submission required to a
National Synod, was not founded on the Word of God, considered abstractedly as
such, because both Consistory and Provincial Synod were supposed to determine
by the Word of God, and yet an Appeal from them was allowed; But that it was
founded on the Word of God, so far forth, as That was explained and interpreted
by the last judgment of the Church; that is, because this is the last and final
resolution; and consequently upon the Authority of the Assembly, considered by
it self. Now this, said he, evidently contradicts that Principle, which denies
there is an absolute submission due to the sentence of the Church. Of this the
Discipline it self was a confirmation, in that it appointed no Excommunication
for such as stood out against the determinations of a Consistory and Provincial
Synod, and yet did, for such as refused to submit to the decrees of a National
one.

The same (proceeded he) is plain from that Letter Missive to the National
Synod. For how can men promise and swear submission to whatever should be
agreed upon, and yet not suppose a full and perfect Submission owing to the
Church? To urge, this Submission proceeds from a persuasion, that God will
preside in it by his Spirit, and his Word; and to swear upon this account, is
to urge, that this persuasion is grounded upon God's express Promise, to direct
his Church in her last determination, by his Holy Spirit, and after an
Infallible manner. This very thing, said he, is plain from the National Synod
of Charenton's Act against the Independents. The Reason they make use of, that
suffering their Principle to take place, might produce as many several
Religions as Parishes, concludes for an absolute Obedience to the decisions of
Synods; since allowing private persons to examine the last determinations,
there might spring not only as many several Religions as Parishes, but as many
as there are persons, and consequently no means would be left for preserving
the unity either of the Faith, or of the Church.

For what relates to the Deputies nominated by the Synod of Saintefoy, to go
and confer with those of the Ausburg Confession; he said, he did sincerely
acknowledge, that the Synod, tho it gave them never so large a commission, did
not however intend it should ever be in their power to subvert all, and if I
may so say, to turn things topsy turvy; That he believed the Synods meaning was
really, that whatever was done by the Deputies should be referred to them, and
that there is a necessity all things of this nature should be ratified. But
still it was very amazing, and a thing which Mr. Claude had not answered to,
that they should proffer to insert their Deputies conclusions with the
Lutherans, in their public Confessions of Faith. For this argued them doubting
as to their Confession of Faith, which yet, they tell us, contains nothing but
the pure Word of God, and in that there can be nothing that requires a change,
etc. Do you think Sir said he, that the Articles of your Confession of Faith
may be changed?

When M. de Condom had left off speaking, Mr. Claude said, he would answer to
each particular of his discourse, and entreated he would please to hear him
quietly. And first of all he said, That M. de Condom put a wrong construction
upon that Article of the Discipline, which declares, that if men do not
acquiesce in the decisions of a Consistory, nor those of a Provincial Synod,
Things shall continue in the same posture, till a National one be convened, in
which a full and final resolution shall be given by the Word of God; and they
who refuse to acquiesce in This, shall be cut off from the Church. For the
reason of This, said he, is not, either that there ought not to be the same
care taken, that the Consistories, or Provincial Synods determinations should
be made by the word of God, as well as those of the National; nor that this
Word has not as much Authority at one time as another, whether declared in a
consistory, or Provincial Synod, or a National one; nor that a full and perfect
obedience is not due to this only, precisely considered as such: But this
method of proceeding (added he) was constituted for two reasons, very different
from what you pretend. First, because it is highly probable, that the search
made into Gods Word concerning the matter in controversy, may be less exact and
sagacious in a Consistory, than it would in a Synod composed of all the
Ministers in a whole Province; and so again by the same reason, less exact and
sagacious in a Provincial Synod, than in a National, which is usually made up
of all the most ingenious and learned men in the Kingdom. The other Reason is,
That men may possibly be prepossest against a Consistory, so as not to hearken
to it so readily and impartially as they should; which is not so likely in
respect of a Provincial Synod, which will be thought less apt to be swayed by
interest, passions or personal prejudices, and consequently they will be more
quietly heard; Lastly, these kind of passions and private Interests being still
less likely to happen in a National Synod, consisting of persons living remote
from one another, and coming from all quarters of the Kingdom, it is very
probable men will not be prepossest against them, and consequently, that they
will receive the Word of God at their mouths, that they will be more ready to
learn, and better disposed to obey them. He said therefore, that this method
was taken for the avoiding as much as was possible two inconveniences; one was
to prevent the last determinations being given lightly, inconsiderately, or
with any mixture of humane passion and Interest* The other, that the parties
concerned might not be hindered by any personal prejudices, from hearing and
receiving the Word of God, with that obedience and faithful submission which is
owing to it. But it could by no means be inferred from hence, that, according to
the meaning and intention of the Discipline, it was not always God's Word, as
such, but the Authority of the Assembly, to which that Obedience must be paid.
And moreover, that the decision of a National Synod, was for this reason
called, the last and final decision, because according to humane methods, and
the present course of things, there is nothing beyond it, to which we can have
recourse.

As for the Letter of Mission to the National Synods, he replied, that did not
infer an absolute submission, any more than the Act of their Discipline did,
because there was in it the express condition of Judging according to the Word
of God, in these words, Being persuaded, as we are, that God will pr^side over
you, by his Holy Spirit, and his Word.

As to the Reason which the Synod of Charenton urged against the Independents,
this, he said, did not at all imply a blind and implicit obedience. That the
dependence which particular Churches have upon Colloquies and Synods was an
external Order, which, tho it had not any sure and infallible means of
preserving the Church in the unity of the Faith, was however of mighty
convenience and use toward the doing it: And we ought always to take it for
granted, that God's Blessing will go along with it, as being an order
constituted by himself. That the Independents by throwing off this Order, do
deprive themselves of these means, and wilfully expose themselves to the great
inconvenience of having as many several Religions as Parishes; so that the
Synod had good grounds for upbraiding them with it, as they did. That the
Protestants principles were not liable to the same objection, who though they
disown a blind obedience, and entire submission, do yet retain such external
means as are most proper and expedient, for preserving the unity of the Faith.
And whereas M. de Condom pretended, that without entire obedience, it was
possible, that as many several Religions might start up as there are Parishes;
it is confessed, this may come to pass, if we speak with respect to men only,
notwithstanding the Order and Ecclesiastical Assemblies be kept up, because the
mind of man is of its self subject to infinite Errors. But in respect of God,
this cannot fall out so, for he, by his blessing on this external Order, and
the Communication of one and the same spirit to his true Believers and Elect,
does by this sure and infallible means preserve them in the unity of the same
Faith, and consequently of the same Church. That Faith being not an humane, but
a Divine thing, none but God alone can either produce, or preserve it in men's
hearts. And this he infallibly does in the hearts of his Elect, by his Spirit,
and such external means of the Ministry, as himself has appointed; 1 Cor. 36.
For Paul planteth, and Apollo waters, but God gives the increase.

Next he came to speak of the Deputies nominated by the Synod of Sainte-foy, to
confer with the Lutherans; and said, That he was extremely pleased, with what
M. de Condom had confessed even now, That they never intended to give them a
power of turning all things topsy turvey, as he had ingeniously expressed it; but
that recourse must be had to the persons commissioning, and their ratification
obtained. That he very humbly thankt him for this sincere acknowledgment,
which, as to this particular, resolved the whole Question, so that this Act
could not now be alleged any more, for the blind obedience pretended to be
inferred from it. That besides this, his accusation against the Synod, for
consenting to change their Confession of Faith, if taken in M. de Condom's
sense, vanished into nothing: For there ought a distinction to be made, between
what is essential in it, and what is not. The essential part of the Confession
consists in the things themselves* called Articles, or points of Faith; and
that which is not essential consists in the terms and modes of expression. That
the Synod had Authority to consent, that the expressions in the Confession
should be altered, that other things might be inserted which might illustrate
and explain it, if this appeared to be useful, for the reducing men that had
deviated from it: But the Synod never took upon them to alter any essential
part of the Confession, for it continues in this respect unalterable, so far
forth as it is agreeable to the Word of God.

Mr. Claude concluding his discourse, M. de Condom replied in the first place,
that, notwithstanding what Mr. Claude said a little before, concerning the
Order observed by the Discipline, it did however enjoin, that such as refused
to acquiesce in the decisions of a National Synod, should be cut off from the
Church; and that the Synod of Dort had actually cut off the Arminians; he
desired therefore to know of Mr Claude whether they were justly and lawfully
cut off. Mr. Claude answered, that in his opinion the Synod of Dorts
proceedings were very just. M. de Condom told him. This was all the Church of
Rome desired; that she also acknowledged her self under an Obligation to judge
according to the word of God, but this was not the matter in dispute. The main
business was about the Sense and Explanation of that word, and that it was the
Churches Province to give this Explanation, and private men's to rest satified
with it; and if they did not, the Church dealt justly in excommunicating them.
That it was thus the Protestants had been excommunicated in the Council of
Trent.

As concerning the Letter of Mission to the National Synods, is it not (said
he) a plain trick to swear Submission to them upon supposal or condition, that
their Determinations shall be agreeable to Gods word? This is all mere
trifling. What say you to it, Sir? Mr. Claude said, there was no trick at all,
and he could discover nothing that was irregular in it. If I have a right
notion of your Doctrine, replied M. de Condom, you hold, that a private Persons
may doubt of the Judgment of the Church, even when given in its last and
highest Court of Jurisdiction. We do hold, said Mr. Claude, that no man can
have an absolute certainty of Faith, that an Ecclesiastical Assembly shall give
right Determinations, and upon this account that men may be allowed to doubt.
But withal, that men should notwithstanding, presume in favor of such an
Assembly, and in this respect we cannot properly call it doubting, as hoping,
and believing that it will judge a right. For Jesus Christ has promised, all
that seek shall find, Mat. 7.
and we ought to take it for granted, that they will discharge their duty in
seeking aright, till Experience shows the contrary. There is therefore, an
assurance of Charity and Equity, that in some Sense excludes doubt. But when we
see Assemblies governed by Factions, Cabals, and temporal Interests, then sure
we have a great deal of reason to doubt; as seeing men that have forsaken their
Duty, and consequently are such, as cannot hope for any advantage from the
blessing of God upon them. Let me beg of you Sir, said M. de Condom then, That
we may let alone what is good for nothing, but to cast dust in our Eyes. What
you said just now of Cabals and Factions, and private Interests, is of no use
in the World, and only serves to perplex the matter. I would know of you, put
the case there appeared nothing at all of Factions, Cabals, nor Interest in an
Assembly; but that all their proceedings were orderly, and regular; whether its
Decisions ought to be received without examining them? No Sir, said Mr. Claude.
Why then Sir, said he, I was in the right, to tell you that all your talk of
Factions and Cabals signifies nothing. That does not follow neither (replied
Mr. Claude) for notwithstanding there appear not any thing to weaken a man's
Presumptions, that the Assembly will discharge their duty faithfully; and that
for ought we can discover to the contrary, all things are carried regularly;
yet, still this is no more than a humane Presumption, not able to give any
certainty of belief, and consequently not precluding our Examination. But when
we see Disorder and Corruption manifestly prevail in an Assembly, we can no
longer presume in favor of such a one, and instead of hoping the best, we must
fear the worst that can come from it. So that it is not without ground, that I
spoke of Cabals and Factions. Here M. de Condom resuming the former method of
his Discourse, said, It was false that the Independents did absolutely throw
off all Ecclesiastical Assemblies; for they themselves held one, he said, at
London in the year 1653. so that the Synod of Charenton could not condemn them
upon that account; but merely for refusing to acknowledge that an entire
Dependence and Submission was owing to Synods.

As for the Synod of Sainte-foy, proceeded he, if all the business had been no
more than illustrating and explaining their Articles, as Mr. Claude would have
it, what need these have been inserted in the Confession of Faith? Could not
this be done by an Act of a Synod without altering the Confession? It is sure
their design was to express that Article concerning the Lord's Supper in such
ambiguous terms as both sides had agreed upon, and each might interpret to his
own advantage, which has been an expedient often attempted, but to no purpose.
Now this is in reality, not barely to explain and illustrate the Confession of
Faith, and by that means settle a mutual Toleration, but down right to alter
it. And now (added he) all that men have to do is but to consider with
themselves what opinion they ought to entertain of a Confession of Faith, which
a whole National Synod consented to alter. That the matter between Mr. Claude
and him, was at last come to such a pass, that the truth must presently appear
on one side or other. That the Principle asserted by Mr. Claude was a Principle
of Pride and intolerable Presumption. For is not this the very extremity of
Pride, that mere single private Persons should fancy themselves wiser and
better able to understand the Scripture than a whole Ecclesiastical Assembly, a
whole Council put together? And yet this was the unavoidable consequence of his
opinion, which allowed private Persons a Privilege and Freedom to examine the
decisions of Councils. That an entire submission to the Church's judgment, and
a full and implicit Obedience to that, was much more reasonable, and argued
more of Christian Humility, than men's taking upon them to amend its Decisions.

It being now Mr. Claude's turn to speak, he told them, That their Discipline
did indeed order such as refused submission, to be Excommunicated, after the
last and final resolution had been given according to the Word of God in a
National Synod Assembled: But it was no part of the Discipline's meaning that
this submission was due to the Authority of that Assembly abstractedly and as
such; but, as he had before observed, to the Authority of Gods Word, according
to which the Assemblies decision was to be formed, and this ever implies an
Examination. The Excommunication therefore was just only upon supposal, that
the Word of God had been followed, and never else. That the Excommunications
pronounced by Councils had not really any thing of Justice or Efficacy, except
when their determinations were founded on God's Word; and when they were not
so, their sentences of Excommunication were unjust, and returned directly upon
the head of those that thundered them out, according to St. Paul's Maxim, If
we, Gal. 1. 2.
or an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel unto you than that which we
have preached unto you, let him be accursed. That, if the Church of Rome
pretended to no more than this, our dispute with her would be at an end;
because then every man would still be privileged, nay, obliged to examine
whether the Decisions be agreeable to God's Word or no; and consequently
whether the Excommunications upon them be just or unjust. That it was with this
temper of mind that the Synod of Dort had condemned, not the men whose Persons
they never anathematized at all, but their Errors, by demonstrating they were
contrary to express Texts of Scripture. That for his own part, he looked upon
that as a very just Excommunication, but the reason why he did so, was, that he
saw it was founded upon Scripture, and not upon the Authority of the Assembly
themselves.

That it was true the Independents had once an extraordinary Assembly in the
Year 1653. for the adjusting their Confession of Faith; but however they did
commonly disavow the use of Colloquies and Synods; and for this very reason the
Synod of Charenton condemned them, and not for refusing a blind and absolute
Obedience to what the Assemblies should decree in matters of Faith, as by the
Act it self is abundantly evident.

For the Synod of Sainte-Foy, I cannot imagine (said he) why you will needs
have it to intend an alteration in the Confession of Faith, I mean as to any
essential part of it; for National Synods are not at all empowered to do this,
and if that at Sainte-Foy had ever attempted it, all the Protestants in the
Kingdom would have disclaimed the thing. I own they had power to put
illustrations and explanations into an Act, and you must own too, that they had
the same power to put them into the Confession; and when the same thing is
capable of being done different ways, men are free to make choice of that which
they esteem the most fitting and convenient. Here M. de Condom interrupting Mr.
Claude, told him, it was certain that Synod had thoughts of couching the
Article of the Lord's Supper in ambiguous expressions, and this was the design
of the Mediators. That there was mentioned a power to decide all points of
Doctrine, which had a manifest relation to the Real Presence, as held by the
Lutherans. Mr. Claude replied, that to tax the Synod with a design of agreeing
upon ambiguous expressions, was a mere conjecture of M. de Condom, for which he
offered not the least proof; and that he for his part guessed the quite
contrary; that he did not at all question but the Synod intended to do all that
could be done for reducing the Lutherans to a full knowledge of the truth; and
this was the meaning of that power given them to decide all Doctrinal Points
with them, that is, to do it by the Word of God.

Then resuming the method of his Discourse, he made answer to what M. de Condom
alleged, that it was intolerable Pride for mere single private Persons to
fancy themselves wiser and better able to understand Scripture than a whole
Ecclesiastical Assembly together. He told him then, that single and private
Persons ought by no means to think so highly of themselves, as to fancy they
were wiser and better able to understand Scripture than a whole Assembly
together. That on the contrary, they should presume favorably of an Assembly,
and retain a disposition to be taught by it. But still this was no Argument,
that they should not continually have their Eyes open to discern whether an
Assembly had really discharged their duty: imitating herein those ^eraeans, of
whom it is said, that they compared what St. Acts 17. 11.
Paul Preached with the Scriptures, searching whether those things were so.
That we must distinguish between a Judgment of humility and charity, which
concludes (...) probably, and a persuasion of Infallibility, which concludes
necessarily and certainly. Th^^ according to the Judgment of Charity and
Humility, we must think the best of an Assembly, nay even of a private Doctor;
but in as much as both Assemblies, and private persons, are liable to mistakes,
a man must not carry on this Judgment of Charity and Humility so far as that he
should suffer himself to be blinded by it; and when an Assembly or Doctor have
really erred, not to see it; for this would be to stretch things beyond their
due bounds. For instance, said he, in the capacity I am in over my Flock, it is
men's duty to presume favorably of me, that I understand the meaning of
Scripture better than plain private Persons; but for all that, they are by no
means bound to think me infallible, nor fancy it impossible I should ever be
mistaken in a point of Doctrine; and in such a case a plain private Person is
privileged to think he could understand the Scripture better than I. Private
Doctors, says Al de Condom, are not at all concerned in our Dispute, all the
World knows private Doctors may err, and consequently they can have no title to
an absolute obedience. The Controversy is concerning the whole Body of an
Ecclesiastical Assembly, and I expect from you a clear distinct answer to this
particular; whether you believe single private men can understand the meaning
of Scripture better than the whole Body of the Church convened in a Council.

Mr. Claude replied, That he only mentioned private Doctors as an Argument that
Christian Humility should not be abused, nor made a pretense for men to deny
themselves the benefit of their own Eyes, that so they might avoid Pride and
Presumption. For, if by M. de Condom's own Confession, private Doctors have no
right to an absolute Obedience, it is neither a proud, nor presumptuous
Imagination, that it may possibly happen, we should understand Scripture
sometimes better than they; tho for the main we are bound to presume in favor
of them, and that in probability it will be otherwise. The case is the same
with Assemblies; for even these, being not Infallible, ought not to challenge
an absolute Submission, and such as God alone has a just right to. That no
less a Person than St. Paul has declared, 2 Cor. 1. 24.
That he had no Dominion over the Corinthians Faith.

M. de Condom said, that quotation was impertinent, and desired to know of Mr
Claude, whether he was not of opinion, that an absolute obedience was due to
St. Paul. The absolute obedience (replied Mr. Claude) which was due to St.
Paul, was so to his Divine Doctrines, and not his person. No more, said M de
Condom, do we pretend, that men ought to pay this obedience to the persons of
men whereof the Councils consist, but to the Holy Ghost, by which they are
guided, according to that profession of the Council at Jerusalem, It seemed
good unto the Holy Ghost, Acts 15.
and to us. When the Holy Ghost appears in the determinations of Councils, as
he did in St. Paul's Doctrine, and that of the Jerusalem Council, then said Mr.
Claude, this Obedience must be paid, never else. And this appearance of the
Holy Ghost consists in the Councils decisions, being framed according to the
Word of God. Still M. de Condom urged. that the dispute was not concerning the
Word of God, but the true meaning of that Word. That distinction, says Mr.
Claude, signifies nothing at all, because the true meaning of the Word of God,
and the Word it self, are but one and the same thing.

Then M. de Condom returned to the business of the Independents, and urged,
that according to Mr. Claude's principle, there was no remedy for the avoiding
Independency, nor any prevention, that there should not be as many different
Religions as Parishes, nay, as many as there be single persons. That the
Independents did not cast off Assemblies, so far as concerned instruction, only
they did not allow them in any Authoritative decisions, and that in this the
Pretended Reformed agreed with them. He beat upon this over and over again for
a long time together, to all which Mr. Claude returned the same answer he had
done before, viz. That there was not indeed any humane means of Certainty and
Infallibility, which could prevent the exorbitant errors of men's minds; but
there was a certain and infallible Divine one, even the Holy Spirit of God,
imparted to his True Believers; That Synods and other Assemblies, were means of
mighty use, and very proper for this purpose, and the Independents condemnation
was for rejecting these last, and not for refusing to Assemblies a full and
Absoute Power of determining matters in Controversy. That although the
Protestants did not allow such Assemblies a supreme and unbounded Authority,
yet they did allow them as much, as the Ministers and Dispensers of God's Word
are capable of.

At this rate, said M. de Condom then, we shall never have done disputing. I
ask you therefore once more, Sir, whether you believe that single and private
persons can understand the meaning of God's Word, better than the whole Church
convened in Council? Mr Claude told him, he had answered that Question already,
to wit, that it does not usually fall out so; and that further, it is our duty
to hope the best of an Ecclesiastical Assembly; but still it might come to
pass, that through the prevalency of men's passions, and worldly Interests, the
decisions of such Assemblies might be contrary to Truth. You must not run back
thus to Interests and Passions, said M. de Condom, but answer my question in
one word, by saying either Yes, or No. Men's Passions, and worldly Interests,
said Mr. Claude, are premised here with a great deal of Reason, because these
are the main things that occasion erroneous determinations; but since you are
not willing to hear of them, my answer must be with this distinction, That God
does not suffer it commonly so to be, but absolutely speaking, it is possible
it should be so, M. de Condom said, that was as much as he desired, and that it
was the most absurd thing in the World, to believe it so much as possible, for
a single Man, and a private person, to understand the meaning of Scripture
better than the whole Church met together in Council.

Mr. Claude replied, that he was amazed to hear M. de Condom cry out upon That
as such a mighty absurdity, which resulted merely from the freedom used by God
in dispensing his Grace. That supposing the Controversy to concern such means
of knowledge as are purely humane. it would indeed be absurd to say, that a
single and private person should be wiser than a whole Assembly, and that this
would be then a principle of pride and presumption. But the matter now treated
of is, Joh. 3. 8.
the illumination of the Holy Spirit, which blows where it lists, and God
can give it to a private single person, and yet not give it to a whole
Assembly. That of this there was an eminent instance in our Saviors time,
Matt. 11. 215.
as he himself said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, for that
thou have bid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them
unto babes. That the whole Jewish Church had in their Assemblies declared Jesus
Christ a Deceiver. That nevertheless this was not only a Church, but the one
sole Church in the World at that time, invested with the Authority of God, who
had founded, nourisht, and brought it up till that time. That God had taught it
by his Prophets, and depesited his Holy Oracles there. That this Church laid a
just claim to a succession of Two thousand years continuance, and valued her
self upon it. That she held formal solemn Assemblies, and such as Jesus Christ
himself acknowledged. They sit, Matt. 23. 2, 3.
says he, in Meses seat, All therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that
observe and do. And yet this very Church determined the greatest and most
heinous Error that ever could be in the World, even that Jesus Christ was to be
rejected as a wicked man and a Deceiver. That we cannot avoid affirming that at
that time si^gle and private persons might understand the Scripture better than
the whole Body of the Church met together; and that in allowing M. de Condom's
Principle to be true, viz. That men ought to yield an absolute obedience to the
decisions of Ecclesiastical Assemblies, without taking upon them a right to
examine what is so decided; we do condemn Jesus Christ, and as many as then
believed in him. For according to this principle, Jesus Christ ought not any
more to have taught the people publicly, after the Church had past such
decisions against him, nor ought the people to have given him their attention
any more, because they were not suffered to examine those decisions. And yet,
proceeded he, Jesus Christ did not forbear Preaching to the people, and
converting many of them; nor did they withdraw their attention, not
withstanding all the decisions given against him. This principle then of a
blind and implicit obedience, is consequently false, and contrary to the
conduct of Jesus Christ and his Disciples.

To preclude this Argument, by urging that Jesus Christ wrought such miracles
as did evidence his Authority to be Divine, is here of no significancy at all.
2 Thessalonians. 2
For there are two sorts of Miracles, the one true, the other false; the one,
that men may believe a lie, the other to convince them of the truth. This
distinction was made by God himself in the 13th Chapter of Deuteronomy, where
he tells the Israelites, That if a Prophet give them a sign or a wonder, and
would persuade them to go after other Gods. They must not hearken unto him, for
the Lord their God proves them. Jesus Christ also has himself owned the truth
of this distinction. Now, said he, if M. de Condom's principle had taken place,
the people had nothing to do to make this distinction, after once the Church
had determined that Jesus Christ wrought his Miracles by the help of Beelzebub,
and not by the Power of God. They must not any more, according to M. de Condom,
so much as open their eyes to see these Miracles, or suffer the least
impression to be made upon themselves by them. And by consequence this
principle is false, and destructive of the Christian Religion.

Hereupon M. de Condom interrupted Mr. Claude, telling him, that this Instance
of the Jewish Church ought not to have been produced in the present case. For,
said he, the Synagogue was to fall, thus the Prophets had foretold, and
therefore the people ought not then to pay such an obedience to their Guides,
as is now owing to the Church of Christ, which must never fail: To which Mr.
Claude returned, That seeing the Synagogue was to fall, it might consequently
so fall out, that single and private persons should understand the meaning of
Scripture better than the whole body of a Church met together in its solemn
Assemblies, which was the very point in debate; and from hence it follows
clearly, that it was neither pride, nor presumption, for private people, either
to believe it possible for them at some time to understand Scripture better
than the whole Body of an Assembly; nor upon this principle to take their
decisions into examination. And that this was all he desired.

Besides, said he, This Reason could have no manner of influence upon the Jews,
because the Synagogue were not only not agreed upon it, but quite contrary,
asserting that it should never fail, they produced in their own behalf several
promises, which, at first blush, seemed to have a great deal of strength. It Is
but lost labor to urge in defense of this, the Prophets who foretold its fall;
for the meaning of those Prophesies was the thing then in question, and the
Synagogue having explained these in a sense that made for them, according to M.
de Condom's principle, it was the people's duty to stick close to that
explanation, without examining it at all. In a word (said he) this fall of the
Synagogue, does not make their Assemblies differ at all from those of the
Christian Church, with relation to the matter now in dispute between us. For
what Promises soever the Church of Jesus Christ may have, that she shall
subsist for ever, there is not any thing in Scripture gives us assurance, that
the Assemblies of Councils shall never fail.

Here M. de Condom took up the Discourse, and said, That Mr. Claude's Argument
concerning the time of the Synagogues fall, was the most impertinent thing in
the World. For at that time it could not be said that there was any visible
Authority upon Earth, to which men were necessarily obliged to submit; because
Jesus Christ himself was there, that is, the very Truth appearing visibly among
men, to whom God had given testimony from Heaven, and who wrought Miracles. Do
but you, proceeded he, bring again Jesus Christ Teaching, Preaching, doing
Miracles among us, and we shall have no further occasion for the Churches
Authority. My Argument, said Mr. Claude, was not only the most pertinent to our
present purpose, but the clearest and most concluding Argument in the World;
and I hope you your self will grant it to be so, after I have entreated you to
consider, that the visible Authority of the Son of God was the very point in
dispute between the Synagogue and Jesus Christ, and that this very point the
Synagogue had determined in the negative; That the main business was to know,
whether Jesus Christ were a Deceiver or not, whether his Miracles proceeded
from God or Beelzebub. That Jesus Christ's visible Authority could not decide
that question in the peoples minds; for no Authority can decide a doubt till it
be first received; and Jesus Christ's Authority was not as yet received, for
the main controversy then depending was, whether it should be received, or
rejected: So that there remained only the Authority of the Church, and this had
determined against him. According then to M. de Condom's Principles, private
persons ought consequently to have stuck to that, and rejected Jesus Christ. M.
de Condom called this Argument of Mr. Claude's a Jewish Argument. Mr. Claude
returned, that this ought not to be called a Jewish Argument, because it
concluded in favor of Christianity; but the contrary principle rather deserved
this name, because it favored the Cause and proceedings of the Jews.

Afterward Mr. Claude said, That if he would have recourse to History, it will
be no difficult matter to demonstrate, that many Councils have fallen into
Error, and been mistaken in their Determinations. Particularly among others,
the Council of Arimini, which condemned the Consubstantiality of the Son, that
is, his Eternal Divinity. M. de Condom cried out, Whether are you carrying us
now, Sir? To the Council of Arimini? When shall we have done, if all those
Histories must be discust? Do not you know that the Council of Arimini was a
forced, packt Assembly? You urge my very argument for me, said Mr. Claude,
which is, that a General Council may be packt. Here is an instance of one,
consisting of four hundred Bishops that was so. M de Condom answered, That
those Bishops were compelled by the Emperors Authority, who had sent Soldiers
among them; but afterward, when they were every one returned home, they
disclaimed what had been done, and expressed their remorse for it. Mr. Claude
replied, That many of them, it was true, did acknowledge they had done amiss;
but that very acknowledgment of, and repentance for a Fault, which M. de Condom
affirms they showed, is a Confirmation of their committing it; and it is of no
great moment to know, upon what motives they committed it, since it is plain,
that it was really committed. And further, every particular man's returning
from his Error, is a plain Indication, that each of them thought himself under
no Obligation of acquiescing in what had been determined, when they were all
met together in Council.

M. de Condom cried out, That there was no necessity of meddling with all these
Historical Points, and that it would divert them too much from the main
business. There is, says he, an easier way of deciding the matter. The Subject
of our Controversy, is the first Principle of Faith in particular Persons. This
in your Opinion is the Holy Scripture; in ours, the Churches Authority. Put the
case in a young Child, who has been baptized, but has not yet read the
Scripture; I would know by what Principle this Child believes the Scripture to
be Divine; Particularly the Book of Canticles for instance, which has not a
word of God in it. Now this Child who is a Christian, who has received the
Holy Ghost, and Faith conveyed into him by Baptism, and who is a member of the
Church, does either doubt of the Scriptures Divine Authority, or he does not;
If he does not doubt, then he believes it Divine upon the Churches Authority,
which is the first Authority he lives under. If he does doubt, then a man may
be a Christian, and yet doubt whether the Scripture be true.

Mr. Claude returned, That he could say something to that supposal of M. de
Condom, That every baptized Child receives the Holy Ghost; but was unwilling to
stay upon a thing by the by, or deviate from the main matter in dispute. He
would therefore satisfy himself, with making a few Reflections upon what M. de
Condom urged last. The first said he, is, That the first knowledge of the
Catholic Church given by the Holy Spirit to this Child, is in all probability
given by his Creed, where he finds I believe the Holy Catholic Church. And yet
in the Creed, that Article is placed after several other Articles of Doctrine.
For it begins with God the Father Almighty, goes on with the Son Jesus Christ,
and the Holy Ghost, and after these comes in the Catholic Church. Now this is
a manifest proof, that the belief of Doctrines is not wholly derived from the
Churches Authority, for else the Creed ought to be put together after another
method, and the first thing said, should be, I believe the Catholic Church,
and by the Catholic Church, I believe in God the Father, and so on.

My second Reflection, said he, is, That you ought not to take it for granted,
as you do, that the first Authority a Child begins to live under, is that of
the Catholic Church. It being manifest, That the first Authority a Child lives
under, is his Father or Mother, or if you please his Nurses; and that the
Churches cannot take place till afterward, but does in some measure depend
upon the other. The Consequence whereof is, That the first Authority, which is
the Paternal, can as well lead the Child to Scripture, as it can to the Church.

Then, Thirdly, said he, It is the easiest thing in the World to retort your
own Argument back upon your self, thus; The baptized Child either doubts of the
Churches Authority, or he does not; if he does not, then he believes it upon
the Authority of Scripture, for there is no other way for him to believe it
with a Divine Faith: And consequently, it is not the Church that induces men to
believe Scripture, but Scripture that induces the belief of the Church, which
is the thing we contend for. If he does doubt, then there is a Christian that
has received the Holy Spirit, and Faith conveyed to him by Baptism, and is a
Member of the Church, and yet is in a state of doubt which is that first
Authority whereupon all the rest of his Faith depends. Now that the Child
cannot with a Divine Faith believe the Churches Authority any other way, but by
the Authority of Scripture, I prove thus. If it be not by Scripture that he
believes the Church and its Authority; then it is either by way of immediate
Inspiration, and Enthusiasm, or by his Fathers, or Mothers, or Nurses
Authority, or by Argument taken from the very nature of the Church. This could
not be by Enthusiasm, because the Holy Ghost does not proceed in such a method.
Nor by his Fathers, or Mothers or Nurses Authority, for you discern the
inconveniences of advancing such kinds of Authority for the first Principle of
Faith. Nor can it be by proper Proofs and Arguments taken from the nature of
the Church; because as you in your Argument suppose the Child not yet to have
read the Scripture; so do I likewise in mine, suppose him not to have
considered the nature of the Catholic Church, and to know no more of it, than
barely the Name. It remains therefore, that the Child either believes the
Catholic Church by the Scripture, which you will not grant; or that he does
not believe it at all, but doubts of it; and so you ^all into the same
inconvenience as to the Church, which you labor to reduce me to, with relation
to Scripture.

It may be said very truly, That upon this Pinch a man might discern M. de
Condom's Wit was not in the condition it used to be, and that his natnral
freedom of Argument and Repartee, plainly slagg'd. He put himself upon
maintaining that the first Authority the Child lived under, was that of the
Church, and not his Fathers or Mothers. Mr. Claude returned, That this was a
thing too evident to be denied, that the Fathers and Mothers, and those who
take the first pains about educating the Child. is the first Authority with
respect to Religion, and that he must at first of all learn from them, that
there is such a thing as a Catholic Church, into which he must enter himself,
or such a thing as the Scripture, which was from God and to which he must yield
Obedience. That being upon enquiry by what mean the Child can come to believe
the Catholic Churches Authority, there is a necessity for fixing, either upon
Inspiration, or the Paternal Authority, or the Scriptures, which informed him
concerning it. M. de Condom answered, That the Child's Faith in the Churches
Authority was a Divine Faith, because it was the Holy Ghost that wrought it in
him. Mr. Claude replied, That the question was not concerning the efficient
Cause, which produced this Faith in the Child, but concerning the Motive or
Argument, by which it was produced. If M. de Condom's meaning were, that the
Holy Ghost wrought Faith in this Child, without any Argument or Motive at all,
this were a sort of Enthusiasm, and the Holy Ghost does not Influence People at
that rate. M. de Condom said, there were indeed Motives of Credibility. Mr.
Claude returned hereupon, That if he would allow the Child so much time, as to
examine those Motives of Credibility for the Authority of the Church, and
perceive their strength, He himself would in like manner allow the same Child
time to examine the Motives of Credibility for the Authority of Scripture, and
perceive the strength of them; but in this case he must forego his Argument,
which proceeds upon a Supposition, that the Child never yet read the Scripture.

But, is not this true, said M. de Condom, That in these circumstances the
Child either does or does not doubt of the Scriptures being Divine? And is it
not as true, said Mr. Claude, That in these Circumstances, the Child either
does, or does not doubt of the Churches Authority? For if you take the Child
before he have read the Scripture, I will look upon him too, before he knows
what Motives of Credebility there are for the Churches Authority. It is your
part to answer my Argument, and the very same answer you give, will serve me
against yours. But do you, as you think fit; I however will not scruple to give
a direct answer to your way of reasoning. The Child then may be looked upon with
Distinction, as to three several times; either, before his Father have ever
showed him the Bible, and informed him that this Book came from God, or after
his Father have told him thus much, but before he himself have read it; or
lastly, after that he has read the Book himself. As to the first of these
times, which is that your Argument looks upon him in, it cannot well be said,
that then he either does or does not doubt, for neither the one, nor the other
is strictly true, according to your meaning. Not to doubt of any thing,
signifies to be well assured of it. Now, before a man can be said, to doubt, or
to be well assured that any thing is so, or so; he must first have some
knowledge of the thing it self. I can neither doubt nor be assured, that such a
Person is King of Spain, unless I first have some knowledge of the Person. So
that your reasoning is by no means good, that a Child either does, or does not
doubt of the Scripture's being Divine: For there is a medium between these two,
to wit, such as consists in a state called, An Ignorance of pure negation. He
knows not as yet what the Scripture is, nor has ever heard talk of it. To
doubt, or not doubt whether Scripture be Divine, a Man must have some knowledge,
and form some Idea of the thing: But the Child can never form any Idea of a
Book he never heard once mentioned. At the second point of time, when his
Father has showed him the Bible, and told him, that Book is the Word of God,
but the Child has not yet read it himself; he believes it to be the Word of
God, but this he does, not by a Divine, but humane Faith, because his Father
has told him so: And this is the case of a Catechumen. At the third point of
time, when he is supposed to have read the Book himself, and felt the virtue
and efficacy of it, he believes it to be God's World, but this he does not now
by a humane Faith, because his Father told him so, but by a Divine Faith,
because he has found the Divinity and Efficacy of it upon himself; and this is
the condition of a Believer.

M. de Condom laid hold of the word Catechumen, and said, that this was a
Christian, one already Baptized, and actually admitted into Covenant with God.
Mr. Claude answered, that by the word Catechumen he meant nothing else but a
Child after Baptism, at the time of his being instructed in the first Rudiments
of Religion. M. de Condom beat again upon almost the same things that had been
said before, constantly affirming it to be the Churches Authority, that the
Child received the Scriptures as Divine; and that having received them as such
from the Church, he did afterward receive the meaning and interpretation of
them from thence also.

Pray, Sir, tell me, said Mr. Claude then, when a Child learns at first of all,
that there is a Catholic Church, Is it barely a general Idea, which consists
in knowing only that there is such a thing as a Catholic Church, without
knowing where, or which it is? or does it determine him to that Church whose
public Assemblies he sees? For if it be the former of these, this, as you
would make it, is a mighty wild and insignificant principle of Faith. I know
that there is a Catholic Church to whose Authority it is my duty to submit,
but I cannot tell where that Church is, nor which is she; this would be but an
odd principle of Faith. The Child, said M. de Condom, does certainly determine
this Idea to the particular Church, whose Assemblies he sees, and in which he
himself bears a part, and does believe that to be the Catholic Church, and not
barely that there is such a Church. Let us imagine then, said Mr. Claude, a
Child born within a Church that is Heretical, or Schismatical, the Ethiopian
Church suppose, the first principle of Faith in this Child will be from the
Ethiopian Church, looking upon that as the Catholic. From this Church then,
and from her Authority, according to your Tenet, he will receive the Scripture
as Divine; from her likewise he will receive the meaning and interpretation of
Scripture; and he must never afterward believe himself privileged to examine
the determinations of his Aethiopick Church, for fear of falling into the
inconvenience and absurdity of fancying it impossible for him, a private single
person, to understand the true meaning of Scripture better than the whole body
of the Church. Tell me now, Sir, whether according to this principle, this
Child be not obliged always to abide within that Heretical, or Schismatical
Church? Tell me what means you will contrive for him to get out of it? It is
evident then, that your principle would serve as well to continue a Jew in his
Judaism, a Pagan in his Heathenism, and a Heretic in his Heresy, as an
Orthodox Christian in the true Church.

To this M. de Condom replied, that in the persuasion of that Ethiopian Child,
we must make a difference between that part which proceeded from the Holy
Spirit, and that which is the effect of prejudice and humane prepossession.
That the Holy Spirit's dictate was in general, that there was a Catholic
Church somewhere or other; but his supposal, that the Church in which he was
born was that Catholic Church, proceeded from humane prepossession. It is
true, he did from this Church receive the Scriptures, and belived them to be
Divine, for no other reason but upon its Authority: But afterward, as he was
reading the Scriptures, the Holy Ghost raised in him some scruples about the
Church he was born in, and by this means he came off from the Heresy and Schism
he found himself ensnared in.

Mr. Claude returned, that M. de Condom must of necessity either retract his
principle, or confess what he now alleged to be utterly impossible. Because
this Ethiopian neither can, nor must be allowed to understand the Scriptures
any otherwise than in the sense and interpretation of his own Church, by whose
Authority it is that he believes them to be Divine, and from whose hands he
receives their meaning; so that when he reads Scripture, there can never start
up any scruples in his mind against the truth of his own Church, because he
never expounds any Text of Scripture but in agreement with the sense of that
Church about it. Now if on the other side your meaning be, that this person
expounds Scripture of his own head, and according to his own judgment, so
taking it in a sense different from that of the Church, you at the same time
make him forego the principle that you have all this while been contending for;
and it is not you only that make him forego it, but you do besides maintain,
that the Holy Ghost himself makes him forego it, and all those mighty
inconveniences you exclaimed against, vanish into nothing. He added moreover,
that what M. de Condom said last, justified the measures the Protestants had
taken in relation to the Church of Rome; for although that had been believed to be
the Catholic Church in the time of our Infancy, tho we had received the
Scriptures from her, and believed them to be of Divine Authority; yet must we
not be blamed for making a difference between that part of this belief which
proceeded from the Holy Ghost, and that which was the effect of humane
Prepossession and Prejudice: We cannot be found fault with, for having admitted
some Scruples against the Truth of this Church, as we read the Scriptures, and
for having upon this accout withdrawn our selves from her Communion.

M. de Condom said, the Cases did still differ in this circumstance, That the
Ethiopian, when he left his own, would betake himself to the Catholic Church,
whereas the Pretended Reformed have not put themselves into any other Communion
at all. You courted indeed Jeremy's the Patriarch of Constantinople, but he
would have nothing to do with you. The separation was not from our selves, said
Mr. Claude, and that is enough to show that we have not separated from the true
Church. If Jeremy the Patriarch of Constantinople would have nothing to do with
us, as you say, that was to his own loss, and he did not do as he should have
done in it.

Upon this the Company rose, and the Conference which lasted some time longer,
grew a great deal more confused; several things were then spoken of. M. de
Condom exaggerated much, and pretended to draw a parallel between the
separation of the Protestants, and that of the old Heretics, particularly the
Arrians and Macedonians, that set up new Churches by themselves. Mr. Claude
compared the Protestants behavior, to that of Christ's Apostles, when they
separated from the Jews; that, as the Apostles relied on Scripture against the
Jews, who relied upon Ecclesiastical Assemblies and their Authority, the
Protestants did the same against the Church of Rome. He said, the Arrians
maintained, that the Consubstantiality of the Son of God determined by the
Nicene Council, was a Novel Doctrine, and that many other persons had in truth
expressed themselves very unadvisedly concerning the Divinity of the Son; among
others he instanced in Origea, Justin Martyr, and the Council of Antioch. As
for Origin, M. de Condom said he was a suspected Author, and the Council of
Antioch said he, was an Arrian Council; to which Mr. Claude replied, that he
was much mistaken; for that Council was held before Arrius his time, and yet
rejected the Term Consubstantial. As to Justin Martyr, How, Sir, said he, a
Martyr speak amiss of the Divinity of the Son of God! I will never believe a
word on it. You may believe what you think sit, Sir, said Mr. Claude; but for
all that, the thing is even so.

Afterward M. de Condom put himself upon the Invocation of Saints, and Prayers
for the Dead: For the first of these, he told them Mr. Daille had allowed it to
be Thirteen hundred years old; and Mr. Blondell acknowledged the second to be
of great Antiquity. Mr. Claude replied, it was no great wonder, if the Church
of Rome, which had collected, and Cononized the Errors and Superstitions of
former Ages, had picked up some that were of a good old standing. But he ought
to have said withal, that Mr. Daille had made it appear, that for Three hundred
years together there was not to be found the least footsteps of Invocation of
Saints, and especially, that there was not any manner of ground for it in
Scripture. That he acknowledged Prayer for the Dead to be one of the oldest
superstitions; but there was a mighty difference between the practice of the
Primitive Christians, and the modern devotions of the Romish Church. And after
all, it was an Error contrary to the principles of Scripture.

M. de Condom betook himself again to the Comparison between the Protestants
and Heretics of old; inferring from thence, that they and their Church was new
and upstart. Mr. Claude showed him, that this prejudice was extremely unjust,
and of very pernicious consequence. Unjust, because on one hand it placed the
advantage on the strongest side, and those that have most of their party;
whereas the Scripture teaches us quite contrary, Exodus 23.
That we must not follow a multitude to do evil: For the strongest side are
continually taxing others with making a new Body, and a new Church. Unjust,
secondly, because a false Antiquity may be mistaken for a true, an Antiquity of
some Ages standing, which is really no better than a Novelty, for an Antiquity
of all Ages of the Church; which in the business of Religion is the highest
injustice imaginable. He added moreover, that this prejudice was of very
pernicious consequence; because at this rate, when once Errors and
Superstitions had by insensible degrees crept into Religion, and Custom, or the
Schools had given them countenance, there would no possible means be left of
exposing or extirpating them: For the maintainers of them will be continually
objecting against those that endeavor it, that they set up a new Church, and a
new Religion. Thus it was, Matt. 15.
that the Pharisees accused Jesus Christ for an Innovator, upon pretense that
his Disciples kept not the Traditions of the Elders, which were indeed but
Innovations themselves. Thus the Jews taxed St. Paul for a Mover of Sedition
among them through the whole world, Acts 21.
and being a Ringleader of the Sect of the Nazarenes, which they looked upon as
a new Sect. Thus all the Apostles were charged by the Heathens, for being
disturbers of the public peace, and bringers up of New things, because they
endeavored to root out the old Errors out of men's hearts, and bring them to
the worship of the one only true God, maker of Heaven and Earth.

M. de Condom replied, That Jesus Christ was new, that the Jews expected the
Messiah; that John Baptist, Anna the Prophetess, Simeon, and the wise men had
owned him. True, said Mr. Claude, he was not really new, for he is the same
yesterday, to day, and for ever: Heb. 188.
But he was new to that whole Nation which expected a temporal Messiah, and did
not see in him any sign of what they expected. He was new in their opinion, in
that he condemned the old Traditions. His Church was new to them, because it
separated from the Body of the Jews, and made a distinct body which they had
never seen before. And as for John Baptist, Anna the Prophetess, Simeon, and
the wise men, what were these single private persons, if compared to the whole
body of Priest; Pharisees and Lawyers, and the whole Body of all the Jews in
general, which never owned him, but looked for an earthly Messiah. It is plain
then, that this prejudice of Novelty, forbidding men to examine things to the
bottom, and not distinguishing between a true and a counterfeit Antiquity,
accounting that old which was practiced yesterday, and every thing new that is
contrary to what was in vogue yesterday, is a very ill and dangerous prejudice.
It fortifies Jews and Heathens against the Christian Religion, and indeed, was
continually made use of by Celsus, and the rest of them that opposed
Christianity.

I own, said M. de Condom, that the Heathens did upbraid the Christians with
their Novelty, but the Christians demonstrated to them, that the Jews always
believed in the same God they worshipped, and did expect the same Messiah they
pro^est. What you say, answered Mr. Claude, is a further confirmation of my
opinion, to wit, that you ought not out of prejudice conclude for what appears
to be new, but search things thoroughly, to know certainly whether what appears
to be new, be so in truth. The Heathens accusation proceeded from your
prejudice, and the Christians defense of themselves is according to my
principle. For it was by an exact examination of things, that the Christians
demonstrated they were not new, tho the World looked upon them so, and that
what they opposed in the Heathen superstitions, was really new, tho taken to be
old.

The Conference having lasted a very great while, near upon five hours, and
being carried on with abundance of earnestness in the disputants on both sides,
and of attention from the standers by, the Company now began to interpose, and
so the dispute broke off. After which Mr. Claude applied himself to M. de
Condom, with a great deal of civility and respect, and entreated him, that the
difference between their Religions and Opinions, might not incline him to think
less kindly of him. That he for his part should ever retain a very high value
and esteem for so deserving a person. M. de Condom returned him this very
obliging answer, That he had some knowledge of him before by his Writings, but
was exceeding glad to know his person now by this Conference, in the management
whereof, he had done all that could possibly by done for the vindication of his
Cause; and that whenever any opportunity of serving him offered it self, he
would very willingly and heartily lay hold on it.

Presently after M. de Condom went away; and Mr. Claude having first returned
thanks to the Company, particularly to the Lady Mareschalless de Lorge, for
their patience and attention, took his leave of Mademoiselle de Duras in words
to this purpose, That he had vindicated the Truth before her; and all that was
now left for him to do, was only to beseech Almighty God in her behalf; and to
exhort her, that she would improve what she had now heard, to the settling her
more firmly in that Religion which God had called her to, and not suffer her
self to be shaken by any temptation: And these things he would not fail to
request of God for her. Mademoiselle de Duras thanked him very kindly for the
trouble he had been at, and very passionately begged his Prayers: Which Mr.
Claude having promised, presently withdrew.

THE END.
ERRATA.
IN the Preface, Page xi. for Palmenia, read Palmeria; p. xviii. l. 1. f: were,
r. wave. In the Answer, p. 2. l. 3. f your, r. our; p. 7. in the Marg. r.
Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. p. 8. l. 18. f rose, r. goes; p. 10. l. 14. f Good, r. Goods;
p. 23. l. 17. f. in, r. on, p. 24. l. 10. after she, r is; p. 31. l. 23. f.
knows, r. follows; p. 32. l. 1. f. as, r. is; p. 35. l. 13. dele That; p. 42.
l. 2. after for, ^^us; ibid. l 3. for this, r. his; p. 60. l. 20. dele If, p.
67. l. 1. f. frequent, r. freely.


