Behold How Providence In all Affairs,
Governs the world, Earth, water, Air, fire, Stars,
Men and the Glorys of the Mighty frame.
Depend upon the bright Celestial Dame.


A NEW DESCRIPTION OF THE WORLD.

OR A Compendious Treatise of the Empires, Kingdoms, States, Provinces,
Countries, Islands, Cities and Towns of Europe, Asia, Africa and America: In
their Situation, Product, Manufactures, and Commodities, Geographical and
Historical.

WITH An Account of the Natures of the People, in their Habits, Customs,
Wars, Religions and Policies, etc.

AS ALSO Of the Rarities, Wonders and Curiosities, of Fishes, Beasts, Birds,
Rivers, Mountains, Plants, etc. With several Remarkable Revolutions, and
Delightful Histories.

Faithfully Collected from the best Authors, By S. Clark.

LONDON, Printed for Hen. Rhodes next Door to the Swan Tavern, near
Brides-Lane, in Fleet Street, ^689.

Licensed, August the 11th. 1688.

THE Introduction Addressed to the READER.
WHEN the great and wise Creator of the Universe thought it in Eternal Wisdom
convenient to build the Mansion, all Creatures now inhabited, he left nothing
undone that might contribute to the Glory and Magnificence of so great a work;
and lest Mankind, the top of the Creation, should grow supine, and neglect the
filling or peopling every part of so admirable a Frame, he even compelled them
to do it by confounding their Language at Babel, and thereby obliging them as
they multiplied, to scatter over the Face of the Earth, that none of his
wondrous works might remain obscure or unobserved to those for whose use and
pleasure they were made; by which means the people in sundry Tribes, wandering
from place to place, incroaching by degrees, as men began to multiply, planted
themselves in the most advantageous Countries, every one striving for the best:
however, through Wars, Pestilence, Inundations, and other strange Revolutions
and Accidents, it is past all peradventure, that the bad as well as the good
found possessors, as at this day. Though, Reader, I shall not trouble you in
this place, with entering upon the original Peopling of Kingdoms and Countries,
^s to particulars; but let you know that my care has been to present you with
Geographical and Historical Description of the World, as it formerly stood, and
at present stands: and though upon first thought it may seem strange, that in
so small a Volume so large a one can be contained, yet upon perusal you will
find that nothing material is omitted, that can be required to render
satisfaction upon this occasion: insomuch, that by well considering this Work,
a mean Capacity may suddenly know how the Worlds mighty Fabric is disposed,
and soon become acquainted with every Country under Heaven, enough to render
him capable not only of contemplating the Goodness of the Almighty, in his
Works and Creatures, but readily Discoursing, even with the most knowing
Travelers, and without hazarding the danger of treacherous Seas, Winds,
Robbers, and a World of Inconveniences that attend an expensive search into
these Affairs; securely Travel in Imagination from Pole to Pole. For to be
brief, there is no Kingdom, Province, or Estate, that is wittingly left out of
this History or Treatise; and as to what is most material, the Account is
considerably large; wherefore recommending it to the benefit of my Country Men,
I remain Reader,

Your Friend to serve, In what I may, S. Clark.

Of EUROPE, a brief DESCRIPTION.
EVROPE is the least of the Four parts of the World, yet nothing inferior in
Goodness to the rest, in the Generosity of People, Riches, Worth and Virtue,
and exceeding them, if we consider the Flourishing of the True Religion; and is
said to take its Name from Europa the Daughter of Agenor King of Phoenicia;
containing many Flourishing Kingdoms and Provinces; as will appear in the
sequel. And is accounted in length 2800 miles; In breadth 1200; bounded on the
West, with the main Ocean; on the East, with the Aegean Sea, Pontus Euxinus,
the Fenns of Maeotis, and the River Tanais; from which a right Line
conjecturally drawn from the Bay of Granvicus, it is dis-joined from Asia; In
the North, it is bounded with the Hyperborean Sea; and on the South, with the
Mediterranean, divided into Continent, and Islands, the Continent Entire, and
the Islands dispersed, In the Greek, Ionian, Aegean, Adriatic, Mediterranean,
Cretan, and Northern Seas; divided chiefly into France, Spain, Italy, the Alps,
Germany, Britain, Belgium, Denmark, Swedeland, Hungary, Sclavonia, Russia,
Poland, Dacia, and Greece; with the dispersed Islands. And in Europe, beside
the Latin Tongue, which is now rather Scholastical, than National, there are
other diversities of Language, besides the Italian and French, supposed to be
corruptly derived from the Latin; and has been Famous by twice giving Laws to
the World, during the flourishing of the Greek and Roman Empires; and at this
day, though the least of the four parts, it excels, in what may be called solid
good, the other Three, etc.

A Queen she Reigns, upheld by strictest Fate,
Whilst the other Three, on her as Handmaids wait,
With Tribute Glories, to enrich her State.
A Geographical AND Historical Description OF THE KINGDOM OF FRANCE, In its
Particular Countries, Provinces, Cities, Towns, etc.
THE Flourishing Kingdom of France, being the nearest part of the Continent on
which we border; I have thought, for the observing the most regular method, to
begin this History of the World, with the Description of it, and its
appendances.

As for France, or so much as is generally understood of it; it is bounded on
the East with a branch of the Alps, passing between Dauphin and Peimont.
Switzerland, Savoy, some part of Germany, and the Neitherlands; on the West
with a Branch of the Pyreenian Mountains, dividing Spain, and with the
Aquitane Ocean; on the North with the British Seas, and part of Belgium, and
has on the South the rest of the Pyreenian Mountains, and the Mediterranian
Sea, being in a manner Square; accounted in Length, from Calais to Toulon 620
Miles, reckoning 73 to a Degree, and in Breadth from the borders of Lorain to
Breast, or from Nice in Peimont to Bayon 492 Miles, though of late the
Teretories have been much enlarged by the new Conquests and Acquisitions, but
being to speak of them in the Counrries where they properly have their
Situation, I willingly here omit them.

This Country is called by the English France, by the Italians Francia, and so
by the Spaniards; by the Germans Franckreich, by the Turks Alfrangua, and is
the ancient Gallia of Caesar and Pliny; lying excellently in Compaction,
between the most Flourishing Kingdoms and States of Europe, Situate in the
middle of the North Temperate Zone, between the middle Parralells of the Fifth
Clime, where the longest Day is 13 Hours; and the middle Parralell of the
Eighth Clime, where they extend to 16 Hours and a half: So that the Air is very
Healthful, the Country every where Rich and Fertile, and the People numerous;
as likewise the Cities and Towns, no less than 4000 being reckoned of note,
especially the greatest part of them, and was Distinguished by four Parts or
Divisions, when the Romans (not without great bloodshed) brought it under
their Subjection, viz.

1. The Narbonensis, or Bracatta, containing Dauphir, Languedock, and a part of
Savoy. 2. Aquitanica, taking its denomination from the City Aquae Augusta, and
now known by that of d' Aeque, containing Gascoigne, Limoisin, Guinne,
Sanctogne, Querci, Peregort, Bourbonnois and Aurergne.

3. Celtica, comprehending the Provinces of Normandy, Britagne, Anjou, Tourain,
Maine, Labeause, part of Campaign, the Isles of France, the Dukedom of
Burgundy, and the County of Lionoise. 4. Belgica, containing Picardy, a part of
Campaigne, Burgundy, and the Spanish Netherlands: But in the time of Honorius
the Emperor, the Goths having overrun Spain and Italy, sent their Forces to
Invade the Norbonensian Gauls, and having Subdued them, called their Country
Langue de Goth, and from thence Languedock; nor did they stay here, but
extended their Conquests to the River Ligeris, now the Famous Loire, founding
themselves a Kingdom, and making Toulouse the Regal Residence; nor was it long
before the Burgundiones, or Burgundians, who had Seated themselves in a part of
the Country of Cassubii, and some of the Teretories of Brandenburg, joining
with the Vandles and Sweths, seized upon other parts of France, and grasped
them with so hard a hand, that they in spite of Opposition founded themselves
a Kingdom, called the Kingdom of Burgundy, but afterward reduced to a Dukedom,
and now in the hands or possession of the present French King.

The Kingdom of France is Hereditary to the Males, but not to the Females, who
are disabled by the Salique Law, and the Heir or Eldest Son is styled Dauphin
of France; nor can the Younger Son of the King, by the Law of Apennages, have
any part in the Government with the Elder: And this Monarchy has been upheld
ever since the Year 420, by the Races of Three Kings, viz. the Moravinian,
Carolinian and Capitine, in a Descent of 63 Kings; and here the Christian
Religion is held to be first Planted amongst the Gauls by Martialis, but
amongst the French, or the latter settled People of the Kingdom, by Remigius,
much latter: as for the Arms Royal, now boren by the Kings, they are Three
Flower de Luces Azure, in a Field Or, being a Device taken by Charles the Sixth.

This Kingdom is composed of Estates, and Orders threefold, viz. the Clergy,
the Nobility, and the Commons; and here are usually found 16 Archbishops, and
106 Bishops, not accounting those of Arras, Tournay, and Perpignan; 16 Abbots
Heads of Orders and Congregations, and about 30000 Curate-ships: and not
accounting other Governments, there are 12 Peers chiefly appointed, or ancient
Peer-ships, besides others of new Creation, and the Order is that of the Holy
Ghost. There are likewise 11 Parliaments, 8 Chambers of Accounts, 22 Public
Places of Receipt, or Generalities of the Kings Revenues.

The Rivers of this Kingdom are principally Four, viz. the Rhone, or Rosne, the
Loire, the Garonne, and the Seine; who receive into them many other Rivers, and
wash the Walls of the chief Cities and Towns, etc. the first arising about 3
Miles from the head of the River Rhine, the second about the Mountains of
Avergne, the third from the Pyreenian Hills, and the Fourth has its Spring in
Burgundy.

The Mountains of most note are those of Avergne, part of the Alps, and the
Pyreenes, on the latter of which Nature strangely expresses her self, for that
part of those Mountains toward rich and wealthy France, are altogether barren,
but that toward Spain exceeding Fruitful, as if it had divested it self to
cloth the one, and robbed the other.

In the Year 1614 Lovis the 13 convened the Estates of the Provinces under 12
Heads, or great Governments, four of which lying toward the North, border upon
the Seine, and the other Rivers that augment its Stream, viz. Picardy,
Normandy, the Isles of France and Campaigne, adjoining toward the middle to
the Loire, Orlenoise, Britagne, Burgundy, and Lionoise; and the other Four
toward the South, near the Garonne, viz. Dauphin, Guienne, Lauguedock and
Provence; and under the Orlenoise are contained Maine, Perch and Beauce: on
the hither side of the Loire, Nievernois, Anjou and Touraine; and above this
River beyond Poctou, Berrey, and Burgundy, has Bresti, and under Lionoise, are
comprehended Lionois, Auvergne, Burbounois, and March; under Guienne is
Bearne, Gascogne, and Guienne, Saintogne, Perigort, Limosin, Querci, and
Rovergne; and under Languedock is found Cevenes.

The chief Cities are, 1. Paris, situate in the Isle of France, anciently
called Lutetia, by reason of the Clayeness of the Ground about it; which for
Riches, Stateliness of Building, the many Magnificent Palaces and Churches,
that every where adorn it, and the Fruitfulness of the Soil about it and
number of its Inhabitants, may compare with most in Europe. 2. Lions, or
Lugdunum. 3. Orleance. 4. Bullogne, taken by Henry the ^ighth of England 1544.
5. Amiens. 6. St. Quintiens, where the English Forces under the Command of the
Earl of Pembrook, in the Quarrel of Philip the Second of Spain, overthrew the
French, Anno 1557. 7. Bordeaux. 8. Roane or Rovenysenlis. 10. Rhemes. 11.
Claremont. 12. Toulouse. 13 Calais, which being taken by Edward the 3 of
England, remained in the hands of the English 220 Years, and was lost in the
reign of Queen Mary, soon after the Battle of St. Quintines, and the occasion,
as many conjecture of hastening her end, she giving out, That if she were opened
when dead, they might find Calais written on her Heart, etc. Many other Cities
and Towns there are of note, whose names for brevities sake I must omit and in
general proceed to say; there is no Kingdom better stored with considerable
places, nor more abounding in plenty of what ever may conduce, to the Commodity
and suport of Humane Life; abounding with almost all the sundry sorts of Fruits
that Europe produces, as also store of River and Seafish; a great number of
Cattle, plenty of Wine, Corn, Salt, Linen Cloth, Flax, Hemp, Wool, Saffron,
Paper, and many other Products and Manufactories, very considerable; for which
the Natives, etc. as it were command the Commodities, or ready Money of most
Countries; as for the Coins those chiefly in use, are the Pistole of Gold, and
the Crown of Silver.

As for the people of this Kingdom, they are great pretenders to Antiquity,
deriving their Original, as to the Inhabitants of the Country from Meseck the
sixth Son of Japhet, though the first Inhabitants mentioned with any credit in
History, were the ancient Gauls, a people thrifty and valiant; who under the
leading of Bellovessus, conquered the heither part of Italy called Gallia
Cisalpina, and soon after under the conduct of Segovesus, subdued a great part
of Germany, nor resting there, under Brennus another of their Commanders; they
discomfited the Roman Army and Sacked even Rome it self, and so passed
Conquering on into Asia, where they fixed a Government, calling it Gaul-Asia,
since corruptly Gallatia, on which the Learned Dubartas discants, viz. The
Ancient Gaul in roving every way,
As far as Phoebus darts his Golden Ray;
Seized Italy the Worlds proud Mistress sacked,
Which rather Mars than Romulus compact:
Then Spoils Pisidia, Missia does Inthraul
And midst of Asia plants another Gaul.


The present Inhabitants though somewhat fantastic, are generaly of a free and
courteous Behahaviour, kind to strangers, and extremely given to Complement; the
Women are likewise wonderfully familiar even with Strangers especially in
Speech, taking it for a great piece of breeding, not to be too Austere or
Reserved.

Their Apparel for the most part is rather Gay than Costly, made of light
Stuffs and slight Silks, etc. though the Country people are distinguished from
others; by the Men's wearing a large pair of Breeches and a Coat to their
Knees; and the Women's attireing their Heads, or rather wraping them in Linen,
and these are in a manner Drudges, or Slaves, to the Gentry, especially such as
are their Landlords, they being all of them Tenants at Will, and have their
Rent raised as the Land improves, or as the Lord thinks fit; which is the
occasion of their great Poverty; for although many of them hold Farms of Wine
and Corn, they have scarce the happiness to taste the first, or eat any good
Bread made of the latter.

In Arts and Manufactury, the French are very Ingenious, and in War very
furious, at the first onset, but with the change of Fortune their courage soon
abates; though Caesar confessed that he slew 110000. of them before he could
bring them into subjection; yet by a small power of the English, they were
frequently worsted; in the Reign of Edward the Third, and almost the whole
Kingdom, after the Fortunate Battle of Azin-court, Conquored and brought under
subjection by Henry the fifth, who with 15000. men, only overthrew an Army of
above 100000. in which the flower of their Nobility were either Slain, or taken
Prisoners: Nor is it less the Fortune, or rather misfortune in all Battles, to
have the greatest storm of War fall upon their Nobility.

The things worthy of Note in this Illustruous Kingdom, are the Cathedral
Church of the Blessed Virgin in Paris, Vulgarly called Notrodam; supported by
120. Pillars, whereof 12. are very great, but the remainder indifferently
large, and in the midst of the Church is a Chancel, accounted 71 paces in
length, and 60 in breadth; and in the Circuit or Circumference, it has 45
Chapels, and is closed with Iron Gates, and two double doors in the front,
adorned with the Statues of 28 Kings; and on the sides are four Towers of
Bell-fries of 44 Cubits in height, and a Bell so large called St. Mary, that 24
Men are required to Ring it out. The Seven Wonders of Dauphin, viz. The burnig
Fountain, the Inaccessable Mountain, the Tower of Sanevenin, the Wine-fats of
Sassinage, the Wine Fountain, the Manna of Briancon, and the Fountain of
Barberon; which Rarities see at large in Allard Sylva: The Statue of Joan the
Peucelle, who assisted the French against the English, and raised the Seige of
Orleance, acting many Wonders in feats of Arms, till taken by the English and
burnt for a Witch: As for the Building, in Cities and considerable Towns, it is
mostly of rough Stone, Plastered and rough cast over flat roofed; and commonly
4, 5, and 6 Stories. And now to France I might add the new aquisitions, but
more of them hereafter.

The chief Islands are Rhee the out-work of Rochle, in attempting the Relief of
which the English lost many brave men in the year 1627. The strong Bell Isle,
Venetica San. Colosus, Salt, Nermoustier, Oleron Vliaras, where our King
Richard the Third, as Lord of the Sea, gave those Laws Marine so much in
request, and known as the Laws of Olerone, Rochle, famous for the siege it
sustained against the whole power of France; Ovissant over against the Lizard,
and in the Mediterranian are the Isles of de Eres by Ptolomie, called the
Staaechades.

The Description of the Kingdom of Spain, in its Provinces, etc.
SPain is acknowledged the most Western part of Europe, formerly called by the
Greeks Iberia and Hsperia enviornd on every side by the Sea, except toward
France; from which it is parted only by the Pyreenian Mountains: The Seas that
bound it are the Cantabrian on the North, the Atlantic Ocean on the West, and
the Straights of Gibraltar, on the South; on the East with the Mediterranian;
the Pyreenians bearing only to the North East, and is formed by Strabo, in the
shape of an Oxes Hide; containing as well Portugal as Spain, Situated in the
most Southern part of the Northern Temperate Zone; so that the longest day
exceeds not 15 hours, accounted 760 miles in length, and 600 in breadth.

As for the Original of this People in Relation to their possessing the
Country, Authors differ; for some will have them to be of the Progeny of Tubal
Son of Japhat, as being the decendants of the Iberij who entered the Kingdom
under Pannus: Others that they are derived from the Celtae, a powerful people
decended from Alchenaz, who first peopling it, called the whole Country
Celtiberia; but more certain it is, that the Phoenicians failing from Tire,
planted Collonies here, and after them the Rhodians; nor did the Carthagenians
fail in a manner to subdue it, till being worsted in the second Punick War, it
became Tributary to the Romans, who divided it into 3 Provinces, viz. Boetica,
Lusitanica and Terraconensis; the first of these containing the Kingdoms of
Andeluzia and Granata; part of New Castile and Estremadure, Inhabited by the
Turdulie Eastward, and by the Celti toward the West; Lusitania contained
Portugal, and part of Old and New Castile, and the remaining part was
comprehended in Terragon; and again they laid it into two parts, comprehending
the two first Provinces in one; and so it remained till the time of Honorius
the Emperor, when Gundericus King of the Vandels, broke in and overrun it with
a numerous Army, Anno 400; but had not well settled themselves before the Goths
Invaded, it and drove the new possessors into Africa; and in the year 720.
under the conduct of Musa and Tarrif, who were invited in by Julian, with a
great Army of Moors and Saracens entered warring upon the Goths and after a
Battle of seven days became Victorious dividing the Country amongst them; so
that at last it fell into 12 divisions, viz. Leon Oviedo, Navarre, Corduba,
Gallicta, Bisca, Tolledo, Murica, Castile, Portugal, Valentia, Catalonia and
Aragon; and so they stand at this day: wherefore I proceed to speak of them in
their order and due places.

Leon had heretofore the Name of Austria, and is a very pleasant Country,
yielding Mines of precious Metal, some Gold, Red Lead, and Vermillion, though
otherwise not very fruitful, as being somewhat Mountainous, yet gives Title to
the Eldest Son of Castile, notwithstanding few Towns of note are found in it.

Navarr is a Kingdom of great Antiquity, bounded on the East, with the
Pyreenian Mountains, on the West with Iberius, North Biscay, and South Aragon;
being a Campaign Country, not subject to Woods, or Enclosures, yet abounds with
Trees in the nature of Hedg-rows, considerably fruitful, and has for Its chief
Cities, Victoria, Sanguessij, Viana, and Pampelune, Garisoned as the chief
defense of the Spaniards, against the Incursions of the French in time of War,
who is King, though wanting the Possession, has the Title of that Kingdom, the
Revenues whereof has been estimated at One hundred Thousand Ducats.

Corduba, is a very fruitful Province, accounted and judged, (as it is) the
richest in all Spain, abounding in Cordivant Skins, Mallago, Sherry, Oranges,
Cattle, Fish, Corn, great store of Fowl; and has in it diverse fair Cities; as
1st, Corduba the Principal from which it takes its Name. 2d. Xeres. 3d. Sevil.
4th. Granada. 5th. Mallaga. 6th. Almeria. 7th. Guadalcanal, where the rich
Mines are found.

Galicia, is a Country very Mountainous, many of which cannot be passed without
great difficulty, and others by reason of their Craggyness, held not passible;
yet in this Province are found the Cities of Compostella, the Seat of an
Archbishop, called St. Jago, in Honor of St. James the Apostle, whom they
impute to be buried here; Bajonna a place very pleasant for its Situation, and
Corronna, or Groynne. This Country is held the Principal in Spain, for the
breed of Jennets; and here is found the Promontory Nerius, formerly held to be
the Ne plus ultra.

Bisca, makes a Famons Bay into the Ocean, yet many times proves dangerous to
Sailers; and although the Country is Mountainous, yet it has many pleasant
Valleys, and is adorned with Cities, and Towns of note, as St. Sebastian,
Tholosa, Fonterabia, Bilboa, etc. And from the Mountains of this Country, the
Rivers that water the greatest part of Spain have their Springs, being
accounted no less than One hundred and fifty; and great store of Timber for
Shipping is found in those parts, with some Iron Mines, etc.

Toledo, a part of New Castile, takes its name from the principal City,
situate on the banks of Tagus or Taio, exceeding pleasant, and is ordinarily
the Residence of the Nobility, and of Merchants that Trade in these Parts;
being the Sea of an Archbishop, who is above the rest of the Bishops of that
Kingdom, his Revenue being accounted Three hundred thousand Crowns; and here
the Kings of the Goths and Moors held their Courts: there are likewise found
the Cities of Calatrava and Talboia, one situate on the Ava, and the other on
the Tagus.

Murica, contains the City Murica, the Town of Alicant, and New Carthage, being
a Country very plentiful, though thinly peopled; and hence come the Alicant
wines and curious Earthen Vessels, with much fine silks: Nor did the Romans in
their Conquest for some time reap a less benefit than Twenty five thousand
drams of Silver a week, from this Country only.

Castile Old and New contain the Towns of Soria, Segovia, Valodolid, Salamanca,
a University, etc. Madrid the Kings Principal Seat; Alcala and Alcaltura, most
of them very pleasantly situate, as being posited in the heart of the Kingdom
of Spain, abounding with Corn, Fruits, and Cattle; and the latter watered with
the River Tagus and Ava, which much enrich the Country. As for Portugal it is
now a separate Kingdom, wherefore I intend to speak of it in its due place, as
more proper in a work of this Nature.

The Principal Rivers appropiated to Spain, are the Tagus or Taio, the Duero or
Duerius, the Guiadiana or Anas, which for a good space Ingulfs it self, and
runs under ground, giving the Spaniards Occasion to boast, that they have one
of the fairest Bridges, in the World, on which Ten thousand Cattle feed, and
over which an Army with extended Wings may March; the other Rivers of note are
Gualdahquiver, and the Ebro, called by Strabo, Baetis, and Iberus. As fot the
Mountains they are distinguished into six great Ridges, continued knit
together, whereof the lesser are but parts, the chief of which are the
Pyreenians that extend from the Cantabrian* Ocean to the Mediterranian Sea.

As for the People of Spain, they are swarthy of Complexion, black-Hair, and of
a good Proportion, stately in their Actions, and grave of Deportment, very
serious in their Carriage, and Offices, much addicted to Religion, and very
Observant and Faithful to their Prince, not prone to alter their Determination,
but patient in Adversity, in War they are very Deliberate and Cautious, not
much regarding Arts, but adict themselves much to Women, and are generally very
much conceited of themselves; As for the Women they carry themselves very sober
and discreet, and are tolerably handsome: Those that are married are in great
Subjection to their Husbands, and extreme loving; though the men are naturally
Jealous. In matters of Religion, they are Roman Catholics, only there are some
Churches of Toledo, where the Mus-Arabick Office is used. As for the Language,
it is not all the same, for in some parts, it has a mixture of French, in
others much of the Moorish, and in some again the Gothish Arabic, but
generally and vulgarly, the Old Spanish is used, which has much Affinity with
the Latin; and as for the Civil and Imperial Laws used amongst them, they are
intermixed with many Customs of the Goths, and the King governs his Provinces
by Viceroys, or Ministers of State; and though this Couutry is not very
fruitful in Corn and Cattle, yet it generally abounds in Wines, Oils, Sugars,
Rice, Silk, Liquoras, Honey, Wax, Saffron, Anniseeds, Rosin, Almonds, Oranges,
Lemmons, Cakes, Soap, Anchovies, Soda, Barrilla, Shumack, Wool, Lamb-Skins,
Tobacco, besides the great Treasures of Gold and Silver that comes from
America, from whence it is conjectured since the first discovery, that above
Fifteen hundred thirty six Millions of Gold has been brought into Spain.

As for the Buildings, they are every where more solid and durable, than
stately and magnificent, unless at Sevil; in Relation to which, the Spaniards
usually say, he that has not been at Sevil, has seen no stately Building. As
for Apparel, they affect rather Gravity than Gaudiness; and their Diet is as
sparing, consisting for the most part of Herbs, made into Pottage, with minced
Meats and Salads; though there is scarcely a Mechanic in any noted Town, but
when he goes abroad, has his Cloak on, and his Rapier by his side, and walks in
as much State as the greatest Don in the Kingdom.

A Description of the Kingdom of Portugal.
THIS Kingdom was in the time of the Roman Conquests accounted a Province of
Spain, but since, been a Kingdom of about Five hundred years standing, bounded
on the North, with the River Minio, and Ava, which parts it from Gallicia; on
the East with the two Castles, and Estremadure; on the South, with Algarve; and
on the West, with the Atlantic Ocean; and was anciently called Lusitania,
deriving its present Name from Porto, a Haven Town, situate in the mouth of
the River Dueras, the usual Landing place of the Gauls; and thence corruptly
called Portugal, or the Gauls Port; and is accounted to be in length, from
North to South, about Six score Leagues, running along the Seacoast; and
consequently, not answerable in breadth, in which it disproportions, as in some
places Twenty five, some Thirty, and in other Fifty Leagues.

This Kingdom, especially of late years, has made its self famously known
throughout the World, by its Discoveries, and Trafficks, in Navigation; so that
no Trading part of the Universe, has escaped its Knowledge. As for the
Provinces attributed to Portugal, they are principally Six, which are as many
General Governments, Inter-Dueras, and Minho, Tralos-Montes, Beyra,
Estremadure, Aleuteio, and the Kingdom of Algarue; and of these, Inter-Dueras,
and Minho, are the most noted, as being exceeding Fruitful, and well Peopled,
that for Eighteen Leagues in length, and Twelve in breadth, it possesses One
hundred and thirty Monasteries, One Thousand four hundred and sixty Parishes,
Five Thousand Fountains, or Springs of Water, Two hundred Stone-Bridges, and
Six Sea Ports: The chief City in these Parts, is Porto, called by the English
Port a Port, from its delightful Situation, and the Advantage of the
Commodities of the Country, there in abundance found; this place contains Four
thousand Houses, and is much traded to by diverse Nations; the next to this is
Braga, famed for the many Councils held there.

Tralos Montes, is a part of this Kingdom, stored with Rich Mines, and in it is
found the City of Braganca, the Capital of the Dukedom of that Title, besides
which there are Towns of lesser note, and the Princes who are derived from this
Title usually reside at Villa-Viciosa, being now in Possession of the Crown;
and had before their coming to it, a Prerogative, beyond the Grandees of Spain,
to sit in public under the Royal Canopie of the Spanish Kings; Beyra another
part of this Kingdom is exceeding fertile, producing store of Millet, Rye,
Apples, Chestnuts, Catle, Corn, etc. And in it is situate the Famous City of
Coimbra, noted for its University, and the Sea of a Bishop, etc. Estremadure
abounds in Wines, Oils, Salt, and Honey, gathered from Citron Flowers; and in
it is seated Lisbon the Principal City of the Kingdom, upon five little rising
Hills; on the Right bank of the River Tagus, or Taio, and Archbishops See, the
usual Residence of the Kings of Portugal, and a City of great Trade, having the
Advantage of the Ebing and Flowing of the Sea, as being but Five Miles from it,
held to contain Thirty two Parishes, Three hundred fifty Streets, Eleven
thousand Houses, and One hundred sixty thousand Inhabitants; the Compass
computed to be near Seven Miles accounting the Subburbs, and was once the
greatest Emporium of Europe. Santarim, a place much in Request for the
abundance of Olives, that grow about it; insomuch, that the Natives boast, but
how truly, I know not, that they could make a River, as big as the Tagus of
their Oil: Setuba, an other Town in this Tract, is accommodated with one of the
best Havens in the Kingdom, being no less than Thirty Miles long, and Three
broad, abounding with Salt Pits, and Wine, which bring a great Revenue into the
Kings Coffers. Alenteio, extremely abounds with Corn, insomuch, that it is held
to be the Grainery of the Kingdom, and has in it the City of Elvara, the second
to that of Lisbon, near which, the Portuguez won a considerable Victory against
the Spaniards in 1663. And next this, Elvas claims Place, for the many Sieges
it has held out against the Spaniard, and the plenty of Oils the Neighbourhoods
produce, etc. Ourique is the place, near to which was fought the Famous Battle,
which occasioned the proclaiming the King of Portugal of the House of Braganca,
Portelegar, is a Bishops See. Algarve, though little in extent, has the Title
of a Kingdom, and was reunited to the Crown by the Marriage of Alphonse the
Third, with Beatrice of Castile, abounding in Eggs, Almonds, Olives, Wines,
Corn. Cattle, etc. And for the Chief Towns, they are Tavila, Faro, Silves, and
Lagos.

The Natives of this Kingdom, are very frugal, yet live in much plenty, the
Earth producing every where abundance: Nor did their Navigation in former days,
less conduce to their Support and Grandeur; being held the first Europeans that
publicly Trafficked into the remote parts of the World, to bring it to any
considerable Perfection. The People are generally straight Limbed, and well
proportioned, very soft skinned, but somewhat inclined to swarthiness, by
reason of the heat in those parts; the Air is very healthy, and the Country for
the most part Hilly, though few of note.

The Roman Catholic Religion, is only publicly professed. There are three
Arch-Bishopricks, viz. at Lisbon, Braga, and Elvora; and Ten Bishoprics. They
have Parliaments as occasion requires it, held at Lisbon and Porto, and Twenty
seven places have their Generalities; and the Revenues of the Kingdom is held
to be about Ten Millions of Livers, not accounting their Collonies in the
East Indies: And although Portugal was seized on by the King of Spain, after
the fatal Battle of Alcazar in Afric, and the Death of King Henry, who
Succeeded Sabastian, slain by the Moors; it revolted in the year, 1640. And is
governed by a King of its own, as a separate Kingdom from Spain, and thus much
for Portugal,

A Description of Italy, In its Kingdoms and Dominions, etc.
ITaly is a very Fruitful Country, and held for its Pleasantness to be the
Mistress of all Countries, as it once was Empress of the World, and is
encompassed with the Adriatic, Jonian, and Tyrrian Seas: Except, toward
France and Germany, from which it is parted by the Alps, which renders it in a
manner a Penjusula, but more peculiarly, it has on the East the lower part of
the Adriatic, and the Jonian Sea, deviding it from Greece; on the West, it has
the River Varus, and some part of the Alps, parting it from France; on the
North, a part of the Alps divides it from Germany, and on the other parts, the
Adriatique Sea devides it from Dalmatia, being held by the Ancients to be in
form like an Oak-Leaf.

This Country branched out into sundry principalities and Provinces, is
situate in a most Fruitful and temperate Air, under the fifth climate of the
North temperate Zone, which is totally taken up; so that the Longest day is 15
hours, and three fifth parts of an hour, Northward and Southward, not much
above 14 hours, and the parts mentioned; and is reckoned in length, from
Augusta Praetoria, now called Aost, unto Otranto the most Easternly part of
Naples 1020 miles, and in breadth from the River Varo, which parts it from that
Province to the Mouth of the River Arsa in Friuli; where it is the broadest 410
miles, and where the narrowest, which is about Otranto, exceeds not 23. so that
the whole compass by Sea, reckoning windings and turnings, is held to be 3448
miles, but reckoned in a straight line upon the coast, it falls much short as
not above 2550.

As for the first Inhabiters of this Country, they remain doubtful, for as
soon as Historians make any considerable mention of it, we find it Inhabited by
diverse Nations, held to be Greek Colonies, who transported themselves at sundry
times; the people of the Sea Coast being said to come thither under Janus, Anno
Mundi, 1925. After them Saturn out of Creet; then Evander or Oenotrus out of
Arcadia, and then Aeneas with his Trojans, with many others; but after the
Romans grew powerful, they brought the whole Country into subjection, and, held
it in spite of the frequent Invasions of Phyrus Hanibal, the Gauls, Cimbri, and
others, till the time of Honorius the Emperor, at what time the Goths Vandals,
Herulies, Huns, and other Barbarous Nations, passing the Alps, rent it from the
Empire, and divided it amongst themselves establishing many Kingdoms and
Principalities; and when these were in a manner subdued by the Valor and
Conduct of Narses, Bellarius, and other Imperial Generals. Albonius King of the
Lumbards, seized upon the greatest part of it calling it Longobardia, vulgarly
Lumbardy; but they a considerable time after were brought under by Pepin King
of France, called in by the Bishop of Rome, who reduced their Kingdom to a
straight compass; after which the seat of the Roman Empire was fixed in
Germany, and Italy, parcell'd out amongst sundry Princes, and the usual
Division is into six parts viz. Lumbardy, the Land of the Church, Nap^ls,
^ascany, Genoa, the Signory of Venice; but more particularly into five greater
and six lesser; as for the first, the Kingdom of Naples, the Papacy, the
Signory of Venice, the Dukedom of Florence, and the Dukedom of Millain, the
lesser are the Dukedoms of Mantoua, Vrbine, Modena, Parma, with the States of
Genoa and Luca; and of these in their Order.

The Kingdom of Naples Described, etc.
AS for the Kingdom of Naples it is Governed at this day by a Viceroy, under
the King of Spain; and is situate in the most pleasant part of Italy, divided
from the Territories of the Church, by the River Axofenus, being on the other
parts Inviornd with the Seas; making many commodious Havens, and contains the
Provinces of Lavaro, Calabria Inferior and Superior, Otranto, Apulia, Puglia,
Abruzzo.

In Lavaro is founded the City of Naples, from whence the Kingdom takes its
Name, and many others of lesser note; but that which is most noted, is the
Mountain Vesuvius lately called Somma, being exceeding high, and casting Flames
out at the top of it, in a dreadful manner; though all the borders or parts of
it are otherways very pleasant and fruitful, abounding in Vines,
Flower-Gardens, Olive-Yards and rich Pastures; many of the Houses of the
Gentry, and Country Villages; the City it self being seated at the foot of the
Mountain, and other Hills that branch from it, extending from the South-West to
the North-East, in a manner Triangular; and so Fruitful is the Country in Corn,
that the Importation of Bread is forbidden upon great penalties.

As for the Buildings, they are of free Stone; many of them four Stories in
height, and the Tops flat, the Windows are generally covered with fine Linen
or Tiffany in stead of Glass, which gives an equal Light and keeps out the heat
of the Sun: Nor consists the City of Naples of any more than three considerable
broad Streets, called La Vicaria, La Lapuan, and La Toletano; the rest being
inconsiderable Lanes, and places of less note; having 8 Gates toward the Sea,
and as many toward the Land, strongly walled and defended with three Castles.
The Women here, are very beautiful, and through the abundance of Silks found in
these parts, the meanest Citizens Wives go clad in it; the people are very
thrifty and industruous, especially about their Gardens, from whence they
derive a great part of their Food, in Fruits, Herbs, Roots, etc. as living very
spare and temperate, though the Country abounds in plenty. The Estates of the
Kingdom of Naples, as we may properly call them, under the Spanish Viceroy,
are held to be 14 Princes, 25 Dukes, 30 Marquesses, 54 Earls, and 400 Barons
and Gentlemen; having 4 public Houses, called the Segij, in which they meet to
consult Affairs of Importance; as also places are appointed for the meeting of
Merchants in the way of Trade.

Calabria is another Province of the Kingdom of Naples, bounded with the Jonian
and Tyrrenean Seas, and with the River Jano, said to be 500 miles in compass,
divided into the higher and lower Calabria: The chief Cities of the former
being Consentia and Salernum, the chief resort of Italian Physicians,
pleasantly situated and well inhabited; the Buildings agreeing with those of
Naples, though not in the General so sumptuous, and all the Neighboring
Countries are full of Villages, and very Fruitful; and in the latter Calabria,
Cuterzary, is seated as principal, being a strong City well Walled, and
Fortified; and formerly this Country was called Magna Graecia, from the many
Greek Collonies that seated themselves in it.

Otranto is on three parts bound with the Sea, and on the other with Puglia,
having Tarentum and Brundusum for its chief places; formerly boasting it self
one of the best Havens in Europe; but for some years past choked up, or much
obstructed by shoales of Sand carried in by the Sea; so that a Ship cannot
without some difficulty enter, by which means the places are much reduced: Here
are found likewise the Towns of Otranto and Gallipolis, very plentious in Oils,
Wines, and Manufacturies of Silks, and other matters of value; there are found
great store of Corn, Mellions, Citron, Saffron, etc. and what is one thing
observable, no Partridges pass the Limits of this Country.

Apulia another Province of Naples, extends it self from the confines of
Brundusium, to the River Fortore, and is properly divided into two Provinces,
and has for its principal City that of Manfredo; Situate beneath the Hill of
St. Angello, accommodated with many stately Buildings, and is the Seat of the
Archbishop of Siponto; and that which adds more to its advantage, is that it
has a capacious Harbor, capable of receiving Ships and Galleys of great
burden, and is defended with a very stong Castle, the Country all about it
being very Fruitful.

Puglia is bounded with the Rivers Tronto and Fortore, and has for its chief
Cities Barlet, which has a good Haven belonging to it, and held to be one of
the 4 strong holds of Italy; and Cannae the Country though somewhat Hilly, or
Mountainous; abounds with Cattle, Saffron, and many other Commodities incident
to Italy.

Abruzzo is in like manner a part of the Kingdom of Naples, having for its
chiefest Cities or Towns Aquino, giving Birth of Thomas Aquinas, and Sulmo
Famous for the Birth of Ovid the Poet, both pleasantly seated and well
inhabited.

The Papacy Described, etc.
AS for the Papacy, commonly called the Estate of the Pope, Inherent to the Sea
of Rome; it consists of two Natures or Jurisdictions, as Spiritual and Temporal
principalities, as touching the latter of which it has under its Jurisdiction
many large Terretories lying between the River Fiore and Cajetta, between
Prenestae and the Truentian Straights, the Dukedom of Vrbin excepted,
containing the Provinces of Romandiola, Murchia, Spolletto, and that usually
called St. Peter's Patrimony is accounted Spiritual.

The first of these extends to the Venetian Terretories on the West, and to
Rubicon on the East, a little River so called from the Redness of the Waters,
over which in the flourishing time of the Romans; the Consuls were forbiden to
come armed homewards, least the fear of any designed might bring a terror upon
the City of Rome. As for the chief Cities in this part, they are Bononia, the
prime University of Italy, and where the Civil Law is very much studied: This
City is Round of form Built with Brick and Freestone, commodiously situate,
and has toward the Streets, Arched Cloisters to secure such as pass them from
Rain, etc. Here is likewise found the City Ferrara, situate on the banks of
the River Po, and fortified on all other parts, with a strong Wall^ in which
the former Dukes held the stately Palace of Beluedevere, so named from its
pleasant situation; as also Ravenna of great antiquity, renowned in Ancient
History; accommodated about two miles distant with a famous Port or Haven. This
Province or Country, produces Corn, Wine, Oil, some Drugs, plenty of Cattle,
and especially good Horses.

Marchia extends from Puglia to Otranto between the Appenine and the Sea,
commodiously divided into little rising Hills, and fertile Plains, by which
means it is very Fruitful, greatly abounding with Corn, Wine, and Oil: Its
principal Empori is Ancona, by reason of the commodiousness of its Haven, and
is a fair City encompassed with three Mountains, and has the form of a half
Moon, the Streets are narrow and paved with Flint; the Haven is Triangular,
where are curious Walks, and a place called la Loggia, where the Merchants that
resort thither for Trade, do meet and is very healthy: the other considerable
Cities are Firmo, and Ascoli, and in this Province stands Loretto, so Famous
for our Ladies Miracles.

Spolletto, anciently Vmbria, has for its chief Cities Spolletto, from whence
it takes its name Onietto, situate on a high Rock and Asis, where St. Francis
was born: and though this Province is not large, yet it abounds with Wine,
Corn, Oil, Saffron, Cattle, Figs, etc.

St. Peter's Patrimony, so called, and accouned the Spiritual Jurisdiction,
contains all the ancient Latium, or Campaigna di Roma, and the chief City is
Rome, formerly the Capital of the most cousiderable Empire in the World,
Mistress of the fairest part of the Universe, and said through the excess of her
many Conquests to extend by Degrees, from 2 Miles in compass to 50, and had on
her Walls 740 Towers, spreading over, or taking in her circumference 7
Mountains or Hills, viz. Pallatinus, Capitolinus, Vnivalis, Aventinus,
Esquiliuus, Caelius, and Querinalis; and is situate on the banks of the Famous
River Tiber; though at this day it is not accounted above 11 Miles in Circuit,
however containing many stately Structures and Monuments of its ancient
Greatness: But what renders it most Eminent is the Popes Palace on the Vatican
Hill, the Famous Church Dedicated to St. Peter, one of the goodliest Structures
in the World, accounted 520 Feet in Length, aad 385 in Breadth, adorned with
Paintings, Tombs, and other choice Pieces of Antiquity, almost Innumerable; the
Vatican Library, and many Monuments of the Roman Emperors; and not far from
this City is Pont Mill, where Constantine the great was showed the Cross in the
Clouds, with this Motto, viz. In hoc Vincis, in this you shall overcome; which
made him take the Insign of the Cross for his Banner; and accordingly
prevailing over his Enemies he not only Embraced the Christian Religion
himself, but commanded it should be observed throughout his Empire: And indeed
in Rome centers the Plenty and Glory of Italy, the Inhabitants being accounted
two Hundred Thousand, most Clergymen.

The Seignorie or Commonwealth of Venice Described, etc:
NOrth of the Alps from Roman-di-ola, are the Italian Provinces, appertaining
to the State of Venice, bounded on the South with the Territories of Ferarra,
and the rest of Roman di-ola; on the West with the Dukedom of Millain; on the
North with the main Body of the Alps; and on the East with the Adriatic Sea,
and the River Arsia which, parts them from Liburnia: besides it commands a
great part of Greece, especially by the late successful Acquisitions and
Victories, as well as diverse Islands in the Sea, and has all along been the
Bulwark of Christendom against the Turks.

As for the chief City upon which the rest depend, it gives a Name to the
People, and is wonderfully situate, or seated at the bottom of the Adriatic
Sea, or Gulf of Venice, upon 72 Islands, five Miles distant from the main Land,
defended from the rage of Sea and Storms by a prodigeous work; being a bank of
(some say 60 other) 35 miles in length; open in 7 places for passage, with
Boats and Gallys, etc. of small burden, of which they have commonly 1300, but
for great Vessels the only passage is at Malamacco, and Castle Lido, strongly
fortified and yet this City is Computed no more than 8 miles in circuit; having
for its better convenience 4000 bridges, one of which is very famous, passing
over the Great Chanel; and the rest, pass waters of lesser note, which in
diverse places refresh this Maritime City.

The Arsmal is the most beautiful, bigest, and best furnished in Europe; being
about 2 miles in circuit* and has a Magazine of all sorts of Arms, Engines and
Ammunition for Sea or Land Service, amongst which are 1000 Coats of plate
Garnished with Gold, and covered with Velvet; but what is most admirable is the
Church of St Mark, their Titular Saint; wrought with Mosaic work, supported
with Pillars of Marble and Prophery; adorned with Images, Tombs, etc. that for
the abundance of Jewels, Pearls, Gold, and Silver, that cover and adorn them,
and their Altars it may be thought that the whole Treasury of the State might
be Employed to that purpose; and besides there are found 200 Palaces built of
Marble, and adorned with Collumnes, Statues, Pictures, and other things of
great Value; that for their grandeur, they are capable of entertaining any
Prince; They have likewise 73 rich Hospitals; 56 Tribunals, or Courts of
Justice; 67 parish Churches, 26 Monasteries of Nuns 54 Convents of Friars, 18
Chapels and 6 Free-Schools; and so powerful once they were that they held War
with all the Prince of Europe, etc. England excepted, for the space of seven
years, and wanted neither men nor money; and if we consider* what Wars they
have had for near 200 years (at times) with the Turks; we must needs proceed to
wonder how they should support themselves under that expense of Treasure, and
loss of men; but their Income is mostly by Navigation, and the fruitfulness of
their Islands; so that according to a Modern account, it has amounted in the
Treasury, (not reckoning the Effects of particular men,) to five millions and
320000 Ducats yearly: as for the City it is Governed by a Duke, and the
Sennate; and so consequently all the Countries and Cities under its
Jurisdiction, many of which we shall have occasion to mention hereafter, and
therefore purposely omit them in this description: only by the way take notice,
that the Terretories of this Signorie, are divided into Land and Sea; and in
Lombardy, Marca, Trevigiana, Friuli and Istri, part of Dalmatia, Sclavoniae,
Albania, and the Morea; and in their Jurisdiction are the famous Cities of
Padua, Brescia, Bergamo, Vicenza and others; as for their Islands the principal
are Corfu, Cephalonia, Zant, Ithaca, and others lately regained.

The Description of the Dukedom of Florence, or Tuscany.
THis Dukedom now under the Grand Duke of Tuscany, is divided from St. Peter's
Patrimony, on the East, by the River Pisco, on the West by the River Macra,
from the Commonwealth of Genoa; on the North from Romandiola, and Marca
Anconitana, by the Apennine Hills; and on the South, has for its boundar^ the
Tyrrean and Tuscan Seas.

This Country formerly had its name from the City of Florence, Situate nigh
the confluence of the River Arno, round in form and strongly fortified with a
Wall, etc. and 8 Forts, whereof the greatest lies toward the South; the
buildings are very stately, errected with Freestone and Marble, flat on the
roofs, except the Palaces which are adorned with Towers and Pinacles; the
Pavements of the Streets being likewise for the most part broad Freestone, a
River running through the chief of them, which greatly cools and refreshes the
City in the heat of Summer; and over it is a stately Bridge almost in the
middle of the City, and toward the North East it is Encompassed with pleasant
Hills, gently rising and planted with choice Fruits, and sheltered from storms
by the Apennine Mountains that lie behind them; nor does the South side want
the like advantage, whilst the West Exposes it to the Flowery Valleys of Arno;
and without the Wall are the Garden houses and Palaces of the Nobility and
Gentry, which likewise scatter over all the pleasant Fields; insomuch that it
is accounted the Glory of Italy, frequently styled its Garden, and takes its
name from the Flowery Plains, and Gardens that enclose, or expend themselves
about it. The next City of note is Pisa, through which the River Arno runs,
from East to West, its Situation being in a plain; and toward the North-west
by North is a Gate, and a fair Cathederal Church, most curiously wrought and
Paved with Marble; and here the Duke of Florence or Tuscany has a Palace,
seated on the bank of the River Sienna; another City is situate on a rising
Hill, indifferently ascending above the Valleys; the streets of which, a thing
unusual, are paved with Brick, wherefore no Carts nor Coaches are allowed to
pass through them, but the burdens are carried by men Mules and Asses; and has
in it several stately Towers and Fountains, the Women of this place being
likewise reckoned the fairest of all Italy. Massa is a Town most noted for the
Quarries of Marble in its neighborhood.

In this Dukedom is the famous Legorne, so much traded to by Merchants of most
Nations in Europe; opening to the Sea a spacious Port or Haven, and is a Mart
or Emporis for all the principal commodities of Italy, and many that are
brought over-land out of remote Countries; and here our Merchants have
frequently settled a Factory, the people being generally fair dealers, and
wonderfully obliging to strangers; so that the Custom of this place is the
greatest part of the Dukes Revenues, being very considerable*

As for this City it is seated in a fruitful Plain, with commodious Avenews,
being somewhat long in form from North to South, and is defended with two
Towers that stand inward to the Sea, for the guard of the Haven, that for great
Ships lying farther into the Sea, than that for Galleys and lesser Vessels,
which is sheltered by a Wall drawn almost round it; and here it is the English
Merchants trading to Italy have their Lading.

The Dukedom of Milain Described, etc.
THE Duchy of Milaine, is very pleasantly seated, in the Country of Lumbardy,
amongst fruitful Plains, and little rising Hills; and held the most desirable
Place of these Countries.

Its chief City is Milain, Anciently Mediolanum, which though so often ruined,
as having been taken no less than Twenty times, and besiged Forty, has still
rise out of its Ashes, more fair and splendid than at first, being now
accounted the greatest City of Lombardy; seated in a large Plain, and
encompassed with Rivers, strongly guarded with a spacious and well fortified
Castle, and other extraordinary Fortifications. As for the Building, it is very
stately and magnificent; but the most remarkable are Castles or Cittadels, the
Hospital or Lazarette; the Cathedral or Dome: besides there are 36 Monastries,
30 Convents of Friars of sundry Orders, 96 Parochial, and 11 Collegate
Churches, mos^ of which are beautified and adorned with Images* Paintings,
Sculptures; there is moreover, a Cabinet of exceeding Rarieties, not to be
paralelled, as report goes, in any place. The City in circuit is accounted Ten
miles, very populous, imagined to contain 300000 Souls; the Inhabitants mostly
Rich, as very much Trading in Merchandice, especially Silks, Gloves, Ribbons,
etc. from whence our Millinary Ware-men derive the Denomination of their Trade;
The City being much Traded to from France, Spain, and all parts of Italy.

As for other places of note in this Jurisdiction, they are principally Pavia,
Papia, made a University by Charles the IV. guarded by a strong Castle, and has
in it a fair Cathedral Church, supposed the richest of Revenue in Italy, viz.
300000 Crowns per. Ann. And near this place, King Francis the first of France,
was overthrown in a great Battle, and taken Prisoner by Lanoy the Duke of
Burbone and others, commanding for Charles the V. Alexandria or Alessandris,
the strongest work in the whole Dutchey; Cremona seated on the Banks of the
River Poe, accommodated with a good Trade, stately muildings, large Streets,
and pleasant Gardens, noted for its Tower and Cathedral Church. And here it was
that Vitellus his Soldiers were defeated by those of Vespatian, and the Town
fired by them.

The Lakes found here are Lago, Magiore, in length 56 miles, and 6 in breadth,
having in it 2 Islands, called the Boremeans, fruitful and pleasant, even to a
wonder, Lago Delcoma and Lugani Lacus, and the Rivers are Olgio Add Lambro,
Tesine, etc. As for the Hills they are of no remark.

The Ancient Inhabitants of this Country were the Insubres, Conquered by the
Romans, then by the Gauls, and next by the Lombards, but now the Country is
under the protection of the King of Spain, who appoints a Governor to reside
in Millain, where St. Ambrose once was Bishop.

The Duchy of Modena described.
THIS Part, or Province of Italy, contains the City of Modena, and Reggio, with
the adjoining Territories: As for the Capital City of Modena, it was known, and
is so still in Roman History, by the Name of Mutina, famous for the first
bloody battle between Marcus Antonius, and Augustus Caesar; and is at this day
the Residence of the Duke, whose Palace, though not appearing very large
outwardly, is nevertheless very Famous and Magnificent, by the rich Adornments
within; his Cabin or Museum being furnished with the choice of Natural
Rarities, as Jewels, etc. to an extraordinary Value: And here Otho the Emperor
slew himself, upon his Army being defeated by Vitellus.

As for the Country, though it is not large, it nevertheless is very fruitful,
and abounds with great store of curious Fruits, Corn, Cattle, and other things
fit man's for Subsistence, watered with many small Streams, and mostly plain,
but that which renders it more Famous, is its being the Native Country of our
present Queen Mary, Consort to his Most Sacred Majesty, King James the Second.

The People of this Dukedom are said to be better natured than most of Italy;
quick in their Resolution, easy to be pacified when wronged, and Friendly in
their Entertainment of Strangers.

A Description of the Dukedom or Principality of Parma.
THIS Country has on the North Mantua on the South the Appennine Hills, on the
West Milan, and on the East the Country of Modena. The chief City is Parma,
seated on the River Pirma, in a Fruitful Plain, being about 4 miles in compass;
adorned with many Rich and Stately Structures, well Peopled, and much
frequented by Gentry, greatly Addicted to Learning, Arts and Arms; the
adjoining Plains produce excellent Pasturage, which feed abundance of Sheep, of
whose Milk is made the Parmasan Cheese, so much in esteem in all Countries; and
here the Duke's Palace is seated, where he holds a Court in great State: as
for the Churches they are beautified, and rarely imbellished with Pictures and
Images.

Piacenza or Placentia is the second City, famous for the Resistance it made
against Hannibal, and h^s Brother Asdrubal, upon their cutting their way
through the Alps, and Invading Italy; and now as much esteemed for the Fairs
and Marts kept here, to which the Merchants and others resort from the
Neighboring Country to make their Exchanges: The Principal River is Trebia,
where the Romans in a Fatal Battle were overthrown by the Carthagenians, and
40000 of them computed to be slain; and near to Placentia are many Salt Pits
and Mines of Iron.

A description of the Dukedom of Mantoua.
THE Dukedom of Mantoua is a very fair Country, very plentiful in Corn, Wine,
Cattle, and rich Pastures, and Fruits of sundry Kinds: As for the chief City
that gives it the Name, it is Seated in a Lake of 20 Miles compass, by Nature
very strong and fencible, there being no Land access to it but by Cause-ways,
and in it stands the Dukes Palace, very fair and stately, though he has
another Palace for Pleasure and Delight exceeding this, at Marmirolla, five
Miles from this City; As for Mantoua it is in a manner round, save that the
Lake on the North-East sides, enters it like a half Moon: The Buildings are
partly of Brick, and partly of Free Stone, and the Streets large and clean: In
the midst is a large Marketplace, where all manner of Strangers are admitted
to vend their Ware, though the greatest Traffic is in the hands of the Jews,
who grow Rich by the Impoverishment of the Citizens, and is in compass 4 Miles,
having 8 Gates, and strengthened by a good Wall. This City is of ancient
standing, and contains about 50000 People, and has often been brought into
Distress by the Germans, especially in the Year 1619* and 1630. As for the
Dukes Revenue, it is counted 400000 Crowns per Annum, though many will not
credit it, seeing some few Years since, he made over part of his Duchy to the
French King* for a considerable Sum of Money; and here it is held unlawful to
wear a Sword, or any other Weapon without Lisence; and in this City the Famous
Virgil had his Birth, as by his Ecclogus appears, etc. and to this Dukedom
partly appertains the Dukedom of Montferrat, in the South-East of Piemont, and
other Territories.

The Dukedom of Urbin described:
THE Dukedom of Vrbin may be said to lie within the Territories of the Church,
bounded on the North with the Adriatic, on the South with the Apennine Hills,
on the West with Romagna, or Roma-di-ola, and on the East with Marca
Aconitania, being in length Sixty, and in breadth Thirty five Miles, and is
accounted to contain Two hundred Castles, and Seven Principal Towns, the chief
is Vrbin seated at the bottom of the Apennine Hills, and built in the fashion
of a Miter. The next to it Pisauro, containing an excellent Haven, for the
Reception of considerable Vesels; and a Third is Belforto, more inward, and
supposed to be in the middle of the Country: The chief of the Castles are, the
Rocks of St. Leo, and Marivolo; and at Vrbin, Polidorus Virgil was born, who
being a Collector of Peter Pence in England for the Pope, wrote a History of
the many remarkable Transactions of our Country, and is quoted by most of our
modern Historians

The Estate or Common Wealth of Genoa Described.
THE Estate of Genoa, formerly contained a large part of Italy, and were
accounted the most expert in Navigation of all Europe, but of late, through the
many Wars they have maintained against the Venetians, and other neighboring
Princes, their own Intestine Broils, and their neglect of Navigation and
Traffic, they are greatly reduced, holding little more than Liguria and
Corsica: The first of these has on the East the River Varus, on the West parted
from Tuscany by the Magura, on the North the Apennine Hills, and on the South
the Ligurian or Tyrrenian Seas.

As for the City of Genoa, it is seated on the sides of small rising Hills,
though behind it are those of greater height, lying open on the South side to the
Sea, where it has a goodly Haven, in the form of a Cresant or half Moon, upon
the Horn whereof, toward the East, is the Sea Bank Lamola, about 600 paces in
length, keeping off the Waves that beat upon the City on the East side; and in
the middle of this Bank is a Fort built to defend the Navy that may Anchor
there, so that the circuit of this City is accounted Eight miles, and though
the Streets are narrow, yet the Palaces of the Dey, and Houses of the Senators,
are very stately; nor are their Walls less strengthened with Bull-warks, and
other Fortifications. The Houses in the High-streets are Four Stories, and many
Five, the Windows being Glazed, which is not usual in Italy, many of them built
of Marble, but all of Freestone: The Streets paved with Flint, and the Suburbs
full of Gardens and Houses of the Nobility and Gentry. As for the People, they
are Masters of other Cities, as Noli, Sarazena, and Savon, being noble minded
and generous in all their Actions, formerly much inclined to War and search of
Adventures; insomuch that they assisted, with a great Fleet in the Holy War,
and taking of Jerusalem by the Christian Army, and aided Phillip the French
King with 10000 Men, against Edward the Third of England, where in one Battle
they were most of them slain. They Aided likewise the Spaniards in 1588 to
Invade England, with several great Carracts and Galleys; which were either lost
upon the Coast, or cast away in their Flight homeward, which loss they have
never since fully recovered; yet they lately made a stout Defense against the
Naval Power of France, which could effect no more, than beating down some part
of their City, by Bombing it at a distance, as being well assured they had no
Fleet capable of Engaging.

The Country abounds in all the Plenties of Italy, and here only the Women have
the greatest Freedom, without the Jelosie or Suspicion of their Husbands of any
Italians; and as a further Honor to this place, it gave Birth to Christopher
Columbus, the first Discoverer of the New World or Country of America.

The State of Lucca Described.
THe State of Lucca is held to be situate within the Dukedom of Tuscany or
Florence, comprehending the Town and Terretory of Lucca.

As for Lucca, it is seated in a fruitful Plain, strongly fortified with a good
Wall, and encompassed with pleasant Trees, so that at a distance it seems to
stand in a Wood, and the Plain wherein it is seated, is environed with
Mountains or large Hills, except toward Pistola, where it opens to the Sea,
and is three miles in compass; as for the Streets, they are narrow and paved
with broad Freestone, and in it are many Palaces, and Merchants Houses, curious
built of Freestone, according to other Building in Italy, and was formerly a
place of great Trade for Silks, Stuffs, Carpets, Cloth of Gold, and the like;
there being a great concourse of Merchants, called Luccois Merchants, that were
wont to meet there at several Fairs or Marts, held for that purpose, but of
late the Trade is declined: however the Inhabitants enrich themselves by their
Manufacture, which they send to other places of greater Trade. And here there
is a strict Law, that no Person shall wear any Weapon, no not a Knife, unless
it be blunted; the People being generally very courteous to Strangers. And thus
much for what may be properly called Italy, which taken in general, is one of
the most fruitful and pleasant Countries of the World, of which Europe being
called the Head, this is accounted the Face. But for brevity sake I must desist
any further Comment, and proceed to other parts adjoining.

The Dukedom of Lorrain Described.
THIS Country is Environed with a part of Belgium, Alsatia, the Country of
Burgundy and Campaign, and is about 180 Miles in compass, exceeding Fruitful in
Corn, Wine, store of Cattle, but especially Horses of an Excellent Breed; the
Rivers and Lakes abounding with Fish, and the Soil with rich Mines: The chief
Town is Nancy, seated upon the River Meuse, and in it the Ducal Palace, much
resorted to for Wines, Brandies, and other Commodities; the Buildings are very
stately and commodious, most of them of Stone, and well fortified with a Wall
of great Strength: The next to this are St. Nicholas, and Vancoleus very strong
and well Garisoned by the French into whose hands the Country fell, in the
Reign of King Lewis the 13. though the present Duke of Lorain now warring in
Hungary, is on all hands concluded to be the rightful Prince. As for the
manners and Customs of the people they are a mixture of Germany and France, as
being seated between those Countries, etc.

The Dukedom of Savoy, and Country of Peimont Described, etc.
AS for Savoy, it is a very Mountainous Country bounded by the Dauphenet,
Bress, Switzerland, Peimont and the Alps; the Ancient Inhabitants were the
Allobroges, who submitted to Hanibal, when he entered Italy with his
Carthagenians to War against the Romans; at what time Bruncius and his Brother
being at variance about the Succession to the Kingdom, he reconciled them;
afterward it was made a Roman Province, and was called from one of the Kings
that then Reigned being a Favorite to Augustus Caesar, Alps Coctiae; but in
the declining of the Roman Empire, it became a part of the Kingdom of Burgundy,
and passed with other rights of the Empire to Germany; but now is independent
under a Duke, who is sovereign Lord of the Country.

The Chief Towns of Savoy are Chambiers, Situate in a pleasant Valley amongst
Mountains, and is graced with a Ducal Palace and many stately buildings of the
Nobles, who are for the most part very Gentile, Active and Airy, though the
Country people on the contrary are very Imbicil and Slugish. Tarantaise, an
Arch-Episcopal See, Situate amongst Mountains as the former, full of pleasant
buildings: Aquabelle, Mauridune another Arch-Episcopal See.

Under the power and Jursdiction of the Savonian Duke, it is Peimont unless a
small part of it claimed by the Duke of Mantoua, seated at the Foot of the
Mountains, and bounded on the East with Milain, on the West with Savoy, on the
North with Switzer-land, and on the South with the Mediterranean, being more
fertile than the other; containing 52 Earldoms, and 15 Marquesats, besides
Barronies and Lordships; and here dwell the progeny of the Albigenses, who
about the year 1100 stood, for the Liberty and Doctrine of the Church of their
Predecessors and about the year 1250, were near all destroyed and ruined by the
Popes and French Kings; when the remainder prefering their Concience before
their Country, retired up into the Mountains, and by their Industry and
Indefatigable Husbandry, made the very Rocks bring forth Grass and Herbage for
themselves and their Cattle, etc. and here they worshipped God, according to the
Worship of the reformed Churches; greatly increasing in number, as being
followed with blessings, until the latter end of the Reign of Francis the
first, at what time happened the Massacre of Merinianum, or Mariguan Gallis and
Chabriers, and in the year 1662 and 1663, they were again persecuted by the
Savoiard, and since that in the year 1684 we had a Mellancholy account of their
treatment: and although there are many good Towns under the Government of
Savoy; yet the Duke chiefly resides at the City Turin Situate on the River Po
and is the seat of an Archbishop and a University, where Erasmus took his
degree, and for Situation is accounted one of the plesantest in Europe.

The Seignory of Geneva, and the Alps Described.
GENEVA is within the Limits of the Dukedom of Savoy, the whole Seignory not
exceeding Eight Leagues in compass, Situate on the Lake Lemanus, and divided
into two parts by the River Rosne. The City strongly walled and fortified, as
being the head of a Free state; containing a flourishing University, Governed
by a Common Council, or 200 of the chief Burghers, four of which are called
Sindiques: As for the Church Government it is composed of Laymen, Elders, and
Ministers founded by John Calvin 1541. and although this City has been beseiged
by the Duke of Savoy, and others who have undertaken to reduce it, yet it has
manfully defended it self against all Invasions; and as for the revenue it is
reckoned 60000 Crowns per annum. The building is generally of Freestone, and
the North side of the City lies close to the South side of the Lake, where is a
little Haven for Galleys, built to keep free passage on the Lake, defended by a
strong Fort; a River Issuing from the Lake runs through the lower part of the
City, and is passed by two commodious Bridges. And although it is a Receptacle
for all manner of Religions, and people that fly from Persecution, yet such is
the Law, that even a Malefactor is Condemned there for a Crime committed in his
own Country, if proved against him, and Adultry punishable with death;
Fornication the first time with 9 days fasting or living with Bread and Water
in Prison; the second time with Whipping, and the third with banishment;
notwithstanding which and although the Women be more reserved here than in any
other place, those Affairs go forward in private.

This Signory abounds with all manner of Fruits, great store of Fish; and is
much Traded to especially by the Italian Merchants for Velvets, Taffatas,
Musket Barrels, and Calevers, etc.

The Alps are the greatest Ridge of Mountains in Europe, parting Germany,
France, and Italy, and in some places require five days to ascend them. There
being five passages through them into Italy, viz. 3 out of France and 2 out of
Germany. The 1 from France is through Provence, close upon the Tyrrenian Seas,
through Liguria, being the Easiest; the 2 through the Hill Geneara, into the
Marquesat of Zaluzzes, and so into Lumbardy: The third is over the Mount Cenis,
and through the Country of Turin. As sor those out of Germany, the first is
through the Country of the Grissons, by the Province of Valtoline; the last
through the County of Tirol, near to the Towns of Juspurk and Trent; and as for
these Mountains, they are in many parts very fruitful; diverse Villages and
Towns, being Situate on them, though mostly barren, and in many places the
Snow and Frost continues all the year, without the Suns having power to
dissolve it, by reason the assent is so near the cold Region; and through part
of them Hanibal cut, dissolving, or loosening the Rocks with Fire and Vinegar,
when he broke unexpectedly into Italy and defeated the Roman Army; and indeed
in some places they are dreadful even to look on.

The Description of the County of Roussillon and Catalonia.
ROussillon by the French Included between the branches of the Pyreenean
Mountains if we begin at Mount Cavo, the one extending to Colibre and C. de
Creux a Promontary, that is the furthest point East of Cattalonia; as for the
other it passes unto Salsas, and as for the places of note, they are Perpignan,
Pupirianum; and Perpinianum built out of the ruins of Ruscinum, by Guinard Earl
of Roussillon, Situate upon the banks of the River Thelis or Thetis, in a
pleasant fruitful plain, etc. A rich and flourishing Emporie, and a strong hold
against the French, till the year 1644; and of such esteem was this little
Country in former times, that it was pawned by John King of Aragon in 1462, to
Lewis the 11th. of France for 300000 Crowns, and restored to Ferdenand the
Catholic, by Charles the Eight, that he might not be diverted from the
Conquest of Naples. and abounds with plenty, etc.

Catalonia or as the French call it. Cattalogne, joins to the Country of
Roussillon, is accounted 170 Italian Miles in length, and in breadth 130, and
held to contain the Dukedom of Cardona, 3 Marquesates, 11 Earldoms, diverse
Barronies and Lordships, and 45 Cities or walled Towns, and 600000 Inhabitants;
amongst which (in the time of Boterius) were 10000 French Shepherds and
Husbandmen. As for the Country, some Authors inform us, that it is generally
Hilly, and full of Woods, yielding but small store of Corn, Wine, and Fruits;
though others speak more favorably of it, and affirm it affords plenty of
Corn, Wine, and Oil, though indeed it is mostly enriched by its Maritime
Situation.

The chief Town is Bracelonia seated upon the Mediterranian Sea, between the
Rivers Besons and Rubricat or Lobrecat, and is a rich noted Port much Traded
to: The buildings are very stately, and contain a Bishops See; an Academy, and
sundry other advantages of Gardens and pleasant places that render it
delightful and well Inhabited.

A Description of Belgium, or the Neitherland Provinces, etc.
THE Tract now called Belgium or the Neitherlands, is bounded on the East with
Westphalia, Gulick, Cleve, Triers, and the Provinces of the higher Germany, on
the West with the main Ocean, which divides it from Britain, etc. on the North
with the River Ems, which parts it from East Friezland, and on the South with
Picardy and Campaign, two French Provinces, and upon the South-East with the
Dukedom of Lorain; and as for the Country in its present Estate, it is divided
into 17 Provinces, viz. The Dukedoms of Limburg, Luxenburg, Gelderland,
Brabant, the Marquisate of the Holy Empire, the Earldoms of Flanders, Artois,
Hatndult, Namurre, Zutphan, Holland, Zealand, the Barronies of West Friezland,
Vtrecht, Overysel, Machlyn, and Groyning, or Groningen, and of these in their
Order.

Limburg.
THE Dukedom of Limburg is pleasantly situate, and a very fruitful Province,
having the Famous City of Mastreich, so lately renowned for its Sieges, as its
Capitol, though the Bishopric of Liege is its appendent, in which is the City
of Liege, the Bishop Regents usual Residence, the Sea at present vacant by the
Death of the late Bishop, and has under it 52 Barronies, and in it a
University, where at one time (if the Story may be credited) Studied 9 Sons of
Kings, the Sons of 24 Dukes, and 29 Earls; it being commodiously and
healthfully situate on the River Meuse; the Buildings very fair and spacious,
and is accommodated with diverse Monasteries and Abbeys, the whole Bishopric
containing 24 walled Towns, and 1800 Villages; as also the Eastern part,
properly termed a part of the Duchy of Limburg, contains 5 walled Towns, and
23 Villages, where Limburg (that gives the Province Name) is pleasantly
situate on the River Wesa or Wesel, or Wesar; and from this Fertile Country,
abounding with whatever is necessary for the Support of Humane Life, is found
that Stone so much used in public, called Lapis Calaminaris.

Luxemburg.
LVxemburg is another Province of the Low Countries, having Limburg for its
boundard on the North, Lorain on the South, the Bishopric of Triers on the
East, and the River Meuse on the West, and is accounted in circumference 24^
Miles, containing 23 walled Towns, and 1169 Vi^lages of the former, of which
Luxemburg scitua^^ on the River Asnaius, Danvillees and Bostonake are chief:
The upper part of this Dukedom is generally Inhabited by Germans, but the
French possess most of the lower part, and indeed they speak either Languages
in most of the Villages, and in manners participate of both Nations; and
bordering upon this Dukedom is the Famous Forest of Ardena, formerly accounted
the greatest in Europe, as being 500 Miles in compass, consisting mostly of
Chest-nut Trees, but now burnt, and otherways destroyed to the circumference of
90 Miles, and near it are found the Spaw Baths, so much frequented by diverse
Nations for the restoring them to Health, by removing sundry Malladies and
Diseases; and in this Region are held to be 7 Earldoms, and many other petty
Governments. The Soil is naturally Fruitful and Pleasant by Situation.

Brabant.
BRabant has for its boundard on the South-East and North, the River Meuse, on
the West the Schald, or the Sclade; in length it is accounted 70 Miles, and in
breadth 60, containing 26 walled Towns, and 700 Villages; the principal of the
former being Lovaine, a City 6 miles in compass, enclosing beside the stately
Building, pleasant Hills, Valleys, Meadows, Fragrant Gardens, and is a noted
University, consisting of 20 stately Colleges. The next of note is Bruxelles,
or Brussels, the usual seat of the Governor, for the King of Spain, pleasantly
seated and Inviorned with Gardens and little riseing Hills; and near it is the
City of Bergeaupzone, a garrisoned place, strongly fortified; and here is found
likewise, the Town of Breda, surprised by the Prince of Orange, and taken from
the Spaniards by a small number of Gentlemen, who came upon it in the night
time, in a Boat covered with Turfs, and desperately setting upon the Garrison
possessed themselves of it; and yet more famous for the Treaty between his Late
Majesty of England, and his Subjects, whereupon ensued his happy Restoration;
and in this Province is contained the Marquesa^e of the Empire, whose chief
Town or City is Antwerp, 7 Miles in compass, once a famous Empori, or the Scale
of Europe, by reason of its Situation on the River -- having two Marts yearly,
and for the more safe Resort of Strangers, qualified with extraordinary
Privileges, and here the Portugals exposed their East India Goods to Sale, and
dispersed them through Europe, but of late the Hollanders growing powerful at
Sea, and great Traffickers, have removed the Scale for the most part to
Amsterdam.

Flanders.
THIS Province which amongst the vulgar passes current for the 10, is divided
into Galicam, Imperialem, and Tutonicam, the latter being separated from the
two first by the River Ley, where is found the City of Gaunt, the Birth Place
of John Duke of Lancaster, Son to Edward the Third of England, from thence
called John of Gaunt; and is so large within the Walls, that there is large
Pastures, and Corn Fields, besides many Gardens, and other pleasant places, and
is Commodiously seated upon the River Schald, which devides it in many parts;
so that for the convenience of the Inhabitants there are 98 Bridges: The next
to this are Brugis and Ypres, walled and well fortified, and within the
Jurisdiction of the Province, are the famous Sea Ports, or Frontier Towns of
Dunkirk, taken from the Spainards by the Valor of the English, and since
delivered to the French: Scluse, which has a spacious Haven, capable of
containing 500 Sail of Ships; and to these we must add Newport and Ostend.

Imperial Flanders, so called for Distinctions sake, is divided from Brabant,
by the River Dender, and in it are found the Towns of Alost and Dendermond,
situate very pleasantly upon the Banks of that River with Hulst, a
considerable Town, indifferently fortified, the Country is generaly fruitful,
and the people very thrifty and sparing, etc.

Gallicam, or Gallica Flanders, taking its Denomination from its dependency on
the French, or the nearness to that Country, has for its chief Town, Lisle or
Lile, a Town of great Trade, and much Resort, where sundry Merchants have
Warehouses, and some petty Factories; the next to it in Dignity is Doway, much
noted for its University, and the great Resort of most Christian Nations
thither to see the curious Library, and other Rarities; and here likewise
stands Tornay, taken from the French by King Henry the Eighth of England, and
ransomed by the Inhabitants at 100000 Ducats; there are moreover 32 walled
Towns of lesser note, and 1178 Villages, within the Jurisdiction of this
Province, adorned with stately Buildings, and pleasant Gardens, replenished
with Fountains, and pleasant Streams; and is in all parts very Fruitful, as
lying low, and not any where encumbered with Mountains, from which indeed the
Provinces are generally free, etc.

Artois is a very pleasant Province, and was once entirely French; but now (as
the rest I have mentioned) under the Government of the King of Spain, quitted
by Henry the Second of France, to Philip the Second of Spain, in the League of
Chambray; and is said to contain 854 Villages, and 12 Towns of note; the chief
being Arras, from whence our Cloth of Arras comes, and Lilliers. The Principal
Frontier Towns that opposes Piccardie are Hedinfort, Air, Pernes, and St.
Omers, most of them very strong and sencible.

Hainault is considerably spacious, as being Sixty Miles in length, and Forty
Eight in breadth, in which are computed 950 Villages, and 24 considerable
Towns, as Monts Famous for the overthrow of the French Army, under the command
of the Duke of Luxemburg, by the Dutch and Germans, under the command of the
Prince of Orange, etc. routed near this Town 1676. Valenciens very commodiously
seated, so that it cannot be besieged but by a considerable Army, divided into
three parts: Conde and Bavais, Towns of considerable strength, the latter
supposed to be built upon the ruins of the ancient Belgium, the Province in
general is very pleasant and fruitful.

Namurre is very commodiously situate, and yields the Inhabitants great
Advantages from the Iron Mines, and Marble Quars; as also those of Free Stone,
and what is indeed a wonder in nature, viz. The Stone Cole which is
extinguished by Oil, but burns the brighter for having Water cast upon it; and
here are found the City Namurre, giving name to the Province as also
Charlemont, Valen-court, or Bornies, with about 182 Villages, accommodated with
rich Pastures, pleasant Gardens, with store of Fruits and Cattle.

Machlyn, though it is reckoned to be situate within the circuit of the
Province of Brabant; yet has in it 9 Villages, with several Castles and Places
of strength, as its dependences being a strong Town, seated in the midst of the
Waters of the River Dole, so that upon drawing up the Sluices, the Country about
it may be drowned; and was of such esteem before the Wars with Spain, that it
was the seat of a Parliament; but now is somewhat impaired by a fire that
happened some years since, by the blowing up of a Magazine of 800 Barrils of
Gunpowder. These are those properly called the Spanish Provinces and
Neitherlands, which were formerly free Estates, and most of them Independent,
governed by their proper Princes and Magistrates; but under a claim of right by
Title, and the more prevailing Power of the Sword, wearied by War, they were
reduced by the Spanish Kings part, of whose Dominions they are at this day
accounted: However, the 7 confederated Estates, commonly called the United
Provinces, viz. Zealand, Holland, Vtretch, Guelderland, Zutphen, Groningen,
Over-Yssel, and some part of Brabant, and Flanders, have yet those Privileges
the former enjoyed, making for their better defense against the Encroachments
of their powerful Neighbors, a strict League and Union in the year 1581. which
has ever since inviolably continued, called now the Estates of the
Low Countries.

A Description, particularly of the Low Countries.
ZEaland or Sealand, is a Country standing upon 7 Islands Northward in the Sea*
commodiously situate for Shipping, and Harbors, so that it may in a manner be
questioned, whether the Inhabitants live on the Water or on the Land, and
though it consists of 7 Islands only at present, it formerly was 15 whereof 8
have been swallowed up by the Waves, with their Towns and Cities, so that we
may well alude.

Invenies sub Aquis, and ad-huc austendere nautae,
Inclinata solent, cum maenibus opida versis, etc.
The Waters hide them, and the Sailers show,
The Ruined Walls, and Steeples as they Row.
The chief Towns of this Province, are Middleburg, Famous for Traffic, and the
Staple for French and Spanish Wines; Flushing, a strong and fortified Sea Town.
All the Islands are fertile, much abounding with Pastures, Corn, and plenty of
Cattle, yielding a great deal of Madder, for dying, Wool, etc.

HOLLAND, (the chief of the Provinces, under the Denomination of which the rest
are vulgarly called, and is the most powerful in Shipping, and Navigation,)
comprehends the Famous City of Amsterdam, by which the River Tay flows like a
large Sea, and is one of the chief Empories of Europe, Rotterdam, Leyden an
University, Doort, Delph, Harlem, and other places of note, as the Hague, etc.
the which, though but an Inland Village, is much honored by the Concourse,
resorting thither, and the frequent assembling of the Estates; and this, more
than any other part, abounds with Woods, esteemed though but small, to contian
400 Villages, and 20 walled Towns in its Jurisdiction.

VTRECHT, another of these Provinces has five considerable Towns in it, of
which Vtrecht, Mont-fort, and Rhenen, are the principal; as also 70 Villages,
many of them very fair and pleasant, all well watered, and accommodated with
Gardens, Pasturages, and other things necessary for the use of Man; the
Province was anciently called Antonia, but since took its Name from a Ferry
that was kept there, for the Transportation of Passengers, etc.

OVER-YSSEL, another of the Provinces, is memorable for the City of Daventree,
won by Robert Earl of Leicester, an English Peer, in the time of Queen
Elizabeth, from the Spaniard, and delivered to the States, and has besides 11
good Towns of which Campene, Swall, and Daventree are the chief, 101 Villages,
and abounds with good Pasture^, Meddows, Corn and Cattle, producing yearly a^
extraordinary quantity of Butter and Cheese, and the rather Fruitful, as being
well watered by the River Yssel, from which it appears to take its name.

ZVTPHEN, though it claims the Jurisdiction of a Province, yet it is no more
than a Town in Guelderland, free, and independent, before which (to the great
Grief of all good Men) the Famous and Learned Sir Philip Sidney, received the
Mortal wound of which he dyed, though the Town was notwithstanding won by his
Conduct and Valor, being a very ancient Earldom.

GVELDERLAND is a Dukedom of considerable note, abounding with Plenty of all
sorts of Provisions, and many curious Manufactures, and is held to contain 24
Towns, and 300 Villages. The chief of the Towns being Nimegen, seated on a
branch of the River Rhine, and much noted for the Treaty held there, Ruremond
and Arnheim, and is recounted in Historians to take its name from Geluba; once
a famous Town Situate in the Province, but now altogether ruined or reduced to
a strait compass.

GROINING or GRONINGEN, is a Barrony of West Friezland, so large that under its
Jurisdiction it has 154 Towns and Villages, the principal being Old Haven and
Keikerk, and boasts of great Plenty and much Riches.

FRIEZLAND contains 11 chief Towns, the most considerable being Harlingem,
Lewarden, and Zwichen, with about 345 Villages, Encompassed with Excellent
Pasture grounds, abounding in Herds of Cattle, of a more then ordinary bigness,
and is in a manner, every where refreshed with pleasant Streams; and not far
from it is the Island of Scelinck, on the Coast whereof the Fishing trade is
continually maintained; and there are found Dog-Fish in abundance.

The Air in these, and the other Provinces, is at this day very temperate; so
that, although the Winters last long, yet are they not excessive; and as for
the Summer it is gentle and mild, resembling the Spring, in the more Southern
Countries; as for the People they are generally corpulent, well proportioned,
and great Artists, being quick of Invention, and very curious Artificers. The
Women are for the most part tolerably handsome, and constant House-wifes much
in subjection to their Husbands, and very careful in the management of such
Affairs as they understand: They are (both Men and Women) frequently great
drinkers; nor do they come behind hand, especially those of the 7 Provinces
last mentioned, in eating; and as for their Warfare they are better Soldiers,
and more fortunate by Sea then Land, for indeed Navigation is in a manner their
greatest business; many of those, we properly call the Dutch, being born on
Shipboard, and there brought up; their Parents having no Land, Houses or
Tenements, but live on board for the most part, and are seldom in Lodgings
which is all they take care for, rejecting any settlement; and thus much in
brief for the 17 Provinces, or Lower Germany, from whence I proceed to the
Higher, etc.

Germany, properly so called, Described in its Province and Principality.
GERMANY, in which at this day the Roman Empire has its Establishment, is
bounded on the East with Prussia, Poland and Hungary, on the West with Belgium
and France, on the North with Denmark, and the Main Sea called the German
Ocean, and on the South with the Alps, and is Situate in the Northern
Temperate Zone, under the 7 and 11 Climates having 17 hours and a half in the
longest day Northward, and 14 and a half Southward; the compass of this
spacious Country, being accounted 2600 English miles, held to be effectually
the largest in Europe, and in most Parts is exceeding Fruitful, the Air
wholesome; and consequently the Natives (were they more temperate) would be
exceeding healthful; however the Inhabitants for honesty of conversation and
firmness to their Governors, are much to be applauded; Valiant they are, and
very deliberate in their Actions; the Women are corpulent and tolerably
handsome great breeders, and very fruitful; though for the Vulgar sort they are
generally poor, notwithstanding they are curious in invention, and performance
of Arts; and the World is beholding (if we may rightly so term it) to this
Nation for the Invention of Printing and Gunpowder.

GERMANY is exceeding fertile, many parts of it abounding with Corn, Wine,
Cattle, Minerals, as Tin, Copper, Silver, and some Gold, Quicksilver, Linen
Cloth, Allom, and many other valuable Commodities, and is properly divided
into the upper and lower Germany. The first of these more bordering upon the
Alps, may be reckoned to contain Austria, Bavaria, Suevia, Helvetia, Switzer
land and Alsatia; and of these in their order, etc.

The Upper Germany Described.
AUSTRIA, a Hereditary Province of the Empire, or Arch-Dukedom of the House of
Austria, Anciently Pannonia Superior, is accounted the most fertile of the
Provinces, in Corn, Wine, Fish, Cattle, etc. And has for its Metropolis, the
famous City of Vienna, called by the Dutch Wien; more noted for the great
overthrow, the Turks received before it, in the year 1683. after it had
sustained a Siege of near 3 months; and is commodiously Situate upon the
dividing of the River Danube, anciently called Ister, adorned with a great
number of stately Buildings, and has not only frequently bafled the Ottoman
power, by putting a stop to their further incroachment into Christendom, but is
usually the Imperial Residence, being strongly defended with a Wall, and
several Towers: and under the Jurisdiction of this Arch-Dukedom are the
Provinces of Styria, or Steir-Mark, Carinthia, Tyrolis and Carniola. The first
Situate on the Spurs of the Alps, yet considerably fruitful, and has for its
chief Towns Gretis, Hall and Marpurg, with many pleasant Villages. The second
is considerably large, as containing many good Towns and Villages: Those of
note being Spital, Veit, and Vellach, with good Pastures, and fruitful
Plantations of Gardens, Orchards, etc.

The Third borders, or is rather Situate on a part of the Alps, very
montainous, and but indifferently Fruitful, yiedling more in Mines then in
other Commodities; yet contains the noted Towns of Inspurch, Tyrol and Trent,
so much known by the Council that was held there, in the year 1546. Seated on
the banks of the River Odesis: The Country is in a manner square; as being 72
Miles, without any considerable difference, every way.

The Fourth is larger than any of the former as being 150 miles in length, and
45 in breadth, Environed with Sclavonia on the East, Italy on the West, Istria
on the South, and Carinthia on the North; a Country, it is very fruitful, and
has in it many good Towns the principal being Esling and New Marched, Situate
on the Banks of the River Save.

BAVARIA is a large Country, and has for it is Boundards Styria and Austria on
the East, Leike on the West, the Danube and part of Franconia on the North, and
Carinthia together with Tyrol on the South; and has for its principal City
Munich, upon the River Asser, being the Dukes principal Seat; Ingolstadt on the
Danube, comprehending an University Ratisbon, Paslaw, Donow, Saltzburg, and
others; and is watered with the Rivers Danube and Saltzech as principal
streams, and with Rivers of lesser note; and so opulent is it, that Travelers
affirm 34 Cities and 46 considerable Walled Towns, are found within its
circumference, and is fruitful in every thing except Wine, with which it is
supplied out of other Parts.

SVEVIA called by the Dutch Schwaben, is bounded Eastward on Bavaria, Westward
on the Danube, Northward on Franconia, and Southward on Tyrol and Retia, or the
Country of Grissens; and has for its Principal Towns Vlm or Elmus, Lindair, a
free City Seated in a Peninsula, made by the Lake Acronius, Auspurg,
Ravenspurg, Wherlingen and Norlingen; most built with Freestone, with Houses
of an extraordinary height, as four and five Stories, and many stately
Palaces, Churches, etc. The Country is generally well peopled and with those
of a good Complexion, tall and well set; the women Ruddy and Fair, and the
Plains abound with rich Pastures, Cattle and Corn; for Hills there are none of
considerable note; and the principal River that passes through it, is the
Danube, receiving other Rivers into its stream; and although Auspurg is
accounted a City of this Province; yet in it self and dependencies, it is a
Marquizat.

HELVETIA, now more vulgarly known by the name of Switzerland, is a very
Mountainous Country, as being posited amongst the Alps, for the most part, or
spurs of that mountain, accounted the highest habitable Region in Europe,
bounded on the East with Tyrol, on the North with Lorain, on the West with
France, and on the South with Italy; and is at this day cantoned or divided
into 13 Divisions or Jurisdictions, under a United Confederacy and League, the
better to oppose the Invasion of any powerful Neighbors; and these have for
their Capitals considerable distinct Cities and Countries, from which they hold
their Regulation; as Zurich, Berne, Lucerne, Glaris, Prenij, Zugh, Friburg,
Basil, Schaffhansen, Apensel, Soloturn, Vandenew and Suits; besides in the
Confederacy is comprehended, the City and Marquesat of Baden, and although they
are divided in Matters of Religion, 5 being of the Reformed Church, and the
rest Roman Catholics, yet that makes no Separation in the common Interest, but
against any opposer, they mutually join their Forces.

As for the length of these Countries thus United, it is accounted 240 miles
and the breadth 180 miles, and from these Mountains Issue the Famous Rivers Po,
and Rhone or Rosne, with others of lesser note, which pass through many Famous
Kingdoms and Provinces; and indeed the Plains that are found amongst the
Mountainous places, are exceeding Fruitful, and produce many Cattle, and the
men are accounted the best Soldiers in Europe* and for as much as their Country
is poor, they much addict themselves to the Sword; serving for pay any Prince
that will entertain them; whereby it appears, that no less than one Million of
the^ have fallen in sundry Battles within One hundred years past.

ALSATIA is bounded on the East with the Rhine, on the West with Lorain, on the
North with the Palatinate, and on the South Helvetia; having for its Metropolis
the famous City of Stra^burg, on the Rhine; lately taken, or surprised by the
French, who undertook the Quarrel of the Bishop that laid claim to that
Dignity; though indeed it has been held a free City: As for the Building, it is
very stately, mostly of Freestone, and contains several fair Churches,
Senate-Houses an^ Stores; the Streets, though not very wide, are in most parts
refreshed by the Streams of Water that pass through them, and all the Country
about it abounds with fruitful Fields, Vineyards, Cattle, Gardens, and every
thing that may be termed pleasant and delightful, and has in the circuit a
considerable number of Towns and Villages, and was reckoned, as is said,
amongst the free Imperial Cities.

To these in this division of the Empire, we may add Rhetia, or the Country of
the Grisons, bounded on the West with Switzerland, on the East with Tyrol on
the South with Milain, and on the North with Suevia, lying half in Italy and
half in Germany; so that the People for the most part are Familiar with either
Language, and is a Region well peopleed and plesantly Situate, only somewhat
Mountainous. The chief Towns are Coyra, not far from the Rhine, Musocco and
Bormia; and in these parts the Reformed and Romish Religion are indifferently
Practiced; and thus much of the upper or higher Germany.

The Lower Germany Described, in its Provinces, Free-Towns, etc*
THAT which we properly term the lower Germany, may be conveniently divided
into Franconia, and the appendant Territories, the three Electorates of the
Palatinate, Brandenburgh and Saxony; with its dependencies. Pomerania,
Medenburgh, Brunswick, Lameburg, Hassia, East Friezland, Westphalia, Cleveland,
Wetteraw or Vetravia, etc. and of these in their order.

FRANCONIA, supposed by some to be the first Seat of the Franks or French, has
for its boundards, on the East Saxony and Bohemia, on the West Elsas, on the
North Hassia, and on the South Bavaria; and contains many fair Cities within
its circle or circumference, as Bamber, Weirtzburg, and Metz or Mentz, the Seat
of a Bishop, and moreover has in it the Palace of the chief Electoral Bishop;
and as for the City, it is commodiously seated upon pleasant riseing Hills,
encompassed with a Valley and spacious Plains, yielding great abundance of
Corn, Fruits and Pastures; being Anciently the Seat of a King, called the King
of Mentz: And in the Province are the free Cities of Noremburg, Rotenburgh, and
Francfort, at the latter of which the Electors of the Empire meet, as occasion
serves, for the Election of the Emperor; all three pleasantly Seated, either by
the nature of the Soil, or the industry of the Inhabitants, well fortified and
of great concourse; there being two of the most noted Fairs in Europe, held
twice a year, and in one of it is streets on the East side, the Jews are
permitted to Trade and Inhabit.

The Kingdom of Bohemia, is an Ancient and Famous Kingdom; containing the
Dukedom of Silesia, the Marquesates of Lusatia and Moravia; accounted in
circuit 550 English Miles, being cast in a manner round or circular, Walled
with Mountains or large Hills, and was once held to contain 78 Cities, Castles
and Walled Towns, and 32000 Villages and stately Buildings of the Nobility.

As for the Soil of this Kingdom, it is generally Fruitful producing great
increase of Corn and Wine, and in many parts there are Mines of Iron, Lead,
Tin, Copper, Gold, Silver, and some Quicksilver: As for the Natives, they are
of a cheerful Countenance, modest behavior, and strong of Body; the Women very
fair and comely, tall of personage and broad Shouldered. As for the King of
Bohemia, which now rests in the house of Austria, he is one of the Electors of
the Emperor, and has precedence in the casting voice; and is great Cup Bearer
on the Coronation day

The chief Cities of this Kingdom are Prague, seated on the River Mulda,
consisting of three parts, by reason of the division the River makes, though
joined by Bridges, and has in it many stately Buildings of Freestone, though
in the generality, the Houses are Timber built, and the Walls of Clay or Loam;
Egra, a place very commodious, and much traded to, watered with a pleasant
Stream, and accommodated with curious Gardens and Orchards, ^^dweis and others.

SILESIA is a Part or Province of the Kingdom, of Bohemia, extending in length
240 Miles, and in breadth 80 Miles, divided almost in equal parts by the River
Oder, into which many lesser Rivers discharge themselves, and so well water the
Country, that it is exceeding fruitful almost every where, though the Air is
much colder than with us at all times, and what the Soil wants, the Inhabitants
by their industry make out; and in it is situate the famous City of Breslaw,
or Preslaw, accounted for stately Building, and Commodiousness, one of the
chief Cities belonging to the Emperor. There are moreover the Cities of
Jadendorf, and Glogaw, with a great number of pleasant Villages.

LVSATIA, or Lusutia, is divided into the Higher and Lower Countries, and
though but small, yet exceeding Populous, so that Historians affirm, that this
little Province has sent 20000 Armed Men into the Field, and is in most parts
Fruitful, as being watered by the River Nise or Nisso, and other Streams, and
has as chief Cities Trabel and Groliz, with many walled Towns, and a great
number of Villages, though several have been destroyed, by the Incursions of
the Turks and Tartars, and the Intestine Wars.

Moravia is a very pleasant Country, affording store of Wine, Corn, and curious
Fruits, with some Myrrh, and Frankincense, the Shrubs and Trees growing
naturally wild, as well as in Gardens by Improvement; the Country being very
Woody and Mountainous, and is a Marquisate of the Empire, the chief Towns
being Almutz, an University, and Brinne, the Seat of the Marquess; the Country
receiving its name (as most conjecture) from the River Moravia that runs
through it; and although the Territories are not large, the People are
nevertheless divided in Language, between the Teutonick, Bohemian, and
Sclavonian.

The Electorate of the Palatinate, or the Country under that Denomination,
contains the Upper and Lower Palatinates, and extends for the most part along
the Rhine 96, and is in breadth 72 Miles, said to be the fruitfullest of all
others, affording abundance of Rhenish Wines, pressed from the Grapes that grow
in great plenty on the Banks of that famous River, from whence the Wine takes
its Name; and in any vacancy of the Empire, the Prince Elector of these
Palatinates has a far larger Jurisdiction, which terminates not till the
Coronation of the Emperor, where he takes his place as Arch-Sewer, and in the
Upper of these Palatinates is situate, the City of Newburg, Amburg, and
Castle; and in the Lower Heidelburg, the Seat of the Palsgrave of the Rhine,
encompassed with high Hills, on the North-East, and South Frankendale, Openheim
and Crutznach; and on the East Side of this Country are Lauden, and Winheim,
and on the West Xeifers and Newstadt.

The Electorate of Saxony has for its Eastern boundard Lusatia, for its Western
Hassia, for its Northe^ Brunswick, and on the South Bohemia and Franconia; and
contains the Countries commonly called Turingia, Misnia, Voitland, and the
proper Saxony; as for the first of these, it comprehends the Principalities of
Manfieldt and Anhalt, the Prince of it being a Lantgrave; and although the
Country exceeds not 12 German Miles, either way, yet the Soil is exceeding
Fruitful, and so abounds that its Fruitfulness supplies other Places of greater
extent; and being divided into 12 Countries, is held to contain 44 Cities,
walled Towns, and strong Castles; and about 2000 Villages, and great Houses of
Noble Men; as for the Duke of Saxonies chief Seat it is Ersdorf, though there
are other famous Places within his Jurisdiction, as Dresden, seated on the
River Albis, in a pleasant Plain, passing between two Mountains: Leipzich, a
Famous University, especially for the study of Physic, and Philosophy; built
mostly with freestone, and pleasantly environed with Cornfieldsd: Wintenburg,
the place where Faustus studied Necromancy, with many others; and this by some
is held to be the Country that gave Birth to those Saxons that invaded England,
and brought it under Subjection.

The Electorate of Brandenburg (though no more properly held than a Marquisate,
notwithstanding the Elector is styled a Duke) is a very spacious Country,
bounded on the East with Saxony; on the West with Poland, on the South with
Lusatia, and on the North with Pomerania; accounted 500 Miles in Circumference,
containing fifty considerable Cities, and 64 walled Towns, besides a great
number of Villages: This Elector being held the most potent of the Empire, as
it has been evident by his contending with the Sweeds, Danes, and others.

The chief Cities are Brandenburg, curiously situate, and adorned with many
stately Buildings, and rare pieces of Antiquity: Berlin, the place of usual
Residence, and where the Duke has a Magnificent Palace, seated on the River
Spree: Oderam and Havelburg, the Sea or Seat of a Bishop, though the Reformed
Religion is that which is maintained and supported by the Prince: And this
Marquisate is divided into the New and Old, Watered by the Od^r and Albis, and
the Elector is great Chamberlain of the Empire, all the Country being exceeding
Fruitful, and naturally bringing forth abundance of Corn, Pasturages, and some
Wines.

POMERANIA is on the East bounded by the River Vistula, on the North with the
Baltique Ocean, on the West with Medenburg, and on the South with Brandenburg;
and here is sound the famous Stetin, which with a very small Garrison, held a
Siege of 3 Months, against the whole Power of the Elector of Brandenburg:
Wolgast, Gripswald, Wallin, and Newtrepon, with many other places of strength,
commodiously seated on the banks of Rivers, or the Seacoast; and although this
Province is not large, it nevertheless yields great store of Corn, Cattle, etc.
and lies very advantageous for Sea Traffic, and to it appertain the Islands of
Volinia, Wisedonian, and Rugia.

MEDENBVRG is situate on the West part of Pomerania, and is the more Fruitful
of the two, as having many Populous Cities and Towns within its Jurisdiction,
the chief being Steremberg, from whence the Late Governor of Vienna derives
his Title, Malchaw, Wesmar and Rostock, the latter of these a University, and
is watered with pleasant Streams, etc.

LVNBVRG, and Brunswick, have for their Northern boundard Denmark, for their
Southern Saxony, and Hassia, and East and West Brandenburg, and West-Phalen,
being properly two Dukedoms, pleasantly situate; as for the chief Cities, they
are Brunswick, a free City of the Empire; from this place the true Mum is
brought over, and is a strong fortified Garrison, no ways in Subjection to the
Emperor; Halbertstadt, or Herbertstadt, a Bishops See; Wolfbitten, the
Residence of the Duke, where he has a stately Palace: And Lunburg the Seat of
the Lunburg Duke, a very pleasant City, commodiously seated for Trade and
Pleasure: The Country about it producing store of Fruits, and Corn, and the
Pastures breeding up a great number of Cattle.

HASSIA, is governed by a Lant-Grave, and lies Eastward of Saxony, Southward
of Franconia, Westward, and Northward of West-Phalen, being a Mountainous
Country, though in many Parts, there are fertile Plains, which yield great
store of Corn, and Fruits: nor do the Mountains that rise by degrees fail,
especially about the skirts of them, to bring forth considerable increase, and
as for this Country, at present it is divided into two Families, the one of
Cassel, and the other of Darmstat, being of the Younger House: As for the chief
places that appertain to the Lantgraves, they are Cassel, or Castle, on the
River Fuld, Marpurg on the River Lohn; an University founded Anno 1426, by
Lewis Bishop of Munster, and near it is a stately and well fortified Castle,
seated on a Hill, high and steep, so that it is accounted impregnable, if well
defended; and is the chief Place of Residence in time of War, or Danger, giving
a prospect of the whole Country. Darmstadt, is another chief Town, guarded by a
strong Castle, and is the Inheritance or Seat of the Younger House of the
Lantgraves; and part of this Country belongs to the Abbey of Fulda, accounted
one of the greatest Revenues in Europe; and was founded by St. Boniface an
Englishman, insomuch, that the Ab^ot is accounted a Prince of the Empire; and
takes Place, as Chancellor to the Empress, stiling himself Primate of Gallia.

EAST FRIESLAND, has on the West, the River Ems; on the North, the Ocean; on
the West, the Weser; and on the South, West-Phalia; and though it is a Country
of no large extent, yet it is in many parts very Fruitful; and is divided by
the River Ems only, from the Provinces of the United Netherlands; and has
Embden, the utmost Borders of the Empire for its chief City, pleasantly
situate, and contains many stately buildings, though in general they are built
of Brick; and the next to this is Oldenburg, considerable for its Trade, and is
of it self an Earldom.

WEST-PHALIA, has for its boundards on the East, Brunswick; on the North, the
Ocean; on the South, Hassia; on the West, Belgium; being a Country full of
Woods and Forests, which yields them notwithstanding great Commodities, by
reason of the abundance of Wild Hogs found therein; said to take their
beginning from one Farrow, which a Sow, straying from a Farm-House, cast in
these Woods; and of the Legs of these Hogs, taken in great numbers, are our
West-Phalia Hams so much in Esteem etc. And although this Country is properly
West-Phalia; yet the Northern part, changes its name to that of Bremen; and is
governed by a Bishop, who is Lord of this Tract; notwithstanding, the Duke of
Saxony claims a part, and other parts are held to belong to the Bishoprics of
Cullen, Munster, and Triers: The chief Cities are Asdrop, Clappenburg, and
Exenburg.

As for the chief Towns under the Bishop of Munster, they are Munster, situate
on the bank of the River Ems, Warendrop, and others, and have a pleasant
Country, all about their Neighborhood, very Fertile, and abounding with store
of Corn and Cattle, plain for the most part, there being few or no considerable
Hills in this Tract.

CVLLEN, or the Bishopric of Collen, though not large, is nevertheless a very
Fruitful Country, and greatly to be desired, whose Archbishop is Chancellor of
Italy, and held to be the second chief Elector of the Empire; and has in his
Jurisdiction, besides the City of Cullen as chief, those of Lintz, Ernance, and
Bonna, much noted for the Archbishops Palace, held to be one of the most
stately in the Empire.

TRIERS is a Bishopric of note, and contains many fair Cities and Towns, as
Triers, from whence it takes its name, Coblents, Boport, and Engers, in chief;
and is pleasantly watered with the Moselle, which renders the Country in its
passage very Fruitful, the Bishop whereof is accounted the third Spiritual
Elector of the Empire.

CLEVELAND, is accounted a Duchy, and borders upon Gelderland, a small
Country, yet as the rest in this Tract of Land, by reason of its commodious
Situation, very Fruitful, containing the Regiments or Territories of Gulick,
Cleve, and Berge: As for the Duchy of Gulick, it contains the City of Akan in
chief, and some other Towns of note, with sundry pleasant Villages, and claims
the honor of the Emperors Presence, soon after his Election, as taking here a
Silver Crown, and performing some other customary Ceremonies.

As for the chief Cities of the Duchy of Cleveland, they are Cleve, Wesel,
Emmerick, Calkar, and others, with their Villages and Dependancies; and those
of the Duchy of Berge, or Mont, are Mursburg, Dusledorp, Hattingen, very
commodiously situate, and the whole Country watered with pleasant Streams, so
that the Soil yields naturally an extraordinary increase to the Husbandmen.

VETERAVIA is another Country of this Tract, accounted a Province of the
Empire, lying to the South-West of Hassia, somewhat larger than those lately
mentioned, as comprehending the Countries of Nassaw, Hannaw, and Friburg a Free
City; as for Nassaw it contains many considerable Towns, and is Famous for the
Princes of that House, who in defense of the Netherlands, so long opposed the
Power of Spain; and from which House, the Illustrious Prince of Orange is
descended; this Country yields abundance of Corn, and many Vines, yet producing
no great store of Wine; and in them, besides the Towns I have mentioned, are
found the Towns of Dellinbourg, Windeck, Hebron, and Catzenelbogen, which
latter has been accounted an Earldom.

As for the Nobility of Germany, the Title descends to all the Sons, which
makes them numerous, though the Younger Houses want for the most part Estates
to support them; and thus much briefly of the Empire, and its dependencies.

Sweedland Described, in its Countries and Provinces, etc.
SWEEDEN, or Sweedland, is a Famous Northern Country, renowned for its many
great Enterprises, and Undertakings; and is bounded on the West with the Dosrin
Hills, dividing it from Norway; and on the North with the Frozen Ocean; on the
South with Denmark, Leifland, and the Baltic Sea, taking, as many hold, its
Name from Sueci, Suetheans, or Suethedie; and is in length from Stockholm to
the Borders of Lapland 1000 Itali^n Miles, and about 600 in breadth, reaching
in a manner, from the first Parallel of the Twelfth Clime where the Pole is
elevated 38 Degrees, and 26 Mi^nutes, as far as to the 71 degrees of Latitude,
(...) which account, the longest day in the Souther^ point, exceeds not 18
Hours, though in the ex^treamest Northern parts, they have scarcely (...) Night
for Two Months; and this Kingdom, tho^g^ posited in an extreme cold Region, is
notwithstand^ing kept so warm by the Mists that arise from the I^slands, that
much of the Rigor other Countries (...) the same Latitude suffer is abated, and
is a Monarchy, one of the Antientest in the Northern Parts (...) the World (if
their report be true who boa^ the immediate Succession, from above 100 Kings;
an^ that the first amongst them was the Son of Japhet, one of the Sons of Noah.)

As for the Kings of Sweedland, they style themselves Kings of Sweeds, Vandals,
Goths; great Princes of Finland, Dukes of Estonia and Carolia; Lords of Ingria,
and bear three Royal Crowns for their Arms; and the present King of this
Country is Charles the 11. of the Family of the Palatine of Deuxponts; as for
the Soil (by the industry of the people) it is rendered exceeding fertile, and
the Air very healthful; unless in places where the Moorish damps arise from
Fenns, by the neglect of not opening the Water course; so that the Inhabitants
generally live to an extreme old Age: And as for the Country it abounds with
Corn, Cattle, Fruits and Minerals as Silver, Copper, Lead: There are found
considerable quantities of Furs, and other Commodities, and is divided into, or
distinguished by the Provinces of Lapland, Gothland, Finland, and Sweeden.

LAPLAND or LAPPIA is the most Northern Part of Scandia, and is divided into
the Eastern and Western parts: The first containing Biarmia and ^orolia, which
properly appertains to Russia, or the Jurisdiction of the Czars of Muscovy, and
the latter comprehending Lappia and Scrisinia, under the Government of the King
of Sweeden; and the people in many parts, especially the most extreme are
Heathen Idolaters, or such as pay Adoration to Creatures; especially such as
they first see in the Morning, and are held to deal in Magic and Witchcraft,
and to sell Winds to Saylors that Navigate those Seas; however they are
miserably poor, as living in the most barren part of the Country, and pay their
acknowledgement or Tribute only in Furs of Foxes, Martins etc. which tolerably
abound in those parts; and they dwell for the most part in Cotts, where they
are by reason of their Temperance very Healthful; some of them living to 140
years.

Next to the before mentioned Division is Finland, between the Finland Bay and
the Baltic Ocean of considerable Extent, and is full of pleasant Pastures,
yielding very much Corn and Fruits, and is properly a Duchy which some of the
Sweedish Kings were wont to assign, for the security of their Brothers
Portions; and has for its chief Cities Albo, a Bishops See, Viburg or Viborch,
a Fortress of considerable Strength; Narve, Rangia and Castle-Helm, and near a
place called Razeburg; in this Country is a Province in which the Needle-touch
by a Lodestone keeps continually turning.

GOTHLAND held to be the Birthplace of the ancient Goths, is accounted one of
the most fertile Provinces appertaining to this Monarchy, participating both of
Island and Continent; as being divided into both the Islands, lying in the
Baltic Sea, being the biggest in these parts, containing five or six
commodious Ports; and on some of the Rocks appear yet diverse Inscriptions (by
way of Monuments) in the Ancient Gothish Characters, one Isle being 18 miles in
length, and 5 in breadth; and as for what is of this Province, on the main
Land, it is posited in the hithermost part of Scandia bordering on Denmark,
where is Seated the noted City of Norkoping, commodiously on the Sea, the place
from when abundance of Copper is brought: Loduvisa a place much traded to,
Colmar, fortified with a very strong Castle, Waldburg and others, and is in all
parts very fruitful; so that it is called by many of the Sweeds Goodland,
instead of Gothland.

SWEDLAND properly so called, though contributing its name in general to the
rest of the Provinces is fertile in many parts; but it holds not throughout by
reason of the many Rocks and barren Hills, and the chief City is Stockholm, or
Holmia, defended with a Castle Royal on a Sea Port, at the Mouth of the Lake
Meler, which some of the Sweedish Kings designed to cut into the Wenner, or
Lake, thereby to have joined the Baltic and the Ocean, frustrating thereby the
Passage of the Sound, but it proved a Work of so much Difficulty, that it was
laid aside; and this Lake is held to receive Twenty Four Rivers, and
disburthens it self with such noise and fury, that it is by some called Devils
Mouth: But as for the Kings Ships, and Vessels of great Burden, they generally
lie at Elsenore, defended by a strong Castle, and so sheltered from the Wind,
that they may lie without Anchors. Vpsal contains the Metropolitan Church,
where the Kings are usually Crowned, and formerly held their Court; and is a
University of this Kingdom, and the most remarkable Mart; Carlstat upon the
Wenner, abounds with Brass and Copper: Strongues is a Bishops See.

There are yet two other Provinces, or Divisions of this Kingdom; viz. Livonia,
by the Germans called Liefland and Ingria, vulgarly Ingermanland; the first
delivered by the Poles upon treaty, and the last taken from the Muscovites, and
are both of them indifferently fruitful, and have in them many considerable
Villages and some Towns of note.

The Commodities of these Countries, in general are Copper, Brass, Lead,
Ox-hides, Tallow, Furs, Goat Skins, Elks-skins, the Skins of Deer; Honey,
Allom, Corn; and in many places there are Silver Mines, but of no consider able
advantage. The men are Active, Naturally strong, indifferent good Seamen, and
resolute Soldiers; Industrious, Ingenious, and very courteous to strangers; and
had the Christian Faith first planted amongst them, by Ausgarius Archbishop of
Bremen; and in matters of Judicature, or deciding Controversies, each
respective Territory has its Viscount, every Province its Lans-men, or Consul,
and every Town it is Layman or Consul; and there lies an Appeal from the
Consul to the Laymen, and from the Lay men to the Viscount, and from him to the
King, in whose only power it is absolutely to determine the matter. As for the
Women they are generally well featured, proper in person, very modest and
courteous, loving to their Husbands, and affable to strangers.

A Description of Denmark, in its Countries, Provinces, etc.
DENMARK, Quasi, Danes-Mark, comprehending its entire Circuit or Territories,
is bounded on the East with the Baltic Sea, and a part of Sweedland, on the
West with the Main Ocean on the North East, with another part of Sweedland,
full North with the Frozen Ocean, and on the South with Germany; lying partly
on the North temperate Zone, and partly within the Artick Circle; extending
from the middle Parallel of the tenth Clime, or 55 degrees of Latitude, where
it joyneth to Germany, and 71 where the Frozen Ocean bounds it; the longest day
in the most Southern parts, being 17 hours and a quarter; but for 2 Months and
3 Weeks they have no Night at all in the extreme North, and is commonly
distinguished in these parts, comprehending the Appendances.

The Dukedom of Holstein, containing Wagerland Dithmarsh, Stormaria and
Holstein. The Kingdom of Denmark containing the two Juitlands, and the Hemodes
or Baltic Islands, and the Kingdom o^ Norway (now in subjection to the Danes)
with the Islands in the North Sea, etc. that properly belong to it; and of
these in their order.

The Cimbrick Chersonese, in which the two Juitlands, and the Dukedom of
Holstein are contained, is in length 120 miles, and in breadth 80, and
accounted to have within that Tract of Land; being in a manner a Peninsula, 20
Royal Castles and Palaces; 28 Cities of note; 4 Bishop Sees, and a
considerable number of Villages; in many places very Fruitful, and affording
sundry curious Havens; and on the South East is Wagerland, and has for its
chief Towns Hamburg on the Elbe. Lubeck seated on the confluence of the Trave
and Billew, near the fall of that River into the Baltic Sea; much traded to by
sundry Merchants, where they find great store of the Commodities of those
Countries which are accounted the most fertile.

Dithmarsh spreads the West side of the Chersonesus, Situate between the River
Albis and Endera, giving Title to the Eldest Son of the King of Denmark, and
has Meldrop and Marnes for its principal Towns; and although by reason of the
many Marshes and Moorish grounds, the soil in many places is not commodious
for Tillage, yet nevertheless it feeds great store of Cattle.

STORMARIA or STORMARSH lying between the River Elbe, and the Rivers Billew and
Store, and has for its chief Towns Crampe on the Bank of a little River of the
same name, falling into the Store, and is well fortified and reckoned one of
the Keys of the Kingdom; nor less noted for the great resistance it made
against Walestein the Imperial General; who is powerful Army it resisted 13
Months, and at last brought him to good terms of Composition. Tychenburgh on
the Banks of the River Elbe; Bredenburg, Jetzebo, Gulick^tadt and others.

South Juitland, or the Dukedom of Sleswick, is that part of the Chersonesus
that lies next to Holstein; having for its chief Towns, Fleusburg on the
Baltic shore Situate amongst high Mountains: Sleswick on the River Slay; from
which the Dukedom of Sleswick has its name, Goterp and Londen a Haven Town upon
the Banks of the River Ender.

North Juitland is the most Northern part of the Ch^rsonesus and has for it is
chief Towns Halne, Rircopen, Arhausen and Nicopen; the soil very Fruitful, and
much abounding with Wheat, Barley, Rice; store of Cattle, producing Butter and
Cheese in great abundance; and able Horses for War, or any other service, here
are also found Rich Furs.

As for those that are called the Baltic Islands; properly belonging to the
King of Denmark though they are 35 in number dispersed in the Baltic Sea, many
of them are Inconsiderable, and some not Inhabited; the chief are Zeland,
Fionia, or Funen; Arsen or Aria, Langland, Laland, Falster, Moan, Heaven or
Wern, Island and Bornholme; of which only the first is very considerable, as
having in it 13 Cities, the chief of which is Copenhagen the Residence of the
Danish Kings; where the Regal Palace, though not very stately, is seated; and
is a City of considerable Trade, though the Buildings are generally mean, as
Erected of Loam and Timber; there is a Market constantly kept, and is the only
University within the Government; it is defended with a strong Wall and a
Castle, and thither are brought all sorts of Commodities the Kingdom affords.

SCANDIA that part which appertains to Denmark, is in the South of a Peninsula,
divided into three Provinces; as Scandia, Hallandia, and Blescida; the first of
these is 72 Miles in length and 48 in breadth, reckoned the most fruitful and
pleasant of all the Countries lying about it, as being on three parts bounded
by Sea, and has for its principal Towns, Lonpen a spacious Haven. Falskerbode,
Elbogue and Elsinburg one of the Keys of the Sound.

HALLANDIA is but a small Tract of Land, yet yields much Fruits and Corn* many
Cattle, and lying South of Scania, has Halaenego for its principal Town, from
which it seems to take its name; and is well watered with pleasant Streams.

BLESCIDA lies North of Sweedland, and though it has many fertile Plains, yet
it is generally Mountainous or Craggy hilled, having for its chief Tradeing
Town, Malmogia and Colmar, a strong Fortress bordering on Sweedland.

A Description of Norway.
NORWAY, though under the King of Denmark, is however a Kingdom of it self,
being bounded on the East with Denmark, on the West with the Ocean, on the
North with Lappia or Lapland, and on the South with Sweeden; but lying so much
in the extremities of cold, though it is a vast tract of Land, it is for the
most part Rocky, Mountainous and Barren, not being furnished with stores of its
one Production, fit for the support of these few People it contains, the
greatest Commodity it affords being Stock Fish, Ship Masts, Deal Boards, Tackle
for Shipping, Pitch, Tanned Leather, Train Oil, Furrs, and Tallow. As for the
Towns or Villages, they are very thinn, and the Houses for a great part are
made of Dirt and Hurdles, covered with Thatch, and windowed with Lattice; and
the whole Country is divided into 5 Praefectures or Governments, according to
the Number of the Royal Castles, built for the defense of the Country, known by
the Names of Bohus, Ager-Huis, Agger-Huse, Trundheim, and Ward-Huis. The chief
Towns in these several Jurisdictions, are Anslo or Astoia, on a Bay opposite to
Juitland, an Episcopal See, Bergen, an Episcopal Sea, and the ordinary
Residence of the Governor for the King of Denmark; Marstrand seated in a half
Island amongst Rocks etc. Trandiheim, Anciently Nidrosia an Archbishops See
who is Metropolitan of Norway; and Ward-huis seated in the Island of Ward; and
although the Country (abounding with horrid Woods, and desolate Mountains) is
naturally Poor, yet at certain Seasons little Beasts, about the bigness of
Field Mice, overspread like Locusts the Fertile Parts of the Field, etc. and
consume every thing that is green or pleasant in their way, and then gathering
together they die in heaps, thereby occasioning a Pestilential Noisomness, that
much afflicts the Inhabitants with Diseases; and these they call Lemmers,
affirming them to be dropped out of the Clouds in Tempestuous Weather: Nor do the
Whales, that appear on that Coast in great number, less disturb their Fishing
Trade, by the indangering the sinking of their Boats and small Vessels; which
monstrous Creatures they have lately found the Art of chasing away, by throwing
Oil of Castor into the Sea, at the Scent whereof they fly: And though the
People are miserable Poor, they nevertheless hate dishonesty, and greatly
delight in Plain Dealing.

A Description of Russia, comprehending the Dukedom of Muscovy.
THIS large Tract of Land is bounded on the West with Livonia and Finland; on
the East with Tartary; on the North by the Frozen Ocean, and part of Lapland;
on the South with Lithuania, ^rim Taytary, and the Euxine Sea; and is accounted
in its greatest length from East to West 3300 Miles, and in breadth 3065, being
subject to the Czar of Muscovy, or great Duke, who notwithstanding styles
himself Emperor of Russia, or Russland, which is part in Europe, and part in
Asia, divided by the River Tanais, the boundard of two parts of the World.

The chief City is Mosco, the Seat of the great Duke, and the Patriarch, and of
most of the Nobility, being very large, though not stately; there are besides
this of note, Roscovia, and Novograd, Archepiscopal Sees, Vologda, Smolensko,
and Plescovia, held to be the only walled Town in Muscovy, Vstium, Mosayce, St.
Nicholas, Sugana, Gragapolis, and the chief Maritime Port is Archangel, seated
in the proper Russia, whither our Merchants Trade, and the Russia Company have
a Factory, the Country yielding store of Furrs, as Sables, White Fox, Martins,
Black Fox, Honey, Wax, Cattle, Tallow, Red Deer-skins, Hides, Hemp, Flax, Tar,
Brimstone, Salt Petre, Train Oil, Tongues, and the like; and the Soil toward
the Southern Parts is exceeding Fruitful, producing abundance of Corn, and rich
Pastures, with Fruits of various Kinds, watered by the River Volga, that passes
from thence through a part of Tartary; but to the Extreme North, which lies in
upward of 76 Degrees, the Weather is so Cold, that little but Rocks, Woods,
Mountains, and Ice are found there, containing a Vicissitude of Light and
Darkness; for the Day, if we have a respect to the Twy-light, lasts six Months,
and a great part of the other six they see not the Sun, but have the Country
covered with Snows and during Frosts, the Sea being never free from Rocks and
Mountains of Ice, over great Arms of which the Inhabitants pass with Wagons,
Sleads, and other Carriages: Nor are there found any Inhabitants in those
desolate Parts during the Winter Season, but in that little Summer they have,
the Shepherds and Fishermen, set up Hutts or Tents, though in the Woods on this
Coast, are the tallest Trees in Europe.

The Inhabitants of this Country are Thick, not tall, but rather square,
habiting themselves in Furrs, course Cloth, and Feeding to excess, given
greatly to Drinking, though it be strictly forbid, and are generally False and
Perfidious, nor regarding their Words, but studying to Overreach, or Cozen all
they can, insomuch that being in other Countries, they strive to dissemble
their own, the better to be Credited: The Women are tolerably handsome, well
Limbed and Proportioned, and have a strange Custom amongst them, not to think
their Husbands either Love or Regard them, unless they once or twice a day
Cudgel their Sides. Their Religion in most things agrees with that of the Greek
Church, not making any acknowledgment to the Pope, or See of Rome, but have a
Patriarch of their own, to whom all their Ecclesiastics submit: And as for the
Government it is absolute, the Czar, who is by the People in extraordinary
Esteem and Veneration, having in his Hands the Power of Life and Death,
disposing at his Pleasure both of the Body and Goods of his Subjects, and is
seldom out of War with the Tartars, a Roving People that border upon the most
Fruitful part of his Country; and though the Armies of the Muscovites are
generally numerous, yet are they composed for the most part of straggling
People, and seldom answer in valor the least that may be expected from them,
as has not only in times past, but lately been manifest, and the reason is,
because they go poor, and unfurnished into the Field.

A Description of Poland, etc.
POLAND is a very considerable Kingdom, bounded on the East with the River
Boristhenes, on the West with the Vistula; on the South with Hungary; and on
the North with the Baltic Sea; and is for the most part plain and level, though
in some places there are little rising Hills, abounding with Woods, and is
properly divided into the Provinces of Livonia, Lithuania, Volhinia, Samogitia,
Prussia, Massovia, Podalia, Russia Nigri, Podlassia, and Poland; and the chief
Cities are, Guesna, an Archiepiscopal See, Posnavia, Cadissia, Siradia,
Vladistavia, Crac^via, and Caminiec; the latter in the Possession of the Turks,
who hold it as their Frontier in those parts; and in Cracovia is a famous
University.

The Buildings in this Kingdom, and the Provinces that compose it, are for the
most part of Timber and Loam; the Land full of Forests, with many Rivers,
yielding notwithstanding abundance of Corn, but is defective in Wine; Honey and
Wax, are likewise found in great store, with Fruits of diverse Kinds, and a
great Number of Cattle and wild Beasts; there are also Salt Pits, and in some
places Mines of Brimstone, Copper and Iron. The Polanders are generally Tall,
well Proportioned, Courteous, and Pleasant of Behavior; their Garments are
rich, and of diverse Colors, being much conceited of their own worth, and
loving to be Praised, or rather Flattered: As for Lithuania, one of the
Provinces of this Kingdom, though it is a very large one, yet it is so full of
Fenns, and pestered by the overflowing of Rivers, that it is not currantly
passable, but when the Frosts are great, at what time they have no hindrance,
neither by Rivers nor Fenns, and their greatest Wealth consists in Cattle,
Honey, Wax and Furrs: As for the Language generally spoken, it is the
Sclavonian; and in the North Extremities, where Villages and Towns are very
scarce, the People dwell in Hutts of Straw and Loam, with Holes at the top of
them to let in the Light, and give vent to the Smoke, living in miserable
Poverty, as do (for the major part) the Peasants or inferior People, being in
a manner Slaves to the great ones, whose Tenants they are, though the Richer
Sort are very Profuse and Expensive, rather Prodigal than Liberal, Impatient of
Injuries, Delicious in Diet, and costly in Attire, often shaving their Heads,
except one Lock, which they preserve with great care, being generally good
Soldiers, and much Glory if they can kill a Turk in Battle, and bring off his
Head, in Token of which, they wear Feathers in their Caps.

Theft in these Parts is very rare, especially to be committed by a Native
Polander, and all Crimes are severely punished: As for the Religion they
Profess, in Relation to the Government, it is that of the Romish Church, though
the Reformed way of Worship is allowed and tolerated; and the King is of late
Elective; the Women are tolerably Fair and well Proportioned, very Witty and
Ingenious, great admirers, and observers, of their Husbands, and very neat in
their Houses. A Peasant in this Country (unless in time of great Danger or
Invasion) is not suffered to bear Arms; and when the Gospel is Read in the
Churches, the Gentry and Nobility draw their Swords, in token that they are
ready to defend it with their Lives. As for the Circumference of this Kingdom,
and the Provinces appertaining to it, some Account it 2600 Miles, and is
Situate under the 8 and 12 Climates: So that the longest Day Southward, is 16
Hours, and Northward 18; bordering upon it are the huge Carpathian Mountains,
where sundry Rivers have their Springs, that Water the Provinces, and pass
through many Countries.

A Description of the Kingdom of Hungary, etc.
HUNGARY, one of the Fruitfullest Countries of Europe, before Wasted and
Destroyed by a Tedious War, is bounded on the East with Transylvania and
Wallachia, on the West Stiria, Austria, and Moravia, on the North with the
Carpathian Mountains, on the South with Sclavonia, and some part of Dacia;
accounted in Length 300 English Miles, and 109 in Breadth, lying in the North
Temperate Zone, between the middle Parallels of the 7 and 9 Climates, so that
the longest Day in the South is 15 Hours and a half, and 16 in the North, and
was Anciently called Pannonia.

The People of this Country are strong of Body, boisterous of Behavior, and
have no great regard to Liberal Arts, or Mechanic Occupations, as giving
themselves mostly to War, and taking it for the greatest Affront Imaginable to
be esteemed a Coward, which they find no other way to obliterate, but by
killing a Turk, after which they have the Liberty of wearing a Feather, as a
Trophee of their Exploit; and though they are extremely Covetous, they are no
ways willing to Labor, but rather desire to live upon the Spoil: As for the
Females they have no claim to any Inheritance, so that the Male Line failing,
the Estate goes to the common Treasury; nor have the Daughters any other
Portion given them, than a Wedding Garment, and are for the most part obliged
to lie on hard Quilts, till such time as they are Married. As for their Cities
and Towns, they are fortified for War, as having for upward of two Hundred
Years been Imbroiled with the Turks, Transilvanians; and other Neighboring
Nations; the chief of which are, Presburg, Buda, Belgrade, Gran, New-hausel,
Great Warradine, Alba Regalis, Raab, Commora, Temeswar, Gyula, Agria, Esseck,
Pest, etc. which have strugled with various Fortunes and Success, though at
present most of the strong Holds of this Kingdom, through the late good success
are in the Imperialists hands; the Kingdom being Hereditary to the House of
Austria, of which Joseph the Emperor's Son, and Archduke of Austria, is now
Crowned King.

The Soil, though for the most part Untilled, is notwithstanding wonderful
Fruitful, yielding Corn where they Till it, thrice in a Year, and in some
places the Pastures are so rank for want of Feeding, that it rises the height
of a Man; it abounds likewise with Fruits of all Kinds, especially abundance of
Rich Vines, of whose Grapes rich Wine is made, and Deer, Goats, Hares, Conies,
and wild Foul are here in great Plenty, though none be forbidden to take them;
there are likewise Mines of Silver, and in some places Gold is found; and in
time of Peace the Cattle so multiply, that they are obliged to send great store
of them into diverse parts of Europe, to prevent their overrunning the Country.

The Religion Established in the Kingdom of Hungary, is that of the Romish
Communion, though at present the Reformed Worship is Tolerated: The chief
Rivers are the Danube, the Gran, the Waag, and the Nitrea; though many other
Water this Fruitful Country; but for Mountains there are none considerable, the
Country being generally plain, unless a few pleasant rising Hills, many of them
Crowned with Vines; and here is the Famous Bridge of Esseck, 7 Miles in Length:
passing over 3 Rivers, and diverse Marshes, though lately it has been much
ruined and destroyed.

The Description of Sclavonia.
SCLAVONIA is a considerable Country, bordering on Hungary, which bounds it on
the North; as the Adriatic Sea does on the South; Carniola, Histria, and the
Seignory of Venice on the West; and Servia, Epirus, and Macedonia on the East;
accounted in Length 480 Miles, and in Breadth 325, of Italian Measure, Situate
in the North Temperate Zone, between the Middle Parallels of the 6 and 7
Climates; so that the longest Day exceeds not 15 Hours and a half.

This Country contains many small Provinces or Divisions, as Windishland,
Croatia, Bosnia, Dalmatia, Contado-Dizara, and the Sclavonian Islands; and the
chief Cities or Towns are, Zatha, Zacaocz, Windisgretz, Sagona, Ragusa,
situate on the Adriatic, being a place of great Traffic, Sebenicum or Sicum,
Zara or Jadera, Scodra or Scutary, before which the Turks lost 100000 Men,
Lissa, Gradiska, Buman, Novigrad, and Sisseg, or Sisseck, with others of lesser
Note, scattered throughout the Provinces, which are partly in the Hands of the
Turks, and partly in the Possession of the Imperialists and Venetians.

These Countries for the most part afford abundance of good Pasture, abound in
Fruits, and are rich in Corn, yielding some Mines, and great store of Cattle,
watered in many places by the Danube, Save, Drove, and other Rivers of note;
and as for the People they are hardy, and inured either to War or Labor; and
though they give themselves not much to Till the Ground, because the Turks and
Venetians for the most part, reap the Benefit of their Labors, yet they want
nothing that is necessary for the support of Humane Life; forasmuch as the
Cattle and Sheep bring forth their Young twice in the Year; and although Corn
be but barely cast on the Ground, without Tillage, it will bring forth Increase.

As for the People, though they are stubborn, and much addicted to Pride, yet
are they put to many servile Labors, by their more proud Conquerors, who Lord
it over them as if they were no other than their Drudges; for which reason the
Word Slave, is derived from these Sclaves, through the unmerciful Usage they
found at the hands of the Venetians, when they were first brought into
Subjection by the Seigniory of Venice: As for their Religious Worship, it is in
most parts according to that of the Greek Church, whose Patriarch they
acknowledge Supreme in Ecclesiastical Matters; and here they permit their Women
very rarely to marry, till they are 24 years of Age, nor the Men till 30. And
at this time, the Venetians have 3000 Sclavonian Horsemen Enrolled amongst
their Militia, and have at all times drained this People to assist in their
Wars against the Turks and neighboring Christians: And as for the Native
Sclaves, their Garb is half Sleeved Gowns, of violet Cloth, and a Bonnet of the
same, much like to that of the Scots* shaving their Heads all but a Lock of
Hair on their Crown, after the Fashion of the Turks; the Women likewise cut
their Hair indifferent short, and if so it be not naturally Black, they use Art
to render it of that Color.

A Description of Dacia, in its sundry Principalities and Provinces, etc.
DACIA, properly so held in the time of the flourishing Roman Empire, is
bounded on the North with Podolia, and some other part of the Realm of Poland;
on the South with part of Thrace and Macedonia; on the East with the rest of
Thrace; and on the West with Hungary and Sclavonia; held at present to
comprehend the Principalities of Transylvania, Moldavia, Wallachia, Rascia,
Servia and Bulgaria; extending from the 7 to the 10 Clime, so that in the most
Southern parts, the days are 15 hours 3 quarters at the longest, and 17 in the
most Northern.

TRANSYLVANIA the first Division of Dacia, takes its name from its lying behind
the great Hungarian Woods, and is in time of Peace an exceeding Fruitful
Country; abounding in Fruits, Corn, Cattle, Fish, Salt Pits, Stone-quarries,
Mines of Gold and Silver, Quicksilver, and other Metals; and in the Woods are
found many wild Bulls, and wild Cattle; and the Pastures breed many fair
Horses, the best for War in all those parts; and in the Frontiers they have
Seven Towers to guard the approach from Hungary, which gives the Dutch occasion
to call it Seven-Burg; though the chief Towns are Clusenburg, Carolstaat,
Harmanstadt, and many others, and are Governed by a Prince of their own, who
has a long time been Tributary to the Turks; but since their late bad success,
put himself and his Country under the Protection of the Emperor.

MOLDAVIA Quasi Maetavia, said so to be called from its nearness to the Fenns
of Maeotis, is a Country abounding with Woods, yet very plenteous in Wine, Corn
and Pastures, producing great store of Cattle though thinly peopled, by which
means it is but slenderly Tilled; however they have out of this small Province,
supplied the great and populous City of Constantinople, with store of
Provisions; so that together with what they send to Poland, the tenth Penny, by
way of Custom, amounts to 150000 Crowns yearly, though the Gentry and Clergy
are excused from paying any thing of this nature, Constantinople receiving from
hence every year 500 Ship Loads of Provision only.

The chief Towns are Occaz^ma the Seat of the Vaivod or Prince Cotiim a strong
Fortress Biolograde and Bender, and has in it two Archbishops Sees; the people
in Religious matters following the Traditions of the Greek Church.

WALACHIA is another Province of Dacia, held to derive its name from Flacous, a
noble Roman, who was Governor of it in the time of Trajan the Emperor; so that
the people at this day speak a kind of a corrupt Latin or Italian; and this
Country is in length 500 miles, in breadth 120, being for the most part plain
and full of Pastures, flourishing Medows which feed a great many Cattle, and
bring up excellent Horses for War and Service of any kind; here are found
likewise Salt Pits and Iron Mines; Mines of Gold and Silver* the which for fear
it should entice the Turks to (...) their Country, they keep for the most part
concealed; they also in sundry places have store of Vines, yielding plenty of
Wine; and have for their chief Towns Galatza on the Influx of the River Pruth,
into the Danube; Frescortum, Prai^aba, and Zorza; and is watered with the
Rivers Danube, Teln, Alluta, Fulmina, Stertius and Herasius; and is as the
former, Gove^ (...) a Vai^od* and dependant in Religious ^gean and (...)
Church; the Ecclesiastical Affairs being Governed by an Archbishop and two
Bishops, and pays at this day Tribute to the Turks.

RASCIA, another Province of Dacia, has in it the Towns of Bodon, Zarnovia,
Covin, Novebard, Severine, Colambes and Columbella; but continually lying in
the way of War; the Turks and Tartars, by their often marching through it, have
by the Waste and Plunder they made, so impoverished the Inhabitants, that the
Towns and Villages are extremely thin; and although the Soil is in many parts
capable of producing Corn and Fruits, yet wanting men to Till it, it produces
nothing material; nor are those that Inhabit it any ways encouraged to Manure
the Fields, as knowing others will reap the Fruits of their Labor.

SERVIA is a Country by Nature more Fruitful, and was Anciently very Rich and
Flourishing, till the Turks made themselves masters of it, by the fatal
overthrow of Lazarus the Despot, on the plains of Cossovia, and was well stored
with Mines of Gold and Silver, especially near the Town* of Zorbenick^; but now
they are either Exhausted, or thrown in, so that little advantage accrues by
them; and the people indeed are degenerated from their former manners and
behavior, as being Rude, Gluttonous, and much given to Wine.

Their principal Towns are Nissa, Vidina, Cra^^^, Zorbenic and Semunder, and
the Province is commodiously watered by the Rivers Colubra, Lem, Ibra and
Moravia, with some others, very pleasant and plentiful in many places.

BVLGARIA was Anciently a Kingdom, and called by the Romans Missa Inferior, as
Servia was Missa Superior; and is a Country very Mountainous and full of rugged
Hills, steep Rocks, and fearful Water-falls, taking its name from (...) Bulgars
a Scythian people, who in the^^g with Woo^d, upon it, driving out the Ancient
Inhabitants; and is divided from Thrace by the great Mountain Haemus, whose
Spurs and Branches in a manner overrun it; yet the Kings hereof have been
accounted very powerful; insomuch that they have worsted in sundry Battles, the
Latin and Greek Emperors of Constantinople: and received the Christian Faith,
toward the end of the Reign of Justinian the Second.

The places of most note are Mesembria, Divogatia, Axium, Nicopolis,
Marcionopolis, and are watered by the Danube; which in part of this Country
takes the name of Ister, and is now Tributary to the Turks; who for the most
part employ the Natives in their Wars, as being very Valiant and Daring,

A Description of Greece, in its Kingdoms and Provinces, as Anciently it stood,
etc.
GREECE as we now must take it, is bounded on the East with the Propontick,
Hellespont, and Aegean Seas; on the West with the Adriatic; and on the North
with the Mount Haemus, parting it from Servia and Bulgaria, and some part of
Illiricum; and on the South with the Ionian Sea; being in a manner a Peninsula,
or rather a half Island, commodiously Situate for Navigation, and has had
diverse notable Revolutions, being now inti^^^ (...) the possession of the
Turks, unless what the ^enetians have preserved, or wrested from them; and as
this large Country properly stands at present, I think it highly necessary, for
the better convenience of describing it, to divide it into respective Provinces
and Countries, etc.

1. Peloponesus. 2. Achaia. 3. Epirus. 4. Albania. 5. Macedonia: 6. Thrace, and
as for the Islands of the Ionian, Aegean and Propontick Seas; together with the
famous Creet, I shall leave them to a particular description of all the Islands
of note, etc.

Peloponesus is in a manner enclosed by the Sea, only where by a small Isthmus
it is joined to the European Continent, of no more than six miles in breadth;
which the Grecians and Venetians formerly fortified with a great Wall and five
Castles, Anciently called Hexamillium; but in the Wars with Amurath the second
Turkish Emperor they were overthrown; and this Country is accounted 600 miles
in circuit, and though it has passed under diverse names, it is now called the
Morea, and held to be the most pleasant Country of Greece, abounding in
fruitfulness, and all things necessary for the support of Human Life; adorned
with many goodly Plains and pleasant rising Hills, furnished on every side with
sundry commodious Ports and Havens; and though for the bigness of it no Country
has suffered more in the ruin of so many stately Cities, yet it remains at this
day, the most populous and best Inhabited of all the Grecian Continent; and
near the middle of it, in Laconia is the Mount Taygetus, the top whereof gives
a prospect over the whole Country, which is properly divided into 7 Provinces,
viz. Achaia-Propria, Elis, Messene, Arcadia, Laconia, Argolis and Corinthia.

Achaia-Propria has on the East for its boundard Argolis and Corinth; on the
West the Ionian Sea; on the North the Gulf of Lepanto; on the South Elis; so
named from the Achaei once Inhabiting it; the Adjuncta Propria being added to
difference it from Achaia in the main Land or Continent of Greece.

In this part the considerable places are Chiarenza Anciently Dymae, Situate
in the most Western point of it, on or near the Promontory, Araxum, Aegria,
once the chief City of this Tract, now called Xilocastro, Chaminisa, Anciently
Olneus, Patreae, a pleasant Town Situate opposite to the Mouth of the Gulf
Lepanto; being a place of considerable Trade, and most note on the Bay of
Corinth, from whence it is called Golfo-di-Patras and here the English had once
a Consul for the establishment of Trade, called the Consul of the Morea, and is
memorable for the death of St Andrew, the Apostle, who there suffered
Martyrdom; and next to these are Pellene, Hellice, Buris, the latter two much
ruined or rather sunk in the Sea by a Tempest, about the time of the Battle of
Leuctres; Tritaea and Phera; but the chief Town which separated from the rest,
we may term a Province is Sicyon, Situate in the most Eastern part, and gives
name to the Country of Sicyonia abounding in Olives, Wine, and Iron Mines; the
Inhabitants whereof count themselves the Antientest of Greece, and have been
Governed by a Succession of 26 Kings, before they fell into other Methods of
Government.

The Country of Elis, is bounded on the East with Arcadia, on the West with the
Ionian Sea, on the North with Achaia-Propria, and on the South Messenia; and
has for its chief City Elis, giving name to the Province, and was founded as
some Historians have it, by Elisha Son of Javan, and Grandchild of Japhet; and
near unto it runs the River Alpheus: In this Tract is found Olympia, near to
which once stood the Statue of Jupiter (...) 60 Cubits in height, and every
way proportionable, composed of Gold and Ivory, by Phidias; and here were held
the Olympic Games, Instituted by Hercules.

MESSENIA is seated in the most Southern part of the Peninsula, and takes its
name from the City of Messene Situate on Sinus Messenaicus now called
Golfo-di-Corone, lately taken and posse^led by the Vene^ians; in this Tract
stood Pylos the chief City of King Nestor, but now called Navarino, a small
Village of little note Metron or Methone, is commodionsly seated in a half
Island, and has on the South side a capacious Bay about 3 miles over, fit for
the reception of great Vessels. Corone the City that gives name to the
Golfo-di-Corone, etc. Cyparissi now called Arcudia, from which the Bay
adjoining takes its name; and although this Province abounding with Corn,
Cattle and Fruits, was taken by the Turks in the year 1500, yet in this last
War it is mostly recovered by the Venetians.

ARCADIA is bounded on the East with Laconia, on the West with Elis and
Messene, on the North with Achaia-Propria; and on the South with the Sea; and
is said to take its name from Arcas the Son of Jupiter and Calisto, called
before that Pel^^gia, and has for its chief City Mantinia; near unto which the
Thebans in a mortal Battle, overthrew the Spartans and Athenians; and then
Epaminondas that famous Leader received his Mortal wound. This Province is
exceeding fertile, abounding in Cattle and rich Pastures, Fruits of sundry
kinds, and diverse Minerals; insomuch that for its pleasantness, many curious
fancies have been ^abled upon it; and in this Country Sir Philip Sidney laid
the Seen of his famous work.

LACONIA has on the East and South the Sea, on the West Arcadia, and on the
North Argolis, Anciently called Lelegia; and was once reckoned to ^ontain 100
Cities, though now it comes very short of that number: The chief are Leuctres,
Amyclae, Thulana, near to which Hercules is said to kill the Hydra; Salass^a,
Epidaurus seated on the Bay of Malvasia, a Town well Built and Fortified; and
Sparta so called from Spartus a Prince of Argos; as for this part it is
wonderful fruitful, and lies very commodious for Traffic and Navigation,
greatly abounding in all the Commodities common to Greece; being pleasantly
watered with the River Eurotas, and other Streams of lesser note; having many
fair Promontories, Bays, and Havens.

ARGOLIS is bounded on the South with Laconia, on the West with Corinthia and
Achaia-Propria, and on the East and North with the Sea; taking its name from
the City Argos, its Metropolis, once the Head of a famous Kingdom; and in this
City King Pyrrhus the great Grecian Conqueror, after he had Victoriously forced
his entrance, was slain with a Tile thrown at him by an old Woman, from the top
of a House; and besides this, it has Traezan, Tyrinthia, Nemea, and some
others; and grew in times past from a small Province, to a powerful Kingdom;
being once the chiefest of Greece in strength giving Birth to many renowned
persons, and the most famed for the breed of Horses.

CORINTHIA, though but a little Region, is yet nevertheless exceeding pleasant
and fruitful, lying toward the Istmus or neck of Land that joins the rest of
Greece to Peloponesus, between Argolis* and Achaia Propria; containing only the
Territories of Corinth, and the chief Towns are Cincrea, Corinth, memorable for
the Epistles Saint Paul wrote to the Inhabitants; commodiously Situate for the
command of all Greece, but that the Inhabitants give themselves more to
Merchandise than War; and although it has been a long time in the hands of the
Turks, it was the last year taken by the Venetians; and is Seated on the bottom
of the neck or Istmus, the Ionian Sea being on the West, and the Aegean on the
East, washing its walls; and making on each side a Capacious Haven, and was
formerly exceedingly Fortified but of latter times the Security the Turks
supposed themselves in, on that part of their Empire, made them little mind
keeping it from running to decay.

And thus much may briefly suffice, as for that part of Greece called
Peloponesus.

As for the other Achaia, it is properly divided into Attica, Megaris, Baetia,
Phocis, Aetolia, Doris, Locris; and the chief City accounted amongst these is
Athens, once the head of a famous Commonwealth, and sometime a Kingdom; and is
Seated very advantagiously, making a Port into the Sea, and was once the
Mistress of Arts and Arms; and in St. Paul's time, who wrote his first and
second Epistle from hence to the Thessalonians a very flourishing City, but by
the Wars and Misfortunes it has sustained, is now only noted, for what it has
been, more than for what it is.

MEGARIS is but a small Region, yet very pleasant and much abounding in Corn
and Fruits, and has for its chief City Magaria.

BAETIA is much larger than the former, and was once all the Dominion or
Kingdom of Thebes, that famous City, so much noted to be built by Cadmus the
Phaenician, being the Metropolis: and in this Tract are found likewise Aulis
and Platea, and is watered with diverse pleasant streams.

PHOCIS is memorable for the Mountain Parnassus, and was much noted for the
Temple of Apollo at the foot of it, but now that stately Structure where the
Delphic Oracle gave Answers is ruined, and scarcely any part of it remaining.

AETOLIA is another considerable part of this Tract, divided by the River
Pindus from Epirus; once a country of great note, and full of Towns and places
of strength, but now retains at present few of note except Chalcis and Thermum;
however the whole Country is pleasant, abounding in Pastures, watered with many
Rivers, yielding some Mines, and great store of Cattle.

LOCRIS though it is but a small Region, yet lies Commodiously on the Sea
Coast, and has for its chief Town Lepanto; in sight of which was fought the
famous Battle or Sea fight, between the Turks, Venetians, and consederate
Christians; in which 29000 of the Turks were killed, 4000 taken Prisoners, 140
Galleys Burnt, Taken, and Sunk, and 1200 Christian Slaves rescued, in the year
1571. and as for the Trade here, it consists in Leather, Oil, Tobacco, Furrs,
Wheat, Barley, Rice, etc. And is again in the Possession or under the Power of
the Venetians.

DORIS is a small Province bounding upon, or rather appertaining to Locris, and
has for its chief Town or City, Amphissa, bordering upon the Mountain
Parnassus; here is also found Guidas, where the stately Temple of Venus stood,
and where St. Paul continued a long time: And as for this Tract it is very
Pleasant and Fruitful, watered with small Rivers, but none of note.

Epirus, was once a Famous Kingdom, of which Pyrrhus (who Invaded the Romans in
Italy) was King, but more memorable for being under the Regency of the great
Scanderbeg, who with a handful of Men stood out against the whole Power of the
Turkish Empire, in the Reigns of Amurath the Second, and Mahomet the great,
defeating and destroying Prodigious Armies of the Infidels; and has for its
chief Cities Cro^ja, Petrela, Petra, Alba, and Stelusia; the Country is very
Fruitful, though somewhat Mountainous, and was once accounted next to Macedon,
the most powerful in Greece, and at this day greatly abounds in Cattle, rich
Pastures and Corn.

ALBANIA is bounded with Macedon, Sclavonia, Epirus, and the Adriatic Sea, and
has for its chief Cities Durazzo, and Albinopolis, memorable for its Breed of
Horses, which the Turks use mostly in their Wars, and the Courage of its
Inhabitants, whose Country being but Indifferently Fruitful, and too strait for
the Inhabitants, they like the Swiss, rather choose the Exercise of Arms, than
Husbandry.

MACEDON, once Famous for being Head of the Greek Empire, is bounded with Missa
Superior, Migdonia, Epirus, and Achaia, and is a very Rich and Flourishing
Country, though the Turks greatly oppress the Native Greeks, and make them
labor that they may reap the greatest Profit, and abounds not only with
Cattle, Corn, and some Wine, but in it are found Mines of Gold, and other
Metals; and of this Country Alexander the Great was King, who not only
Conquered the greatest part of Asia, but brought all Greece into Subjection,
founding here the third Empire of the World: And as for the chief Cities, they
are Aedassa, Andrastus, Eriba, Scidra, and Philippus, or Philipopolis, Built by
Philip the Father of Alexander; and to the People of this City it was, that St.
Paul Wrote his Epistle.

THESSALY was once likewise a Kingdom, lying on the South of Macedon, abounding
with Pleasant Valleys and Hills, and amongst the latter are found that of
Olympus, so famed for Transcending the Clouds, Othris, Pelion, and Ossa, so
often struck with Thunder, and Fabled to be laid one upon the other, when the
Giants went about to Storm the Skies. The Country indeed is very Fruitful in
many Parts, and produces an Excellent Breed of Horses, the Natives being held
first to Invent the Art of Breaking and Backing them: and here Achilles
Reigned, who was Slain at the Siege of Troy: The chief Towns of this Country
are La^ia, Tricca, Pharsalia, on whose large Plains Caesar and Pompey fought
for the Empire of the World; as also Philippi, in whose Fields Augustus Caesar
and Marcus Antonius, overthrew Brutus and Cassius.

MIGDONIA is a small Country, and accounted by most a part of Thrace, and
famous for nothing more than the Hill Athos, held to be the highest in the
World, as being 3 days Journey in Ascent, and 75 Miles in Circuit; so that its
shadow reaches (upon the declining of the Sun) 40 Miles: nor are there wanting
in this Country Cities and Towns of considerable Note, as Thessalonica,
commonly called Salonica (to whose Inhabitants two of St. Paul's Epistles are
directed) Appollonia, Nicladia, and others.

THRACE, properly so called, though now Romaniae, as it lies at present circum
scribed is within these Boundards, viz. on the East the Euxine, or black Sea,
the Propontis and Hellespont; on the West with Macedon; on the South with the
Aegean Sea, and part of Macedon, and on the North with the large Hill Haemus;
and is a large and goodly Province, accounted 20 Days Journey in Length, and 6
in Breadth, and in Relation to the Heavens reaches unto 44 Degrees North
Latitude, so that the longest Day in Summer is about 15 Hours, and 3 Quarters;
and in this Country is Situate the great City of Constantinople, so Named by
Constantine the Great, and made by him the Capital of the Roman Empire, and is
now the like to the Turkish Empire, and the chief Residence of the Grand
Seigniour; Built in a Triangular manner, the one Angle thrusting into the Main
Land, and the other two bordering upon the Sea; Adrianople, Built by Adrian the
Emperor, and Trajanopolis, Founded by the Emperor Trajan; with others of lesser
Note.

This Country as to the Soil, is very Fruitful, but by Reason of the sharp cold
Air coming off the Seas, they ripen not kindly, nor do the Inhabitants trouble
themselves much with Husbandry, as knowing they labor but for others; however
in their Gardens toward the Sea, they are very curious, so that much Wine is
produced from the Grapes that grow there, which is properly called Greek Wine,
and mostly sent into other Countries, the Turks by their Law being forbidden to
Drink it: They have large Plains likewise where Corn grows indifferently
Plentiful, but more Pulse which is amongst them in great use. The Natives of
this Country, as indeed of all Greece, are much declined from what they
formerly were, in Learning, Arts, and Arms, as being no better than Slaves to
the Imperious Turks, who Lord it over them, whereby they are discouraged and
dulled, even to a kind of Stupidity; nor does the Eloquence of their Original
Language continue pure amongst them, but is mostly corrupted, insomuch that
they in few parts perfectly understand the Ancient Greek.

The Commodities found in the Principal Trading Towns of this, and other Sea
Provinces, are Grograms, Carpets, Silks, Drugs, Leather, Chamlets; and indeed
the chief Commodities of Europe and Asia, which Pay great Customs to the Grand
Seigniour. And thus much for the main Land of Europe, whose Islands we shall
hereafter consider, with those of the other Three Parts of the World, when we
come to treat of the Respective Seas in which they are posited, and therefore,
for Orders Sake, Omit them here, and proceed to Asia.

A Geographical and Historical Description OF ASIA.
In its Kingdoms and Provinces, etc.
Of Asia in General.
ASIA held to be larger than Europe and Africa, is bounded on the West with the
Mediterranean and Aegean Seas, the Hellespont, Propontis, and the Thracian
Bosphorus, the Euxine Sea, Palus Maeotis, the Rivers Tanais and Duina, a Line
in that case being drawn from the first to the second River, as its bounda^d to
Europe; on the North it is bounded with the main Scythian Ocean, on the East by
the Streights of Annian, the Indian Ocean, and Mare del Zur, on the South, with
the Mediterranian, or so much of it, as is called the Carpathian Sea, bathing
the Shoars of Anatolia; and the Main Southern Ocean, passing along the Coasts
of India, Arabia, and Persia; and on the South-East, with the Arabian Bay, or
Red Sea, parting it from Africa, and is indeed washed on all sides with the
Sea, but where a narrow Istmus joins it to Africa, and the space of ground
between the Tanais and Diuna, where it is joined to Europe.

This large Tract of Land, is held by some, to take its Name from Asia, the
Daughter of Oceanus, and Thetis the Wife of Japetus, and Mother of Prometheus,
and others, from Asius, Son of Atis, a King of Lydia; but Originals of this
kind, being generally uncertain, it will be convenient to wave them, and
proceed to what is more Material, viz. In Ancient times Asia was divided into
the Greater and Lesser; but by modern Writers, it is divided into five parts,
according to the Divisions it is settled in; as First, that which Borders upon
Europe, is allotted the Great Duke of Muscovy; the Second, the Great Cham of
Tartary; the Third, the Turk; the Fourth, the King of Persia; and the Fifth,
held by the Great Mogul, and others, known by the Name of the East India; not
accounting the petty Princes, who have independent Provinces, nor what remains
in the Hands or Possession of the Europeans in sundry Parts, etc. To which five
we may properly add China, a large Country, very populous, and powerful,
accounted one of the Fruitfullest in Asia.

This part of the World may rightly be held or termed, the Noblest of all
other, as conjectured, on all hands, once to contain the Earthly Paradise: Here
the Law was given, and here our blessed Savior, wrought the stupendous, and
amazing work of our Redemption: Hence sprung the Noble Sciences, that the
Greeks learned of the Hebrews, and flourished under the Monarchy of the Medes,
Persians and Assyrians: And is divided into two Parts, or Divisions, as Asia
Major, and Asia Minor, the latter called Anatolia; the whole Country situate
East and West, from 52 to 169 Degrees of Longitude; and North and South, from
82 Degrees of Latitude, to the very Equator or Aequinoctial Line; some few
Islands only lying beyond that Circle, which occasions the longest Summers Day
in the most Southern part, to exceed little above 12 Hours, though in the most
Northern Parts, for near the space of Four Months, they have no Night at all.

As for the Commodities, this great part of the World abounds with in general,
they are Gold, Silver, all sorts of Minerals, Jewels, Pearls, Spices, Odours,
Ivory, Drugs of sundry kinds, Silks, Dies, Sweet-woods, Perfumes, etc. But to
come nearer to the Description of the Countries, for Orders sake, it is
convenient to begin with Asia Minor, or Anatolia.

Asia Minor, or Anatolia, described, in its Kingdoms, and Provinces, etc.
ASIA MINOR, or Anatolia, is bounded on the East, with the River Euphrates; on
the West, with the Thracian Bosphorus, Propontis, Hellespont, and the Aegean
Sea, parted by them from Europe; on the North with Pontus Euxinus, or the Black
Sea; on the South by the Rhodian, Lydian, and Pamphilian Seas, and several
parts of the Mediterranean; extending from 51 to 72 degrees, of Longitude; and
from 36 to 45 degrees of Latitude, and is accounted in length, from the
Hellespont to the Euphrates 630 Miles, and in breadth from Trabezond, a City so
called to Sinus Issicus in Cilicia, 210, and is under the middle Parallel of
the Fourth, to the Sixth Clime, by reason of which, the longest Day in the
Summer Southward, is but 14 Hours and a half, and differs not above an Hour in
the extremest North, which is longer, insomuch that the Air is very Temperate,
and the Soil very fit for any sort of Grain or Fruit; but that Husbandry is
neglected by reason of its being under the Turkish Yoke, though the Rich
Pasture of its own accord breeds great store of Cattle, and an excellent Race
of Horses; and here stood the Famous City of Troy, so much renowned for its
sustaining Ten Years Siege, against the whole Power of Greece: nor did this
Country formerly boast of less than 4000 Cities and Towns, but at this day most
of them are found to be Ruined by War and Earth quakes.

As for the Division of this part of Asia, it is properly divided into
Bythinia, Pontus, Paphlagonia, Galatia, Cappadocia, Armenia minor, Phrygia
minor, Phrygia major, the greater and the lesser Missias, Aeolis, and Ionia,
Lydia, Caria, Lycia, Lycaonia, Pisidia, Pamphilia; and what in the time it
appertained to the Roman and Greek Empires, were under the Province of the
Rhodes; and of these in their Order.

BITHYNIA, is a very pleasant Province of Asia minor, formerly called Bebrycia,
and afterward Migdonia, taking the present Name from one Bithynius, who was
King thereof when a Kingdom, though (...) will have this Name derived from
Thyni a People of Thrace, who Subdued and Possessed it. The Country is
naturally Rich on that part bordering upon the Bosphorus, opposite to
Constantinople, which is Situate on the European Shore, full of little rising
Hills, and grassy Plains, and was once the Delight of such as sailed those
Seas, or Streights; but the Turks (who affect neither Art nor Sumptuousness in
their Retirements or Recreation) have neither Improved, nor kept up the
pleasant Gardens and Palaces they found in it.

The Principal Towns of Bithynia, are Scutari, facing Constantinople,
Chalcedon, memorable for the Fourth General Council there Assembled, for the
Suppression of the Nestorian Heretics, Nicomede, so named from Nicomedes once
King of Bithynia, Libussa, memorable for the Death and Sepulcher of the Famous
Hannibal, the Carthaginian General, who fell by Poison, Prusa, once a
considerable City, and the Residence of the Turkish Kings, till Mahomet the
First removed to Adrianople: Nice, or Nicaea, Situate on the Fenns of the
River Ascanius, Famous for nothing more, than the first General Council held
there under Constantine the Great, Anno 314. to Settle the Peace of the Church,
greatly disturbed and put out of Order by the Arian Heresy, where there
Assembled no more than 318 Bishops, yet in such Esteem for Learning and Piety,
that to this Day, it is highly approved by all good Men; and here after the
taking of Constantinople by the Latin Princes, the Greek Emperor held his
Residence; and the Rivers of this Province are Phillis, Ascamius, Sangaris, or
Sangri, but for Hills or Mountains none of note appear.

PONTVS, or Metapontus is a Bordering Province on Bithynia, has for its chief
Cities Flaviopolis, Claudiopolis, Juliopolis, Diospolis, Heraclea, Amastris,
Phillium, and others formerly very famous, but o^ later Times not of much note;
and in that Part called the Eastern Pontus, is Sinope, pleasantly seated on a
long Promontory, shooting into the Main, and memoralble for the Sepulcher of
King Mithridates, who held a Forty Years War against the Romans; Themisciyra,
now called Fanogoria; Amasia, the Birth Place of Strabo the Geographer; Cabira,
afterward called Diopolis, noted for the overthrow Lucullus gave King
Mithridates near it, when to retard the Pursuit of his Enemies, he was obliged
to scatter his Treasure in the way, and thereby escaped their Hands, with the
greatest part of his Forces: As for the Rivers in these Parts, or any other
Division of Pontus, they are not (except Thermodon, on whose Banks the
Amazonians formerly Inhabited) of any considerable note.

PAPHLAGONIA, though a Country of little compass, yet once was the chief Seat
of a Powerful People, but ruined by Cyrus for their Assisting the Lydians
against him, and the Principal Cities were Gangra, now memorable for nothing
more than the Council held there in the Year 339. Conica, or Coniata,
Pompeiopolis, Germanopolis, Xoana, and Andrapa; and from this Country the
Venetians had their Original, as sprung from a People called Heneti, anciently
Inhabiting a part of it; and, as the rest, the Soil is very Fruitful in places
where it is Manured: The Inhabitants are a mixture of Greeks and Turks, with
some Christians and Jews amongst them, but not very many; nor have they any
considerable Traffic at Sea, which renders the Province poor.

GALATIA, deriving its Name from the Gauls, when they overran these Parts, who
called it Gaul-Asia, and corruptly Galatia; it was likewise called
Gallo-Graecia, from the mixture of Galls and Grecians; and here to this day the
Ancient Language of (...) Galls is much spoken, or at least mixed with that of
the Greek.

This Country (above what we have mentioned) is very plentiful in Fruits, and
other things necessary for the Support of Mankind; and in this part only is
the Amethist (that great Preservative against Drunkenness) found; and here the
People of Old had the Vanity to throw Written Papers into the Funeral Fires of
their Friends, as conceiting they would read them in the other World, and
thereby know the Sorrow they made for their Departure; and were so much given
to Sacrifices, that it is Noted by Athenaeus, how a Rich Galatian for the space
of a Year, Feasted the whole Province with the Flesh of such Beasts, as were
ordained for Sacrifices. To persuade them from which, and confirm them in a
more Glorious Religion, St Paul Wrote his Epistle to this People: As for Rivers
of note, there are none that rise in this Country, however it is supplied with
refreshing Streams, from Halys and Sangarius.

The chief Cities are An^yrana, now called Angauri, Olenus, Agriama, Tavium, or
Tanium, Androssi^, Fabarena, Thermae, and Talachbacora; there are likewise
sundry lesser Towns and Villages, but of no Note.

CAPPADOCIA, is on the East of Galatia, and is a Country abounding with Wine,
and sundry kinds of curious Fruits, many Mines of Brass, Iron, Silver, and
other Minerals in the Mountains, and other Parts, as also store of Allom, and
Alabaster; moreover the Crystal, Jasper, and Onyx Stone; it affords a great
number of Cattle, but more especially a great many Horses, insomuch that they
are sent into most parts of Asia; and as a boundard of this Country is the
Famous Ante-Taurus, a ridg or chain of Mountains, bending toward the North,
and in it were Born most of the noted Ringleaders of those Sects of Heretics,
that so much opposed the Church in its Infancy, insomuch that it grew into a
custom, to call a wicked Man a Cappadocian; and has for its Principal Cities
and Towns Erzirium, upon the Borders of the great Armenia, where the Turkish
Army usually Wintered in their return from the Persian Expeditions, and is the
Seat of a Bassa. Mazaca once the Residence of St. Basil: Sebastia, so named in
Honor of Augustus, whom the Greeks called Sebastas; Trepesus or Trepesond,
once the Seat of an Empire, but now under the power of the Turks, where the
Amazons were said to Inhabit, at the time Troy was razed by the Greeks, and
till displaced by Alexander the Great.

ARMENIA MINOR, though somewhat mountainous, is however a very fertile Country;
and is held by some to be that Ararat, upon whose Hills Noah's Ark rested after
the Deluge; and so consequently first to have been peopled after that Universal
Calamity, and is only parted from Armenia Major by the famous River Euphrates,
and is so enclosed in most parts, with that and the Mountains Taurus and
Ante-Taurus, that it is difficult to be entered, though in other places it is
delightful, and well watered by pleasant Streams issuing out of the Mountains;
the chief being Melas, which falls into Euphrates, and is so called from the
blackness of the Waters.

This Country was once a part of Cappadocia, till the Armenians wrested it by
force, and planted their Colonies here, from whom it took the present name; and
has for its chief Cities Nicopolis, Suur, anciently Melitene, Oromandus, built
by Pompey the Great, in token of his Victory over Tigranes the Syrian King,
under whom was both the Armenia's, Garnace, Caucusum, and Arbyss^s, whither St.
Chrysistom was Banished by the means of the Empress Eudoxia, who took part with
the Heretics: and these Countries had the Blessing to be converted to the
Christian Faith, by St. Paul and St. Peter, as appears by the Epistle of the
first to the Galatians, and of the last to the Strangers scattered or dispersed
in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, etc. And what remains is
more properly called Asia, though circumscribed in Anatolia, or Asia Minor, viz.

Asia Propria, was formerly held to be the most rich and flourishing part of
this Peninsula, as Tully affirms, when he certifies that the Roman Tributes
from other parts were but sufficient to defray the charges of keeping them; but
Asia says he, is so Fertile and Rich, that for the fruitfulness of the Fields,
variety of Fruits, largeness of Pastures, and quantity of Commodities, which
were brought from thence, it abundantly excelled all other Countries; and it
properly includes Phrygia Minor, Phrygia Major, Mysia, Aeolis, Ionia, Lydia and
Cario.

Phrygia Minor, so called, as many hold it, from the River Phryx, descending
from the greater Phrygia, is a very fruitful Country, mostly Champaign, and
watered with sundry noted Rivers, as Scamander, Xanthus, Simois, and others so
much renowned by Homer. In this Country, upon the Banks of Scamander, stood the
famous City of Troy, whose goodly Ruins, appear in some sort, to this day; and
from the Inhabitants of which City most Nations labor to fetch their Original.
Near to it stands Troas or New Troy, begun by Alexander the Great, and finished
by Lysimachus, one of his Captains, who yet named it Troas Alexandri, in honor
of his Master. Here are found likewise the Ports of Lyrnessus and Sigaeum, with
many other things, upon which the Poets especially have been large, who keep
them alive even in their Ruins; for indeed little else remains at this day; for
as Ovid has it, Jam seges est ubi Troja fuit, resecandaque falce,
Luxuriat Phrygio sanguine pinguis humus.
Corn ripe for Sciths, grows where Troy once stood,
And the Soils fatted with the Phrygian Blood.


PHRYGIA MAJOR, joins to the former, and is a very fruitful Country, abounding
with some Corn, Wine, and some Olive-Yards well watered, by the River Sangarius
and Marsyas; the former taking its Spring in this Country, discharges it self
into the Euxine Sea. And the Towns are Gordian, once the Residence of Gordius,
who of a Husbandman being made King, hung up the Furniture of his Wagons and
Ploughs in the Temple of Apollo, tied in such a Knot, that an old Prophecy run,
That he who could unty it should be Monarch of the World; which Alexander the
Great, upon his coming thither, trying to do and failing therein, cut it in
sunder with his Sword, showing thereby, what Policy could not do Force should
effect. Colosse, where the Colossians, to whom St. Paul wrote one of his
Epistles dwelt: Miedaeum, once the Seat of Midas; Pesinus where the Statue of
Cibele was held in great Veneration, and being from thence shipped for Rome,
the Ship by no means could be brought to pass up the Tiber, till a Vestal
Virgin, who had been accused of Incontinency, to clear her Innocence, by
fastening her Girdle to it (if you will believe the Story) drew it up the River;
and the reason why the Romans so coveted it was, that the Empire of the World
had been promised to those that could get it into their possession.

MYSIA is a Country lying, as it were, between the Phrygia's, supposed
anciently to be a Phrygian Nation, being much the same for Fertility: And here
is found the Asian Olympus, a vast Mountain, but inferior to that of the same
name in Greece, and has, for Rivers of note Cacus and Aesopus; on the Banks of
the former stands the once famous City of Pergamus, but now of little note.
There is likewise the River Granicus, having its Fountain in Mysia Major, and
falling into the Propontis, on the Banks of which Alexander gained the first
Victory against Darius the Persian King; who upon his first coming into Asia,
had made so little account of him, that he sent Order to his Lieutenant in
Anatolia to take him alive, and after having whipped him with Rods, to send him
bound to his Presence. And this Mysia is divided into the lesser and greater;
and here stands the Tower of Abydos, over against Sestos in Thrace, memorable
for the Story of Hero and Leander; with many other things more remarkable; as
the Inhabitants slaying themselves, to prevent falling into the hands of Philip
the Father of Persaeus King of Macedon, its being betrayed to the Turks by the
Daughter of the Governor, upon her falling in Love with Abderachmen, a Turkish
Officer; upon her Dreaming she fell into a miry place, and he coming by took
her up and wiped her clean, etc. Cyzicus, famous for its Port, Marble Towns and
stately Buildings, etc. And in Mysia Major are found Apollonia, Dainta,
Trajanopolis, Alydda, and others.

AEOLIS and IONIA Are generally conjunct, as Countries much depending on each
other, indifferently Fruitful, and contain sundry good Harbors. The principal
places in the first are Pitana, Acarnea, Elaea, Myrina, now Sebastopolis, Cene
the the chief in this part; Cumaea the Birthplace of one of the Sybils, and
Phaecia; and the People are held by Josephus to descend from Elisha the Son of
Javan, but by the many Conquests that have been made of this and other
Countries, whereby the People have been either destroyed or carried away, and
others planted in their steads, such Originals must needs be uncertain.

IONIA, Has for its principal Cities Mias on an Arm of the Sea, which
Artaxerxes assigned to Themistocles the noble Athenian, when the ungrateful
City of Athens had banished him after the glorious Conquests he had Achieved
in their behalf. Erythra, memorable for the Habitation of one of the Sybils,
Lebedus, Clazomene and others, especially Smyrna, a fair Haven City, on a Bay
named from it the Bay of Smyrna, and is not only famous for comprehending one
of the Seven Churches of Asia, written to by St. John, but is at present a
place of great Traffic, where the English have a Factory, and most Europeans
trade for Chamlets, Grogran, and other Stuffs, Drugs, with many such like
Commodities: The Grand Signior having there a Custom-House which brings in a
vast Revenue; and in old times there stood a goodly Temple, dedicated to Homer
the Greek Poet, as supposed to be the place of his Birth. In this Tract is
likewise found the City of Ephesus, so renowned for the Temple of Diana,
accounted one of the Seven Wonders of the World, and was in its Splendor 425
feet in length, and in breadth 220, supported with 127 Pillars of polished
Marble, curiously wrought, and was indeed a very goodly Structure, and so it
had need, for after it was modelled by Ctesiphon, a most expert Architect, it
was 200 years in Building, though Burnt in one day by Erastrotus, on purpose,
as he alleged to get him a Name, though of Infamy.

LYDIA once a famous Kingdom till ruined by the Persians, under the leading of
Cyrus; took its name, as many Historians will have it, from Lud the Son of Sem;
the People of which Country are said to be the first Coiners of Moneys, and
Inventers of sundry Games; and here is the Mountain Tomalus covered naturally
with Vines and Sipylus; and which are very fruitful Valleys; and yield the best
Saffron of Asia: the Rivers of note are Hermus, which taking its source in
Phrygia Major, passes by the skirts of Lydia, pleasantly watering the Pastures,
etc. and falls into a fair Bay of the Aegean Sea, opening toward the Island of
Clazomene; likewise Pactolus Castros, and the Meander; the which though upon a
direct line not exceeding 60 miles is nevertheless in measuring the winding,
accounted 600 which greatly ^etters the Country; in which are found Mines of
Gold and Silver, and some Stone of considerable value; and has for it is chief
City Sardis, seated on the River Pactalus. Philadelphia near to the bank of the
River Caistras: Thyatyra, Laodicea and others; nothing more renowned than to be
of the number of the 7 Churches, to which St. John wrote his Apocalypse; and of
this Country Croesus the Rich was King, who was deceived by the Oracle, in
these words, viz.

CROESUS Halyn penetrans magnam subvertit opum vim. Thus Englished:

When Croesus over Halys goes
A mighty Nation he o'erthrows.
Which he Interpreting according to his own hopes, crossed the River, and was
vanquished and taken Prisoner by Cyrus; overthrowing indeed his own People, and
was the last King of Lydia.

Caria is on the North of Lydia, in which is the Hill Latmus, where Endimion
retired for the better privacy in the study of Astrology, and there finding out
the course of the Moon and her changes, gave occasion to the Fable of his being
beloved by her and her kissing him, etc. and the River Salmacis which enfeebles
any Person that enters into it or drinks of the water; and has for its chief
Cities, etc. Miletus, Mindus, Heraclea and Latmum, Borgilia or Borgilos,
Milusa, Primassus, and others; and in the Southwest of this Province, thrusting
it self into the Sea like a Promontory, stands the little Country of Doris; so
called from Doors a Greek people that first Inhabited it; and has for its chief
Cities Cnidus, Cressa, formerly a noted Haven Town; Halicarnassus, where Queen
Arthemisia in Memory of King Mausolus her Husband, raised at vast expense a
Monument, accounted one of the 7 Wonders of the World, from which all great
Structures of that kind are called Mausoles.

As for the people of Caria, their name or denomination, is conjectured to be
derived from Cares the Son of Pharoneus King of Argos; though Bochartus rather
alludes it to the Phaenician word Car, signifying a sheep or Ram, because they
were formerly dealers in Flocks, with which their Country abounded, and is
indeed full of rich Pastures.

LYCIA lies on the West of Caria; said to take its name from Lycius, Son to
Pandion King of Athens; and is a Country enclosed in a manner with Sea and
Mountains; the principal Mountain being Taurus, the biggest in Asia; which
begins in this Province, and extends to the Eastern Sea; one of its branches in
this Country is the Chimaera, casting out Flames like Mount Aetna; which gave
occasion to the Fablers of former times, to render it dreadful, by likening it
to a Monstrous Beast, with a Head like a Lion, a Belly like a Goat, and a Tail
like a Serpent; though some to justify this Fiction, will have it to be
infested at the bottom by Serpents, grazed in the middle by Goats, and
containing nearer to the top, dens of Lions, altogether framing the Monster,
said to be destroyed by Bellerophon; which indeed tended to nothing more than
that he first caused the Mountain to be Inhabited, and this Country in former
days was so opulent, that 60 Cities of note were found in it, but now most of
them Ruined; the chief in it being Are, Phaselis, Myra, Solima, Rhodia,
Pataras, Mylios, and Podelia; and so powerful were the Lycians in the time of
Cyrus the Persian, that they were not without great difficulty brought under,
but from thence forward followed the Fortune of the Conquerors as the Greeks,
Romans and Turks, etc.

LYCAONIA is a Country so named from the Lycaones, a people of Lycia; or from
the Lycaonians a people, the Inhabitants of Lyconia a Town in Phrygia Major;
and has for its chief Cities Iconium, once the chief Residence of the
Caramanian Kings, who so stoutly opposed in its beginning the Growth of the
Ottoman Empire; Lystra, the birth place of Timothy the Evangelist; and here it
was that the superstitious people would have done divine Sacrifice to Paul and
Barnabas; Darbe, Laranda, Paralais, Adopissus, Canna and Caratha; but as for
the Inhabitants, they are not found in History to be of any considerable note;
nor does their Country much abound in Fruits or Corn, for want of Convenient
streams to water it.

PISIDIA is on the South of Lycaonia, and is a small Country, yet furnished
with great plenty of all things necessary for Human subsistence; where the
Plains extend themselves, though in some parts it is much Incumbered with
Barren Mountains; and has in it the Towns or Cities of Antioch, Seleucia,
Lysinnia, Selge, Sagalassa, Cremna, Termessus, Olbanassa and Plutanessus; the
Ancient Inhabitants being said to descend from the Solimi, a people on the
Borders of Lycia; and were formerly daring and valiant, as appeared in their
opposing Cyrus, and did more wonders than any of their more powerful
Neighbors, but now being in subjection to the Turks, who hold them as Vassals
or Slaves, they have lost much of their Courage and Industry.

PAMPHYLIA has Pisidia on the North, and is separated from it by the Mountain
Taurus; and its held to take its name from its being Inhabited by a mixture of
Nations; which word in the Greek expresses no less, and is much overrun with
the Spurs or Branches of Taurus; rendering it Barren in many places; yet on
those Mountainous parts abundance of Goats are fed, whose Flesh serves for
Food, Hair for making Chamlets, and Skins for Leather; yet that part which is
the Sea coast, and runs 150 miles on the Mediterranean, is well Inhabited, and
enjoys sundry Towns of Note, as Attalia, Perge, Side, Magidis, Aspendas, Oliba,
Caracensium, Colobrassus, Cretopolis, and Menedemium, and is watered with the
Rivers Cestrus, Cataractus, and Eurymedon; and since they first planted this
Country, they have been frequently brought under subjection by the Pontois,
Persians, Romans and lastly by the Turks, who at present remain Lords of all
the lesser Asia, and good part of the greater.

CILICIA has Pamphylia on the West, and is a very fruitful Country, especially
on the Eastern part; and is said to take its name from Cilice the Brother of
Cadmus; and though it is but meanly Inhabited, yet it is much traded to; and
has in it many Towns of Note, as Tarsus the Birth place of St. Paul, Anchiala,
Epiphania, Adena, Mopsuestia, Nicopolis, Amavara, Scandelora, and others
watered with the River Pyramus, now called Malmistra, Orismagdus, Calicadnus,
and the famous Cydnus, whose waters are so Cool, and withal so Rapid that they
had like to have proved fatal to Alexander the Great, and did so to Fredrick
the first German Emperor; for whilst he was bathing in the stream, he was
carried away by the violence of the Current, and smothered in the waves. As for
the chief Mountains they are Amanus and Taurus accounted the largest in the
world.

ISAVRICA is a distinct Province from the former seated on both sides of
Taurus, which renders it altogether Mountainous, being East to Pamphylia;
parted in the midst by the River Calecadnus on whose banks are many Vines and
pleasant Pastures and has for its principal City and Towns Seleucia, I^auria,
and Claudiopolis; and as for this and the Province of Cilicia, they were
Anciently famous for Piracies; but Pompey breaking their power at Sea placed
them in a more Inland Country, and especially on these Mountains in a strait
compass, but they have since enlarged their borders.

And thus for Anatolia or Asia Minor, except such Islands as are reputed to
appertain to it, which shall be treated of in another place; it being our
design that nothing shall be omitted, though we are obliged to be brief,
constrained to it by the narrowness of our compass; only note that it is wholly
subject to the Turks.

The Kingdoms and Provinces of the greater Asia Described.
AS to the Boundards and Situation of this Part of the World, it has been
already laid down in general, wherefore now nothing remains, but to describe it
in particular, etc. and to do this in order, we will begin with*

The Kingdom of Syria.
THE Kingdom of Syria, as it Anciently was, is bounded on the North with
Cilicia; on the South with other parts of Asia minor; on the East with the
River Euphrates; and on the West with the Mediterranean Sea: And is Inhabited
by diverse sorts of People, Professing sundry Religions, as Christianity,
Judaism, Mahometism, and in some places not altogether freed from Paganism; for
upon the Borders next to Armenia minor, there dwell the Cardi, or Coerdes, a
People who pay Veneration to the Devil, and the slender excuse they alledg for
it is, to prevent his doing them Mischief, they being on the contrary assured,
that God being in his Nature good, he will not injure them. And the whole
Country is divided into 3 Provinces, viz. Phoenicia, Caelo-Syria, and
Syro-Phaenicia.

PHAENICIA, is bounded on the East and South with Palestine; on the North with
Syria, so properly called; on the West with the Mediterranean Sea; and has this
Name given it by the Greeks, from the abundance of Palm Trees that are found
growing therein, the Word signifying in that Language a Palm: As for the
Country it self it is not great, for though in Length it reaches to the further
side of Mount Carmel, and again to the River Volanus, on the North, the Breadth
however is so inconsiderable, that it rather seems a Seacoast, than a
Country; nor did the Phaenicians less improve the opportunity in former times,
but were accounted the chief Navigators of the World. As for the Cities of note
they are, Acon, seated in a Pleasant Plain of great Length, Besieged by the
Western Christians in their Expedition for the regaining the Holy Land.
Sarepta, the place where the Woman sustained Elias, or rather he her, by
Miracle in the time of Famine: Tire once a Famous Sea Town, but now little of
it remains: Sidon a Pleasant Place, but wants of its former Largeness and
Grandeur, being reduced to a narrow compass. As for the chief Mountains they
are Libanus and Carmel; and as for Rivers there are few of note, the principal
being Adonis, however the Country is Fruitful in Olives and Vines.

COELO-SYRIA is more compacted than the former, and is watered with the Rivers
Abana and Pharaphar, called in Scripture the Rivers of Damascus, and has in it
the Mountains of Asmadamus, a ridg of Hills beginning at the East Point of
Ante-Libanus, and bending directly Southward, shuts up that part from the Land
of Israel, and has for its chief Towns Heliopolis, so called from an Image of
the Sun formerly Worshipped there; Chalcis, Abila, Adida, Hippus, or Hypone,
Capitolias, Gadara, Gerasa, Scythopolis, Philadelphia and Damascus, the Head of
this Province, once a Famous City, but now reduced to a small compass, however
it is Situate in a large Plain, Environed with Hills, and watered by the River
Chrysorhe^^, having about it many pleasant Gardens, Orchards and Fountains; and
indeed the whole Country, where the Mountains interpose not, is a Terrestrial
Paradise, which made the Impostor Mahomet refuse it for his Regal Seat, lest
swallowed up in the Delights and Pleasures of that Country, he should forget
his Business.

SYRO-PHAENICIA is a third Provinc^ of this Kingdom, and has for its chief
Cities and Towns Aleppo, a considerable Mart Town, though not bordering on the
Sea, but standing within the Land, for hither the Merchants of Egypt, Arabi^
and Persia, come over Land with their Camels Laden with Silks, Cloth of Gold
and Silver, Drugs, Spices, etc. Biblis, Tripolis a place taken and possessed by
the Western Christians, in their Expedition to the Holy Land, and is a very
considerable Seaport Town, Fortified with a strong Wall, and many Towns, and
has many Storehouses for the Accommodation of Merchants; and that part of the
Mountain Libanus, that stretches upon it like a Curtain, abounds with Fruit
Trees, Vines, and Trees harboring abundance of Silk Worms; but of this Country
Antiochia is accounted the Metropolis, and not far from it is the River
Orontes, which beginning in Coelo-Syria, ingulfs it self and rises near
Apamea, watering Antiochia, and passing thence 16 Miles; falls into the
Mediterranean Sea, and from hence come the greatest part of our Tapistry
Hangings.

The Building in this Country, and indeed in all Syria, is one high Roof, with
a plain Top, Plaistered or Terrassed to walk on the Platform, and Arched
Cloisters before the Doors, so that People may walk dry in the Streets, in all
Weathers. As for Religion they are as the first, a mixture, etc.

A Description of the Land of PALESTINE.
PALESTINE is bounded with the Hills of Hermon; on the East parted by them from
Coelo-Syria, and Arabia Deserta; on the West with the Mediterranean Sea, and
some part of Phaenicia; on the North with Ante-Libanus, and the remaining part
of Phaenicia; on the South with Arabia the Stony, called Palestine, from the
Philistines, a People that Inhabit it; but it is not conjectured they held any
more than a part of it, but being very Powerful gave a general Name to this
Country; as the Asiaticks usually call the Europeans Franks, from France, which
is only a small part of it; however we will take it as formerly it stood, viz.
its Division into Galilea, Judea, Idumea, and Samaria, accounted 200 Miles in
Length, though not above 50 in Breadth, possessed by the Tribes of Israel, as
the Land Promised to Abraham, etc.

GALILEA is accounted the most Northern Part of Palestine, being divided into
the higher and lower, the first allotted to the Tribes of Napthali, Asher, and
part of the Tribe of Dan, is a pleasant Country abounding with all manner of
Fruits, and Exuberant, that for its Plenty this Conjunct with the rest, was
called a Land flowing with Milk and Honey; the chief Cities being Apheck, whose
Wall falling slew 27000 of Benhadad's Soldiers. Giscala, the Birthplace of
Jehu, who Slew Joram his Master, and took upon him the Kingdom; here is
likewise found Capernaum, where our Blessed Savior healed the Centurions
Servant, and Fed 3000 with 5 Loaves and 2 Fishes; not far from it Ribla, where
Unfortunate King Zedekiah, after he had seen the slaughter of his Children, had
his Eyes put out, and to these we may add Genesareth, Hamath, and Ramath.

As for the lower Galilea, it contained the Tribes of Zebulon and Issachar, and
the first of these had for their chief Cities Cana, where our Blessed Savior
wrought his first Miracle; Bethsaida, the Birth place of St. Peter, St. Andrew,
and St. Philip. Hippopolis, Tiberias on the Sea Coast, and some other Towns of
lesser note, as Nazareth, and Bethulia; here is likewise found the Mount Tabor,
on which our Lord was Transfigured, as a manifestation of his Glory; as also
the Brook Kishon, out of which flows the Famous River bearing that Name.

The principal places appertaining to the Tribe of Issachar, were Tarichea, on
the side of the Lake, about Eight miles from Tiberias, and was so stoutly
defended against Vespatian, that it cost him the Lives of 1200 men, before he
made himself Master of it; Chishon a City of the Levites, Rameth, called also
Jarmouth, another City of the Levites, where the Hills of Gilboa take their
beginning, and pass Westward to the Mediterranean, and East to Jezreel;
En-haddad, near which Saul being discomfited by the Philistines, slew himself in
despair. Nai^ on the Banks of the River Kison, where our blessed Savior raised
the Widows Son to Life; and on the Banks of the same River stands Haphraim or
Aphraim, Endor, the place where Saul consulted the Witch, about the raising
Samuel; Deborath, one of the Cities of Refuge, Arbela, etc. And although these
Tribes are held to be carried away by Salmanasser, and the Galileans placed in
their stead, yet they were strict Complyers with the Jewish Ceremonies and
Customs, and so zealously affected that neither Threats nor Force could oblige
them to offer Sacrifice to the Health of the Roman Emperors.

SAMARIA, The Country taking its name from the chief City, is bounded on the
East with the River Jordan; on the West with the Miditerranean Sea; on the
North with Galilee; and on the South with Judea: And gives in all parts a
curious Prospect of pleasant Fields and Valleys, with little rising Hills, from
whence issue refreshing Streams; and is every scattered over with Fountains,
affording abundance of Grass, and consequently a great number of Cattle; and
the People were for the most part Assyrians, sent thither by that Conquering
King to supply the places of the Captive Israelites, and were Gentiles at
first, till better instructed by the Lions God sent amongst them, and afterward
by the Priest, who returned with the Five Books of Moses, and taught them the
manner of the God of the Land, 2 Kings 17. However they frequently relapsed and
forsook their living Strength, as may be seen in Holy Writ: and this Province
upon its being first possessed by the Children of Israel, was allotted to the
Tribe of Ephraim, and the two half Tribes of Manasses; the one seated on the
Mediterranean, and the other beyond Jordan. In the half Tribe of Manasses, on
the Mediterranean, the chief Cities were found to be Bethsan, Terza, Acrabata,
Thebes, Ephra or Hophra, Asophon, Bezek, Jezreel, Megiddo, Dora or Dor,
Caesarea; and others, many of them memorable in Scripture upon sundry occasions.

The Tribe of Ephraim had for their chief Cities, or most considerable places,
Saron, on the Mediterranean, Lydda, Ajalon or Helon, a City of the Levites;
Thenath-Chares, given to Josuah, Adasa or Adarsa, where Judas Macchabeus
overthrew with 3000 men, the vast Army of Nicanor: Jefleti or Pelethi, giving
name to the Pelethites, that were of David's Guard: Silo situate on the top of
a lofty Mountain, and the receptacle of the Ark, till taken by the Philistines;
Michmas, Najoth, Bethoron, the City of the Levites, Pirhathon, Simor, and
Samaria, the Metropolis of the Kingdom of Israel, founded by Omri, one of their
Kings, on the top of the Mountain Samron, taking thence its name, overlooking
the Seacoast, and was very stately and magnificent, vying with Jerusalem, but
much impaired by the Wars that have frequently happened, and at this day scarce
to be found, or at least extremely wanting of its former Glory; and in this
compass mixed together in a manner the other Tribes mentioned were contained.

JVDEA, The Country of the more peculiar remnant of the Jews, containing the
Tribe of Juda, but may be said to be divided between the Philistines, the
Tribes of Dan, Simeon, and Benjamin: At first the Philistines commanded the Sea
Coast from the South of Phaenicia, to the North of Idumea, or from the City of
Gaza, to the Castle of Pilgrims, taking both, except Joppa, into the Account,
and but that and all the Northern Towns were the Israelites; and though the
Philistines held no more then six of note, yet they were of such importance and
so strongly fortified, that having the Edomites to back them, and some other
Neighbors, who relished not the Jewish Nation, they perplexed and wearied them
continually with Wars and Inroads, and became more troublesome, than the whole
body of the Canaanites; which Towns were Gath or Geth, where the Giant Goliath
slain by David was Born; Accaron on the South of Gath, a Town of great Wealth
and Power; Ashdod, by the Grecians called Azotos, Memorable for the Temple of
Dagon, whither the Ark of the Lord was carried when taken by the Philistines;
Ascalon, Situate on the Coast of the Mediterranean, aad first Founded by a
Noble Lydian; Gaza more Inland, signifying in the Persian Language the Place of
Treasure, where indeed Cambyses laid up the Tribute of those Countries; and
Majoma the Port Town of Gaza: And in these they had their strong Holds, from
which they so often vexed the Israelites.

The chief places possessed by the Tribe of Dan were Joppa, since called Jaffa,
once a Famous Mart Town, and the Principal Haven of those parts, taken by the
Christians in the Holy War; Rama or as the Moors called it Romula, built with
Freestone, and situate upon rising Hills, in a Sandy Plain, where yet remain
the Ruins of a Monastery and several Christian Churches. Imnia, the place
where Judas Macchabeus Burnt the Syrian Fleet. Ceder, or Cedron; Modini, where
the Macchabees were Buried; Gibbethon, Cariathjarim, Beth-shemesh, to which the
Ark was brought by the Oxen, when dismissed by the Philistines; Tisrah, Caspin,
Lachis, Ajalon, a City of the Levites, mentioned before in the Tribe of
Ephraim, in the Borders whereof it is Situate; which occasions Authors to
disagree in which Tribe to place it, and therefore leave it indifferently to
either.

To the Tribe of Simeon is ascribed the Cities and Towns of Gerar; Siceleg, or
Ziglag; Haijn, a City of Levites; Cariath-Sepher, Interpreted the City of
Books, within the Borders of Simeon, but appertaining to Judah; and Chorma,
with others of smaller note, rather Villages than Towns.

The Tribe of Judah, so called from Judah the Fourth Son of Leah, had for its
Lot Arda, Situate in the Entrance of Judea; Hebron, one of the Antientest
Cities of the Canaanites, formerly Inhabited by the Giant-like Sons of Anakim,
or Anak, the Word signifying a Chain, and here it was that Abraham bought a
Buryal Place for his Dead, and Buried his Wife Sarah; Tecoa, the City of Amos;
Jether, or Jutter; Maresa, where the Prophet Micah was born; Emmaus, since
called Nicopolis; Hasor, or Chatsor, one of the Frontier Towns of Idumea;
Odalla, or Hadullun; Ceila, or Keila, where David hid himself when he fled from
Saul; Eleutheropolis, or the free City, not far from Hebron; Azeca; Beth-sur,
or Bethsora, signifying the House of Rocks, alluded from its standing on a
Rocky Hill; Adoram bordering on the Dead Sea; Zore, in former times called
Bela, but took its Name from the words of Lot, the word Tsohor, Importing
Refuge, Safety, or Deliverance; Massada a strong Hold; Libna a strong Fortified
City, seated in the Corner of Juda between the Tribes of Dan and Benjamin; Ziph
in the Wilderness, where Saul came to pursue David.

BETHLEHEM called Bethlehem-Judah, to distinguish it from one of the same name
in Zebulon, the Birth place of our Blessed Savior, and the Grave of those
Innocents that suffered on his account by the Cruelty of Herod. As for the
Territories of these Cities and Towns, they are exceeding fruitful, and in many
of the Valleys are Gardens of Balsam or Opobalsamum Trees.

The Tribe of Benjamin had for its Portion the Cities of Mizpeh, Gebah, Gibeah,
Ai, Gibeon, Jericho, Anathoth, Nob, Gilgal, Bethel, Ramath, differrent from
what has been mentioned; Chadi, or Haidi, Lod and Ono; but the chief
Magnificence of this Tribe, was the Famous City of Jerusalem, situate upon a
Rocky Mountain, yet in most parts easy of ascent; Environed with Neighboring
Hills* and consisted in its most flourishing time of four parts, separated by
several Walls, resembling distinct Cities, divided into the upper, lower and
new Cities; together with the City of Herod, which made the Fourth division;
all the Walls fortified with Towers and Castles, and the Cities stored with
stately Buildings, Fountains, and pleasant Gardens; but all these exceeded by
the magnificence of the Temple, held to be the chief wonder of the World; the
Description of which is lively set down in the Old Testament; wherefore it will
be superfluous here to delineate it, though at this day its Glory is laid in
the dust.

The Tribe of Levi, though properly a Tribe of the Israelites, had no
Possessions assigned it, but had the Priesthood for its Inheritance; and
therefore scattered or planted in diverse Cities, assigned for the Levitical
Residence; being as Jacob their Father had before Prophesied: divided in Jacob,
and scattered in Israel, their Portions being to live on the Altar, and the
Tenths of the Offerings, etc. and as it is in Joshua 18. 17. The Priesthood of
the Lord was their Inheritance. And of these there were four Kinds or
Distinctions. 1. Punies or Tirones, which from their Childhood, till the 25
year of their Age, were obliged to Learn the duty of their Office, 2. Graduats
which were obliged for 4 years to study the Law, or till they were well
grounded in it. 3. Licentiates who actually exercised the Priestly Office: And
4 the Doctors or Rabbis, who where of the highest Order, and expounded the Law
to the People.

IDVMEA is a part of Palestine, separate from the Tribes commonly called the
Land of Edom; bounded on the East and South with Arabia the Stony; on the North
with Judea; on the West with the Mediterranean Sea; Inhabited by the Children
of Esau Brother to Jacob; and is a very fruitful Country toward the Sea coast;
but that bordering on Arabia is somewhat Barren and Mountainous though they
heretofore afforded Balm, and now a great many Palm Trees grow there; as for
the People, they are, and anciently were, rude, boisterous and untractable,
given much to Violence, and were no small contributers, by raising a Sedition
in Jerusalem, to the Destruction of that famous City by the Romans, under
Titus; and had for their chief Cities and Towns, Dinhahath, the City of Bela,
the first King of Edom, Aniath the City of Hadad, and Pan the City of Hadar;
two other Kings of this Country, mentioned in Genesis, Berzamna, Caparosa,
Gamararis, Elasa, Rossa, Rhinocurura, Raphia, and others, with many scattered
Castles and Villages; and of this Country the Horites are thought to be the
first Inhabitants; amongst whom Esau, upon the discontent he received by his
Brothers circumventing him of the Blessing, went to dwell, and took to him
Wives of the Daughters of the People of the Land; and as though the two
Brothers Difference had been inherent to Posterity, the Edomites always proved
mortal Enemies to the Israelites, not only siding with their Enemies, but
making continual War and Inroads upon them their selves.

The other Parts of Palestine, which may properly be so called, are the
Divisions of Peraea and Ituraea, and the first of these lies between the
Mountains of Arnon, and the River Jordan, abounding with Olives, Vines, and
Palm Trees, the Soil every where being exceeding Rich, and was formerly the
Habitation of the Midianites, Moabites, and Ammonites, as also of the two
Tribes of Gad and Reuben.

The Quarter of the Midianites was at the South Side of the Dead Sea, at the
very entrance of the Country, and were held to Descend from one or more of the
5 Sons of Madian the Son of Abraham, by Keturah, mentioned in Genesis 25. 4. and
had for their chief Cities Recome, Built by one of the 5 Midianitish Kings,
slain by Joshua; and Midian on the bank of the Dead Sea; and these were they,
that by the advice of Balaam, sent out their Beautiful Women to Ensnare the
Israelites, upon their entrance into the Land of Canaan.

The Moabites Possessed all that part of the Country, from the boundards of the
Midianites on the South, as far as Esebon on the North, on both sides the River
Arnon, having the River Jordan on the West, and the Hills of Abarim on the
East, first possessed by the Emmims, a Race of Giants, whose Principal City was
Sheneth Kirjathaim, but they being Vanquished by Chedorlaomer; and driven
thence, their forsaken Seats were possessed by the Moabites, Descended from
Moab one of the Sons of Lot, and had for their Cities in chief Rabbat, the
Regal Seat of Balak King of Moab; Diblathum, Gallim, Muthana, Nathaliel,
Bamath, Mispha, Hor, Kirhajareth, and some few others of little note; and this
Country God commanded Moses to spare, because he had given it for an
Inheritance to the Sons of Lot.

The Ammonites had their Habitations on the North-East of the River Arnon, and
possessed all that Tract from Arnon on the ^ead of the River, to the City
Rabbah, and on both sides the River Ja^oc, as well within as without the
Mountains of Galaad, Anciently the Seat of the Raphaim and Zamzummins, a Race
of Giant-like People; and had for their chief Cities Rabbah, before which Vriah
was Slain on the account of his Wife; Dothema, Mitspa, and others of lesser
note, and had continual War with Israel, God appointing them as a Thorn in
their side, because they had not at first rooted them out of the Land.

The Reubenites or Tribe of Reuben, had their Dwellings appointed on the East
side of Jordan, having the Gadites on the North, and the Arabian Deserts on the
East, and on the South the Land of Moab, parted by the River Arnon; whose chief
Cities were Abel, Sittim, Bethabara, or Beth-bara, Machaerus, Lasa or Lesha,
Medeba, Bosor or Bozra, a City of Refuge to the Levites; Livias, a Town Built
by Herod, in Honor of Livia the Mother of Tiberius Caesar; Kedmoth, Adom,
Heshbon, Bamothbal; and within their Territories is the Mount Nebo, from whose
Top Moses took a view of the Land of Canaan; and joining to it is the Hill
Pisga, or to say more truly, one of the Tops or Spires of the same Mountain.

The Gadites, so called from Gad the Seventh Son of Jacob, begot on Zilpha the
Handmaid of Leah, had their Lot of the Promised Land, between the Reubenites
on the South, and half the Tribe of Menasses on the North, the River Jordan on
the West, and the Mountains of Arnon on the East; and inhabited the Cities of
Aroer, upon the Banks of the River Arnon, Dihon, toward Jordan; Beth^mrah,
Natoroth, Beth-haram, Beth-ezob, Mahanaim, so called from the Apparition of
Angels; Succot^, Jahzor, Ramoth, Penuel, etc. All the Plains of this Country
being exceeding Fruitful, as on purpose prepared for the Favorites of Heaven;
yet the People who had been brought out of Slavery with a mighty hand, growing
fat in these fruitful Fields, soon forgot their Maker, and went a Whoring after
the Gods of the Strangers, for which the Canaanites had been cast out of the
Land.

There were moreover in this Tract, called the Land of Palestine, the
Trachonites inhabiting the Hilly Country, bordering on the Ammonites, called
the Mountains of Gilead, extending Northward as far as Libanus, living, as
Josephus tells us, for the most part, in Woods and Caves, upon Prey and Spoil,
etc.

The Batanea* a People living in a part of the Kingdom of Basan, but their
Kingdom, upon the Arrival of the Children of Israel, was given to the other
half Tribe of Manasses, and contained many fenced large Cities: The chief was
Pella, formerly called But is, but the Name changed by Seleucius, the great
Assyrian King, of the Greek Race; destroyed by Alexander Janaeus, a King of the
Jews, for refusing to admit the Law of Moses, but afterward by Pompey the Great
restored to its former Luster: And more memorable in Church History, for the
Voice heard from Heaven, admonishing the Christians then in Jerusalem to retire
thither, that they might escape the Destruction that the Roman Army, under the
leading of Titus, was about to bring upon that great and sinful City.

Gessur, since called Aurantis, the last Division of Ituraea, is North of
Basan, and was once accounted a Kingdom; and had for its chief Cities Hauran,
Gessur, Mahacath, Chatsar, Hevanus, and others of lesser note.

As for the Country of Palestine in general, or the promised Land, it is taken
by some to be the place where the Terrestrial Paradise stood, and is indeed
Fruitful, even to a miracle; for in most places there is an Eternal Spring, and
in Summer the Flowers always smiling, and the Vernant Trees seldom casting
their ripe and mellowed Fruit before Blossoms and green Fruit take place, and
are naturally of extraordinary growth; insomuch, that we read, when Caleb,
Josuah, and others, went up to spy the Land, they brought a cluster of Grapes,
as an earnest of the rest, so large, that they were obliged to carry it upon a
Staff, between two of them. And thus much for the Land of Palestine, as it
flourished in its most glorious days, but now its ancient Inhabitants are
scattered over the face of the Earth, and Turks possess their pleasant places.

The three ARABIA'S Described, in their Countries and Provinces.
1. ARABIA DESERTA, called by the Turks Beriara, is bounded on the East with
the Babylonian Territories; on the West with some part of Palestine and Arabia
the stony; on the North with Mesopotami^ and Palmyrene; the first of these
parting it from Euphrates; and on the South with Arabia Petraea part, and
Arabia Felix; and takes the name of Deserta from the great Deserts that are
found in it, all of loose Sands, taking eight days in passing over them, which
at certain times are carried so violently by the Wind, that Travelers are
overwhelmed under heaps and mountains of Dust, and buried Alive: as also are
the Shepherds, who build little Cots on the borders of these Deserts, though
very poor and despicable: as Lucan has it in his Pharsalia; and thus Englished.
The greatest part of Land, the Winds do bear
Unto the Skies, which hangs not fixed there.
His House and Land, the Nasamonian Seas,
Fly in the Wind their little Cottages.
Blown o'r their Heads into the Air as high,
As from a Fire the Smoke and Sparkles fly,
Till mounted, Dust like Smoke obscure the Sky.
Mountains of Dust, the South Winds furious hand,
Rolls o'r them till their drowned in heaps of Sand.


And indeed this whole Division of Arabia yields nothing pleasant, being mostly
inhabited by Thieves and Rovers, who having committed Robberies and Outrages,
in more populous and wealthy Countries make this their retreat, as knowing few
will give themselves the trouble of looking for them in so waste and desolate a
Country; yet there are some few Cities and Towns found in it, but those mostly
on the Borders, viz. Sabe or Saba, the Habitation of the Sabaeans, that was so
called from the Grandson of Abraham by Keturah, mentioned Genesis 25. 3. And these
were they that plundered Job of his Cattle; Thema, supposed to be the City of
Eliphaz the Them anite, one of Job's Visitants; Shua, Tharsacas, Zagmais,
Phunton, Oboth, and Reganna; though they had no formal Government, as being a
disjoynted People, the poverty of the Country obliging every one to shift as he
could; although now counted part of the Turkish Empire, it is so only in name
rather than in effect, as paying little or no Tribute to the Grand Signior.

2. Arabia Petraea, or the Stony, is bounded on the East with Deserta, and a
part of Sinus Persicus, on the West with the Isthmus, that joins Africa to
Asia, and part of the Red Sea, or Arabian Gulf, on the North with Palestine,
and on the South with a long ridge of Mountains, dividing it from Arabia Felix,
and is called Petraea, from its rockyness, and the abundance of large Stones
that are found every where in it; and is indeed barren in a manner, as the
former, but more firm and solid, which gives it the pre-eminence in
Fruitfulness; and is full of woody Mountains, wherein the wild Arabs lurk and
fortify themselves, being reduced under Captains of Tribes, as also
untravell'd Deserts, unless by such as carry their Provision with them for fear
of starving, and for that they are many times set upon and murdered by the
Thieves and Rovers; so that the general passage to Egypt and Babylon is by
Caravans, to defend which there seldom go less than 4 or 500 armed men, where
they carry their Merchandise upon Camels, one of these Beasts carrying
ordinarily 6 or 800 weight, and sometimes a 1000, and are the fittest of all
Creatures for this Journey, because they will endure three or four days
together without drink, in a Country where Water is not to be found, but rather
by chance than any certainty; and of these Deserts the most memorable are those
of Sinan, Pharan; the Inhabitants said to descend from Chus and Ishmael,
intermixed with the Medianites, who are held to be of the posterity of Madian,
the Son of Abraham by Keturah, and have for their chief places, Petra,
memorable for the many Sieges it has held out against the Syrians, Jews, and
Romans, etc. And was much aimed at in the time of the Holy War, even coveted by
the Turks and Christians, as a Gate or Inlet to Palestine; Bosra, said to be
built, or rather repaired by Augustus Caesar, to curb that wild and untractable
Nation; Ph^ra, Bernice, Sur, Havilah, Madian, Rephaim, Kadesh-Barnea, and
Thara; and in this Country stands the famous Mount Sinai, on which the Law was
given; and here for the most part it was that the Children of Israel suffered
so much in the Wildernesses and Deserts, during their progress to the Land of
Canaan. And the Character Marcellinus gives more particularly of these
Arabians, is viz.

That they are a martial People, half naked, clad only as far as the Groin,
with painted Clothes, ranging up and down upon Camels, swift Horses, and
Dromedaries, as well in Peace as times of Trouble, not used to Plough, plan^^
Trees, or get their Living by Tillage, but wander for the most part, from one
place to another, without any settled Habitation; nor have they the use of Laws,
neither can they long endure the Air or Soil in one place: Their Food is
chiefly upon Venison, and store of Milk, Herbs, Fruits, and Wild Foul; but as
for Corn and Wine they have none: their Wives are hired only for a time, though
for a show of Marriage they present their Husbands with a Spear and a Tent, as
their Dowry, though they part when they please; and both Sexes are extremely
given to Lust, the Women as rambling as the Men, leaving their Children to the
help of Providence, where they fall without any further care of them.

As for the Rivers in this thirsty Land, there are but few, and the chief are
Trajanus Amnis, Trajans River passing through the Country, and ending its
course in the Red Sea, Rinocorura, called in Scripture the Torrent of Egypt,
rising in this Country, and passing by the Borders of Idumea, falls into the
Lake of Sirbon.

3. ARABIA FELIX, or the Happy Arabia, so called from its Fruitfulness,
supplying in a manner the defect of the foregoing, is bounded on the East with
the Persian; and on the West with the Arabian Gulphs; on the North with a
continued ridg of Mountains; and on the South with the main Ocean, whose bounds
is not known.

In this Arabia, the Fields, Valleys and Hills are exceeding Fruitful,
abounding with Myrrh, Frankincense, Balsamum, Spices, Fruits of sundry kinds,
very delicious; as also Gold, precious Stones, etc. and lying so commodiously
on the Seas, is acquainted with what ever Blessing, either Element can afford,
well furnished with quiet Harbors, and Roads for Shipping, the Towns of Trade
and Merchandise standing near together, and the retiring Houses of the Kings
neat and very sumptuous, the Country being generally accommodated with wholesome
Fountains, and Medicinal Waters, with sundry Brooks and Rivers cool and clear,
and the temperature of the Air exceeding healthful.

And this Country by the Arabians themselves is called Jeman and Al-jeman; and
although the people are more Civil here than in the other parts, yet they had
and have many Barbarous Customs amongst them, as Carnally knowing their nearest
Relations, holding Community of Wives; and of dead Bodies no care is taken, but
they cast them into some Ditch or a Dung hill, and are frequently a bragging of
their descent from Jupiter, foolishly neglecting all Arts and Sciences, as
disparagements to so great a Nobility; however there are some amongst them that
apply themselves to Grazing, the Country abounding with Cattle and rich
Pastures, and others to Merchandise, tho the chief Product of the Country is
managed by Strangers.

The chief Cities or Towns that are at this Day found in this Tract are Elgra,
on the Shore of the Red Sea, called Sinus Elgranaticus; Jathrib, or Jatrib, in
the way between Algiar and Medina, the Birthplace of Mahomet the Impostor; and
in the City of Medina (to which is added the Name of Talmabi, signifying the
City of the Prophet) is the Sepulcher of Mahomet, not drawn up with a
Lodestone as the Vulgar rumor goes, but enclosed in the manner of our
Sepulchers with an Iron Grate, and covered with a green Velvet Carpet, which
the Grand Seigniour sends every Year as his Offering; so that when the New
arrives, the Old is cut into innumerable Shreds, and Sold to Pilgrims by the
Priests at large rates as Holy Relics; and in this Temple, which is large and
Magnificent, are 3000 Lamps continually burning: Meccha a Town Situate in a
barren Soil, not far from Medina, but of greater Resort and Traffic, the
Commodities not only of Arabia, but of Persia and India flowing thither, from
whence it is dispersed into all parts of the Turkish Empire; and here it is
made Death for any Christian to come, so made to pr^ Clouds. Discovery of the
Fopperies in their Religion, and is utterly destitute of Waters, except such as
is taken in Cisterns when it Rains, or brought on Camels Backs from distant
Places, though three Carravans with Troops of Merchants and Pilgrims Visit it
every Year: Zidon accounted the Haven Town of Meccha, though distant 40 Miles,
Situate on the Red Sea; Zebit, held now the Metropolis of the Country, much
Traded to for Spices, Sugar, and Fruits; Eltor a Port Town, where the
Christians are suffered to Inhabit. Aden on the entrance of the Red Sea, and is
the most Famous Empory of this Country, well Fortified, and has a very
capacious Haven for the reception of Shipping, once the Head of a distinct
Kingdom, but now in Subjection to the Turks, being Treacherously surprised by
them in the Year 1538, and soon after all the rest of the Country, Hor, Zarnal,
and Muskahat, over against Surat in the East-India's: As for the Woods that are
found here, they naturally abound with Spices, and Odours, which in their Bloom
send forth a grateful Smell, which accosts the Mariners before they can see the
Land, and the Rivers are many, the chief Harman, Lar, Prion, Messinatis,
Betius, etc. and in the Arabian Fields, or no where, the Phoenix is said to
Inhabit.

A Description of Chaldaea, Assyria, and Mesopotamia, in their Countries and
Provinces, etc. As also the Mountains Kingdoms, etc.
THESE three Countries or Provinces, are held to have been the Principal Body
of the ^^mpire, wherefore it is thought fit to place them together, though in
our Proceeding to Describe them, we shall do it severally; and First

1. CHALD AEA, is bounded on the East with a Persian Province, called Susina;
on the West with the Desert of Arabia; on the South with the rest of Deserta,
and the Persian Gulf; and on the North with Mesopotamia. As for the Original
from which this Country has its Name, is uncertain; however it is exceeding
Fruitful, yielding Corn in many places 2 and 300 Fold; and Pliny affirms the
Babylonians Mow their Corn twice a Year, and Seed it a third time, or else it
would Produce nothing but Blades; and here many hold the Terrestrial Paradise,
a Select Garden, more Enriched by the Bounty of Heaven, than any other part of
the World; and the Reason they give for it is, because the Rivers mentioned in
Scripture to flow from it are found in this Tract, according to all
circumstances the same, though length of Time has caused corruption or
alteration, but rather in name than place, etc. and in this Country, on the
large Plains of Shinar was founded Babel, signifying in the Hebrew Confusion,
where happened the first Confusion of Languages, a work so Stupendous, being
the Business of almost all the Inhabitants of the Earth, that before it was
left off, it began to rea^ a Head of Majesty, 5146 Cubits from the Ground,
having proportionable Basis and Circumference, the Passages going up winding,
and so easy of Ascent. that Horses and Carts might not only pass up it, but
meet and turn, having Lodgings and Stations in them for Men and Beast, and
Earth spread upon the mighty Work for Corn Fields; and all this foolishly
undertaken to secure themselves in case of a second Deluge; and would however
(had it not been prevented by the Divine Power) according to the Model devised,
have Transcended the Clouds. In this Tract was the City of Babylon in its
Ancient Glory, the Walls of which was 46 Miles in Circuit, 50 Cubits in
height, and of such a thickness, that Carts and Carriages might meet on the
top of it, Finished in one Year by the daily Labor of 200000 Workmen, Built
on both sides the River Euphrates, having its Communication by stately Bridges,
and is said when taken by Cyrus the Persian, that he had possessed one part of
it three days, before the more remote Inhabitants knew the Enemy was entered;
but it has been since that time destroyed and removed; so that at this day
Bagdat is taken for Babylon, Situate on the River Tigris, and now in the
Possession of the Turk; the other Places of note are, Ctesiphon, Sipparum,
Apamia, Vologesia, Borsipha, and Balsora, the Port of Bagdat or new Babylon,
Situate at the Fall of Euphrates, into Sinus Persicus, a Place of great Trade
and Wealth, now in the hands of the Persians.

As for Mountains this Country affords not any; and for Rivers, the chief are
Euphrates and Tigris: The People anciently were much addicted to South-saying
and Divination, and held to be first Idolaters, but now they are divided into
several Sects, and become a mixture of Christians, Jews, and Mahometans, though
once the Christian Faith Flourished here altogether, as Planted by St. Peter,
who assures us that he was at Babylon in the latter end of his first Epistle.

2. ASSYRIA is bounded on the East with Media; on the West with Mesopotamia; on
the South with Susiana; and on the North with some part of Turcomania, and part
of Chaldaea, taking its name from Assure the Son of Sem, who first Inhabited it,
though of late it has been called by other Names, but this being warrantable by
Scripture, we shall the rather continue it.

As for the Country, it is free from Hills, unless such as render it very
Commodious, so that being watered with pleasant Springs and Rivers, it is every
where very Fruitful, and the People were anciently very Warlike, making
themselves by their Arms Lords of the greatest part of the East, extending
their Dominion from the Mediterranean Sea to the River Indus; the Men
especially very formal in their Habit, wearing Robes trailing on the ground,
their Hair exceeding long, and their Caps so steeple Crowned, that they seem
like Pyramids, Perfuming themselves, and Adorning with Jewels, Rings, etc. and
a Staff of Ivory, Rich Wood, or some precious Metal in the form of a Scepter
in their Hands; and as for the ancient Custom, it was to expose the fairest
Women to Sale in open Market, not as Slaves, but to be purchased as Wives, and
with the Money they put off those of the courser sort that were more deformed;
happy for our English Doudies, were the Custom in use amongst us: And as for
the Celebration of Marriage, it is a little strange; viz. The Bridegroom sees
not his Bride before the Wedding Day, but takes her upon the good report of his
Friends and others, when having made the Bargain with her Parents, they meet in
the Chancel of the Church, and there the Cassisse or Priest obliges the
Bridegroom to put his hand through the hole of a Partition, and take the Bride
by the Hand, which done, her Mother with a sharp Bodkin pricks his hand all
over with much eagerness; and if so, for all that he holds her fast, and wrings
her hand till she squeak, they term it a presage of lasting Love, but if he let
go, the contrary; and if the first Year a Male child is born, the Father loses
his Name, and is called Abba or Father, the Sons Name being added to it.

ASSYRIA is principally watered with the Tygris; so named from its swiftness
and rapidity: Into which, as Ptolomy affirms, discharge themselves, the Rivers
Cuprus, Lycus and Gorges, with some other Streams, or Rivulets, and the whole
Assyria was divided into six parts, viz. Araphachits, Adiabene, Calacine,
Sitacene, Arbelites, and Apoloniates, and has for its chief Cities Calach, one
of the four Cities built in the Land of Assure by Nimrod; Sittaca, about Two
Miles from the Banks of Tygris; Athela, Apollonia, Geguamela; Memorable for the
first great overthrow given by Alexander to Darius the Persian, wherein 90000
Persians are accounted to be slain, with the loss of 300 Macedonians only;
Reboboth another City, said to be built by Nimrod, but now supposed to be that
called Birrha. On the Tygris; Rhesen another, said to be built by the same
party; Ninive, first built by Nimrod, and so named from Ninus his Son or
Nephew; the City to which Jonah was sent, and in those days accounted Sixty
Miles in Circuit, which may properly enough in those hot Countries be accounted
three days Journey: Mosul, seated on the Tygris, Arzeri and Scheheruzal, the
chief Residence of the Turkish Bassa, Governor of this Country. As for the
Profession of the Natives, and some Strangers mingled amongst them, it is that
of the Nestorians, but the standing Religion is Mahometism imposed by the Turks.

3. MESOFOTAMIA has on the East for its boundard the River Tygris, parted by it
from Assyria; on the West the Euphrates; on the North Mount Tauryus; on the
South Chaldaed and Arabia Deserta, and is frequently in Scripture called
Padan-Aram which in the Latin signifies Syria Culta, and was, anciently
Inhabited by the Aramites, and is full of Rich Pastures, the Soil very fruitful
in Corn, abounds with Vine-yards and store of Cattle, and is indeed so well
furnished with all things necessary for Humane Support and Pleasure, that
Strabo calls it Mesopotamia Felix, tho in the extreme South, there are a few
barren Deserts and some rough Mountains or Hills; and though it is a kind of a
Compounded Country, yet the people are very Active and Industrious, improving
Natures Bounty more than any in this Tract, though being but a small Country,
it has always been in Subjection, and is watered with the Rivers Tygris,
Euphrates, and Caboras or Abaras.

The chief Cities found in this Country, are Edessa, Cologenbar, Nisibius, and
Vr; as for their Religion, as far as relates to Christianity, it is in a manner
Orthodox, agreeing in most Points with the Reformed Churches of Europe.

I might now proceed to say something of the Two Kingdoms in the great Mountain
Taurus, named from their two last Kings, the Kingdoms of Aledeules and Bahaman;
the first subdued by Selimus the First Emperor of the Turks, and the last by
Abas the Persian Sophy; but having nothing but Rocks and barren Mountains to
deal with, and indeed the difficulties the Inhabitants struggle with, being
more to be wondered at than any thing else, I shall thus briefly pass them
over, and proceed to Turcomania.

Turcomania described in its Provinces, etc.
TVRCOMANIA, or the Land of Turkey, so called from the Turks Inhabiting it
before they got by Stratagem the Persian Empire, is on the East bounded with
Media and the Caspian Sea; on the West with Cappadocia, Armenia Minor, and the
Euxine Sea; on the North with Tartary, and on the South with Assyria and
Mesopotamia; and is properly divided into four parts, viz. Armenia Major, held
to be the true Turcomania; Colchis, now called Mengrelia; Iberia now called
Georgia; and Albania called by some Zuirca, and of these in their order.

ARMENIA MAJOR, now called Turcomania, is a very Hilly Country, as much
overspread with the Spurs of Mount Taurus and Anti-Taurus, though between them
are many fruitful Valleys, that produce store of Cattle: The greatest business
of these people when exempted from War, being to feed Sheep upon the Mountains,
and other Cattle on the lower ground, driving them from place to place where
the Pastures are best, and where they find the most commodious Springs,
carrying with them their Families, Tents, and Provision, and usually go Armed,
not so much for fear of Rovers, as Wild Beasts that possess the Caves of those
Mountains: The People being large of Body, comely of Personage, much used to
the Bow and Spear; patient of all kind of Labor: The Women are very homely,
but of a manly aspect, and when occasion requires, addict themselves in
Disguises to the Wars, and mingled with the Men, perform equal Exploits; and in
Towns, where they are settled, their Families are very great, by reason they
co-habit under one Roof to the third or fourth Generation, the eldest commonly
bearing Rule, and being in all things absolute as King of the Family, yet those
live not idle, but employ themselves in making Tapestries, Gograms, Watered
Chamlets, and other Manufactures, dispersed into all parts, and some, tho not
many of them are considerable Merchants, dispersing themselves over the Eastern
Country, and from a Mountain of this Armenia called Abas has the great River
Araxis its Fountain, and the people generally are Christians.

The chief Cities and Towns of this Country are, Artaxata the Royal seat of the
Ancient Kings of Armenia; Sebastia, now called Suassia; seated on the
Euphrates, Tigranes, Certa, Arsamosata, Clamassum, Cholna, Baraza, Chars,
Colonia, Thespia, and others of lesser note: as for Forests or Woods, this
Country has very few, and none considerable.

COLCHIS the second Division of Turcomania on the North of Armenia is Inhabited
by a rude uncivillized people; however the soil is fertile producing naturally,
much plenty, and the Vines of their own accord, twist themselves about Trees;
creeping up into the spreading Branches, and affording much Wine; but that
which in Ancient times rendered it most memorable, was the abundance of Gold
found in the Sands of the Rivers issuing from the Mount Caucasus; for which
Jason made his Expedition; and thereby gave the occasion of the Fable of the
Golden Fleece: there were likewise found diverse Veins of Silver in the
Mountains, though at present for want of working, or being exhausted, the
People deficient in Coin, are obliged to Barter Goods for such things as their
necessities require; however they are much given to Riot and Excess, nor do
they refuse to prostitute their Wives and Sisters, to the pleasure of their
guests upon any slight Entertainment, as not thinking they can be otherways
sufficiently welcome; nor do the Women refuse a compliance. And here the chief
Cities are, or were Dioscurias, Sibaris once the Royal Seat of the Colchine
Kings; Siganeam, Aeopolis, Neapolis, Phasis; from whence the Phesants were
first brought into Europe by the Greeks; Alvati, Mechlessus, Zadris and Sirace;
though at present none of them considerable; however the Christian Religion
continues here, though the Turks have possessed themselves of the Country.

IBERIA takes its name from the River Iberius, running through it, though
lately the name is changed to Georgia; as some will have it from St. George the
Capadocian Martyr; who first planted, or at least greatly improved the
Christian Religion amongst them.

The Country is Mountainous, Woody, and a great part of it covered with Snow
three quarters of the year; so that the Soil not being very fruitful, the
people addict themselves much to War; so that for a long time they lived in
freedom under their own Princes, till the Persian* War; at what time they
partly by force, and partly by submission, became Tributary to the Ottoman
Emperors; so that it contains not any Cities of note; however amongst them are
reckoned Artaxissa, Vasada, Lubium, and Armastica, so named by P^olomy; though
at present Cremen and Cachet are in most esteem; and to keep the people in aw,
the Turks have fortified many places; and amongst others the strong Castle of
Teflis, the Key of Media, now called Servan, Garrisoned with 6000 men; and has
in it besides other Ammunition 100 pieces of Ordnance.

ALBANIA in Asia, distinct from that in Europe, East of Iberia is accounted to
be first peopled by Gether Son of Aram, and Nephew of Japhet, and rested out of
the way of War till the Romans time; when siding with Tigranes King of Armenia
Major, and Mithridates King of Pontus, they were brought under subjection by
Pompey.

The Soil of this Country is very rich in many parts, as being watered with the
Rivers Saonia, Cyrus, Gerrus and Albania; and on the latter is seated a City of
that name, the chief of the Province; here are likewise found Chabala, Thelbis,
Getara, Namechiae and Telebae: The chief commodities are Corn, Cattle, Wine,
and some Manufactures, and has over it a Turkish Bassa; and from these
Countries the Turks are held on all hands to descend, as in the History of that
people, appears more at large.

Media and Persia described, in their respective Provinces, etc.
MEDIA (the first that occurs in order) is bounded on the West with Armenia
Major, and some part of Assyria; on the East with Parthia, and some part of
Hyrcania, and the Provinces of Persia; on the North with the Caspian Sea, and
Georgia; and on the South with other parts of Persia; held to take its name
from Madai, the Son of Japhet, who first planted it; though at this day it is
called by the Turks (in whose possession the greatest part of it is) Sheirvan,
or Servan; the word in their Language signifying a Milky plain; alluding
thereby to the great plenty of the Country, and is of large extent; once famous
for a warlike people, that overrun the greatest part of the East; yet this
Country like all others, differs in degree of fertility, for although the South
part is exceeding fruitful; yet the North part lying between Mount Taurus and
the Hyrcanian Sea, is very barren; insomuch that the people make their Bread of
dried Almonds, and their drink of the Juice of certain Herbs; no Fruit trees
flourishing there, nor any considerable quantity of Corn.

As for the Kingdom of Media, we may properly divide it into two Provinces;
viz. Atropatia and Media Major; the first of these contains the northern parts
of the country; and is held to be that, where Salmanasser, the Assyrian King
placed the Israelites, whom he carried into Captivity, and is watered by the
River Gonza; and had for its chief Cities or Towns Hamadum, Gonzavia,
Mandagarsis, Gelin, Bochu, Eres, Sumachia, or Shamaki; the last built by Cyrus
the Persian, and much Illustrated by others; and in it as a Monument, stands a
Pillar Interwoven with the Heads of Noble men all of Flint, curiously wrought,
etc. This Province is very Mountainous, as having the Spurs of the Taurus
branching out, and the body of the Mountain it self, etc.

MEDIA-MAJOR, on the South of Mount Taurus, is a very pleasant Country;
yielding Corn and Wine in abundance, with many pleasant Fruits, and good
Pastures, watered every where with fresh streams; so that Cattle, especially
Horses increase in great numbers; the men being generally expert Riders, and
much redoubted in War.

The chief Cities that were here found are the great E^batana, to which Semir
amiss took such a liking, that she caused for its better Accommodation, water
courses to be cut through the Mountain Orontes, reckoned to be in compass 24
Italian miles and fortified with a Wall of 70 Cubits high, 50 broad, with 100
Gates, and Towers built over them of smooth stone, and had formerly six lesser
Walls, though now little of it remains. Taurus a City pleasantly situate,
under the shadow of Orontes; opening to a curious fertile Plain on the South;
once a place of great Trading, but having been often ruined by the Turks, in
their Wars with the Persians; it has lost much of its former splendour. Arsacia
built by some of the Parthian Kings, in their Conquest of this Country: Casbin
situate in an open Plain, on the Banks of a small River, but of no
considerable Trade, though the Persian Sophies have a Palace in it: Rages,
Nassivan, Ardovile, Sultania, Turcoman, and Marant. The Christian Religion is
held to be first planted here by St. Thomas; and though it was not Universally
Embraced, yet it flourished till Mahometism was introduced, more by the power
of the Sword than the Peoples Inclination.

Persia Described.
PERSIA has for its Eastern boundard India; for the Western Media, Assyria, and
Chaldaea; the Northern Tartary; and the Southern the main Ocean; so named, (if
you will credit the Story) from Perseus, Son to Jupiter and Danae; though
rather from Persis a small Province; or part of the Country which took its name
from one of their Kings: and the whole Region of Persia, is found to extend
from 82 degrees of Longitude, to 120. 36 degrees in all, and in breadth from 32
degrees North Latitude to 42, situate under the fourth, fifth, and sixth
Climates; so that the longest day in the Southern parts, is 13 hours and almost
three quarters but in the most Northern 15 and a quarter; the Air for the most
part pure and wholesome, though the Earth by reason of the great heat of the Sun,
is dry, and sandy in many parts, and destitute of water; having few Rivers, and
not many Lakes; however taking the Country in general, it abounds with all
things necessary, and may properly be divided into 12 Provinces, viz. Susiana,
Persis, Carmania, Ormus, Gedrosia, Drangiana, Aria, Parthia, Arachosia,
Paropamisus, Hyrcania, and Margiana; and held to be one of the Antientest
Kingdoms of the East; the people as the Chaldaeans, giving themselves up to the
Study of Astrology; and as to their Religion, its the Sect of Haly, differing
in many things, from the Tenets of the Impostor Mahomet; tho amongst them are
many Christians and more Jews; and the chief Rivers that visit Persia, are
Araxis, some windings of Euphrates and Tigris; and here are found Mount Taurus,
the Seriphian Hills, and some others of less note: And has for the most
material Cities, Persopolis, Aracca, Tarsiana, and others; the Country
affording Dates, Myrrh, Drugs, Spices, Mines of Silver, Brass, Quarries of of
Marble, Cedar-wood, and rich Manufactures of Silks, and Embroideries of Silver
and Gold, and has been much traded to, by the European Merchants, especially
the Island of Ormus; accounted the most fruitful in the World; so that those
who have compared the World to a Ring, have allowed this to be the Jewel, that
ought to be set in it; for the Portugals upon their first coming hither, so
much enriched themselves, that they easily commanded the whole Trade of Europe.

As for the Persians, they are generally good natured, courteous to Strangers,
exceeding obedient to their Prince, whom they in a manner Idolize; they are
tall of Stature, well Limbed, and for the most part handsome (especially the
Women) Patient of Labor, yet through the Plenty of the Country much given to
Luxury, Valiant in Fighting, as well the Women as the Men, who accompany their
Husbands to the War in disguise, and frequently die Fighting by their sides, as
appeared by the great number of them found upon the stripping of the Slain in
many Battles fought between them and the Turks. And within this Jurisdiction we
may include Bactria, lying West of Margiana, watered by the River Oxus, so that
it is partly Fruitful, and partly Barren and Desert, possessed by a rough and
untractable People, and has many Woods and Forests full of wild Beasts, which
renders the Passage dangerous to Travelers, and has its Name from Bactria the
Metropolitan City, Seated at the Foot of the Mountain Sogdij, and is now in
Subjection to the Persians.

Tartaria Described, in its Kingdoms and Provinces, etc.
TARTARIA, or Tartary, is a large Tract on the Northern part of Asia, and
shooting out considerably to Europe, bounded on the East with China, and the
Eastern Ocean; on the West with Russia and Podolia, a Province of the Kingdom
of Poland; on the North with the Frozen Scythian Ocean; and on the South with
another part of China, from which it is separated by a mighty Wall, the River
Oxus parting it from Bactria and Margiana, the Caspian Sea from Media and
Hyrcania; the Caucasian Mountains from Turcomania, and the Euxine Sea from
Anatolia and Thrace, and is possessed under the general Name of Tartars, by
many powerful Nations, accounted to be 5400 Miles from East to West, and 3600
from North to South.

The People are generally Rude, giving themselves more to War and Rapine, than
to Arts or Husbandry, big Bodied, broad Faced, little and hollow Eyed, thick
Lipped, and flat Nosed, Swarthy of Complexion, tho distant enough from the Sun,
hardy and capable of enduring extreme Hardships, loving to ride^^ tho on Cows,
Oxen, and other Beasts, not used in other parts in such Services; their Speech
carries a kind of a whining Tone with it, and when a Company are got together a
Singing, one would imagine them a consort of Wolves a Howling, and have indeed
in their many Excursions and Wars proved the Terror of the World, yet are
seldom Covetous, of more than is sufficient to support them, as being
altogether regardless of Silver, Gold, or costly Apparel, going for the most
part clad with the Skins and Furrs of Beasts they take by Hunting, and are by
some held to be the Offspring of the Ten Tribes removed out of Palestine by
Salmanasser; for many of the great Lords of the Tartars st^^e themselves
Naphthalites, Danites, etc. and Canton themselves into Families and Tribes.

This Country is usually divided into these following Provinces, viz,
Precopensis, Asciatica, Antigua, Zagatha and Cathaia: The first contains
Taurica Chersonesus, and the Asciatican Banks of Tanais, taking its name from
Precops the chief City, and has in it, beside the Towns of Ozaclow, Capha,
Crim, and others of lesser note. The second contains Asciatica Deserta, or
Deserta Muscovita, held to be the ancient Sarmatia Asciatica, remaining
unciviliz'd at this day; as feeding upon Raw Horseflesh, sucking Blood from
living Creatures, and oftentimes preying upon each other, and neglecting all
manner of Tillage. The Third contains the Cities of Noyhan, Cashan,
Charackzieke, Astracan, and some others of lesser note, as Coras, Caracora, and
the whole Kingdom of Tendock, and affords the Drug called Rhubarb, not any
other where to be found. The fourth Division contains Scythia, Inter Imaum,
inhabited by a more civilized People of the Tartars, and have for their chief
Cities Istigias, situate in a very fruitful Plain, to which flow the principal
Commodities of the whole Kingdom, and Samarchand, usually the Residence of the
Tartarian Chams, where Tamerlain the Great was born and died; but the most
pleasant of all, and indeed the Glory of the whole Country, is the Kingdom of
Cathia.

The Soil of this part of Tartary yields a superabundance of Fruits, Corn,
Hemp, Flax, etc. and the other Merchandise are Woolls, Rhubarb, Musk, Silks,
and Manufactures of its own, and also those of China, that are brought hither,
and has for its Chief Cities Cambalu, Tebeth, Carraran, and Xeamdu, all of them
very stately; containing in their large Circumferences, Palaces, fixed and
moving, Parks, Pastures, with many other Rarities; but in all these Countries,
the Government is Arbitrary, the Lives and Estates of the People depending upon
the pleasure of the Prince.

There are yet another sort of this people called Crimesian Tartars, inhabiting
the Crim, on the Fenns of Maeotis and borders of Moscovy and Poland, but much
of the nature of those already mentioned. As for Religion, they are in many
places divided in Opinion, as being a mixture of Armenians, Christians, Jews,
Mahometa^s, and some Idolaters.

The chief Rivers that Water this Country, are the Tanais and Volga, and the
principal Mount Imaus, which runs in a long Chain or Ridge, branching however
into diverse Spurs, etc.

A description of the Kingdom of China in its Provinces, etc.
CHINA is a large Kingdom, though not well known, till the latter times to the
Europeans, bounded on the North with the Eastern Tartars, and Altay; separated
from them by a continued Chain of Hills, and a Wall of 400 Leagues in length,
furnished with Towers, and so broad, that a Cart may be driven on the top of
it, built (as they give it out) by Tzaintzon the 117th King of China. The
Southern boundards are partly Cochin-China, a Province of the East India, and
partly the Ocean; on the East with the Oriental Ocean, and on the West with
part of India and Cathaia; and is indeed on all parts so hemmed in with
Mountains, Seas, and Artificial Fortifications, that it is no wonder Travelers
missed it in their way to other Countries.

This Kingdom, according to the account of the Natives, contains 15 Provinces,
viz. Canton, Foqueit, Olam, Sisuam, Tolenchia, Cansay, Miuchian, Ochian,
Hionam* Paguia, Tuitan, Quinchen, Chagnian, Susnam, and Quinsay, in which are
Computed 591 Cities, 1593 Walled Towns, 4200 Unwalled Towns, and 1154 Castles;
the whole Country being accounted 3000 Leagues in Circumference, reaching from
130 to 160 Degrees of Longitude, and from the Tropic of Cancer to the 53
Degree of Latitude, lying under all the Climes from the Third to the Ninth, so
that the Air is very Temperate and Healthful, by which the Natives are for the
most part exempted from Sickness, and live to an extreme Age: As for the Riches
and Fertility, it is very much, even to admiration, the people being very
Industrious, and the Soil as suitable; so that in many places they have two,
and in most parts three Harvests in a Year, nor do they spare to Plant and Sow,
the best of all kinds they can compass.

The chief Commodities coming from hence are Pearls, Bezora Stones, Wool,
Cotton, Olives, Wine, Flax, Metals, Fruit, China Ware of sundry kinds, Stuffs,
Carpets, Embroideries, Musk, Amber, etc. The People are of a Swarthy
Complexion, especially those living toward the Southern parts, short Nosed,
black Eyed, with thin Beards, wearing long Garments, with loose Sleeves, and
Hair at its full growth; they are much given to often eating, but then they do
it very sparingly, not touching their Victuals with their hands, but take it
with a Fork made of Ebbony or Ivory, from whom the Europeans learned the
Fashion. The Men are very Jealous of their Wives, insomuch that they will not
suffer them to go abroad, nor sit at the Table with them if any Stranger be
there, unless some very near Kinsman; however they permit them to go as Gay as
they please about the House, and one Trick has been brought into a Custom, to
prevent their desiring to ramble, the which is by the hard binding up their
Feet when Children, to render them small, that being accounted the greatest
Ornament or Beauty, so that being Cripled by that means, they cannot go without
pain. As for their dead, they bury them in Fields fifteen days after their
decease: They that are buried within the Walls of Cities, etc. being by them
accounted most miserable. Knowledge they have of the Deity, and some marks and
footsteps of Christianity is remaining amongst them, but so obscured, that
they live for the most part after the manner of the ancient Gentiles, offering
Sacrifices to the Devil, thereby to appease him, that he should do'em no
Mischief; and will needs have the date of their Actions, or the beginning of
their Kingdom, long before the World was made, telling many strange and
incredible Stories about the Creation, etc. In their Building, and indeed in
all their Actions, they are very neat, and the Country so populous, though the
Wars with the Tartars have somewhat lessened the number; that some of their
Kings have brought a Million of People into the Field, and has seldom less,
than 1000 Ships of War, though of no great Service, in a readiness, and 10000
lesser Vessels on several Rivers, for carrying of Goods and Merchandise from
place to place; yet so jealous are they of Strangers prying into their Affairs,
that in some Cities it is Death for any but a Native to lodge a Night within the
Walls, nor is he permitted in the day time to enter, without giving his name to
a Public Notary, which when he returns, he must see crossed out, or where
ever he is found, he suffers for it.

The Towns and Cities are too Numerous to be particularly recited, but the
principal are Quinsay, 100 Miles in Circuit, with a Lake of 30 Miles compass
within the Walls, in the middle of which is an Island, where the Emperor (as he
styles himself) has a Magnificent Palace, and is thought to contain Two
millions of People. Pequin or Pekin, not much inferior to the former in
bigness, but nothing in Trade, and all the Country is so free from Hills or
Mountains, that the Chinese ride in Charriots made of Reeds, or Canes, which by
the help of Sails is driven by the Wind, as if drawn by Horses, or floating
upon the Water. As for the Rivers, they are but few, and those proceed from
great Lakes, as wanting hills to give them Springs; the principal are Aspthara,
Senus, Ambactu, and Cotiaris, all Navigable; and have over them a great Number
of Bridges, the Arches of some of them rising so high, that a Ship under Sail
may pass with as much ease as a Boat: And as for the Customs arising by Trade,
they are so great, that no Prince whatsoever receives so much upon the like
occasion.

East India described, in its Kingdoms and Provinces, etc.
INDIA the largest Tract in the World, going under one entire name or
denomination, except Tartary and China, is bounded on the East with the
Oriental Sea, and a part of China; on the West with the Dominions of the
Persian Sophy; and on the North with Branches of Mount Taurus, that divide it
from Tartary; and on the South with the Indian Ocean: The whole Country (as
most considerate persons affirm) taking its name from the River Indus, the most
famous and noted in that part of Asia; tho some will have it to be so called
from the end or furthest extent of Asia, and is extended from 106 to 159
degrees of Longitude, and from the Equinoctial or Equator, to 44 degrees of
North Latitude, as to the main Continent, tho some Islands reckoned within the
compass of India, extend to 9 degrees South Latitude.

This Country, to give it its due, is in most parts exceeding pleasant and
flourishing, enjoying healthful and Temperate Air, unless at some Seasons, when
the heat is excessive in the Southern parts, the Summer continuing there much
longer than with us, so that they have in a manner Two Summers giving a double
increase; so that they want nothing fit for the sustaining the Life of Man, or
whatever may tend to Recreation or Delight: The Kingdoms and Provinces
generally abounding with Precious Stones, Spices, Perfumes, Medicinals, Mines
of Gold and Silver, and Minerals of all other kinds, Copper and Lead excepted;
and that they may not so abound as to reject the Traffic of other Countries,
they are deficient in Wheat and Vines, and have but few Horses; the Creatures
they use for Service, being Camels, Elephants, and Dromedaries, with other
Creatures of lesser note: Though the Woods, Plains, and Rivers abound with
Tigers; some Lions, Rhinocerots, Apes, Serpents, and Crocodiles; and in the
Seas are found Whales of a monstrous size, as 66 Cubits in length and 20 in
thickness, with lesser Fish of sundry forms, not found in the European Seas,
nor perhaps in any other. The Natives of India are different, according to the
Climates they inhabit; but in general of a-Swarthy Complexion, Tall of Stature,
Strong of Body, and in most places very much Civilized, and Exact Dealers; and
although the common sort are but meanly clad, and many only with Garments capable
of hiding their Privities, and others merely for Decency, yet those of the
better rank observe a Majesty in both Sex, as to their Raiment and Attendants,
Perfuming themselves, and wearing besides Rich Attire, Jewels, and other
Ornaments of great value; and tho the Women are barred of that Perfection of
Beauty the Europeans posses, yet have they many lovely and attractive Features,
wearing their Hair long and loose, yet covered with a Veil of Calicut Lawn;
their Ears hung with Rings and Jewels, so heavy, that the weight distorts and
disproportions them; they have also Jewels in their Noses, according to their
degree, and are very submissive and loving to their Husbands, insomuch that
they frequently leap into the Funeral Fires, and perish with the dead Body, in
hopes to enjoy him in another World; those that refuse it, being looked upon
worse than common Prostitutes, and not only hated, but severely persecuted, to
the hazard of a worse Death by their own Relations.

The Religion of the India's is mostly that of Gentilism, tho Mahometism has
made a considerable progress; and since the Europeans have Traded here,
Christianity has considerably prevailed or rather revived; it being held on all
hands that St. Thomas the Apostle planted the Christian Religion in these
parts, of which upon the first Arrival of the Portugals, many marks remained;
and in this Country it is held he suffered Matyrdom, being run through the
Body with a Spear as he was at his Devotion, by the Command of an Indian King;
and if we take India in general, it consists of a mixture of five sorts of
people more especially, viz. Indians, Moors or Arabians, Jews, Tartars, and
European Christians, who have planted diverse Colonies on the Sea Coast, and in
the Islands, strongly fortifying themselves against the Power of the Natives
and other Strangers.

This large Country, especially on the Continent, is principally divided into
India intra Gangem, and India extra Gangem, and then subdivided into Kingdoms
and Provinces, and the chief contained in the former, are Narsinga, Mallabar,
Balassia, Cambaia, Mandoa, Bengala, Ostrian, Conora, and Dellie; and of these
in their order.

NARSINGA lies on the East of the Golf of Bengal, properly accounted a Kingdom,
and is 3000 miles in Compass, the King whereof is not subject to the Great
Mogul, but for his support, and the defense of his Country, keeps 40000 Men in
pay, and can raise upon occasion a far greater Number; the Country is very
fruitful, as being watered with many pleasant Streams, besides what the Ganges
contributes toward it, and has for its Chief City Melleaper, otherwise called
St. Thomas, in Memory of the Apostle said to be Martyred in it; Bisnagar a Town
of considerable Beauty and Trade; as also Narsinga, from whence the Kingdom
seems to take its Name; and here the Women burn themselves with their Husbands.

MALLABAR, formerly called Aurea Chersonesus, is a Country extremely well
peopled, yielding Corn, Spices, Cocoes, Jaceroes, and although it has not above
25 Leagues of Sea Coast, yet it has in its Tract the Provinces of Kanonor,
Calecut, Cranganor, Cochin and Cariolam, and is of large Inland extent; the
people upon many parts of the Coast addicting themselves to Piracy, and prove
very inhospitable to Strangers, eating Humane Flesh, and giving their Virgins
to the Priests or Strangers to be deflowred, before they suffer them to be
Bedded by themselves when Married; with many other Barbarous Customs, as their
changing their Wives, and their having sometimes but one between seven or eight
of them.

BALASSIA, called the Kingdom of Bocan, tho but very small, is nevertheless
famed for the Mines of Gold and Silver found therein, by which the Neighboring
Countries are enriched, having for its Chief Towns Senergian, Balassia, and
Bocan, very Fruitful in many parts, and much Traded to.

CAMBAIA, called by some Guzant, is accommodated with 500 Miles of Sea Coast,
very Fertile, and is full of Cities and Towns, many of them considerably Traded
to, and although Cattle of sundry kinds abound here, the people are so
Superstitious, that they will eat no Flesh, but live upon what else the
Country affords, fancying, like the Pythagoreans, that the Souls of Men pass
into Beasts, etc. though they spare not to kill the Elephants for their vory,
and have for their Chief Sea Towns, Daman, Curate, Bandora, Ravellum, and for
those more inland Campanel, Tanaa, Mollar, and Cambaia; the last giving Name to
the whole Kingdom.

MANDOA, a Province very Fruitful, and stored with considerable Towns, and
above the rest Mandoa, from which it takes its name, being 30 Miles in compass,
and said to be so well Furnished for Defense, that it held out a Twelve years
Siege against the Armies of very Powerful Kings; Molta, where the Women
imitating the Men, ride a stride with Boots and Spurs on, etc.

BENGALA, is a very large, and no less Fruitful Kingdom, lying upon the great
Golf of the Sea, to which it gives Name, making 120 Leagues of Sea Coast,
watered by the River Chaberis, on which are seated many considerable Inland
Towns, full of people, but such as are exceeding Crafty and Deceitful, thinking
it no crime to cozen or overreach Strangers, nor the Women to prostitute their
Bodies to any that will give them Money; the Fathers letting the Daughters to
hire for so long as is desired to do the Work at Bed and Board, it being the
Custom of the Country, being a place much resorted, by reason of the rich
Commodities found there, as Ginger, Long Pepper, Silks, Cottons, and others,
etc. As for the Chief Cities, they are Bengala, situate on the Bay or Golf
Chatigan, or Satigar, and Gouro, and in this Tract the beast called the
Rhinoceros, is chiefly found.

ORISTAN or Orixa is a Province not very large, yet furnished with Rice, Cloth
of Cotton, a fine Stuff like Silk made of Grass, and there called Yeva; Long
Pepper, Ginger, Mirabolans, and other Commodities; So that from the Haven of
Orissa 25 or 30 Ships have been laden with the Commodities of this Province in
a Season; and here the people differ from the foregoing, as being very honest
and just in their Dealings, and has for its Chief City Raman, where the
Governor for the Mogul resides.

CANORA is a Kingdom of considerable strength and largeness, but famed for
nothing more than the Quarries of Adamant, where likewise Diamonds of
Considerable Value are found, and that none may purloyn them, a Wall is drawn
about the Hill, and a Guard set upon the Gates: As for the chief Cities or
Towns, they are Lispeo, Dangar, and Vltabat, with some other of lesser note.

DELLIE is accounted as the former, a Kingdom, the Prince, or rather Governor
of it living in great State, and is so highly Reverenced by his Subjects, that
they not only kneel when he passes in a Rich Chair of State carried on Men's
Shoulders, but upon Notice given that he shaves his Beard, or has his Hair Cut,
a Jubilee is kept throughout his Country: As for the Soil, it is not very
Fruitful, as lying considerably Northward, and more subject to Frosts than the
rest: Its Chief City is Dellie, from whence the Kingdom takes its Name; besides
which, there are of note, Fremel, Fultaber and Besmer; and these People above
other Indians addict themselves much to the study of Magic.

In this Tract of Intra Gangem, are found the Provinces of Cochin, where the
Portugals hold a considerable Trade, and have some Collonies; Cranganor a small
Kingdom, mostly inhabited by such as style themselves the Christians of St.
Thomas, and is very plentiful as well in Product as Manufacture: Conlam is a
small Dominion of about 80 Miles extent, Governed by a Petty King; but for want
of good Havens or Seacoast, not much Traded to, though it comprehends Three
and twenty Walled Towns.

India Extra Gangem.
IN this part of India are found diverse Rich Countries, viz.

ARACHAN, an Inland Region environed with Mountains and Woods, yet exceeding
Fruitful, and in it are gathered from the Rough Rocks, etc. great quantities of
Precious Stones; as for the Chief City it is Arachan.

MACHIN a little Kingdom, wherein grows the Wood Aloes, much esteemed and
valued, and has Machin for its Chief City.

CAMBOIA a large Country full of People, abounding with Elephants and
Rhinocerots; also with Gold Silver and Aloes, and other Commodities of
considerable value, put to Sale in Camboia its Chief City.

COCHIN, China a Country (once belonging to the Chinese, but now under the
Mogul, Governed by his Deputed King*) abounding with Porcelain, Aloes, Silks,
Gold, Silver, etc. having its Chief City of the same Name.

BRAMA once a Kingdom of no account, but now by the Conquests the Kings have
made, it has under its power Cal^^, P^o^a, Melinta, M^a^da, Decan, Tangu, Ava,
Machin, Aracan, Odia, Pegu, Siam, and others; so that it is the most powerful
in this Tract; and the City of Pegu is the Royal Residence of that King.

SIAM, once a powerful Kingdom, the King thereof styling himself Mighty, but
now, as before intimated, it is Tributary to the King of Brama, and is however
a very Fertile Country, having Malucca for its Chief City, possessed by the
Portugals, and much Traded to by other Nations for Spices.

PEGV was formerly so powerful, that the Kings thereof have brought Armies of
11 and 900000 men into the Field, extending their Conquests very wide, but now
the good Fortune of the Bramanian holds it in subjection. These are the places
of chief Note upon the Continent; however there are found in this large Tract
the Provinces or Kingdoms of Dulsinda, Pengab, Agra, Sanga, Camboia, Decan,
Botanter, Patanaw, and Jangoma; many of them very spacious, abounding with
Fruits, Cattle, Minerals, Precious Stones, and the like: This Country rarely
failing any where to produce something worthy of Note.

The Principal Rivers are Ganges, Indus, and Hydaspes; the first in such esteem
with the Natives, that they come many miles on Pilgrimage to it,
Superstitiously imagining, that if they drink the Water of this River before
they die, they shall undoubtedly possess their Imagined Felicity in another
World; and in the last are found a great number of Precious Stones, washed from
the Rocks and Mountains, by the sudden Showers; and to these Streams above 40
considerable Rivers contribute, fatning and enriching the Soil in every part
where they flow. As for Mountains of note, except some Branches of Ta^rus,
there are but few.

A Geographical and Historical Description OF AFRICA, In its Kingdoms and
Provinces, etc.
AFRICA larger than Europe, but less than Asia, is bounded on the East with the
Red Sea and Arabian Bay, parted by them from Asia; on the West with the Main
Atlantic Ocean, separating it from America; on the North with the
Mediterranean Sea, dividing it from Europe and Anatolia; and on the South with
the Aethiopick Ocean, separating it from the Southern Continent; and joins only
to Asia by an Isthmus of 60 Miles, over which Cleopatra the Queen of Egypt
when she fled with Antony from the Naval Fight at Actium, purposed to draw by
main force her Ships and Galleys into the Red Sea, but was dissuaded from it,
by being put in hopes of a better Fortune.

AFRICA is held to have taken its name from Affro or Apher, descended from
Abraham, and is properly held to contain Six principal Regions, besides other
of lesser note, viz. Barbary, Egypt, Numidia, Sarra, the Country of the
Negro's, and the Dominions of Prestor John, and is in form like a Pyramid
reversed, the Basis of which, from Tangier to the Straights of Gibralter, to
the Point where it joyneth to Asia, is counted 1920 Italian Miles, the Cone of
it very narrow, but to reckon from the Cone or Pyris, to the Northern parts of
the Basis, it extends it self 4155 Miles, and is situate for the most part
under the Torrid Zone, being crossed by the Equator almost in the midst, which
made some of the Ancient Writers conceive it not habitable, by reason of the
excessive Heat in the middle and more southern parts, in which they deceived
themselves; for although in some places it is full of Sandy Deserts, yet the
greatest part of those Regions that lie near or under the Line, are furnished
with so many Fountains, Rivers, and little Brooks, Cedars and other lofty
Trees, casting a large Shade as well as bearing delicate Fruits, and at all
times stored with Blossoms, that the place is not despicable, but much to be
desired, and especially places more Northward, but leaving it in general, we
proceed (for the better satisfaction of the Reader) to particulars.

A Description of Egypt, etc.
EGYPT, once a Famous and Flourishing Kingdom, now in the hand of the Turks; is
bounded on the East with Idumaea, and the Arabian Bay; on the West with
Numidia, Barbary, and part of Lybia; on the North with the Mediterranean Sea;
and on the South with Aethiopia Superior, containing in length from the
Mediterranean to the City of Asua or Syene bordering on Aethiopia, 562 Italian
Miles, and in breadth from Roseta to Damiatia, or from the most Western Branch
of Nile to the farthest East 160 of the like Miles; said to be first Inhabited
by Misraim the Son of Chus, and Grandchild to Cham, situate under the Second
and Fifth Climates, making the longest Summers day but 13 hours and a half, and
although by reason of its Southerly situation, it must consequently be in a hot
and sultry Air; it has nevertheless fresh Gales of Wind to temperate it, and
once a Year (...) overflowing of the River Nilus, which renders it so
Fruitful, that it abounds with rich Pastures, store of Camels, Horses, Oxen,
Asses, Sheep and Goats of extraordinary growth; also with infinite store of
Wild and Tame Fowl, with plenty of Minerals, Precious Stones, Wine, Choice
Fruits, as Oranges, Lemons, Citrons, Pomegranats, Cherries, etc. and has Palm
Trees in great numbers growing Male and Female, and the Female bears not unless
she grows by the Male; a Tree universally useful, as serving to above twenty
ends.

As for the People, they are of a Swarthy or Tawny Complexion, very much inured
to Labor, tho the Country yields great Increase of its own accord; very
servile and obedient to their Conquerers, who Lord it over them; the Richer
sort generally addicting themselves to Necromancy and Sorcery, and are said
first to Teach the use of Letters to the Phaenicians, though the Magi, and
those that were styled their Priests, strugled all that in them lay to obscure
Learning, by representing the meaning of what they intended to express in
Hieroglyphics, shadowing it under diverse forms of Birds and Beast, etc. and
here are to be found the Ruins of mighty Structures, as the Pyramids and Tower
of Pharo's built of Marble, exceeding high, nightly hung with Lights, as a
Sea-mark to Sailors, and many other rare Matters to demonstrate the
Magnificence of a Plenteous Kingdom.

As for the Cities of Egypt, they are generally built upon Hills or high rising
Ground, to stand dry during the overflowing of Nilus, from whose Waters the
Country receives its Fertility; so that whilst it carries its Stream over the
Land, they Commerce with each other by little Boats, which beginning on the
15th of June, lasts 40 days, standing 15 Cubits in many places, and in 40 more
gathers its Waters within the Banks, by which means the Earth is so well
tempered (for in this Kingdom there falls no Rain) that the Increase is sixty
and eighty fold, their Harvest being commonly in our March and April; and if
the River flows too scanty or too immoderate, then it betokens scarcity or some
misfortune to the Prince, Governor, or State, and whilst its Waters are
abroad, which at the first issuing create a Plague for the space of a day: The
Cattle feed on the Hills; and when the Famine was here in the Reign of Pharaoh,
this River refused to pass its bounds, or give any Assistance to the Thirsty
Land.

This Country was formerly divided into two parts, viz. Delta and Thebais; the
first lying between the two extreme Branches of the River Nilus, in form of the
greek Letter, from whence it takes it is name, and the last taking name from the
City of Thebes, containing all the rest of the Rivers Course; and these again
with some odd Angles, are divided by some into many Parts, Shires, or Counties,
and is said in the time of King Amasis the Second to contain 20000 Cities,
Towns, and considerable Castles, but now a far less number, as being ruined in
their several Wars, etc. they being Cairo or Grand Cair, Alexandria, Pelusium,
since called Damiatia, taken and possessed by the Christians in the Holy War,
yet held out so obstinately upon the Siege, that 70000 persons died of the
Famine and Pestilence: Heroes or Heroum, situate on the Arabian Isthmus, at the
very bottom of the Golf, where Jacob and Joseph had their first interview:
Heliopolis, the City of the Sun, now called Betsames in the Land of Goshen:
Arsinoe, on the Shore of the Red Sea, Cleopatris built by Queen Cleopatra:
Gleba Rubra, by the Greeks called Hierabolus, and sometimes Erithia Bolus, of
which there goes a Story, That King Amenophis the Fifth being Blind, was
informed by one of his Magi, that if he could procure the Water or Urine of a
Woman that had been Married a Twelvemonth and upward, who had known no Man but
her Husband, it would restore him to Sight, when having tried in vain a great
number, at last one was found, whose Urine effected it, upon which he took her
as a mark of Honor, to be his Queen, and caused the rest to be brought into
this Town, and to be burnt together with it.

As for the Egyptians, they are a great many of them Mahometans, and some
maintain their first Idolatrous Custom, in Worshipping an Ox, Onions, Leeks,
and other Foolish Matters, and when they have a great Increase, they Offer to
the God Nilus, as they term the River, in which Feast the poorer sort spend
almost all they have Labored for through the course of the Year; and indeed,
this Country in Fruitfulness, occasioned by that River, affords them no small
Store, alluding to which, thus the Poet Lucan; Terra suis contenta bonis, non
indiga Mercis,
Aut Jovis; in solo tanta est Fiducia Nilo.
The Earth content with it is own Wealth does crave
No Foreign Wares, nor Jove himself they have,
Their Hope's alone in Nilus Fruitful wave.
And one thing extraordinary in this Kingdom, we think not fit to pass by,
which if true (as indeed it is confirmed by People of known Credit) may justly
create a wonder in all, coming to pass by a supernatural means, and not the
work of Art and Nature, viz. about five Miles from Cair, there is said to be a
place which every Good Friday shows the appearance of the Heads, Legs, Arms,
etc. of Men and Children, as if rising out of the Ground, to a very great
Number; however if any Person approach them, they shrink in again: A strange
forerunner, or earnest, if true, of the Resurrection of the whole Body,
presented Yearly by the rising of the Members; and to confirm the Truth hereof,
Stephen Dupleis (held to be a sober discerning Man) affirms to be an Eye
Witness of the Wonder, and that he had touched diverse of the rising Members,
and as he was once about to do it to the Head of a Child, a Carian forbad it,
telling him he knew not what he did. Another Wonder is the Crocodile, which
coming from a small Egg, not exceeding the bigness of a Turkies, grows to be 30
Feet in length and proportionable in thickness, living at Pleasure in the
Water, or on the Land, destroying not only Fish, but Men and Beasts; and with
these the Nilus abounds, as also with a Fish called the River Horse; and thus
much for Egypt.

A Description of Barbary.
BARBARY, (a considerable part of Africa, so called) is bounded on the East
with Cyrenaica; on the West with the Atlantic Ocean; on the North with the
Streights of Gibraltar, and some part of the Atlantic Ocean; on the South with
Mount Atlas, separated by that Mount from the Deserts of Lybia, situate under
the third and fourth Climates, so that the longest Summers Day in the most
Southern parts, amounts to 13 Hours 3 Quarters, but in the North 4 and a
Quarter, accounted in Length 1500 Miles, and in Breadth in some places 100, and
in others near 300 Miles, taking its Name from the Word Bar made double
signifying in the Saracens Language a Desert.

The Part of Barbary lying toward the Mediterranean, is full of craggy Hills
and Mountains, shaded on the Top with Woods, where Lions and other Beasts of
Prey shelter themselves, though the Valleys are very Fruitful, but deficient in
Wheat, insomuch that the Inhabitants Eat Barley Bread, yet between these and
Mount Atlas, the Country is Champian, watered with many Pleasant Rivers,
issuing from that Mountain, rendering the Soil rich and fertile, so that it
affords great store of Plums, Pears, Figs, Cherries, Apples of sundry Kinds,
Oil, Honey, Sugar, and some Mines of Gold, called Barbary Gold, being the
finest of all other: And Pliny reports that near Leptis we may behold a Date
Tree over-shadowing an Olive, and under the Olive a Fig Tree, and under the
Fig, a Pomegranate-Tree, and under that a Vine, and under the the Vine, Pease
or Corn, etc. all Flourishing at the same time, and this they do the rather,
that they may shelter each other from the heat of the Sun.

The People are of a Dusky Color, inclining to Blackness, held to Descend from
the Arabians, so that the Language they Speak in most parts is the Arabic, or
so bordering upon it that it may be easily understood, and are Impatient of
Labor, Covetous of Honor, Crafty and Deceitful, yet studious in matters of
their Law, and some Sciences, more especially Philosophy and the Mathematics,
and are in Religion generally Mahometans; they are also stately of Gate,
exceeding Mistrustful, Implacable in their Hatred, and Jealous beyond compare;
for the Women indeed are comely of Body, well Featured, delicate, soft Skinn'd,
and want nothing but Color to make them Accomplished Beauties; nor has this
Country failed to produce Persons, not only Famous for Arts and Arms, but for
Piety and Learning, as, Amilcar, Hannibal, Septimus Severus, Massinissa,
Tertullian, Cyprian, Arnobius, Lactantius, Augustine, and others of no less
Note; and here once Ruled Queen Dido in the Famous City of Carthage, which City
so long and strongly contended with Rome for the Empire of the World, but at
last was destroyed through the Importunity of Cato, at which time there was
found in it (notwithstanding the charge of a tedious War) 470000 pound weight
of Silver.

As for the whole Country, called Barbar, it was Divided into 7 Parts, viz.
Africa Propria, called also Zugitania, Byzantena, Tripolitana, Numidia,
Mauritania, Caesariensis, Sitisensis, and T^^gitania, under diverse Kings and
Governors, who then held it as Tributaries to the Roman Emperors, but since
reduced to four Divisions, viz. Tunis, Tremesen or Algiers, Fesso, and Morocco;
and of these in their order.

TVNIS is accounted a Kingdom, containing whatever the Ancients called Africa
Propria, or Minor, and Numidia Antiqua, the Air very Temperate, considering the
degree it lies in; the Soil very Fruitful, divided again into 5 parts, viz.
Bugia, Constantia, Tunis, Tripoley and Ezab, accommodated with many curious
Havens, the chief being Tripoley, where the Turkish Bassa resides; and Tunis a
considerable City giving Name to the Kingdom, supposed to be founded on the
ruins of the Ancient Carthage; and has in it a Temple of singular Beauty and
Greatness.

TREMESEN, or the Kingdom of Algiers, commonly called Argie, now in the hands
of the Piratical Turks; has for its chief City Algiers, from which the Country
takes its name, Situate near the Sea in the form of a Triangle with a Haven,
but neither great nor secure from the fury of the North Winds; though the City
is strong and beautiful, having not only in it spacious Inns, but Baths, and
Mosques, very commodious and sumptuous; and here every Trade takes a Street to
themselves; the Streets standing even one above another, upon the rising of the
Hill; which renders it a very pleasant prospect, to such as sail by it, and the
Harbor or Mole defended with strong Castles, and other works, which render the
Approach inaccessible and was formerly a place to which Merchants traded; but
now only a nest of Pirates, studying and striving all they can, to endamage and
molest, such as sail those Straits or Seas; and though they have been often
curbed by the English, French, and Dutch, etc. and brought to terms of Peace;
yet like through paced Thieves, they never kept it longer than they found an
opportunity, to break it to their advantage; and were in the year 1688; so
resolute when the French Fleet lay before it, and had with their Bombs fired
the Town about their Ears, not only to reject the offer made, but in contempt
to that puissant Monarch, to shoot his Consul out of a Mortar, or piece of
Cannon toward the French Ships in the Road, etc. As for the Upland Country, it
has many pleasant Towns and Villages in it, abounding with Gardens, Vineyards,
Pastures, Cattle, Cornfieldsd, and Fruits of sundry kinds.

FEZ and MOROCCO, are now joined under one King, who fondly styles himself
Emperor; and contain the whole Country of Mauritania, properly so called, which
took its name from the Mauri, a people that Anciently Inhabited it; and the
first of these has Fez for its chief City, giving name to the Kingdom; and here
was situate the City of Tangier, lately demolished by the English, as not
worth the keeping; nor is the Country wanting in large Forests, Green Fields,
Vineyards, flourishing Gardens, abounding with Fruits, and producing an
infinite number of Cattle, a breed of excellent Horses, and the Mountains many
wild Beasts, watered with the Rivers Buringrug and Inavis for the space of 100
Miles.

MOROCCO is Situate in a warm breathing Air, which renders the Country very
fertile; so that it abounds with Figs, Dates, Grapes, Apples, Olives, Honey,
Sugar, and Cattle; the whole Country being divided into 7 parts, viz. Guzzula,
Morocco, Hea, Duccala, Hascorasus and Tedles, all holding under the King of
Morocco, and paying him Tribute, his Power being Absolute and Tyrannical;
insomuch that he causes whom he pleases to be put to Death, that is, cast to
the Lions, or other wild Beasts, to make him sport; nor can any of his
Subjects, account what he has his own; as for the Profession of Religion these
people make, it is Mahometism, though there are a great many Jews, and some
Christians, living amongst them; as for Rivers there are not many in this
Country, the Land being watered mostly by Brooks, and little Springs; nor do
they know in most parts what Winter means as never having seen Ice or Snow, but
what hangs on the Top of the Atlas a huge Mountain, held to Transcend the
Clouds; the top of it Crowned with Pines, and so steep and rugged, that it
cannot but with great difficulty be ascended; lying in the upper part, so near
the Cold Region; that not withstanding the people beneath fry with the
scorching heat of the Sun; it is covered with Snow and Ice: of which Virgil
thus writes. Atlantis Cinctum, etc.
Atlas whose Piny Head, with Clouds Enclosed,
Is to the Storms of Wind, and Rain exposed;
Now hides the Snow his Arms, now tumbleth down,
Upon his Chinn, his Beard with Ice o'regrown.


Lybia Interior Described, etc.
LYBIA INTERIOR, has for its Northern bound Mount Atlas, parted by it from
Barbary and Cyrenaica on the East; Lybia Marmarica on the South; Aethiopia
Inferior, and the Land of Negro's and bounded with the Atlantic Ocean on the
West distinguished from the other Lybia by interior, as lying more in the main
Land of Africa.

This Country, however it anciently was distinguished into parts, stands now
divided into Biledugerid or Numidia; Lybia Deserta, or Sarra, and a
considerable Portion of the Country called Terra Negritarum, or the Negro's
Country; and as for Numidia, it abounds in many places with Cattle, Palm
Trees, and Forests of Wild Beasts, not more Salvage than the People, who live
for the most part by Rapine and Murder, inhospitable to Strangers, neglecting
Tillage, and giving themselves up chiefly to the feeding of Cattle upon the
Mountains, Carrying like the Tartars their Families and Tents, with other
Provisions from place to place, by reason of the scarceness of Water; for where
this day a Spring is found, the next it may perhaps be sunk again; yet near the
River Dara, and in some other parts, the Country people have scattered
Villages, and those of better Rank Castles. As for the Towns we find of Note,
they are or were Timugedit, Tafiletae; Talfet, a Town of 400 Houses, but no
place considerable near it in 300 Miles: Techort, where inhabit the most
Courteous People of all the Country, and chose rather to Marry their Daughters
to Strangers than to Natives, with some other of lesser note, not worth
mention, as being exceeded by most of our Country Villages.

LYBIA DESERTA, is a place so destitute and poor, by reason it mostly consists
of wide Deserts, and barren Sands, breeding numbers of Poisonous Serpents, that
few People Inhabit it, unless Thieves and Robbers, who live upon the Spoil of
those that attempt to pass them; yet near the Borders, where there is any
Green, they have some petty Towns, such as go for Cities in those Parts, as
Tagaza, 20 Days Journey from any other Peopled Place, yet affords Veins of
Salt, which they Exchange for Victuals with the Tombutan Merchants, or else
must Perish for want, and are many times overwhelmed with the Sands, driven
like Clouds upon them by the South Wind; Guargata, Situate on the Brink of a
Lake; Huaden, and Tomburaum; nor was this Country ever fought after by the
great Conquerors, as not being worth their Travel, etc.

TERR-ANIGRITARUM, or the Land of Negroes, is partly in Libya Interior, and
partly without it, and is exceeding Hot, by Reason of its Situation under the
Torrid Zone, yet full of Black People; and though a great part of it be Desert,
yet some places by the favor of Springs are so well knit and fastened, that
they appear Green and Flourishing, and especially those that lie within the
compass of the overflowing of the River Niger, insomuch that they have
Pleasant Gardens, Pastures, Corn Fields, and store of Cattle, Woods full of
Elephants, and other wild Beasts, whose Flesh they Eat, when taken by Hunting,
and Clothe themselves with their Skins, but have very few Fruit Trees, unless
such as bear a kind of a Fruit like a Chestnut, very bitter, nor have they,
unless very rarely, any Rain in this Country, but are supplied, like Egypt, by
Dews, and the overflowing of Niger.

The People of this Tract were so simple, that at the first coming of the
Portugals hither to trade, they took their Ships to be great Birds, with white
Wings, and the Roaring of their Guns to be the Voice of the Devil; nor could
they conceit their Bag-pipes to be any thing but Living Creatures, and when
they were permitted to convince themselves of the contrary, they would not yet
be beaten out of it, but that they were Immediately the Work of God's own
Hands; yet are they very Reverent or Respectful to their King, who exceeds not
in Manners, or Breeding one of our Cobblers, never daring when they come before
him to look in his Face, but cast their Eyes downward, and when they sit,
though the chiefest of his Favorites, it is at his Feet, Flat on their
Buttocks.

As for the Religion (if it may be so termed) of these Negroes, it is a mixture
of Idolatry and Mahometism, though formerly, as appears by some footsteps yet
left, Christianity was predominant in diverse parts of the Land; and through
this Country the River Nilus passes, and it is Watered likewise with Senaga, a
River arising out of the Lake Guaga, little inferior to the former, and has
diverse Mountains, as Arualtes, Arangus, and Deorum Currus, thrusting into the
Sea, and reaching in a manner the Clouds.

The chief Cities of this Country in the time of Ptolomy, were Nigra,
Thumondacana, Malachath, Seleuce, An^gath, Panagra, with some few of lesser
note, but most of them are ruined, and scarce any thing but their names
remaining; however there are some crept up in their steads, but those not many,
as Argina, Porto Dio Porto del Riscato, either built or so named by the
Portugals.

In this Tract (for it is a very large one, taking up above a third part of
Africa) are Guinea, extended from Sierra Leona in the 10th Degree of Longitude,
to Benin in the 30th. where they have the Juice of a Tree as strong as Wine, as
also Mines of Gold: A place very Fruitful, and much abounding in Rice, Barley,
Ivory, and Guinea Pepper.

TOMBVTVM, a Kingdom of it self, very Rich in Mines of Gold, yet a greater
store is gained by his Warring on his Neighbors; as also Mell, Can^, Gialosia,
Guber, Gua^gara, Gaoga, Gambra or G^mbea, Gialosi, Bito, Temiano, Zegzeg,
Zaffara, Gethan, Medna, Daum, Gualta, Agadez, Cano, Cas^n^, Savaga, most of
them Petty Princes, not of any considerable Note.

BORNVM, a large and populous Country, accounted 500 Miles in Length, yet
mostly Inhabited by keepers of Cattle that abound here, by reason of the
abundance of Pastures; and here they use no Marriage, but mix together as they
think convenient, giving their Children Names by some mark or token of their
Body; however the Kings Revenues are great, his very Dogs being coupled in
Chains of Gold.

BENIN, Eastward of Guinea; the King whereof has 600 Wives, with whom he
Marches in State Twice a Year to show them to Strangers, and the Subjects
following the Example of their Prince, get as many as they can, few having less
than Ten, and here the Men and Women go naked till they are Married, and then
have only a Covering from the Waste downward, Superstitiously raising the Skin
with three slashes of a Knife, from the Navel to the Privy Parts, as a mark of
their hopes of Salvation.

NVBIA, a considerable Country, stretching from Gaoga to Nilus, has Dangula
for its chief Town and some other of lesser note, and affords, amongst other
Drugs the mortalest of Poisons; insomuch that the tenth part of a Grain will
dispatch a Man in a quarter of an hour; and affords moreover Civit, Sugar,
Sanders, Ivory, etc. The Kingdom taking its Name from the Nubiaea, a certain
people that inhabit it, and is well refreshed with Rivers and Lakes, and the
people were generally Christians, a strong and potent Nation, well Skilled in
War, in so much that Cyriacus one of their Kings, hearing the Christians were
oppressed in Egypt, raised an Army of 100000 Horse to succor them, but being
about to enter that Kingdom, to the great Terror of the Turks and Sarazens, he
was met by the Patriarch of Alexandria, at whose Supplication and Entrcaty he
returned, without enterprizing any thing Memorable, nor has it been long since
they, for want of Spiritual Guides to strengthen and confirm them, have fallen
off from the Christian Faith, and embraced the Superstitions of Mahomet.

Aethiopia Superior described in its Kingdoms and Provinces.
AETHIOPIA SVPERIOR has on the East Sinus Barbaricus, and the Red Sea; on the
West, Lybia Interior and the Kingdom of Nubia; and part of Congo in the other
Aethiopia on the North; Egypt and Lybia Marmarica on the South; the Mountains
of the Moon parting it from Aethiopia Inferior, and had its present name from
the Grecians, and is situate on both sides the Equinoctial, extending from the
South Parrallel of 7 Degrees to the North end of the Isle Meroe, situate under
the Fifth Parallel on the North of that Circle, being accounted in length about
1500 Miles, and in breadth about half as much, in Circumference 4300 Miles;
containing the whole Country of Aethiopia, as before limited; the greatest
part of it being the Abyssine Empire or Dominion of Prestor John; the rest
comprehending the Kingdoms of Adel and Adea, the Provinces Quiola and Melindi,
though the last are reckoned parts of Aethiopia Inferior; the Island of Meroe
in the North possessed by Mahometans Enemies to Prestor John, all on the South
of Nubia and the West of Nilus, is Inhabited by the Anzichi, a Cannibal and
Idolatrous People, who have a King of their own; and all the Coast of the Red
Sea, as well within the Coast of Babel-mandel, the Port of Erocco only
excepted, is in the Possession of Moors and Arabians, who pay Homage to the
Kings of Adel and Adea.

As for the People of Aethiopia, properly so called, they were formerly held to
be great Astrologers, the first Ordainers of Sacred Ceremonies, from whom the
Egyptians had their Instructions, always counted good Archers, yet
Treacherously shooting with Poisoned Arrows; they go ill Clothed, and as bad
Housed, for the most part extremely inclined to Barbarisin, and unless they
Swear by the Life of their Emperor, not to be credited in matters of Weight;
their Color is an Olive Tawny, inclining more to Swarthiness, except their
Emperor, who as a mark of the true Prince, and are held to be Converted to the
Christian Faith, by the Eunuch of Queen Candace, Converted by St. Philip the
Evangelist, which Flourishes amongst them to this day, and comes very near in
all the Material Points, to the Orthodox Religion of the Reformed European
Church, etc. and are under a Patriarch.

The Country of the Aethiops, is like all other Countries in this Tract,
Fruitful in some Places, and Barren in others, yet it generally abounds in
Rice, Barley, Beans, Pease, Sugars, Minerals of all kinds, Cattle, viz. Goats,
Oxen, Sheep, Horses; and have great store of Flax and Vines, yet make neither
Cloth nor Wine, unless peculiarly for the Emperor, Patriarch, or great Men,
being much given to Sloth; nor do they indeed know how to bring their Minerals
to Perfection, nor will they trouble themselves to Fish or Hunt, though the Woods
and Rivers are infinitely stored with Fish and Venison.

As for the Provinces comprehended at this time within the bounds or limits of
Aethiopia, they are, Guagere, Tigremaon, Angote, Damut, Amma, Bagamedrum,
Goijami, Adel, Adea, Barnagassum, Danculi, D^bas, Fatigar, Xoa, and Barus;
though not all, as I intimated within the Circuit of the Abassine Empire; and
of Note amongst these are, viz.

BARNAGOSVM Situate upon the Red Sea, extending from Suachen, almost to the
Mou^^ of the Streights, and has for its Sea Port Frooco, the only Port of the
Empire, held Tributary from the Turks, who sometimes since took it from the
Aethiopians, with the Town of Suachen, for which they pay yearly 1000 ounces of
Gold.

TIGRAMAON, lying between Nilus, Marabo and Angote, is a pleasant Kingdom,
though of no great extent, and has for its chief City Cazunia, supposed to be
the Regal Seat of Queen Candace, whose Enuch St. Philip Baptized.

ANGOTE is a Province considerably Barren, lying between Tigramaon and Amare;
insomuch that being deficient of Gold or Silver, or any other valuable
Commodities, Iron, Plate, or Rings, and hard Loaves of Salt, made to sundry
degrees of bigness, pass as Current.

XOA is more Fertile than the former, as having many green Pastures, where a
great Number of Cattle Feed, as likewise abounding with Fruits, and is almost
in all parts Grateful to the Husbandman.

FATIGAR is noted for having in it a Lake of that Name 12 Miles in compass,
being on the Top of a high Mountain, from whence diverse Rivers, well stored
with Fish, descend to water the Country.

GOIJAMI is famed for the Mines of Gold found, as also for the Unicorn, who
makes his abode in the Hills of the Moon, large Mountains so called, because
the Moon upon her rising, appears first from behind them to that Country; and
although the Beasts are rarely taken by reason of their Swiftness, yet their
Horns, so famous for expelling Poison are found, which at a certain Period of
Time they shed.

GVGERA, otherways Meroe, is an Island of which we intend to speak hereafter;
and in this Country is found the Hill Amara, which is a Days Journey to ascend,
and 30 Miles in compass, in Form round, and on the top of it are sundry
pleasant Plains and Palaces, the Air being much cooler than that beneath, and
here the Princes of the Blood dwell. As for the Emperors Style, by reason of
the strangeness of it, we think fit to insert it, viz.

P. I. Supreme of his Kingdoms, and the Beloved of God, the Pillar of Faith,
sprung from the Stock of Judah, the Son of David, the Son of Solomon, the Son
of the Column of Sion, the Son of the Seed of Jacob, and the Son of the
Handmaid of Mary, the Son of Nahu, after the Flesh, the Son of St. Peter, and
St. Paul, after the Spirit, Emperor of the higher and lesser Aethiopia, and of
the most mighty Kingdoms, Dominions, and Countries of Xoa, Goa, Caffares,
Fatigar, Angote, Balignazo, Adea, Vangue, Goijami, (where are the Fountains of
Nile) Amara, Banguamedron, Ambea, Vangucum, Tigremean, Sabaim, (the Birthplace
of the Queen of Saba) Barnagosum; and Lord of all the Region unto the Confines
of Egypt.

And is said to have for his Arms, a Lion Rampant, in a Field Or, with this
Motto, viz. The Lion of the Tribe of Judah shall overcome. Which gives many
occasion to think, he either descended of the Jewish Race, from the Stock of
David, or from the Offspring of the Queen of Sheba, or Saba, called the Queen
of the South, supposed to be Begotten by Solomon; but leaving these Conjectures
to those that are disposed to make a more strict Inquiry into them, we proceed
to the Inferior Aethiopia.

Aethiopia Inferior Described, in its Kingdoms and Provinces, etc.
AETHIOPIA Inferior has on the East the Red Sea; on the West the Aethiopick
Ocean; on the North the Higher Aethiopia, and Terra Nigritarum; and on the
South the Main Ocean, parting it from Terra Australis Incognita; being lower in
Situation than the former; a Country but little known to the Ancients, but
since more fully Discovered, and is divided properly into 4 Parts, viz.
Zang^bar, Monomotapa, Cafraria, and Manicongo; and as for the People, they
differ little from the other Aethiopia, either in Customs or Manners, going
Clad with striped Plads, or Skins of Beasts, part Mahometans and part Idolaters.

ZANGEBAR is a Country Low and Fenny, by reason of the overflowing of the
Rivers, and so pestered with Woods and Forests, that for wa^ of the free
motion of the Air it is very unwholesome; and so little are the people skilled
in Shipping, that the Moors who dwell on the Sea Coasts use to adventure in
little Vessels sowed together with Leather Thongs, and Caulk'd with Gum, having
no other Sails than the Leaves of Palm Trees; and this Province contains 15
lesser Provinces, as Melindi, Mombaza, Quiola, Mosambique, a very Fruitful,
Populous Country; Sofala, supposed the Ophir^ of Solomon for its store of
Gold, Ivory, and other Rich Commodities; Moenhemago or Monemug, an Inland
Province, affording Mines of Gold, which the People barter with the Portugals
for Silks, Taffata's, and the like, Moeneremage, Corova, Calen, Anzuga,
Mombira, Mombiza, Bandi, Monzala, Ma^oas, Benda and Embreo, and has for its
Chief Cities or Places of resort, Mombaza, Ampaza, both taken by the Portugals;
Quiola, Mosambique, Safola, and others of lesser note; and in this Region are
diverse Cannibals of a black and horrid Aspect, who War upon their Neighbors
for no other end than that they may eat them when they take them Captive; and
amongst others, having taken Mombaza, they made a great Feast of the King and
such Citizens as escaped not their hands, and would have no Commerce held with
them, were not their Country exceeding Rich.

MONOMOPATA lies mostly upon the Sea, and is in Circuit 3250 Italian Miles; the
Air very Temperate, and wholesome and pleasant, and is Watered with the Rivers,
Panami, Aurug, Luanga, Mangeano, in whose Sands is found much Gold, and as for
the people of this Tract, they are black of Complexion, mean of Stature, swift
of Foot, and very strong, covering themselves only with Cotton Cloth, and diet
upon Flesh, Fish, Milk, Rice and Oil of Susiman, being Pagans in Religion,
Worshipping a God called Mozimo, yet invisible, for they hate Idols; and here
above all Countries in Africa, the Women have the greatest privileges. They
punish Theft, Adultery, and Witchcraft with Death, yet have no Prisons, but
execute the Offenders as soon as taken; and the lesser Provinces into which
this greater is divided, are Motuca, Rich in Mines of Gold, Torra or Butna,
Boro, Quiticut, Inhambran, and some others of lesser note, they being all very
Fruitful, but most famed for their Mines of Gold; but their Towns are very
inconsiderable, the people mostly living in straggling Cotts, the meaner sort
not suffered to have any Doors.

CAFRARIA, A third Division of this Aethiopia, is a Country greatly abounding
with Herds of Cattle, Deer, Antelopes, Baboons, Foxes, Hares, ^elicans,
Ostriches, Herons, Ducks, Geese, Pheasants, Partridges; exceeding well watered,
but deficient in Corn, by the neglect of the Natives, who choose rather to live
idly upon the bounty of Nature, than to improve it by Art; making their Aboads
in Woods and Forests, and building, for the most part, their Houses of
Branches of Trees, interwoven Hurdle-waies, and are black of Color, thick
Lipped, flat Nosed, long Headed, but longer Eared, which reach beneath their
Shoulders, occasioned by their hanging extraordinary Weights in them for
Ornaments, as Rings, Chains, etc. And to render themselves more beautiful,
slash their Skins in diverse parts, carving it out into sundry Forms, in
imitation of the Ancient Britains; and the better to show it in all parts, they
go mostly naked, unless a piece of a Beast's Skin over their Privities; and
those that go best attired, it is only in Skins of Beasts, rough as they take
them off, their Diet being raw Flesh, and with the Guts of Be^sts they adorn
themselves, by hanging them about their Necks, and indeed are altogether Brutal
and Bestial. And in this Tract live the Imb^ans, not far from the Cape of
Good-hope, Tall, and o^ considerable Strength, living by War and Rapine*
feeding on the Flesh of their conquered En^mies and dying Friends, whose Deaths
they hasten, that they may the sooner Eat them, and make Drinking Cups of their
Sculls; and in their War* they fight with Poisoned Arrows, and a long Pol^,
hardened at the end with Fire, carrying likewise Fire before them, signifying
thereby that they intend to Roast and Boil all they shall overcome; and these
were they that Eat up the King of Mambaza and his People; their King if such a
Monster deserve that sacred Epithete, accounting himself Lord of all the Earth;
and when at any time the Heat or Rain offends him, he darts his Poisoned Arrows
at Heaven, by way of defiance: As for Towns, they have none of any note, living
in Hutts, straggling Villages, and Woods; and in these parts is the Cape of
Good-hope, frequently touched by such as Sail to the East Indies; and the
better to discover the customs of these People, in the beastly and inhumane
condition they live in, take the following account, viz. It happened that some
English Ships, in their way home from the Indies, ^ortuned to take two of the
Natives, near the Bay of Soldania, in order to learn from them, when they could
be brought to speak English, a farther account of the Country, and one of them,
named Coore, they brought to London, the other dying by the way, when the
better to please him, they not only arrayed him in fine Clothes, but gave him
Beads, Bells, and other things, wherein the Natives of his Country most
delighted. yet not these, nor the sumptuous Fare he met with, could alter his
inclination, for he altogether appeared Dogged and Melancholy; and when he had
a smattering of English, he would often throw himself upon the Ground, in a
melancholy posture, and passionately cried out, Home go Saldania, go Coore
home, go. So that all hopes being lost of bringing him to any better manners,
than what he had naturally im^ibed, they sent him back again by the next Ships,
and set him, to his no small joy, on Shore where they found him: So that at any
time when he saw Ships with English Colors, he would come running to the Bay
with Gut and Garbidg about his Neck, to them, doing them all the good Offices
he could, being more pleased with that Beastly manner of Living than any other.

MANICONGO, is a very temperate Region, free from extreme Colds, as being
situate under the Equator, rendering by that means the Soil exceeding fruitful,
affording Fruits, Plants, Herbs, store of Pasturage; abundance of Bulls, Cows,
Goats, Hares, Deer, Elephants, and Serpents so large that they will swallow a
Man; Fowl of sundry kinds, they have in great plenty, both wild and tame, as
being watered with the Rivers Coanza, Bengo, Barbela, Ambrizi, Dande, Loza, and
Zare, and has in it the Mountains of Siera, Complida, the Chrystalline
Mountain, where great store of Crystal is found, the Mountains of the Sun, the
Mountains of Sal Nitri affording great quantities of that kind of Minerals, and
the Mountains of Cabambe, rich in Mines of Silver. And this Province of
Manicongo, contains sundry lesser; the King styles himself, King of Bomba,
Congo, Sango, Sundi, Bangu, Batti, Pemba, Abundi, Matana, Quisoma, Angolu, and
Cacanga, Lord of Congemes, Amolaze, Langelum, Anzuichi, Chucchi, and Zoanghi,
though several of them are undiscovered to the Europeans, the whole Coast being
first discovered by the Portugals, who o^ened a way on this side of Afric, to
the Wealth of India in Asia; and although the King of Congo, has no other
Current Money but Cockle Shells, yet his Revenues are great by Presents, for
none may come to him empty handed, as also by his share of Gold and Silver,
dug out of the Mines; and in this Tract are sundry Nations of Cannibals who
greedily devour Man's Flesh, rather than that of Beasts, and of these there are
the Igges, or Giachi, inhabiting the Mountains of the Sun, the which though
they have Wives 10 or 20 a piece, yet have they no Children to be their Heirs,
for they unnaturally strangle them as soon as Born, and Eat them as Dainties,
supplying the Decrease in number by such as they take Prisoners of either Sex,
stealing none under 16 or 20 years of Age, which by force and custom they bring
to be as bad as themselves, against whom the Batti, a neighboring Province,
keeps 70000 Men in Arms, to prevent the Stealing or Eating the rest. Another
sort there are of these Monsters in Zazichana, who Eat not only their Enemies
but their Friends and Kinsfolks; and if at any time they can make to the value
of a penny more of a Slave Dead than Alive, they kill him, and cut out his Body
in Joints, selling it publicly in their Shambles, as Beef and Mutton with us;
and when they have any that are Lean, they fat them for the Slaughter. And
great pity it is, that so good and fruitful a Country, as these Regions of
Africa, should be possessed with such impious Wretches; wherefore lest a
further Relation of such a barbarous People, should prove ungrateful to the
Reader, we will put a period to the Discourse of this Country, and of Africa,
till we come to the Islands, and so proceed to the Description of America, the
fourth and last part of the World, yet discovered Continent, etc.

A GEOGRAPHICAL AND Historical Description OF AMERICA, In its Kingdoms and
Provinces, etc.
AMERICA, the fourth Division of the World, so named by Americus Vespucius, an
adventurous Florentine, who discovered a part of the Continent, is bounded on
the East with the Atlantic Ocean, and the Virginian Seas, called Mare del
Noort; on the West with the Pacifick Ocean, called Mare Del Zur; dividing it
from Asia on the South, with part of Terra Australis Incognita, from which
separated by a long narrow Straight, called the Straight of Magellan; but on
the North reaches, as some suppose, to the Artick Pole; the bounds are not
known, and although this Country has been but lately discovered by us, yet it
is conjectured to be as anciently Peopled as Europe it self, and though some
have guessed it was knownto the Ancient Greeks Romans and Carthaginians, yet
they are but Conjectures, only the Arguments or Probabilities, they bring to
confirm or strengthen them, being much too weak to hold with a considering or
Judicious Reader, and therefore coming to more certainty, we must be impartial,
and ascribe the Honor of the Discovery of this great Country, called by many A
New World, to the Honor and Memory of Christopher Colon or Columbus, a
Genoese, born at Neray in the Signiory of Genoa, who being a man of
considerable Abilities of mind, could not upon considering the motion of the
Sun, persuade himself but that there must in reason be large Countries not
found out, to which it communicated its influence, and being strongly possessed
with these thoughts, he imparted them to the State of Genoa, in the year 1486,
whereupon he sent his Brother Bartholomew to propose the Discovery to Henry the
Seventh of England, who unluckily, by the way, was taken Prisoner, though some
time after, being set at liberty, he performed his Trust, and was received with
much cheerfulness, insomuch that Columbus was sent for by the King: happy for
the Natives had they fell into such merciful hands; but Providence otherways
ordered it, for Columbus ignorant of his Brothers being taken by the Pirates,
not hearing any return or answer, concluded his Proposals rejected, and
thereupon he made his Overtures to the Court of Castile, where after many
delays and six Years Attendance, he was furnished with three Ships, not for
Conquest, but Discovery, when having Sailed sixty days on the Main Ocean, he
could descry no Land, so that the disheartened Spaniards growing out of love
with so tedious, and as they concluded, fruitless a Voyage, began to Mutiny,
refusing to pass any further, at what time, as fortune would have it, Columbus
espied a bright Cloud arise, growing still more light, from which he gathered,
that they must ascend from the Fumes of the Earth, and not the Ocean, whereat
taking Courage, he prevailed with them to stand three days course, and if in
that time no Land was discovered, he would engage to return; when toward the
end of the third day they espied Fire, which they afterward found to be on the
Coast of Florida, where Landing his Men, he caused a Tree to be cut down, and
making a Cross, he erected it on the ^irm Land on the Eleventh of October 1492,
taking thereby possession of this New World in the name of the Spanish King,
finding it exceeding pleasant and promising, and so by degrees proceeded
further, and after him diverse others, till they brought to light the Kingdoms
and Countries Intended here to be described.

The Country of America on the Continent, is properly divided into two great
Peninsula's, whereof that toward the North is called Mexicana from Mexico the
Chief City, computed to be 3000 Miles in Circumference; the South is called
P^ruana, the Sailing about which is reckoned 17000 Italian Miles, and the
Isthmus that joins them together, is very long, but narrow in some places, no^
above 12 Miles from Sea to Sea, and in many not above 17; called by the
Spaniards the Streights of Darien, from a River of that name near the Isthmus,
which Isthmus has been often proposed to be cut, that by the joining the two
Seas, the passage might be very much shortened to China, and the Molucca's but
never yet enterprized.

The Mexican Province is properly divided into the Continent and Islands. The
Continent contains the Provinces of Estotiland, Nova Francia, Virginia,
Florida, Califormia, Nova Gallicia, Nova Hispania, and Guatimalia, and these
sub-divided into lesser Countries. The Peruan Province, or the Southern
Peninsula, taking in some part of the Isthmus, has on the Continent the
Province of Castela Aurea, Nova Granada, Peru, Chiele, Parognay, Brasil,
Guiana, and Paria, with their several Members, and particular Regions, of which
in their order, and then of the Islands of the Universe.

Estotiland, and its Regions described.
UNder the name of Estotiland we comprehend the Northern Regions of the Mexican
Province, as also those on the East; and it is bounded Eastward with the Main
Ocean; on the South with Canida, or Nova Francia; on the West with undiscovered
Tracts of Land; and on the North with an Inlet or Bay of the Sea, called
Hudsons Bay, taking its name from Henry Hudson an Englishman, who first
discovered it.

ESTOTILAND, properly so called, is the most Northern Region on the East side
of America, the Soil sufficiently enriched by Nature; the Natives Rude and void
of Civility, Arts, or Tractableness, going many of them Named, notwithstanding
the extreme Cold, living by the Flesh of Wild Beasts they kill in the Woods,
and is but little Inhabited but by the Natives, by reason of the lasting
Winters; the greatest Advantage drawn from this extreme Region, being the
Fishing Trade, where in the Rivers at the Season, are such a Number of Cod,
called New-land-fish, that with a red Rag and a Hook, a Man may catch forty or
fifty in an hour, which dried and salted, are brought into England and other
parts of Europe; besides they Trade sometimes with the Natives for Feathers,
Furs and Skins of Beasts; and the most noted places (for Cities you must expect
none) are such as have been named by the English, viz. Prince Henry's
Fore-land, Charles Cape, King's Fore-land, and Cape Wolstenham at the end
thereof, where the Streights open in a large and spacious Bay, called Hudsons
Bay; but to come more Southward, the next Region is Terra Corterialis.

In Terra Corterialis, the people are found to be of a little better
Understanding, Clothing themselves more decently in Skins of Beasts, and such
other Garments as they can conveniently obtain, being generally good Archers,
getting their Provision thereby, yet Strangers to Towns and Cities, as living
in Caves and Swamps, or fortified Woods, to which they gave the Names of Towns
or Villages; not Marrying, but living Common, most of them Idolaters, and those
that are their Guides, pretenders to Southsaying and Witchcraft, much
delighting in Fish, which they eat more gladly than any thing* though a French
Colony settling here, have built some inconsiderable Towns, indifferently
Inhabited, as Breast, Cabo-Marzo, Sancta Maria, and some others; and this part
was first discovered by Sebastian Cabot in the Year 1499, at the Charge of King
Henry the Seventh, though not Improved, but took soon after its name from
Gaspar Corterialis a Portugal, who some years after, Sailing upon Discovery,
fell in with it; and here are found Staggs, White Bears, and Scut-fish a Yard
long, and such shoals of Cod-fish upon the Coast, that they retard the Sailing
of the Ships.

NEW-FOVND-LAND, another part of this Tract lies on the South of Corterialis,
parted from it by the Frith or Straight, called Golfes des Chasteaux, pretty
well Inhabited, though not free from the Extremities of Cold, and has on the
Coast such abundance of Cod-fish, Herrings, Salmon, Mussles, with Pearls in
their Shells, etc. that it is to be wondered at; as also Thornbacks, Smelts and
Oysters; the up-land Country well Manured, producing naturally Roses, and bears
Pease in extraordinary Crops, Flourishing with Trees of sundry kinds, as well
for Fruits as Shades; and in these Parts the Natives, scaping the Bloody
Cruelty of the Spaniards, are pretty Numerous, being of a reasonable Stature,
broad Eye'd, full Faced, and Beardless, their Complexion the Color of Oaker,
and their Houses for the most part made of Pol^s, their Tops meeting together,
and covered over with Skins, their Hearth, or Fireplace in the middle, after
the manner of the Laplanders; their Boats, with which they Sail in the Rivers,
and on the Sea near the Shore, are made of the Bark of a Tree, that Country
affords, 20 Feet in Length and 4 in Breadth, yet one of them weighs not 1
Hundred Weight; and on this Coast are many curious Bays, safe for Ships; and
before this Part, which some term an Island, as being divided by the Frith from
the Continent, lies a long Bank or ridg of Ground of many Hundred Leagues
extent, but not above 24 at the Broadest, and all about Islands, called by some
Cabo Baccalaos, from the Swarms of Cod fish found about it, which by the
Natives are called Baccalaos, so that the Bears frequently pull them out of the
Water with their Paws and eat them: As for the Natives (upon the coming of the
Christians*) they Inhabited the Seacoast, but now for the most part have
betaken themselves to the Woods and Fastnesses, and used to express their Duty
and Reverence toward their King, by stroaking their Foreheads, and rubbing
their Noses which if the King accepted, or was well pleased with the Party, he
turned his Head to his left Shoulder, as a mark of Favor: And at this day the
Fishery for Ling and Cod, chiefly draws the English thither, though some Furrs
and Civit are likewise to be found, which the Colonies there settled have much
improved.

Canada, or Nova Francia, Described, etc.
ANother part of this Tract, is called Canada, from the River of that Name that
Waters it; and New France, from a Colony of French that settled there, who at
their first arrival were gladly received by the Natives, with Singing and
Dancing; and this part (as well as Nova Scotia, and Norembegue) is considerably
Woody, in the up-land parts full of Stags, Bears, Hares, Martins, Foxes, whose
Flesh (till more Civilized) the Natives did Eat raw, as they did their Fish,
only being dried in the Sun, or Smoked in their Hovels; they have also Coneys,
Land and Water Fowl in great Plenty, taking great Pride in Bracelets and Chains
of certain Shells, called Esurgnie, which the^ gather on the Coast; and here
are many great Rivers of fresh Water, which together with Mountains of Snow,
render it very cold, yet Wheat and ^ulse grows pretty kindly, though but few
Fruit Trees; and here the Women Labor more than the Men, and if so the Man
(who is allowed two or three Wives) dye, the Widows will not be induced to
Marry again, but continue in their sort of Mourning, which is to daub the naked
parts of their Body over with Coal-dust, for in some parts of this Tract they
go Naked, both Men and Women.

VIRGINIA is a Country somewhat more pleasant than what we have described;
bounded on the North with Canada; on the South with Florida; on the East with
Mare del Noort; and on the West with the Woods of the Country, the end of them
not Discovered, and is a Colony of the English, along the Sea Coast, and
considerably upland, so called in Honor of Queen Elizabeth, that Virgin Queen,
and Glory of her Sex, by Sir Walter Raleigh, in the Year 1584. though by the
Natives called Apalchen, from a Town of that Name, the Seacoast only being
Pleasant, for as much as what lies more Inland, is full of barren Mountains
and rough Woods, where notwithstanding the Natives Inhabit in poor and
miserable Houses, under sundry Chiefs, or Petty Kings, and yet frequently at
War amongst themselves, for those wretched Dwellings, and sometimes make
Inroads, and Plunder the English Territories, killing as many as fall within
the compass of their Power, and then Fly to their Woods and Fastness, where
they know they cannot without great hazard and danger be conveniently pursued.

The Country properly called Virginia extends from 34 to 38 Degrees of North
Latitude, and is very Temperate, by reason of the frequent Breizes, and
refreshing Gales of Wind that allay the heat, so that it affords abundance of
Pleasant Valleys, Spacious Fields, Fruit Trees, as in England, yielding a
greater Increase, and has sundry Veins of Allom, as also Pitch, Turpentine,
Cedar, and Olive Trees, with many Pleasant Hills, which are Planted as
Vineyards; store of Fish, Fowl, Cattle, and above all sundry large Plantations
of Tobacco, especially upon James and York Rivers, and have considerable Towns
and Villages, many of them well Fortified, to prevent Incursion of the Savages,
whose Neighboring Petty Princes, the Governor obliges to pay Tribute, and to
send their Slaves if any outrage be committed by them in the Territories of the
English, to James, Charles, or any other Town, appointed to be Punished
according to the degree of the Fact; and here the Natives (such as border on
the Plantation) are much Civilized, in consideration of those that are more
remote, Trading with the English, for Furrs, Skins, and Indian Corn, which they
fet with a Stick, as we do our Beans, which is the work and business of their
Wives, as soon as they have bought them of their Parents, and Built them a
House, which for the most part is of Poles, pleated on the Sides and Tops
Hurdle-wise; and if Female Children be Born, they as soon as they are able, go
into the Field to work with their Mother, but the Male goes along with his
Father to shoot in the Woods; and so Lazy are the Men, that if they kill any
considerable Game, they leave it at a certain remarkable Tree, and when they
come home send their Wife to fetch it, who dares not on pain of Death disoblige
her Husband. But this is only meant of the Natives, for the English are there,
as here, Governed by wholesome Laws, and live for the most part in great Plenty.

MARYLAND lies on the South of Virginia in the same Tract, divided from it only
by some considerable Rivers, and is as the former a Tobacco Plantation,
abounding likewise with Corn, Cattle, and considerable Gardens and Orchards of
Fruit Trees, Planted by the English. As for the Natives Bordering it, they
differ not in manner and quality from the former, going mostly loosly Arrayed
in Beasts skins, Feathers compacted, and armed with Bows and Darts.

NEW ENGLAND, an English Colony in this Tract is bounded on the North-East with
Norumbegua, on the Southwest with Novum Belgium; and on the other parts by the
Woods and Sea coast; situate in the middle of the Temperate Zone, between the
degrees of 41 and 44, equally distant from the Artick Circle, and the Tropic
of Cancer; which renders it very temperate and very agreeable to the
Constitution of English Bodies, the Soil being alike Fruitful, if not in some
places exceeding ours; all sorts of Grain and Fruit trees common with us
growing kindly there: The Woods there are very great, wherein for the most part
the Native Indians dwell Fortefying themselves as in Towns or places of
defense, living upon Deer and such other Creatures, as those vast Wildernesses
whose extents are unknown to the English abound with: there are in this Country
store of Ducks, Geese, Turkies, Pigeons, Cranes, Swans, Partridges, and almost
all sort of Fowl, and Cattle, common to us in Old England; together with Furs,
Amber, Flax, Pitch, Cables, Mast, and in brief whatever may conduce to profit
and pleasure; the Native Indians, in these parts are more tractable, if well
used, than in any other; many of them though unconverted, often saying, that
our God is a good God, but their Tanto evil; which Tanto is no other than the
Devil, or a wicked Spirit that haunts them every Moon, which obliges them to
Worship him for fear, though to those that are converted to Christianity he
never appears.

This English Colony after many Attempts and bad Successes was firmly
Established 1620, at what time New Plymouth was Built and Fortified; so that
the Indians thereby being over-awed, suffered the Planters without control to
Build other Towns, the chief of which are Bristol, Boston, Barstaple, and
others, alluding to the Names of Sea Towns in Old England; and are accommodated
with many curious Havens commodious for Shipping, and the Country watered with
pleasant Rivers of extraordinary largeness; so abounding with Fish, that they
are not taken for dainties: The Religion professed is Presbyterial; and for a
long time they were all Governed at their own dispose, and Laws, made by a
Convocation of Planters, etc. but of late they have submitted to receive a
Governer from England

NOVVM BELGIVM, or the New Neither-land, lies in this Tract on the South of New
England, extending from 38 to 41 degrees North Latitude; a place into which the
Hollanders intruded themselves, considerable Woody; which Woods naturally
abound with Nuts and wild Grapes, replenished with Deer, and such Creatures as
yield them store of Furrs, as the Rivers and Plains do Fish and Fowl; rich
Pastures, and Trees of extraordinary bigness, with Flax, Hemp, and Herbage; the
ground very kindly bearing the Product of Europe; and here the Natives, such as
live in Hutts and Woods, go clad in Beasts Skins, their Household goods
consisting of a Wooden dish, a Tobacco Pipe, and a Hatchet made of a sharp
F^^nt Stone, their Weapons Bows and Arrows; though the Dutch unfairly to their
cost, out of a covetous Humor, traded with them for Guns, Swords, etc. showing
the use of them which the Indians turning upon their quondam Owners, found an
opportunity to send 400 of their new Guests into the other World; and here the
chief Town is New Amsterdam, commodiously Situate for Trade, and the Reception
of Shipping.

FLORIDA is a large part of the Mexican Province, bounded on the North-East
with Virginia; on the East with Mare Del Noort; on the South and some part of
the West, with the Golf of Mexico, and the remaining part of the West with New
France, extending from 25 to 34 degrees North Latitude; and first discovered to
any purpose under the Conduct of Sebastian Cabot an English man, 1497, and now
mostly possessed by the Spaniards so named from the many Flourishing Trees and
Flowers that enammel the Country; the Soil being naturally so Rich, that a long
Manuring cannot impair it is rendering 60 fold increase; so that they have two
Crops yearly of Maize ard Corn; and here flourish most sorts of Fruits, as
Grapes, Cherries, Mulberries, Chestnuts, Plumbs, etc. The Country yielding
Cattle, Fowl, Fish, and many Medicinal Drugs; likewise Pearls, Precious Stones,
and some Mines of Gold and Silver, though not much improved.

The Indians Inhabiting this Tract, are of an Olive Color, great Stature and
well proportioned going mostly naked, unless a cover made for their Privity
with a Stages Skin, painting their Arms and Legs with diverse Colors not to be
washed out; their Hair is Black, hanging down to an extraordinary length,
cunning and much desirous of revenging injuries; insomuch that they are
continually at War amongst themselves; the Women upon the Death of their
Husbands, cut their Hair close to their Ears, and Marry not again till it is
grown sufficiently long to cover their Shoulders (a very commendable way if
used amongst us, to prevent our over hasty Widows, who are frequently provided
before hand;) they have amongst them many Hermaphrodites which they hold in
such detestation that they are marked out for Slaves as soon as Born; and
though they have a kind of a Glimmering of Immortality, yet they worship Idols,
representing the Devil; and when Ferdinando Sotto a Spaniard, went about to
persuade them he was sent from God, to bring them to places of Joy and Delight;
they at that time Reflecting upon the Cruelties of that Bloody Nation, told him
they could never believe it, forasmuch as they were assured that God was good,
and never would send any amongst them to kill, slay, and do all manner of
mischief; which indeed is not one of the least causes, why so many of these
poor Wretches, conceiving an Aversation to the Religion for the wickedness of
the Professors, remain yet in darkness, and obstinately shut their Eyes against
the Marvelous Light that should guide them to Salvation: As for the chief
Towns, mostly Inhabited by the Christians (for the Natives here, as in other
parts, live in Woods and small Cottages) they are St. Helens, situate on a
Promontory of that Name; Charles Fort, upon the Bank of the River Maio; Port
Royal, a Haven on the Mouth of a River of that Name; Apalc^e, formerly a Town
of Forty Cottages, taken by the Spaniards, and plundered of great store of
Wealth; Ante, Ocalis, St. Matthews, St. Augustines, taken by Drake 1585, from
the Spaniard, where he found 18 Brass Pieces of Cannon, and 20000 Florens in
ready Money: The Mountains here are not very considerable, and the Rivers of
note only 11, abound with Fish, where the Crocodiles haunt not.

CALIFORMIA is another Country of the Mexicanian Province or Division of the
West India's, comprehending a vast Tract of Land, by some branched under diverse
Denominations; it has on the East some parts of Nova Gallicia, with the vast
undiscovered Countries lying on the West of Canada, and Virginia on the
opposite Shore, bounded on the North with the unknown parts of the Mexicanian
Province, on the North West with the Streights of Anian; on the West with the
Sea interposing between it and the Island called Mer Vermiglio; on the South
and South West with the rest of Nova Gallicia, divided at first into the
Province of Quivira and Cibola; the former of these taking up the most Northern
parts of this side America, being very barren in the extremest North, yielding
few Houses, Trees, or Herbage; the Natives Rude and Savage, eating Raw Flesh
without Chewing, Clothing themselves in Bull and Cow Hides, living in Hoords
and Clanns, like the Tartars, and are thought to be upon the Tartarian
Continent; but the Mountains of Snow and Ice interrupts all Communication
between the Nations; but more Southward the Country appears green and
pleasant, Flourishing with Herbs and Trees, breeding store of Cattle, not much
differing from those of Europe, for bigness, tho in make otherwise, for they
have Bunches like Camels between their Shoulders, and Bristles, like Logs upon
their Backs, their Mains like that of a Horse, and Beards like Goats, having
short Horns and Legs, insomuch that they look frightful to those that first
behold them; but in these the Natives place their greatest Riches, making them
serve their turns sundry ways, as their Hides for Clothes and the Covering
Houses; their Bones for Bodkins and Needles; their Hair for Thread, their
Sinews for Ropes; their Horns, Maws, and Bladders for Vessels to drink in;
their Blood for Drink; and the Calve-skins for Budgets to carry Water in; the
people generally Roving from place to place, and seldom being at a stay.

CIBOLA, the second Division of Califormia, lying more Southward, is pretty
Temperate, so that the Natives go Naked, unless a short Mantle of Beasts-skins
cast over their Shoulders, and a Flap to hide their Pri^ities: As for
Fruit Trees, they are rarely found, except Cedars, of which they make their
Boats and Fuel; yet they have Maize and small white Pease growing Naturally, of
which they make their Bread; some quantity of Sheep they have, and as for
Venison, though they have store, yet they rarely eat it, but rather kill it for
the Skins, and so much the Woods abound with Lions, Bears, and Tigers, that
those who border on them are continually obliged to stand upon their Guard;
they are very Civil to Strangers; however, the Spaniards, tho they entered this
Country, withdrew again their Forces, as not thinking the Country worth their
maintaining; as for Cities or Towns there are none of note.

NOVA ALBION, so named by Sir Francis Drake Anno 1577. is another part found in
this Tract, lying about 38 degrees North Latitude, which renders it
considerably Fruitful, abounding in Cattle by reason of the pleasant Pastures
it affords, and such store of Deer and Conies, that it is greatly to be
admired; and of the Skins of these, those of most Dignity make them Robes, but
the meaner sort go Naked, except the Women, who have only an Apron of Bulrushes
to hide their Privities; and here it was the King of the Country offered up
his Crown of Network, and Feathers, to Sir Francis Drake, who received it on
the behalf of the Queen of England, erecting a Pillar and fixing her Arms
thereon, as a mark of the Countries Subjection to her, naming it thereupon New
Albion.

NOVA GALLICIA, so called from a Province of Spain of that Name, to which it is
likened for Temperature of Air and Production, is bounded on the East and South
with New Spain; on the West with the River Buena Guia; and on the West with the
Gulf of Califormia; situate between 18 and 28 degrees of North Latitude, 300
Leagues in Length and 100 in Breadth; the Air is generally very temperate, but
rather inclined to heat than cold, and tho often the Inhabitants are disturbed
with great Storms of Thunder and Rain, yet is the Air very healthy, so that no
Contagious Disease happens amongst them, and when they are deficient of Rains,
the Dews refresh the Earth, and the Country withal being Mountainous, affords
Quarries of Stone and Mines of Brass and Silver, but none of Iron or Gold, and
amongst the Metal a great mixture of Lead happens; however the Plains
wonderfully abound with Corn, yield Wheat 60 fold, and Maize 200 fold; they
have Bees likewise without stings, who make their Honey in Trees of the Woods
to great quantities; and here grow Citrons, Figgs, Malacotoons, Cherries, and
Olives; the people wavering and inconstant, upon the least discontent betaking
themselves to the Woods, and deserting their Houses; their Garments being for
the most part Cotton Shirts, with a Manle over it, given much to Singing and
Dancing, and sometimes to Drinking, and have their Tribes, whose Heads Command
in Chief, and succeed Hereditarily, yet those Chiefs Commanded by the Spanish
Officers, inhabiting those parts; and in this Tract are the lesser Provinces of
Cinaloa, Conliacan, Xalisco, Guadalaiara, Zacatecas, New Biscay, and New
Mexicana: All of them, as to the Natives and Quality of the Countries, little
differing, the greater part of them Commanded in Chief by the Spaniards, to
whom the Petty Princes and Governors of the Natives are Subservient and
Tributary, and have for their Chief Towns, St. Philip and Jacob, St. John de
Cinaloa, Pistala, Xalisco, Nombre de Dios, plundered of great Treasure by Sir
Francis Drake, St. Lewis, St. Barbara and Chia, every one the Chief of
Province, and hold some Trade, tho not considerable, the Spaniards not desiring
to have Commerce with any other Nation, nor suffer the Natives to do it, lest
they should be incroached upon; for they hold the poor ignorant people in hand,
that they are the most powerful Lords of all Europe, and the invincible People
of the World.

NOVA HISPANIA, or New Spain, is another large Country, in the Mexicanian
Province, bounded on the East with an Arm of the Sea, called the Bay of New
Spain and Gulf of Mexico; on the South with part of Nova Gallicia and Mare del
Zur; on the North with the rest of Gallicia, some part of Florida and the Gulf
on the South of Mare del Zur; or rather the South Sea, and is so called, in
reference to Spain in Europe, extending from the 15th degree of Latitude to the
26th. Measuring on the East side from the Bay of Mexico to the North of Panuco,
but less by 6 degrees, if the Measure be taken to the West side, and tho it is
situate under the Torrid Zone, yet the Air is very Temperate, by reason the
Heats are allayed by the Cooling Briezes that come from off the Seas on Three
sides of it, and the Ground being Cooled by the Showers that seasonably fall in
June, July, and August, when the Weather is at the hottest; and here are found
Rich Mines of Gold and Silver, some of Brass and Iron, great plenty of Coco
Nuts, store of Cassia, and vast quantities of Cocheneal growing upon Shrubs or
little Trees, planted by the Natives and Spaniards; they have likewise store of
Wheat, Pulse, B^rley, Plants, Roots, Oranges, Lemons, Pomegranats, Malacotoons,
Figgs, Apples, Pears, Grapes, Birds and Beasts, both Wild and Tame, almost of
all sorts; and in the hottest part of this Country, their Seed time is in
April, and their Harvest in October; but in colder places, lying low and moist,
they Sow in October and Reap in May, by which crossing, they are Supplied with
Two Harvests in a Year.

The Natives of this Tract are more Ingenious than any other of the Salvages,
giving themselves up to Curious Arts, especially to the making of Feather
Pictures, which they perform so lively without Dying the Feathers, but taking
them in their natural Colors, that they will imitate Men, Beasts, or any other
thing, so lively, that at a very small distance, any one not knowing the
contrary, would verily believe them to be drawn by the most Curious Master with
a Pencil, etc. Working in Gold more neat and dextrous than any Europeans, yet
so little esteeming it, that at the first coming of the Spaniards, they
Bartered it for Knives, Beads Bells, and such inconsiderable Matters, and not
having been used to Ride on Horseback, they took their new come Guests for
Centaurs; they were exceeding Populous, which appears by the Spaniards, having
destroyed Six millions of them in 17 Years, Roasting some, plucking out the
Eyes of others, Consuming them in their Mines, and Inhumanly casting them
amongst Wild Beasts to be devoured, insomuch that the Women, many of them not
only refused the means for Generation, but such as found themselves pregnant,
destroyed their Children in the Womb, that they might not be brought up to
serve so Bloody a Nation.

In the great Province of New Spain, are found the lesser Provinces of Panuco,
Mechuacan, Mexicana, Thascala, Guaxaca, and Jucatan, all plentifully abounding
with the pride of Art and Nature; the whole Province taking its name from
Mexico, a great City upon a Lake, as likewise all that I have hitherto written
relating to this New World, and because the taking of this City proved of such
Importance to the Spaniard, we think it not amiss to give a brief Relation of
it, viz.

Hervando Cortz, born in Medeline a Town of Estremadure, a Province of Old
Spain, rising from an obscure Birth to become a private Adventurer in these
parts, raised by Industry his Fortune to so high a pitch, that with the help of
his Friends, he Manned Eleven Ships, with 550 Men, and after some contending
with the Seas, arrived at the Island now called Sancta Crux, and passing up the
River Tabasco, sacked Potonchon a small Town on the Banks of it, upon the
Inhabitants refusing to sell him Victuals, and by the help of his Horse and
Cannon, put to the Rout an Army of 40000 of the Salvages, and so receiving the
King a Vassal to the Crown of Spain, he passed onwards toward the Golden
Mines, Landing at St. John de Vllo, where he was met by order of the Governor
of the King of Mexico, with rich presents of Gold and other rich Things, which
so inflamed him, that forgetting the Civility, he found means to pick a quarrel
with the King, by building Forts in the Country, and claiming it for Charles
the Fifth, King of Spain and Emperor of Germany, and getting the Flasc^lians
on his part, a party of the Natives who were at variance with the King of
Mexico, and increasing, his Spaniards by such as he found in the Country, to
900 Foot and 80 Horse, he with the whole Force of the Flascalians, being 100000
Men, and the help of 17 Pieces of Cannon, 13 Galliots, and 6000 Cnoa's or
Boats, besieged that great City by Land and Water, and in 13 Months took,
sacked, and burnt it, by which means this Rich Kin, (...) fell to the Spaniards.

GVATIMALIA is another large Tract in the Mexicanian Province, bounded on the
North with Jucatan and the Gulf of Honduras; on the South with Mare del Zur; on
the East or South East with Castela Aurea; and on the West with New Spain;
extended 300 Leagues upon the Coast of Mare del Zur, but upon straight measure
not above 240, and in breadth about 180 Leagues, comprehending the lesser
Provinces of Chiapa, Verapaz, Guatimala, properly so called, and from which the
whole Tract takes its Name; Hondura, Nicaragua, Veragua; and has for its Chief
Towns Civida Real, St. Augustines, St. Salvador, St. Jago de Guatimala, St.
Maria de Comyagena, Leon de Nicaragua, and La Trinidada, with diverse others of
lesser Note.

This part of Mexicana, by reason of its nearness of Situation to the Line, is
Fruitful in all parts, unless where the Rocky Hills thrust up their heads
abounding with Fruit, Trees, Corn, Cattle, Foul, Fish, and Mines of Gold,
Silver, and Brass; and in the Rivers, which are considerable, much Gold is
found, as washed from the Mountains, and here the Natives bear the Spanish Yoke
more uneasily than in other parts.

A Description of the Peruanian Province, or the Second Devision of America.
THis great Province, divided into many lesser, resembles a Pyramid Reverse
more properly so than Africa, joined to that we have mentioned by the Isthmus
or Streights of Darien, deriving its Name from Peru the Chief Province of the
whole, which stands thus divided, as far as is hitherto Inhabited by the
Spaniards or other Europeans, viz. Castela Aurea, the new Realm of Granada,
Peru, Chiel, Paragnay, Brasil, Guyana, and Paria, not accounting the Islands,
which are reserved for another place; and as for the boundards in general,
having already described them; we now proceed to describe the particular
Provinces, and of them in their order, viz.

CASTELA DELORE, or Castela Aurea, is bounded on the West with Mare del Zur and
some part of Virginia; on the South with the New Realm of Granada; on the East
and North with Mare del Noort, called Castile, in reference to that in Spain,
as being discovered by the Influence of those Kings, and Aurea added, by reason
of the abundance of Gold found there, and contains Panama, Darien, Nova,
Andaluzia, St. Martha, and the Provinces De La Hacha, the Air in most parts is
very Healthful, especially to those that have been there for any considerable
time, or born there; however the Inland Country is thinly peopled, by reason
the Spaniards upon their first settling there, destroyed in a manner the whole
Race of the Natives, whose Assistance now they want to Manure the Soil; there
were likewise found at their first Coming, an extraordinary number of Swine,
which they also destroyed and suffered to rot upon the ground in such
multitudes, that now, tho they would fain retrieve that loss, it is not in
their power; however the Earth brings forth a considerable Increase, where the
Fields and Valleys are found, tho the Country abounds with barren Mountains
and Woods, so that in this Province, besides the Mines of Gold and Silver that
are found, enriching the people with great Treasure; they have Corn, Wine, Oil,
Mellons, Balsom, sundry sorts of Drugs and Trees of sundry kinds, producing
Fruits different from what are found in Europe; and in the Province of A
daluzia, the Spaniards upon their Arrival, greedy of Gold, found in the Graves
of the Dead, which were brought from all parts to be buried there, as held to
be the most Sacred ground, so much Treasure, that for a time they took no care
to dig it out of the Mountains: As for the People Inhabiting this Tract, they
are mostly Spaniards, those few Natives that are left, being in a manner their
Slaves: The Country is full of great Rivers, as Rio de Lagartus, the River of
Crocodiles; Sardinila, Sardino, Riode Comagres, Rio de Colubros, and others,
being in many places overspread by the Spurs of the great Mountain Andes, held
to be as big as any in the World.

The Chief Towns in this Province are Panama, Darien, on the bank of the Gulf
of Vmbra; Carthage^a, situate in a Sandy Peninsula, and consisting of 500
Houses; St. Martha situate on the shoars of the Ocean; Lahach, situate upon a
River of that name; all of them under the Power of the Spaniards, governed
according to the Laws of Spain, to which the Natives are obliged to submit.

NOVA GRANADA, or the New Realm of Granada, lies on the North of Castela Aurea,
being about 130 Leagues in Length, and not much less in Breadth, and is divided
into Granada and Popayana; the Air for the most part well, with a mixture of
Heat and Cold, but more of the former; neither differ the days any thing
considerably in length; the Country extremely Woody, and somewhat Mountainous;
yet stored with Fertile Plains, and breeds a number of Cattle, affording Veins
of Gold and other Metals, and in a part of it called Tunia, are found Emeralds
of great value: The Natives that are yet remaining, go very decent, and are by
their Conversation with the Spaniards (amongst whom they live in small Towns)
much Civilized; the Women being more White and Comely than in any other part,
very Industrious, Tall, and well Proportioned, most of them embracing the Roman
Catholic Religion, much delighting in Singing and Dancing* and as for the
Chief Towns in this Province, are they St. Foy an Archbishops See; St. Michael
a Market Town, well Traded to; Trinidado seated on the River of that name;
whose Fields are ful^ of Vines of Crystal, Emeralds, Adaments, and Chalcedons;
Tunia, Pampelonia, Papayan, the u^^al Residence of a Governor, and a Bishops
See: Antiochia, Carthage, Sebastian de la Plata, so called from the Silver
Mines in its Neighborhood, with some others of less note: As for the Rivers
and Mountains, most of them want names, wherefore for brevities sake, we pass
over any tedious Enquiry into them.

As for this Province, it had its Name given by Gons^lvo Ximenes de Quesada, in
reference to Granada in Spain, who having Murdered (contrary to Faith given)
Sangipa the last King of Bagota, whom he had made use of in subduing the
Panches, he seized his Treasure, which amounted to 191294 Pezoes of fine Gold,
35000 of courser Allay, and 1800 large Emeralds; by which the Riches of the
Province may be guessed.

PERV lying South of the former Province, is accounted in Length 700 Leagues,
but disproportional in Breadth, as not exceeding in some places 60 and 40
Leagues, tho in others 100, and is divided into three parts, but so differing
in nature and quality, as if they were at a larger dis^ance from each other,
being called the Plains, the Hill Countries and the Andes; the first extending
on the Sea shore, in all places level, without Hills; the second composed of
Hills and Plains, stre^ching out from North to South; the whole Length of the
Province; and the third a continual Ridg o^ huge Mountains without any Valleys;
however, ^ho the Mountains and Hills are Woody, or otherways Barren, by reason
of their Minerals, yet the Plains and Valleys produce store of Corn, Fruit, and
Herbage, Flourishing with an Eternal Spring, the Southerly Wind continually
blowing on them, bringing no Rain, though on the Mountains all manner of Winds
have power, and bring Rain, Thunder, and Fair Weather by turns, as in other
Countries, and to supply the want of Cattle, they have in the Woods and
Mountains, a Beast like a Goat called Vicagues, and a kind of Sheep as big as
young Bullocks; bearing large Fleeces, which they use as Horses, to carry their
burdens; but if at any time they find themselves over-laden, neither force nor
fair means can oblige them to move forward, before they are alleviated, living
upon slender diet, and will sometimes Journey three days without Water; and
amongst Plants, the Fig Tree in this Country has a strange effect, viz. the
North part looking toward the Mountains, brings forth Fruit in the Summer
only, and the South part looking toward the Sea in the Winter; and in this
Province grow Coco's in great plenty, whose Leaves dried in little Pellets,
satisfy Hunger and Thirst, and are a great part of the diet the Spaniards
afford their poor Slaves in the Mines, so that it is said 100000 Baskets full
of them have been devoured in a year at the Mines of Petosia; and a plant they
have, by which they try sick Persons, whether they will live or dye, for if the
Patient look cheerful when it is fast grasped in his hand, then is it a sign of
Recovery, but if sad, the contrary; and have Beasts called a Huanacu's, the
Males of which stand Centinals upon the Mountains, whilst the Females descend
and feed in the Valleys; and if they perceive any man approaching them, they
give warning, by making a terrible noise; and hastily running to their
assistance, interpose their Bodies till they make their retreat; and many other
things are found worthy of note; and the whole Province is divided properly
into three juridical Resorts, viz. Quito, Lima and Charcas, these having under
them other Divisions of lesser note, as Las-Quixos, Cusco, Collao, etc.

As for the People they were not so ignorant, upon the first Arrival of the
Spaniards, of Letters, whereby they might acquaint themselves with other parts
of the World, but that they labor to keep them so still, that they through
Ignorance may the better brook their Yoke; however they are courageous and
industrious, fearless of Death, animated to contemn Life in hopes in the other
World to live in Luxury and Riot, and enjoy delicate Women; so that when any of
their Chiefs or petty Princes die, some of his Servants willingly submit to be
Buried with him, that they may wait upon him afterward; some of them dwelling
in the most Mountainous parts, go half naked; but the rest have long Mantles
reaching to their heels, though in dressing their Heads they differ, each
having a peculiar Fashion: And to guess at the Riches of this Country by some
part of it, it is affirmed, that the Mines of Petozi, discovered in the year
1545. afforded for the Kings Fifth's payable to his Exchequer 111 Millions of
Pezoes of Silver, every one valued at 6 s. 6 d. of our money, and yet a third
part of the whole was discharged of that payment; and in some parts as much
Gold is dug as Earth, etc. As for the Rivers of most note, they are St.
Jago, Tombez, Guagaquil, and others of lesser note. The Towns are principally
Carangues, Peru, Cusco, Andreo, Truxilo, Archidona, Baeza, Lima, Collao,
Potozi, Plata, Chiquita, with others; but to draw to a conclusion of this rich
Province, we need only say for a further Demonstration, that when Atabalaba was
overcome by Pizarro and his Spaniards, he gave (besides what infinite Sums the
Spaniards had plundered before) for his Ransom, a large Room full of Gold piled
up to the Ceiling; yet this prevailed not with those Unchristian like
Christians, for falling out about the sharing, and willing to conceal it from
the King of Spain; they notwithstanding contrary to their Oaths and promises,
Strangled that poor Peruanian Prince, the last of the Race of the Inga's, or
Emperors of Peru; for which violation and perfidy, God was not slow in
punishing them all that were concerned in it, dying a miserable and untimely
death: And in this Kings Palace at Cusco, all his Utensils were of Gold and
Silver, even to his Kitchen Furniture, and in his Wardrobe were found Statues
of Giants, the Figures of Beasts, Fish, Birds, Plants, etc. in their proper
shape and largeness of the same Metal; and thus much for Peru, etc. whose Gold
proved the ruin of the Natives, and the Impoverishment of Old Spain.

CHILE, is on the North bounded with the Desert of Alacama Interposing between
it and Peru; on the West with Mare del Zur; on the South with the Magellan
Streights; and on the East as far as Rio dela Plata, with the main Atlantic
Ocean, Situate in the temperate Zone, beyond the Tropic of Capricorn; if we
reckoned to it some other Countries bordering on the Atlantic, not yet fully
discovered called Chile or Chil from the extreme cold it indures, when the Sun
is in our Summer Solstice, that it is reported Horses and Riders in the extreme
parts are often Frozen to death, or lost in the Snows, which extremes on this
side, and beyond the Equinoctial demonstrates the Continent of America to be
larger than Asia; the Soil of this Tract in the mid-land parts is Mountainous
and unfruitful, but toward the Seaside, level and full of Trees abounding with
Gold Silver, Honey, Cattle, Wine, Maize, Corn, etc. The Natives are of a
Gigantick Stature, but very civil, if not too much provoked; clothing
themselves with Skins of Beasts, and Arming with Bows and Arrows; shaggy
Haired, and whiter of Complexion than any we have yet spoken of in the Peruanan
Provin^^s; and the Country is Watered with the Rivers of Rio de Copayapo, Rio
de Coquimbo, La Ligna, Canten, Cacapool, Topocalma, and some others of lesser
note, especially one, though we find not the name, which falls into the Sea
with a violent Torrent all day, but in the night its Channel is dry, and the
reason is, it has its Waters from the melted Snow falling from the Mountains,
which cease when the Sun is gone down: The Towns of note in Chile and
Magellanica, for into these two parts is the Province divided, are St. Jago the
Chief, tho not above 80 Houses in it, because it is the Residence of the
Governor and Court of Judicature. Serena on the Sea-shoar, having in it about
200 Houses, and near it many Mines of Gold Conception. Delos Confines,
Imperiale and some few more in the part called Chile, but in Magellanica, we
find nothing but Capes and Rivers Inhabited, a Savage and Barbarous People
afflicted with sharp Winds, and the Mountains continually covered with Snow,
wherefore as a Country not fit for Commerce, we leave, it and proceed to
Brasil.

BRASIL is a large Tract, reaching from 29 to 30 degrees South Latitude, 1500
miles in Length, and 500 in Breadth, bounded on the East with Mare del Noort or
the Main Atlantic; on the West with undiscovered Countries, on the North with
Guiana, and on the South with Paragua, or the Province of Rio de la Plata, and
is a great part of it possessed by the Portugals and Dutch: The Country
intermixed with Rivers, Mountains, Woods, and pleasant Plains; the Air
wholesome, by reason of the purging Winds which rise from the Southern Coast,
every day about Ten in the Morning; the Country yielding great store of Sugar
Canes, which is brought to perfection by the working of many Thousands of
Slaves, so that the Portugals brought thence in few Years 150000 Arobes of that
Commodity, each Arobe containing 25 Bushels of our Measure; and here it is the
Brasil Wood grows, whereof there are Trees of such bigness, that when the
Rivers overflow, as frequently they do in the level Country, the Inhabitants
dwell in the Branches of them, like Birds in their Nests, till the Waters abate.

The People in this Tract nearest the Line, are of a reasonable Understanding,
wearing Apparel, but further off they are Barbarous, both Men and Women going
stark naked, gladly eating Humane Flesh, insomuch that when they can privately
catch any of the Christians, they Roast them, and invite all their Friends,
feasting on the Flesh, with great Merriment; and here the Women are wonderful
quick, and easy at Childbearing, never lying by it, but in two or three days
seem as well as ever: Beasts are found in this Tract of strange forms; one with
the head of an Ape, the Body of a Man, and the feet and paws of a Lion; a Plant
they have called Copiba, the back of which being slit, affords a precious Balm,
which is so well known by the Beasts of the Forests, that when they have taken
in any Poison, or are bit by Serpents or other Venomous Creatures, they fly to
it for succor, as to a Sanctuary for Life, and by sucking in the Antidote,
find a speedy Cure: An Herb they have, that being roughly touched, as in
Modesty, shrinketh in its branching Leaves, and opens them not till the party
who offends is gone out of sight. The People in this Tract, both Men and Women,
are good Swimmers, and so used to Diving, that they will remain under Water an
hour without respiration, and many of them are so overgrown with Hair, that
they seem rather Beasts than Men; the Divisions of Brasil are Sr. Vincent, Rio
de Janeiro, Del Spiritu Santo, Porto Seguro, Des Ilheos, Todas Los Santos,
Paraguay, Rio de la Plata, Tucaman, St. Crux de Siera, a Province full of Palm
Trees; Fernambuck rich in Tobacco and Sugar; Tamaraca, Paraiba, Rio-grande,
Siara, Maragnon, and Para, being termed Captainships or Praefectures, possessed
by the Portugals, Spaniards, French, Dutch and other Nations, who in some
places live promiscuously with the Natives, and in others, some coming in
search of Adventures, others driven by Distress, as being not suffered to live
quietly at home; insomuch that tho the Brasilians had but few Houses and fewer
Towns, yet now the increase of them has rendered it in many parts a pleasant
Country, the Plains enriched like those of Egypt, by the overflowing of the
Rivers, which are exceeding large.

GVIANA is another Tract of this Peruanian Continent, bounded on the East with
the Main Atlantic Ocean; and on the West with the Mountains of Peru, or an
undiscovered Country interposing between them; on the North with the River,
Orenoque; and on the South, as some will have it with the Amazons; tho indeed
we find no such Country; however it is undiscovered, and therefore Travelers
have liberty to name it as they please.

Tho Guiana is situate on both sides the Line, extending from the Fourth
degree of Southern to the Eighth degree of Northern Latitude; notwithstanding
by reason of the fresh Winds and cool Air that comes off the Sea and Rivers, it
is indifferently Temperate; toward the Sea side it is level, but the Inland
swelled with rising Hills, and the Trees and Fields wearing a lasting green, as
knowing no Winter, there being always ripe and green Fruits and Blossoms at the
same time; so that it may be compared for pleasantness, with any we have yet
named in this Tract.

The People (Natives of Guiana) have no settled Government, yet reduce
themselves into Tribes, under several Heads or Chiefs, though this is left to
their own discretion, and every one may separate when he pleases, and all the
punishment they have for Offenders, is only in case of Adultery and Murder,
for which when proved, the Criminal makes an Expiation with his Life; the
poorer sort are allowed but one Wise, and the rich two or three; not owning any
God, but either not regarding from whence they had their being, and are by
Power sustained, or Atheistically ascribing all to Fate and Chance: As for
their Accounts they keep them in bundles of Sticks, which they increase or
diminish according as the Debt or Business grows more or less; and at their
Funerals the Women howl extremely, whilst the Men on the contrary are Singing
and Feasting.

This Country is divided into the Provinces of Rio-de-Las, Amazons, Wiapoco, or
Guiana, properly so called, Orenoque, Trinidado, and Tobago; and are full of
great Rivers stored abundantly with Fish, and wild Fowl, but most of all they
refresh the Gountries with the Dews that arise from them and the principal of
these are Orenoque, Arrawari, Conawini, Caspurough, or Cassipure, falling into
the Atlantic Ocean, Wiapoco, the River of the Amazons, and a great many of
lesser note; and in this Tract are said to be Mountains of entire Crystal;
Mines there are of Gold and Silver, with many strange Plants, Fruits, and
Beasts; as also Tobacco and Sugar Canes, and at Comolaha, on the South of
Arenoque, they hold a Fair for the Sale of Women, only where an Englishman
left by Sir Walter Ral^igh, reports to have bought 8 for a three halfpenny red
hafted Knife, the eldest not exceeding 18 Years, which he says without making
any Burglarys upon their Virginities, he liberally bestowed in Marriage on
sundry of the Natives: And near this place is the mighty Water-fall, or
Cataract of the River Arenoque, whose horrid noise makes the Mountains tremble,
which may well fit the Words of the Poet, viz. Cuncta tremunt undis, and multo
murmr Montis,
Spumeus invictis albescit Fluctibus amnis.
The Noise the Mountains shakes, who roar for spite,
To see the Unvanquish'd Waves clad all in White.


In an other part of this Province they have a strange custom with their Dead,
for when the Flesh is worn off the Bones by Putrefaction, they hang up the
Skeleton in the Chamber or House where the party died, decking the Skull with
Feathers of diverse Colors, and hanging Jewels and Plates of Gold, about the
Arm and Thigh Bones. As for the Towns of note in this Tract, they are Mano,
called by the Spaniards El'Dorado, from the abundance of Gold and Silver Coin,
Armor, and Utensils found there, held to be the largest of all the Country,
though some question the Truth of this place; Caripo, Gomeribo, Tanparanume,
Morequuto, St. Thome, and St. Joseph, with some others of lesser note, which
they are obliged to build upon Hills, Rocks, or the like advantageous Places,
forasmuch as the Rivers yearly overflow a great part of the Country, obliging
the Natives to live in Trees with their Families, building them Hutts in the
Branches like Birds Nests.

PARIA, another considerable Province, lies on the West of Guiana, divided into
the lesser Countries of Cumana, Venezuela, St. Margaita, Cubagna, and some
Islands; and here the Nature of the Soil and People are different, though in
general the Country is very Pleasant, being watered with the Rivers of
Rio-de-Cacioas, Rio-de-Neveri, Cumana de Bardones, and others of lesser note,
and has for its chief Towns, Maracapana (once a Spanish Garrison) Venezuela,
New Cadiz, and some others; and in this Tract the Pearl Fishery is used, those
valuable Commodities being gotten by Diving, and they bring up a Fish much like
an Oyster, out of the Shells of which they take the Pearls, supposed to be
Engendered there by the falling of Dews, when the Fish opens to receive the Air
upon the Shore: and though the People in the Province of Cumana have Plenty of
Fruits and Cattle, with other things whereby to subsist even to Riot, yet they
rather choose to feed upon Insects and Vermin, as Batts, Spiders, Horse-leaches,
Worms, etc. each Man being allowed as many Wives as he can maintain, though
they never have the Maidenheads of any, prostituting them the first Night to
their Piacos, or Priests, or their appointment, who for small matters turn over
that Drudgery to Strangers; nor do they at any time think their Guests welcome,
unless they will do the Office of Men to their Wives, Sisters, etc. blackning
their Teeth, and Painting their Bodies of diverse Colors; in this Tract are
found diverse Mines of Gold, some of Silver, and other Minerals; and here the
Spaniards met with many disasters, as well the Ecclesiastics, as Military,
being frequently expulsed or cut off by the Salvages, who are in general a
Stout and Warlike People; and here are found the Capa, a Beast, the Soles of
whose Feet are like a Shoe, and a Hog of monstrous size, with Horns like a
Goat, living altogether upon Ants, Pismires, Parrots, and Batts; and could I
have added to this Bill of Fair, Booksellers and Printers, the World might have
taken this Monster for a mere Robin Hog, etc.

Cattle this Country affords in great Quantities, insomuch that Instructed by
the Europeans, they make Butter and Cheese of their Milk, in sundry places,
which the Natives take as the Prince of Rarities. And thus much Reader may
suffice for the Empires, Kingdoms, Provinces, and States of the Universe,
relating to the Continent of Europe, Asia, Africa, and America, from which we
proceed (for the greater Satisfaction of the Curious) to the Description of the
Islands scattered in the several Seas, attributed to the four Parts of the
World; and of these in their Order.

A Description of the Islands of Europe, and their various Scituations in their
sundry Seas, etc.
Great Britain Described.
GREAT BRITAIN, being in a manner known to most that Inhabit it, may occasion
some to reflect upon this brief Description as superfluous; however, having
undertaken to omit nothing material in this great Undertaking, which indeed
wanted nothing but the permission of a larger Scope, to render it more
Illustrious, we will not be wanting to give a modest Account of the Princess of
Islands, or Epitome of the Universe, being properly, and not without just
Reason styled, the World Minature; and in this case we must divide it into two
Parts, viz. England, Wales, etc. and Scotland, comprehending the Ocean Islands.

England, described, etc.
ENGLAND has for its Eastern boundard the German Ocean; on the West the Irish
Sea; on the South the British Ocean; and on the North, parting it from
Scotland, the River Tweed and Solway; Environed as to the whole Island, with
the main Sea, guarded in most parts by such Rocks, as render it Inaccessible
from Foreign Invaders, if the Shoars be but indifferently Defended, though its
Walls consists in its many more Powerful and Impregnable Defendants, than those
of Stone; which notwithstanding it had not always to defend it, as appears by
its becoming a Prey to the Romans, its being harassed by the Picts, Scots, and
wild Irish, and the Subjection it was brought under by the Saxons, Danes, and
Normans; but at this day the often Languishing Island lifts up her head as high
as the tallest of the Daughters of the Nations upon Earth.

As for the Soil, improved by industrious hands, it is in most parts exceeding
Fruitful, as well in Grain as Herbage, Fruit Trees, Rich Pastures, etc. as all
other things necessary, and conducing to the support of Life; with Mines of
Iron, Tin, ^ead, etc. but exceeds other Nations in the Woollen Manufacture; nor
is making of Stuffs, Silks, and other Curious Arts wanting in a great measure,
but more especially the Traffic abroad, where for our Native Commodities, we
command the most valuable things in the Universe.

ENGLAND in particular, holds from 50 to 54 degrees of North Latitude; the Air
Pleasant and Temperate, by vicissitude of Heat and Cold, as also the varying of
Night and Day; but more for the wholesome Laws, good Constitution of the
Established Government and Nature of the People, whose Generosity and Valor
has famed them in all parts of the known World, and the whole divided into 39
Shires or Divisions, viz. Middlesex, Essex, Kent, Sussex, Hampshire, or the
County of Southampton, Surry, Buckinghamshire, Bedfordshire, Cambridgshire,
Cheshire, Cornwall, Cumberland, Darbyshire, Dorsetshire, Durham, Glocestershire,
Huntingtonshire, Lancashire, Leicestershire, Lincolnshire, Northamptonshire,
Notinghamshire, Rutlandshire, Shropshire, Somersetshire, Wiltshire,
Warwickshire, Westmorland, Yorkshire, Norfolk, Northumberland, Oxfordshire,
Staffordshire, Barkshire, Devonshire, Hartfordshire, Suffolk, and
Worcestershiye, Herefordshire; all of them extremely replenished with Woods,
Parks, Rivers, Cities, and Towns of Note, insomuch, that of considerable Rivers
there are found 352, and on them 847 Bridges of Note, Cities 25, Market Towns
588, Parishes 8760, Arch-Bishopricks 2, Bishoprics 23. Forests 61, Parks 752,
Chaces 12, and had before the grand unnatural Rebellion, 134 Castles, but
during that tedious War, many of them were demolished; the whole Country
consisting of pleasant Valleys, moderately rising Hills, flourishing Fields and
Medows, that it may suffice to live upon its own plenty, without the help or
assistance of any other Nation, and for stately Buildings and many other
Curiosities too many to be contained in a much larger Volume; if no other
Countries were spoken of: We must wave them, seeing we are at home, and suffer
the Experience of the knowing Reader to supply the omission.

WALES is properly a part of England, but seeing it is generally divided, or
accounted a Principality, etc. we think it not amiss to speak of it by it self,
viz. This Country is from East to West about a 100 Miles, and from North to
South 120; and in it are found 965 Parishes, 55 Market Towns, 4 Bishoprics, 67
Castles, 230 Rivers, 99 Bridges of note, 28 Parks, 6 Forests, and 1 Chase, and
is divided into the Shires of Brecknock, Anglesey, Cardigan, Carmaerthen,
Carnarvan, Denbigh, Flint, Radnor, Glamorgan, Merioneth, Montgomery, Pembrook
and Monmouth, containing both North and South Wales, stretching into the Sea
like a large Promontory, Fruitful in many places, where the Mountains raise not
their Heads, especially the Isle of Anglesey, which of it self is held
sufficient to feed the whole Country, for its store of Cattle and abundance of
Corn; this Country yielding sundry Commodious Harbors and Landing Places,
commercing at once with England and Ireland; and has for its Chief Towns,
Radnor, Carnarvan, Brecon, St. David's, Cardriff, Carmaerthen and Monmouth, most
of them very pleasantly seated, and of considerable Trade; the Natives very
Industrious and much given to Labor, Frugal, and for the most part Thrifty;
nor may we spare to sum up these two Countries, so mostly distinguished in the
Epitome of the Poet, viz.

For Mountains, Bridges, Rivers, Churches fair;
Women and Wool, they both are past compare.
SCOTLAND is the next considerable part that compacts the British Empire or
Kingdom of Great Britain, separated from it only by the Tweed and Solway, and
the Hills extending from one to the other, and is held to be 406 Miles in
Length, tho in Breadth not proportionable, being in some parts but 60 from Sea
to Sea, divided properly into two parts by the River Tay, viz. South and North,
the former Division being both Fruitful and Populous, and again sub-divided
into the Counties of Merch, Tevi[]tdale, Lothian, Liddesdale, Eskedale,
Annandale, Niddesdale, Galloway, Carrick, Kyle, Cunningham, Arran, Cliddesdale,
Lennox, Sterling, Fife, Stratherne, Menteith, Argile, Cantire, Lorn, all
comprehended in South Scotland: Loquabrea, Braidalbin, Perth, Athole, Angus,
Merns, Mar, Buquhan, Murrey, Rosse, Southerland, Cathaness, and Strathavern,
North Scotland; and in this Kingdom are found Two Arch-bishopricks, viz. St.
Andrews and Glascow, under whom are Eleven Suffragan Bishops; and here the
Chief City is Edenburg, a City principally composed of one large Street, about
a Mile in length, of very good Building; the rest less considerable, tho
throughout the whole Kingdom are many fair Cities, Towns, and Villages.

The Principal Islands lying upon the coast of Great Britain and Subject to it,
are the Islands of Wight, Man, Anglesey, Jersey, Guernsey, the Orcades or Isles
of Orkney 30 in Number; the Chief of which are Pomania, Hethy, and Sheathland,
all very Fruitful, abounding with Cattle and Corn: The Hebrides 40 in number,
but many of them rather Rocks than Islands, the Chief being Illa and Jona, the
ancient Burying place of the Scottish Kings: Mulla, where the Redshanks
Inhabited, once so frightful to the English: The Sorlings containing 145
Islands, but none of note, except Armath, Sansod, and Scilly, after the name of
which the rest are called for the most part; some others there are on this
Coast, but scarcely worth noting, as yielding little Trade or Commodity.

IRELAND, a Kingdom in Subjection to Britain by right of Conquest, separate
from England only by a tempestuous Sea, of about a days Sail; and is as all
other Islands of note, situate in the Ocean, or environed with Sea, etc.
containing in Length 400, and in Breadth 200 miles; and especially divided into
four Provinces, viz. 1. Munster, divided again into the Counties of Limrick,
Kery, Cork, Waterford, Desmond, and Holy Cross in Tipperary, 2 Lemster again
divided into the Counties of the East and West Meaths, Kilkenny, Caterlough,
Kings County, Queens County, Kildare, Weixford, Dublin, and Wicklock; 3.
Connaught, divided into the Counties of Clare, Thumond, Galloway, Majo, Slego
Letrim and Roscommon. 4. Vlster, divided into the Counties of Tyrconnel, or
Dunhal, Tyrone the upper and nether, Fermanagh, Cavan or Cravan, Monaghan,
Colrane, Antrim, Down, Armagh and Lough. And of this Kingdom the chief City is
Dublin, mostly inhabited by the English, pleasantly seated and very commodious
for Trade, which renders it the chief Seat of Justice, and a Bishops See;
besides which are Waterford, Tredagh, Limrick, Armagh, and others of lesser
note. The Country is in many parts very fruitful but being encumbered with Hills
and Boggs, a great deal of it lies waste, and the more for the sluggishness of
the Natives, who agree not with Labor, though otherwise Sharp and Crafty,
hardy of Temper, and Living upon slender Fare; however the Rivers abound with
Fish, especially Salmon, and the Hills and Valleys with Cattle; insomuch that a
Cow or a Horse may be purchased at about half a piece of our Money; and one
thing remarkable here is, that no poisonous Creature can sive upon this Coast,
and of such force is even the Wood brought from Ireland into England and other
Countries, that no Spider will fasten a Cob-web on it.

The Isle of Oleron, is situate against the French Province of Xaintoigne,
South of the Isle of Rhee, famous for the Maritime Laws, established here by
Richard King of England; tho for nothing more than the quantities of Salt sent
hence into France, and other parts.

RHEE or REE, is a pleasant Island about 10 English Miles in length, and 5 in
breadth, and has in it the Towns of La Butte, de Mont, St. John de Mont, St.
Hillary and St. Martins, famous for the defense, the Protestants made here
against the power of France, but fatal to the English in their attempt to
rescue them.

ALDERNY is an Island distant about 6 miles from Cape Hagge in Normandy, very
Rockey and hard of access, and not exceeding 8 miles in compass consists but of
one considerable Town, called from the name of the Haven Lacrab; it not
containing above 100 Families, nor is the Island of any considerable Trade.

The SARK is an Island about 6 Miles in compass not much distant from the
former; and is subject to it, being of little Trade or Moment, and these being
all of note in the Neighboring Seas, we pr^ceed to those more Northern and
Remote, which are

GROEN-LAND under the Frigid Zone, where the Cold is so extreme that it is
scarce habitable, though accounted in length 600 miles; yet having St. Thomas,
and Alba for its chief Towns supported mostly by the Fishing trade.

ISELAND an extreme cold Country, extending 400 Miles, yet thinly Inhabited;
and from this Region come the Shock Dogs, so much in esteem; and here contrary
to other Countries, the Oxen and Kine have no Horns; the Trade to it being
mostly upon the account of the Fishery, and that for Ling; few Trees except
Juniper growing in the Country.

FREEZ-LAND is an Island resorted to by the English, Flemings, Danes, Scots,
and Hansmen, upon the account of the Fishery.

NOVA-ZEMBLA lies extreme North, under 78 Degrees, so cold that no Human
Creature is capable of Inhabiting of it in Winter, unless driven by Distress,
or Fatal Necessity; as were once about 14 Dutchmen, who during their abode
there, strugled with so many Miseries, as are almost unexpressible; however
Bears and Foxes are found here, and great store of Sea Fowl, etc.

SIR HVGH WILLOVGHBY's Island, rather infamous than famous, as having its Name
only from that Adventurous Gentleman's being found Frozen to Death in his Ship,
upon the Coast.

GREEN-LAND, doubtful whether Island or Continent, noted only for the Whale
Fishery, etc. otherways so extreme Cold, as not to be Habitable after the
Season, unless by force; which Fate several English found, by overstaying the
Ship, etc. and were forced to subsist on the Flesh of Bears, Foxes, and Whale
Fretters, in a little Hutt under Ground, enduring a lingering Torment, worse
than Death, till the Ships returned; at what time some of them (though
unexpectedly) were found alive.

Having thus far proceeded briefly to the Northern Islands, we now proceed to
the more Eastern Islands.

TENEDOS is an Island seated in Pontus Euxinus, or the Black Sea, so called
from the dark Mists that arise, where it charges name into that of the
H^llespont, not very big, but Fruitful, and pretty well inhabited, famed for
nothing more than its being taken upon the Greeks Expedition against the
Trojans.

SAMOTHRACIA, called by some Samos, from Samia the name of its Chief Town,
seated in the Aegean Sea, as also are Lemnos, Lesbos, or Mittelene, Chios, or
Scio, Eubaea, Scyror, Salamis, the Sporades, and the Cyclades, or the Isles of
the Arches, most of them in the hands of the Turks, and of no considerable
note, though heretofore diverse of them were independent, and notable Seafaring
Islands, famed for many Wonders, and other strange matters by the Poets, tho at
this day they are exceeding Fruitful, many of them bearing Lemons, Oranges,
Dates, Figgs, Grapes, Olives, Apricocks, Mulberries, etc. affording a great
number of Silkworms, which yield much Silk; the Towns which are generally
Havens or Seaports, are pretty numerous, inhabited mostly by the Greek
Christians, Turks, and Jews; and from Lemnos is that Earth brought, so much in
use for curing Wounds, stopping Fluxes, and expelling Poisons; and indeed all
these Islands standing like Studs in the Sea, are so well refreshed and
tempered by a mild and healthy Air, that for their Fruitfulness, they may be
termed little Paradises of Delight, most of them having Towns or Cities of the
same name for their Metropolises or Chiefs. The Sporades, tho under one seeming
denomination, are in number 12; and the Chief of these are Milo, Canaton, and
Assine; and the Chief of the Cyclades, are Delos and Coos, as likewise Patmos,
where St. John was banished and wrote his Revelation: Giarras and some few
others of little note, lying some in Greece, and some in Asia; so accounted, as
lying farther or nearer the shore of either Country; especially in this case
it cannot be distinguished to which of the^ properly the Island belongs,
especially if it be free from the Jurisdiction of any Monarch reigning upon the
Continent.

A Description of the Isle of Creet, and other Islands.
THe Isle of Creet was very famous in former times, for being Mistress of those
Seas, nor less for its Fruitfulness, and commodious Situation for Traffic, as
being posited between the Ionian, Libyque, Aegean, and Carpathian Seas, and is
now better known by the name of Candia, taken at several times by the Turks
from the Venetians; and is in circuit about 650 Miles, abounding with Oil,
Wine, Corn, Cattle, and many other things of value, which made the Turks
contend with the loss of much Blood, to possess themselves of the whole, when
they had found the sweetness of a part of it: As for Hills, Mountains, and
Rivers of note, this Island affords not many, but has for its Chief Cities
Rhetimo, Candia, and Canea, or New Candy, built by the Turks to secure their
first possession in the Island; and in this plenteous Country Titus was
Bishop: As for the other Islands lying about it there are only Claudia and
Egelia; very Fruitful by reason of their situation, but not considerable by
reason of their smallness.

The Islands in the Ionian Sea described, etc.
THe Islands in this Sea are chiefly these, viz. CYTHERA commonly called
Serigo, held Sacred by the Poets to Venus, who took her other name from hence,
lying about 5 Miles from Cape Mello in Peloponnesus; and although it is not above
60 Miles in Compass, yet it yields such store of Fruits, Corn, and other
Commodities of value, that it is esteemed the Jewel of this Sea, and was
formerly called Porphyrus from the abundance of that sort of Stone dug out
of its Mountains; and has for its Chief Town Capsalo, situate on a small
Haven, tho not so much frequented, by reason of its shallowness.

The Strophades are a brace of Islands, where Ulysses and Aeneas are said to
find the Harpy's, and indeed fit for such kind of Creatures only, by reason of
their Rockiness, which renders them so barren, that only a few Greeks, and some
others (out of a desire to exercise their Religion without molestation) possess
them.

ZANT, an Island of the Venetians, not exceeding 60 Miles in Circumference, is
yet so abundantly Fruitful, that it almost exceeds the credit of Report,
producing the Grocery sort of Currants, for which it is famed above all other
Places; also Pomegranates, Citrons, Oranges, Lemons, Olives, Granadires,
Grapes, that make strong Wine, both white and red, and has for the Defense of
its Haven a strong City and Castle, Inhabited by Greeks and Venetians, yet has
the Misfortune to be subject to Earthquakes, though not extraordinary; and
indeed the Country is not so Fruitful, but the major part of the Inhabitants
are as wicked, not making it a scruple to Murder any, against whom they have
conceived a Grudge.

The Echinades are five small Islands, supposed to be made by the Seas casting
up Sand Banks, and the Mud that comes out of the River Achelous, according to
Poets speaking in the Name of that River, viz. Fluctus Nostrique Marisque etc.
The Fury of the Sea Waves, and my own,
Continual heaps of Earth and Mud drew down,
Which parted by the Inter-running Seas,
Made as thou see the five Echinades.


And indeed they are rather Rocks, or hardened Earth, than any Island of note
and so we leave them.

CEPHALONIA is in Circumference about 156 Miles, and contrary to the Echinades,
very Fruitful, as yielding Figgs, Olives, Rasins, Currants, Honey, Sweet Water,
Mulberries, Pine, Date, Malvasi, Muscadel, Vino Leatico, Wool, Cheese,
Turkeys, Drugs, and Dies, besides Cattle, Corn, and Rich Pastures; and has for
its chief Towns, held under the Venetians, Guiscardo, Nolo, and Argostoli,
Inhabited by Greeks and Venetians; the people Civil, and very honest Dealers.

CORFV is another Island in the Ionian Sea, 44 Miles in Length, and 24 in
Breadth; taking its name from the City of Corfu, seated at the foot of a large
Mountain, on which to strengthen it, tho strong in it self, are two Fortresses,
but chiefly out of the natural Rock; and tho the Southern part of this Island
be mountainous and subject to hot Blasts, yet the whole in general produces
Corn, Oranges, Lemons, Pomegranets, Fig Trees, Olives, Wax, Honey, some Drugs,
and many other pleasant Fruits, tho it has not in it any Rivers of note.

ITHACA is a small Island giving a name to Ulysses, who was born there, tho now
it has lost its own name, and is called Val de Campare; in compass not above 56
Miles, and of little note, unless for the Reception of Pirates that haunt this
Sea.

St. MAVRO, formerly called Leucadia, is a small Island inhabited mostly by
Jews, formerly the Venetians, but taken from them by the Turks; and although at
present it is not much set by, yet formerly was it of such esteem, that the
Inhabitants cut an Isthmus of Two Miles breadth, that joined it to the
Continent, and was famous for the Temple of Apollo seated in it; from the top
of which, those that leaped into the Sea were held to be cured of extravagant
Love; better believed than experienced.

Of the Adriatic Sea, and the Islands therein.
THe Adriatic Sea is that at the bottom of which the City of Venice is seated,
it being accounted 700 Miles in Length, and 104 in Breadth, and has in it these
Isles, viz.

MESINA, an Island about 150 Miles in Circumference, yielding considerable
Plenty, and has only a strong Fortress for its Defense, the Towns being mostly
unwalled, and but indifferently stored with Houses or Inhabitants.

LISSA or Clissa, is another of the Adriatic Islands 20 Miles over, and 60 in
Circumference, very Fruitful, and in Subjection to the Venetians, who only
defend the Sea Ports, and by that means hold the rest in Subjection.

CVRZOLA a place not exceeding 60 Miles in Circumference, yet of great moment
to the Venetians in rendering them Wood sufficient to build their Ships and
Galleys; having the Chief Town of the same name with the Island, defended by
Two strong Fortresses, Commanded by a Governor, revoked or changed yearly; and
although the Island it self affords no extraordinary Merchandise, yet it lies
Commodious for Ships Trading in those parts.

The Mediterranean Sea Considered, together with the Islands therein.
THe Mediteranean Sea is so called from its Midland Situation, as being
environed with the Earth, etc. and in it are found these Islands of Note, viz.

SICILY, about 700 Miles in Circumference, famed throughout the World for its
Fertility, producing Oil, Corn, Wine, Rice, Sugar, Alloms, Salts, Fruits,
Metals, Corral; and of Cattle such abundance, that it feeds not only it self
but a great part of Italy and other Neighboring Countries, and was accounted
the Granary of ancient Rome; nor can the New well subsist without its supplies:
And here is found the Flaming Mount Aetna, which frequently has such horrible
Eruptions, that it not only sends Stones and Cinders with Fire into the Air an
incredible height, which scatter over many parts of the Country, but to the
great Misfortune of the Inhabitants, and many times to the overthrow of Towns
and Cities, emitteth streams of Liquid Fire or melted Minerals, which have been
known to run in a Fiery Torrent a mile into the Sea, before the Waves could
extinguish them; and here the Chief Cities are Mesina and Syracuse; and the
whole Country at present is under the King of Spain, tho formerly it was an
entire Kingdom Governed by a King of its own; the Kings of Sicily, lately
stiling themselves Kings of Jerusalem; and the people are much of the nature of
those in Italy, from which the Island is divided by a small Arm of the Sea only.

MALTA, anciently Melita, the Landing Place of St. Paul in his way to Rome,
when the Viper clave to his hand, and he shook it into the Fire, is a fair
Island, tho but little in Compass, yielding store of Oranges, Lemons, Figgs,
Citrons, Cottoons, Pomgranats, and many other delicious Fruits; but is so
unhappy to be mostly deficient in Wine and Corn, by which it is supplied from
Sicily and other parts; however it is one of the Chief Sea Fortresses or
Bulwarks of Christendom against the Turks, Commanded by an Order of Knights,
called the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem, tho vulgarly termed or named the
Knights of Malta; the whole Territory being 10 Leagues in Length and 4 in
Breadth, yet contains 60 Villages, and 4 principal Cities; the Chief Valet, a
strong and well Fortified City, wherein the great Master of the Order has his
Palace, and the Knights their Chambers; as also a Tower from whence a Prospect
may be taken of the whole Island.

CORSICA, Situate over against Genoa, being 325 Miles in Circumference, and of
a very Fruitful Product, yielding Corn, Wine, Figgs, Raisins and Honey, and has
in it Iron Mines, Mines of Allom, and other Minerals, and has for its chief
Cities, Bastia, (pleasantly seated on the North East part of the Island, on a
commodious Haven) Mara, Gallera, St. Florence, St. Boniface, and some others of
lesser note, and is under the Government of Genoa, and affords a Beast, rarely
found but in this Island, called Mufoli, with a Skin like a Deer, but harder by
many Degrees, and Horns like a Ram; and here are bred an Excellent Race of good
Horses, and is an Island much noted for its good Havens, upon the Account of
the Reception for Shipping, Trading in the Mediterranean.

SARDINIA is another Island of this Tract, not above 7 Miles distant from the
former, though much larger, as not held to be less than 560 Miles in compass,
abounding with Corn and Fruit, as being but little troubled with Hills; and
though the Soil is Rich, yet no Poisonous nor Offensive thing is found in the
Island, having for its principal Cities Coliaris, (well Inhabited and
Fortified, seated upon a good Haven, being an Archbishops See) Reparata,
Bossa, and Aquilastra, and in the whole Island are two other Archbishops, and
15 Suffraga^ Bishops; the People throughout this Island demeaning themselves
courteous to Strangers, and are very just in their dealings.

The Baleares are sundry Islands found in this Sea, and the greatest of these
are Majorca and Minorca.

MAJORCA is an Island about 300 Miles in Circumference, lying about 60 Miles
from the Coast of Spain, all the Borders of it being Mountainous, and for the
most part Barren, but the Inland Country Fruitful, bearing Corn, Olives,
Grapes, Fruits of sundry Kinds, and has in it the City of Majorca, a
University; and that of Palma.

MINORCA is about 9 miles distant from the former, and 150 miles in
Circumference, having for its Principal Cities or Towns, Minorca, and Javan,
and is a Flourishing Island, especially the Inland Parts, both of them under
the King of Spain: near to these are two other small Islands, viz. Ebrisa, and
Olihusa, considerably Fertile, but not large, well Inhabited, or of any
considerable Trade, there are moreover the lesser Islands dispersed abroad as
the Vulcanian or Aeolian Islands, on the Sioilian Shore; the principal of which
is Lipra, not exceeding 10 miles in Circumference, and are both properly called
the Liparean Islands, and abound with Sulphur, Allom, Bitumen, hot Baths, and
some Fruits, though not much, as being very Rockey and Mountainous, yet
Inhabited by some Spaniards.

VVLCANIA, formerly held to be the Forge of Vulcan, where he made Thunderbolts
for Jupiter, by reason it cast out Fire in three rising Hills, like the Funnels
of Chimneys, casting up Stones, and horribly Roaring like a Smiths Forge.

STROMBOLO is another Aelian Island, or rather a Burning Mountain in the Sea,
carrying its Flames and Fire so bright, that it appears like a Beacon, and may
be seen in the dark for many Leagues; held by some who know no better, to be
the mouth of Hell; when indeed this and all other Burning Mountains are
occasioned by the firing of Minerals, or the unctuous Quality of the Earth;
through the vehement Agitation of Heat and Cold, struggling for mastery in the
vacant Caverns, etc.

There are in this Tract 18 Islands, called the Isles of Naples, but only
Isica, and Capra, and Aenaia are of any moment, and these so small, that they
render little Trade: There are others called the Ligurian Islands, viz. Elba
and Gallinara and some others, rather Rocks than Islands; wherefore we pass
them over as unworthy a place in this Book; and thus much to these Islands.

The Oriental Islands are those of the Eastern Seas, and to these by many (tho
somewhat improperly) are reckoned Rhodes and Cyprus, Two famous Islands in the
Mediterranean, exceedingly abounding in all manner of Plenty, and have for
their Chief Cities Famagusta and Rhodes, both Famous for their Strength, and
the Sieges they sustained against the whole Power of the Turks.

ORMVS, lying upon the Ethiopian Coast, and a place much frequented, spoken of
before.

ZELON, a Famous Island for Plenty, lying not far from the Indian Coast called
Cape Comerein.

MOLOCCOES, Six Islands in Chief, but have many other subject to them, viz.
Tidar, Tarnate, Macir, Rachian, Machin, and Bottone, the only Islands,
fruitfully abounding with Cloves, Nutmegs, Ginger, Cinnamon, Aloes, and Pepper,
for which they are much Traded to by the Europeans.

AMBOYNA is an Island Fruitful in Lemons, Oranges, Cloves, Cocoa's, Bonanus
Sugar Canes, and other valuable Commodities; and here it was the Dutch executed
their Inhumane Cruelties on the English, and is called one of the Islands of
Sindae or Selebes; the other Three being the Selebes, Magassar, and Gilolo,
considerably Rich and Plentiful, but Inhabited partly by Canibals, and partly
by a rude sort of people, little inferior to them; and next to these is Banta
or Banda, abounding with Nutmegs.

JAVAMAJOR and Minor, are Two extraordinary Islands abounding with Spices,
Rice, and Cotton, and all other things necessary for the subsistence of Life,
Governed by many Kings, which are in continual War with each other; and in this
Tract are Bala and Madara, Bocuro, Burneo.

SVMATRA, is a very pleasant Island of East India, as indeed are most of the
Oriental Islands named, 700 Miles in Length, and 200 in Breadth; and to these
of this Tract we may add the Philippine Islands, many in number, but most of
them small spots or specks in the Sea; and the Chief of these Islands, being in
the possession of the Spaniards, are Minbanao, Lusson, Tandain, and Pollohan,
abounding with Fruit, Cattle, pleasant Rivers, Fowls, etc. Here are also the
two Islands of Avirae, lying West ward of Sumatra.

The Islands of Africa Described.
MADAGASCAR, a large Island of 1000 Miles in Length, and 230 Miles over,
Inhabited by Negroes, where either Sex go Naked, and consequently there is no
Employment for Tailors; yet with the Natives the Europeans Trade, tho mostly
for Slaves, Copper, Gold, Silver, etc. and in this Tract are found the Islands
of Chameree, Meottey, Mohelia, Mauritius, Johanan, an a Woody Island, called
Englands Forest, but of no Trade, though considerably Fruitful.

Socotora, is an Island lying at the Mouth of the Red Sea, 60 miles in length,
and 64 in breadth, abounding with Gums, Alloes, Spices, etc. Here are also the
Island of St. Thomas, the Princes Island, and the Gorgades, in number 9, viz.
St. Vincent, St. Anthony, St. Lucius; Buenavisita, Insula, Salis, Del ^ogo, St.
Nicholas, St. James, and St. Majo.

The Canary Islands are in number 7, viz. The Grand Canary, La Palma,
Teneriffa, Lancerota, Hieorro, Forte Ventura, and La Gomera; all of them very
plentiful, abounding with Fruits, Cattle, etc. But above all, the Canarys yield
us the Wine, taking its name from the Country; and in one of them is found the
Mount Teneriff, much transcending the Clouds, as being 15 miles in ascent.

Maedera is a famous Island, first discovered by an English Ship, cast away
upon the Coast, now abounding with Corn, Wine, Honey, Sugar Canes, and Madder,
used in Dying: and upon the Coast is Holy Port, an Island, though but 15 miles
in compass, very fruitful and pleasant.

The Azores are 9 in number, viz. Tercera, the principal, St. Michael, St.
George, St. Mary, Fyall, Gratiosa, Pico, Corno, and Flores, not being very
Fruitful, except the first.

Hesperides, or the Hesperian Islands, are 3 in number, viz. Buanista, Mayo,
and Sal, lying about an 100 miles from the Continent of Africa, being in
themselves not only Fruitful, but exceeding pleasant, by reason of the
temperate Air, which occasioned the Poetical Fictions, of their being the
Elysium Fields, or abode of happy Souls after their departure.

The American Islands, etc.
JAMAICA, now an English Colony, lately taken from the Spaniards, is 170 miles
in length, and 70 in breadth, very pleasant and temperate, considerably
Fruitful, abounding with Oranges, Lemons, Cocoa Nuts, Pomgranates, and other
curious Fruits, abounding with Cattle as England, the Trees always Green, etc.

BARBADOS, an other English Colony, is very well inhabited, yielding store of
Sugar, Cattle, Corn, etc. though not exceeding 14 or 15 miles in length.

BERMVDES, called the Summer Islands, are very pleasant, abounding with
Oranges, Sugar, and other Commodities, breeding in their Mulberry Trees, great
store of Silkworms, which return to considerable account.

ST. CHRISTOPHERS is a small Island, yet produces store of Tobacco, Cotton,
Ginger, full of Woods and steep Mountains, and is possessed by the English and
French.

NEVIS, about 18 miles in circumference, is a Colony of the English, and
produces Cotton, Sugar, Ginger, etc.

ANTEGO is about 7 Leagues in length, and as much in breadth, with very rocky
Shoars, unsafe for Shipping, yet abounding in Fruit, Fish, Venison, Tobacco,
Indico, Sugar, etc.

HISPANIOLA, 350 Leagues in Circumference, very Fruitful, as are all the
Islands in this Tract, viz. Cuba, Laba, Balima, Lucayoneque, Abacoo, Biminy,
Labaquene, Viemo, Curateo, Gotao, Oquaato, Samana, St. Salvador, Le Triangulo,
St. Vincent, Dominica, Anguila, and some others, scarcely taken notice of by
Historians, as for the most part not inhabited, yet visited frequently by the
Neighboring Islanders, upon the account of the wild Cattle and Fruits found in
them; and for the convenience of the Fishing Trade. And upon these Coasts of
America, are lately settled two Colonies of English, in Pensylvania and
Carolina, very prosperous and thriving: But not having more room for a further
Description, we must, after having thus far proceeded, put a period to this our
History of the Universe.

Hoping 'twill find acceptance, since Mankind
To struggle for the World is much inclined.
FINIS.

