THE CATHOLIC Doctrine of the EUCHARIST Written in French by the Learned M.
Claude.

Veritas fatigari potest vinci non potest Ethe^ and B^^^ 1683.

(...) (...) (...) London, Printed for R. Royston.

engraved title page

THE Catholic Doctrine OF THE EUCHARIST In all AGES: In ANSWER to what M.
ARNAVD, Doctor of the Sorbon Alleges touching The BELIEF of the Greek,
Moscovite, Armenian, Jacobite, Nestorian, Coptic, Maronite, AND OTHER EASTERN
CHURCHES.

Whereunto is added an Account of the Book of the Body and Blood of our Lord,
Published under the Name of BERTRAM.

In Six BOOKS.

LONDON: Printed for R. ROYSTON, Bookseller to His most Sacred Majesty, at the
Angel in Amen-Corner, MDCLXXXIV.

modern bookplate

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND RIGHT REVEREND FATHER in GOD, HENRY Lord Bishop of
LONDON, AND One of His MAJESTY'S most Honorable PRIVY-COVNCIL, etc. J. R. R.
Humbly Dedicateth this TRANSLATION.

To the Worthy Gentlemen The MINISTERS, and ELDERS of the CONSISTORY, Assembled
at Charenton.
Gentlemen, and my most Honored Brethren,
THE design of the Book which I here offer you, being chiefly to invalidate
those pretended proofs of Perpetuity, wherewith men would set up such new
Opinions as alter the purity of the Christian Faith touching the Holy
Eucharist, I have therefore reason to believe that this present Treatise will
not prove unacceptable to you; for although the Religion we profess, needs not the
hands of men to support it, no more than heretofore the Ark of the Israelites;
yet have we cause to praise God, when we see that Reproach, of departing from
the Ancient Faith, may be justly retorted upon them, who charge us with it. Ye
will find here in this Discourse a faithful and plain representation of things,
such as they are in truth, in opposition to every thing which the Wit of Man,
and the fruitfulness of Human Invention have been able to bring forth to dazzle
men's Eyes and corrupt their Judgments: As soon as ever I had read the Writings
of these Gentlemen whom I answer, the first thought that came into my mind was
that of Solomon, That God made man Eccles. 7. 29.
upright, but he had sought out many inventions. And indeed, what is plainer
than the Supper of our Lord, as he himself has instituted it, and his Apostles
have delivered it to us; and what can be more preposterous than to search for
what we ought to believe touching this Sacrament, amongst the various Opinions
of these later Ages and different Inclinations of men; and especially amongst
them, who are at farthest distance from us: These remote ways do of themselves
fill us with doubts and suspicions, and the bare proposal of them must needs
disgust us, and make us draw consequences, little advantageous to the Doctrins
which these Gentlemen would Authorize. Yet I have not refused to join issue
with them on their own Principles, as far as the truth will permit me; and if
they would read this Answer with a free unprejudiced mind, I am certain that
they themselves will acknowledge the contrary to what they have endeavored to
persuade others.

I here offer you then Gentlemen, and my most Honored Brethren, this last fruit
of my Labor: first, for your own Edification, and secondly, for a public
testimony of my Respect and acknowledgments. All that I do, or have done, is
justly due to you, not only upon the account of the Right which ye have over me
and my Labors, but likewise because it is partly from your good Examples that I
have taken, and do still every day draw the motives which strengthen me in the
ways of God and in the love of his Truth. It is in your Holy Society that I
learn the Art of serving the common Master of both Angels and Men, according to
the purity of that Worship, which he has prescribed us, and at the same time,
how to work out my own Salvation as well as that of others. And indeed what is
it, that a man cannot learn in an Assembly, wherein all hearts and minds do
unanimously concur in the practice of Piety and Charity, which consists of
persons who have no other aim, but so to order their Conversations, as to draw
down thereby the Blessings of Heaven upon themselves and the people whom God
has committed to their Charge, and render themselves worthy of the protection
of our great and Invincible Monarch. This Work would have been published
sooner, had it not been for three great Losses we have suffered by the Death of
Mr. Drelincourt, Mr. Daille, and Morus; three names worthy to be had in
everlasting Remembrance. These persons have left us so suddenly one after
another, that we have scarcely had time to bewail each of 'em as much as we
desired: The loss of the first of these extremely afflicted us; the loss of the
second overwhelmed us with Sorrow; and the Death of the last stupefied us with
Heaviness. God having taken to himself these three famous Divines, it was
impossible but this work should be retarded. But being now at length able to
Publish it, I therefore entreat you Gentlemen, to suffer me to Dedicate it to
you, that it may appear in the World honored with your Names. May the Father of
Lights, from whom descends every good and perfect Gift, enrich you more with
his Graces, and preserve your Holy Assembly, and the Flock committed to your
care: These are the ardent Prayers of your most Humble and Obedient Servant and
Brother in Christ Jesus,

CLAVDE.

THE PREFACE.
THE Dispute which the first Treatise of the Perpetuity of the Faith has
occasioned on this Subject of the Eucharist, has made such a noise in the
world, since Mr. Arnaud's last Book, that I have no need to give an account of
the motives which engage me in this third Reply. Besides, it is evident to
every one, that the Cause which I defend, and which I cannot forsake without
betraying my Trust and Conscience, obliges me necessarily to state clearly
matters of Fact, and maintain or refute those Doctrins which are debated
between Mr. Arnaud and me.

AND yet whatsoever justice and necessity there may be for publishing this
Work, I am afraid some persons will be displeased, seeing so much written on
the same Subject; for this is the sixth Book since the first Treatise of the
Perpetuity has been published, besides two others of Father Nouet's and mine.
And these Tracts which at first were but small, have since insensibly grown
into great Volumes. Yet for all this, we have not seen what Mr. Arnaud, or his
Friends are obliged to produce as to the first six Centuries, of which without
doubt much may be said on both sides.

IF any complain of this prolixity, I confess it will not be altogether without
cause. For although the Controversy of the Eucharist is one of the most
important, that is between the Church of Rome and the Protestants, and which
deserves therefore to be carefully examined, yet since it may be treated, with
greater brevity, even this consideration of its importance, is a good reason
for shunning all tedious Digressions, which tire the Readers mind, and divert
it from attending to so necessary a truth. But it would be very unreasonable to
charge me with this irksome length of our Debates, since none can be justly
blamed, but those who have first made this Labyrinth, and then plunged
themselves into it, to the end they might forcibly draw others after them. For
as to my own part, I have ever protested, that I entered not into it, but in
condescension only to follow them; and that I might endeavor to draw them out
of it, and bring 'em into the right way.

IT is certain that for ending of this Controversy, we must have recourse only
to the Holy Scriptures, by which we may examine the nature of the Sacrament,
which our Savior instituted, and the end which he has appointed it for, the
force of the Expressions which he has made use of, the manner after which he
himself did Celebrate it, the circumstances which accompanied this Celebration,
the Impression which his Words and his Actions may be thought to make on the
minds of his Apostles, who were eyewitnesses of what they have delivered to us,
and the agreement which this Sacrament ought to have with the other parts of
the Christian Religion; and in a word every thing which is wont to be
considered, when men make an exact search after truth. This way without doubt
would be the shortest and certainest, or to speak better, the only certain
method for satisfaction, and that which can only quiet the Conscience: For the
Sacraments of the Christian Religion, being as they are, of an immediate Divine
Institution, our Faith, our Hope, and our observance of them, ought to be
grounded immediately on the Word of God, there being no Creature who is able to
extend them beyond the bounds of the Heavenly Revelation.

IT were indeed to be desired, that the Author of the Perpetuity and Mr. Arnaud
had taken this course; but seeing they have been pleased to take another, and
enquire after the Faith of the Ancient Church, before the rise of these
Controversies, they ought at least to have spared their Readers the trouble of
all fruitless and unprofitable Digressions: for so I call whatsoever they have
done hitherto; especially in Mr. Arnaud's last Volume. He has engaged himself
to give us another, wherein he promises to enquire into the belief of the six
first Ages, which plainly shows, that he himself confesses the necessity of
such a Disquisition. Wherefore then has he not at first taken this course,
seeing that at length he must come to it? What necessity is there of taking up
imaginary suppositions concerning the distinct belief of the Presence, or
rather Real Absence; and of the conformity of the Greeks and other Eastern
Christians with the Roman Church, in the Doctrine of Transubstantiation?

WE have seen within a short time three different methods of handling this
Subject, that of Father Maimbourg's, that of Father Nouet's, and that of Mr.
Arnaud. The first seems to put a stop to all farther enquiry, by this reason,
that what has been once established, ought not to be called in question; and
on this Principle he justifies the Doctrine of the Real Presence and
Transubstantiation, which having been decided by Councils, ought not again to
be brought under examination. The second consents to a Review, and to this end
allows us to search for the true Doctrine of the Church in the Scriptures, and
amongst the Fathers from Age to Age. The last permits what has been already
decided to be called in question, but withal, proposes for finding out the
true Doctrine of the Church, that men ought also to hearken to such arguments as
are grounded on certain maxims which it supposes.

OF these three methods, that of Father Nouets is certainly the most reasonable
and easy; and had he contented himself with the holy Scripture, without
entangling himself in the Writings of the Fathers; which be himself has
compared to a Wood, where such as are pursued do save themselves: on this
account his method had been commendable. That of Father Maimbourg is unjust,
because he sets up the decisions of Councils against us, not remembering that
nothing can be prescribed against Truth; especially when Salvation is
concerned; and that the determinations of Councils are not considerable any
farther with us, than they are agreeable with the holy Scripture, and the
Principles of Christian Religion; there cannot therefore be any more reasonable
or effectual way to end these particular Differences which divide us, than to
examine strictly and impartially whether this agreeableness which we plead for,
be necessary or no. Yet it must be granted, that this method of Father
Maimbourg's is far more direct, and better contrived than that of Mr. Arnaud's.
For besides, that it is more agreeable to the Doctrine and interest of the Roman
Church, taking for its Principles the Authority of the Ecclesiastical
decisions, which the other does not, it engages not a man as the other does
into new Disputes and new dangers: yet both of them avoid a through search into
the bottom of the Controversy. Now that which opposes the judgment of the
Councils can only involve us in that Debate which concerns the Authority of the
Representative Church and its Assemblies; whereas the other makes suppositions
which we affirm to be false, and of which we pretend, there cannot any good use
be made, even tho we were not able to show the falsity of them; and by this
means it entangles us into new and long Controversies, whereby they gain
nothing, but rather run a greater risque of losing the whole Cause which they
defend, so that it seems this new way was invented for no other end but to give
us new advantages against the Church of Rome and its Doctrins.

AND this will evidently appear, if we take but the pains to read this work.
For first we shall see in general the uselesness of the suppositions and
reasonings of the Author of the Perpetuity and of Mr. Arnaud, and in particular
the unprofitableness of their suppositions touching the Greeks and other
Churches, which are called Schismatics. This is the Subject of the first and
second Book. In the first I show that the method of these Gentlemen can be of
no effect in respect of us, and that we are not in reason obliged to hear, or
answer them, whilst they lay aside the holy Scripture, which is the only Rule
of our Faith; and yet leave unanswered the proofs of fact, taken from the
testimony of the Fathers; by which we are persuaded that there has been made a
change in the Roman Church. In the second I make it appear that tho it were
granted that the Greeks and other Christians of the East do agree with the
Roman Church in the Doctrins of the Real Presence and Transubstantiation, yet
the consequences which these Gentlemen would draw thence will be of no force,
for it will not hence follow that these Doctrins have been always received by
the Christian Church, which is the chief design of Mr. Arnaud's Book.

IN the second place I discover the falsity of this supposition, that the true
Greek Church, and other Eastern Christians do believe Transubstantiation, and
Adore the Sacrament after the same manner as the Church of Rome does. The
contrary of this will appear so plainly, and Mr. Arnaud's Proofs so solidly
answered, that a man would wonder to see with what confidence he treats of this
matter, in which he betrays so great ignorance and oversight. Here also his
pretended proofs touching the Greeks, from the 7th. to the 11th. and touching
the Latins in the 7th. and 8th. Centuries are fully confuted, together with the
consequences which he has blindly drawn from thence of the consent of all
Christian Churches in the Doctrins of the Real Presence and Transubstantiation.
This is the Subject of the 3d. 4th. and 5th. Book. The third proves by many and
clear arguments, that the Greeks do not believe Transubstantiation, nor adore
the Sacrament with the adoration of Latria, as the Church of Rome does, and
moreover shows particularly what their Doctrins are, wherein they agree with
the Latins and with us, and wherein they differ. In the fourth I answer all Mr.
Arnaud's Proofs, discovering their weakness, and make it appear, that the
greatest part of what he offers does necessarily conclude against him. And
because of the affinity of the matter, I examine at the same time his 7th. Book,
wherein he treats of Greek Authors, of the 7th. 8th. 9th. and 10th. Centuries.
In my fifth Book I pass over to the other Christians, which are called
Schismatics, Moscovites, Armenians, Nestorians, Jacobites, Coptics,
Ethiopians, and show they do not believe Transubstantiation nor the Real
Presence, with the Latins. From thence I come to the Latins in the 7th. and
8th. Centuries, and examine Mr. Arnaud's 8th. Book, after which I consider his
10th. Book, which concerns the consequences drawn from the consent of the
Churches, which he pretends to have proved; and I make it appear that they are
but Paralogisms and Sophisms.

IN the third place I lay open the falsity of Mr. Arnaud's second supposition,
touching the distinct belief of the Real Presence, and refute his sixth Book.
Afterward in refuting the ninth Book, I show the absurdity of his conjectures
about the impossibility of a change, and demonstrate that it is not only
possible, but might easily happen. Lastly, the innovation of Paschasius is as
evidently proved as a thing of that nature can be. This is the subject of my
sixth Book.

NOW from all these discourses it will evidently appear what I have already
observed, That this new way has not been laid open, but for to give us new
advantages against the Church of Rome.

I speak not of the intention of these Gentlemen, for they have declared
themselves plainly enough against us, to leave no place for us to suspect them
of any collusion. And the last Book of Mr. Arnaud has provided against all
such suspicions something more perhaps than is reasonable. But I speak of the
success their method has had, which has been quite contrary to their
intention. As for example, it has given me occasion to prove, that the Greeks
did not believe Transubstantiation, nor the Real Presence, which the Church of
Rome taught, when they condemned Berengarius, neither in the preceding nor
following Ages: That whatsoever efforts the Latins have made since the 11th.
Age to this present, to procure the reception of these Doctrins in Greece, yet
the true Greek Church has not embraced them: Neither do the Armenians and
other Schismatics believe them any more than the Greeks.

NOW who sees not that the first and most natural consequences which can be
drawn from thence is, That these Doctrins are new; for if they were established
at first together with the Christian Religion, they would have appeared in
those Churches, and been retained among them after their separation from the
Latins, and that they do not appear, is a manifest sign of their novelty. This
consequence is not like that of Mr. Arnaud, his and mine are not only contrary
in the matter, but they are likewise very different in form; for mine is just
and direct, whereas his is neither just nor true. For suppose the Greeks and
other Eastern Christians should at this day believe Transubstantiation, nay
suppose they should have believed it, some Ages since, what advantage can Mr.
Arnaud make of this, seeing he has been showed several ways by which it might
be introduced into their Churches? But if it be true that they held it not
neither in the 11th, nor in the following Age, as I have invincibly proved,
then it cannot be imagined how it should disappear, nor how the Latins who have
for several Ages since, overspread these Countries with their Emissaries, would
have suffered such a Doctrine to be lost amongst them, which it was so much
their interest to preserve. Moreover, this same method has furnished me with
an occasion to overthrow the pretended impossibilities of a change; and to make
appear on the contrary the facility thereof. Now suppose we could not answer
the Arguments of the Author of the Perpetuity and Mr. Arnaud, this would be but
little advantage to their cause: for still our proofs of the matter of fact,
would remain unanswered, without the examination of which, the question of the
Perpetuity of the Doctrins in Controversy cannot be decided. Whereas these
having made it appear that their pretended impossibilities are mere Chimera's,
and that this change might easily happen, this is a great inducement to believe
our account of it is really true.

IT is then certain that these Gentlemen could not make a worse choice for the
interest of the Church of Rome than of such a way, in which nothing of
advantage to their Church can be expected, but she is thereby exposed to great
fears and dangers; and that the cause which they have opposed is more beholding
to them, than that which they have taken upon them to defend. Had it not been
for them, perhaps we should not have much troubled our selves either with
discovering the real belief of the Greek Church, or that of the Armenians, or
with the displaying the mystery of their Seminaries and Missions, neither
should we have concerned our selves in showing how the change could be wrought,
and how it was made.

AND having now given an account of the several parts of this work, and of the
present state of this Controversy as to the matter of it, it is likewise fit
to say something of the manner in which I have handled it. One of my greatest
cares has been religiously to keep to truth and sincerity. For I am very
sensible, that prejudice, partiality, love of vain glory, and even sometimes a
secret desire of revenging a man's self on his Adversary, are passions which do
commonly obtrude themselves on us in Disputes, and which never fail to corrupt
the mind; I have therefore endeavored to the utmost, not only to keep these
from me, but likewise to watch against their susprizes. And for this purpose I
can affirm I have labored as in the sight of God, not proposing to my self any
other aim than his glory and truth; always remembering that I write not a line
of which I must not one day give him an account. I have not warped from that
sincerity and uprightness which an honest man ought to observe on these
occasions. I have not taken Mr. Arnaud's words in a wrong sense, nor charged
him with saying what indeed he says not, nor strained his expressions beyond
their natural signification. No man can reproach me for making false citations,
or maiming any passages, by suppressing that which is important; neither have I
alleged them abusively and contrary to the intention of their Authors. I hope
there is no unfair dealings, either in my Arguments, or Answers, in my
Suppositions, or my other Discourses. I have followed Reason and Nature as much
as I could, and have not made use of Philosophy, but to strengthen the ordinary
notions of common sense, and not to stifle or hinder their effects.

I hope likewise that I shall not be complained of as having not observed,
either in general toward the Church of Rome, or in particular, toward Mr.
Arnaud, all that moderation which might be reasonably expected from me. I have
noted the Errors and Sophisms of Mr. Arnaud, which I have found very numerous,
in every Subject on which he has treated, especially concerning the Greek
Church. I was not a little troubled to see with what sincerity he alleged
several passages, whereof some are not faithfully translated; and others so
imperfectly, that he has suppressed whole Clauses, which would clear up the
difficulty, and others which are palpably perverted, contrary to the sense of
their Authors. I could not but resent his unhandsome dealing, when he
disjoynted from the series of a discourse, several of my words, to make them
look of a quite contrary sense than what was intended; or fastened on them
strange chimerical senses, that he might have some matter of triumph, or
groundlesly slandered some famous men, or endeavored to decry by violent and
odious terms our morals, which cannot but be holy and pure, seeing we have no
others, but what are taken from the Law and the Gospel. In fine, when he
employs his declamatory style, to dazzle the eyes of the world, and to
mis-represent the truth. I have discovered several of his contradictions, and
how much his opinions are influenced by his interest; several fallacious
suppositions which he would have introduced into this Dispute, and some vain
and ill-grounded accusations with which he has charged me; are clearly laid
open; and some faults of his in History and Grammar I have but lightly touched
upon. In short, I have set before him what I believe he ought to have said on
these occasions, and others of the like kind; and do moreover here protest that
I should have wholly spared him in the most part of these matters, had the
interest of the cause which I take upon me to defend permitted me so to do. But
what I have said to him has been without sharpness and passion, and even with
as little complaining as may be against his starched Prefaces, and imperious
tartness, which appears throughout his whole Book, wherein I every where meet
with the rough terms of Enthusiasm, Extravagancy, senseless Propositions, and
other such like expressions. I confess that these injurious terms were not at
all pleasing to me, and presently I wondered that Mr. Arnaud should use a style
so little becoming his profession: but at length being accustomed to it, I
passed over it, and have comforted my self by the motives of Christian
patience. There are very deserving persons, even of his own Communion, whom he
has handled no better than my self; and after all, it suffices me to know that
I have not given just cause for so great animosity and bitterness, as I do
believe some have already acknowledged, and which I believe Mr. Arnaud himself
will acknowledge, when he has read my last Chapter, in which I answer his 11th.
Book, which concerns our pretended personal differences.

AS to exactness, I believe I have kept as much to it as can be desired, in
such an Answer as this. Indeed I have not followed blindfold Mr. Arnaud, when
he strayed from his own subject, as he has done in the last Chapters of his
first Book; where he treats of Episcopacy, of Praying for the Dead, the
Invocation of Saints, the Worship of Relics, and the Prohibition of certain
Meats.

FOR seeing the matter in hand only concerns the Eucharist, it would have been
contrary to sense, and a gross abuse to the Readers patience, to engage in
these Controversies, on each of which there might be written whole Volumes: not
to say farther that I have endeavored to avoid that prolixity which Mr. Arnaud
seems on the contrary to have affected. But according to prudence and
discretion, I have omitted nothing considerable in Mr. Arnaud's Book, which
relates to our present Controversy unanswered, except the two Dissertations of
the Criticism on John Scot, and on Bertram, to which there is a distinct Answer
preparing. It cannot be said that Mr. Arnaud and his friends have done the like
by me, for to speak ingeniously and freely, is there any thing less exact or
more careless than their large work, considering it as a Refutation of my
answer to the Perpetuity, of which they have scarcely handled the tenth part?
They have taken here and there some one of my passages separated from the
sequel of my discourse, and the greatest part of them turned into another
sense, hereupon they have traveled from East to West. And this they call the
Perpetuity of the Faith defended, against the Book of the Sieur Claude,
Minister of Charenton. But seeing I have followed the second Treatise of the
Perpetuity, and even accommodated my self to its method, ought not then the
Author in defending it against my Book ^o follow me a little more closely? And
when he was obliged to write a second Volume, as to what respects the first six
Ages, certainly he ought to have considered the rest with some care. Mr.
Arnaud's In his Preface.
excuse is vain and frivolous which he alleges for the length of this work.
For to make it short he needed only to have insisted on matters essential,
avoiding fruitless digressions and retrenching injurious invectives. It is
likewise a vain pretense of his, that in following my fancies, as he is pleased
to speak, the connection of his Principles with their consequences, remain hid
and obscured. For what else does he intend by this, but to preserve these
colors and appearances which cannot otherwise subsist? Wherefore should he
call that method which the Author of the Perpetuity has himself begun, and
which I have but followed; wherefore I say should he term this my fancies?
Wherefore should he at least suppress several things which I proposed in order
to the discovery of the falsity of these pretended Principles and their
consequences, and wherefore must this neglect have the Title of the Perpetuity
defended? For my part, who de not believe my self bound to follow this example,
I have examined whatsoever I found of importance in Mr. Arnaud, be it never so
difficult. If I have changed his method in some places, it has been to lay
down a better, more short and natural, as when I joined his 7th. Book, which
treats of Greek Authors from the 7th. Age to the 11th. to the general Dispute
touching the Greek Church, to avoid doing twice the same thing: or when I
referred his sixth Book touching the distinct belief of the Presence, or Real
Absence, to the question of the impossibility of a change, because that in
effect this distinct belief was not invented but for this purpose, or when I
remitted what he said of Paschasius and the Authors of the 9th. Age, in the
second part of his 8th. Book, to the account of the Innovation, because this
was its proper place. But even in this I have not at all weakened Mr. Arnaud's
proofs, nor the less exactly examined his Book.

AS to what further remains, the Authors which I have made use of cannot be
suspected by Mr. Arnaud, seeing they are for the most part, either Greeks, or
persons of the Roman Communion, or Authors of former Ages, which neither one
nor other of 'em have written with any foresight of our debate. I have alleged
but very few Protestants, and they such of whose sincerity there is no reason
to doubt. Mr. Arnaud and his friends have not done the same, who have cited in
this Controversy, Acts and Attestations, sent by the Emissaries, such as the
Acts of a Synod of Cyprus, the Profession of Faith of six Priests belonging to
the Patriarchate of Antioch, and such like particulars in the 12th. Book, of
the Writings of the Greeks, Armenians, or Nestorians latinis'd, as of Manuel
Calecas, of John Plusiadene, of Adam Nestorian, and of Hacciadour, an Armenian
Patriarch now resident at Rome, the testimonies of the Scholars of the Seminary
of Rome, as of Paysius, Ligardius, of Abraham Ecchellensis, and of Leo
Allatius, etc. They have likewise frequently made use of him that has lately
continued Baronius, named Odoricus Raynaldus a Priest of the Oratory at Rome;
but if any would know of what authority this Author is, he may be informed by
this description: He is a man of little wit, of no judgment, no sincerity, no
credit, who takes matters upon trust with an unsufferable boldness, and
delivers the most unjustifiable pretensions of the Court of Rome with the same
confidence as if they were Articles of Faith, who cites Authors known to be
the most partial and passionate of all others, as Poggius, Blondius,
Turrecremata, and such like, as unreprovable witnesses, and by following whose
Testimonies, we shall be obliged to condemn the best of men, even those whom
God has owned by Miracles, who for want of proofs, makes use of unjust
clamours and outrageous declamations, unbecoming an Historian, who ought never
to be led by passion. And in short, such a man than whom there was never any
less fit, for so important a work, as is an Ecclesiastical History. And this is
the true Character of this Author. Who would imagine that persons who believe
what I now rehearsed, and who desire the whole world to be of the same judgment
with them, should make use of him, in a dispute so important as this, and take
from him the greatest part of their Relations. And yet these are the Gentlemen
who quote him at present with so great confidence, after they themselves have
represented him in the manner I mentioned. It was either Mr. Arnaud, or some of
his Remarks on the 18th. Tome of the Ecclesiastical Annals of Rodoricus
Raynaeldus. Aug. contr. Faust. lib. 32. chapter 16.
Friends, who under the name of several Divines have taken the pains to publish
their Animadversions on this History after a diligent perusal of it. Whereupon
may we not justly apply to them that of S. Austin to Faustus, Who is there that
having decried a witness as false and corrupted, will ever again produce his
testimony? If we believe him, and believe him not according to your fancy, it
is not him whom we believe, but you. And if we must needs believe you, what
need is there of your producing other witnesses. We shall see what these
Gentlemen will do henceforward, for should they take the same course again as
they have taken already in this occasion, should they pretend to quote no other
Authors but what are decried, false Greeks, Scholars of the Seminaries, persons
won to the interests of Rome, or Proselytes of its Doctrine, and remitted to its
Sea, this would be as much as to say that their Authority would have a greater
share in this Controversy than Reason, and perhaps they might be let alone to
talk to themselves, it being very unreasonable that a man should be continually
employed in combating Phantasms, and fighting with Shadows. For to maintain
faithfully and solidly the Hypothesis of the Author of the Perpetuity, This was
most necessary to be proved, That the Real Presence and Transubstantiation were
established and commonly held in all Christian Churches, when Berengarius his
Disputations were on foot, for which end a thousand attestations of persons now
living would be of no use. These attestations may serve to show that the care
which has been so long taken, and which is still continued to introduce
insensibly the Doctrins of the Roman Church into other Churches, by the ways
which I have observed in my second Book, and especially by their Missions and
Seminaries has not been altogether fruitless. But this is the greatest
absurdity of all, to conclude from thence that the Doctrins in dispute were
every where established in Berengarius's time, or that they were perpetual.
There is reason to hope that the world will not suffer it self so easily to be
cheated, and what has here been done will sufficiently manifest the Truth.

WE live not now in the times of ignorance and darkness wherein men's credulity
is easily abused. Our Age is an enlightened one, and its notices are clear and
penetrant, and we should soon see the downfall of several ancient Errors, were
they not supported by the affinity which they have with men's temporal
interests. God will break off this alliance when it shall seem good in his
sight, but it is our duty to keep firm in his truth and prefer the honor we
receive from it, above all the advantages of the earth, and beseech him that he
would reconcile those to it by his Grace, who are far from it, that all of us
may have but one heart to fear him, and one and the same mouth to glorify him.

A TABLE OF CHAPTERS.
BOOK I. Wherein is treated of the Method which the Author of the Perpetuity
has followed.
CHAP. I. THAT I have reason to take for granted, as I have done, the Proofs of
Mr. Aubertin, against the Book of the Perpetuity, till Mr. Arnaud has showed
them to be invalid Page 1 CHAP. II. That the Author of the Perpetuity's Method
may be justly suspected to be deceitful, and that his manner of assaulting Mr.
Aubertin's Book is disingenious 8 CHAP. III. The third Observation justified,
viz. That the Author of the Perpetuity has been to blame in pretending to
overthrow the proofs contained in Mr. Aubertin's Book, by Arguments which can
amount to no more than mere conjectures 15 CHAP. IV. My fourth Observation
justified, viz. that we need but oppose our Proofs of Fact against the Author
of the Perpetuity's Arguments, to make them invalid 25 CHAP. V. The pretended
advantages which Mr. Arnaud attributes to the Treatise of the Perpetuity,
examined 34 CHAP. VI. A farther examination of the pretended Advantages which
Mr. Arnaud attributes to the Treatise of the Perpetuity. 44 CHAP. VII. The six
last Chapters of Mr. Arnaud's Book, examined 53
BOOK II. Wherein is shown, that when it should be true, that those which are
called the Schismatical Churches believed Transubstantiation; yet would it not
thence follow, that this Doctrine was always held by these Christians.
CHAP. I. COntaining the chief Heads of this whole Controversy touching the
Eastern Churches, and their Opinion from the 11th. Century to this present. Mr.
Arnaud's first Artifice laid open 61 CHAP. II. That the temporal state of the
Eastern People since the 11th. Century, and the efforts the Latins have made to
communicate to them their Religion, do invalidate the proof which is pretended
to be drawn foom their Belief. Mr. Arnaud's second Illusion detected 73 CHAP.
III. That the Greek Emperors, led by politic interests, have themselves
favored the designs of the Latins, in introducing their Doctrins into Greece.
Mr. Arnaud's third Artifice discovered 81 CHAP. IV. That the Monks and other
Emissaries, with which the Eastern Countries have been for a long time
replenished, do invalidate the proof, taken from the Belief of these people.
Mr. Arnaud's fourth deceit laid open 89 CHAP. V. That the means the Emissaries
have used for the introducing of the Roman Religion amongst the Schismatics,
the Seminaries which have been set up for the same design, and the particular
instructions given them touching the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, do
sufficiently show that there can no advantage accrue to Mr. Arnaud by their
Belief. Mr. Arnaud's fifth Artifice discovered 97
BOOK III. Wherein is shown that the Greek Schismatical Church, so called,
holds not Transubstantiation.
CHAP. I. THE question stated, and Mr. Arnaud's sixth illusion manifested 109
CHAP. II. The first Proof taken from the Greeks refusing to use the term of
Transubstantiation: The second from their not expressly teaching the conversion
of Substances. Mr. Arnaud's seventh Delusion 114 CHAP. III. The third proof
taken from that the expressions used by the Greeks are general, and
insufficient to form the idea of a substantial Conversion. The fourth, that the
Greeks only receive for determinations of Faith, the Decrees of the seven first
General Councils. The remaining part of Mr. Arnaud's Delusion laid open. The
fifth proof taken from that the Greeks in their transactions with the Latins
have ever kept to their general expressions. Mr, Arnaud's eighth Delusion
discovered 119 CHAP. IV. The sixth proof taken from the Greeks employing on
other subjects, the same expressions as on the Eucharist. Mr. Arnaud's tenth
Illusion manifested 129 CHAP. V. The seventh proof drawn from that the Greeks
do not believe the Particles of the Virgin Mary and the Saints ought to be
Consecrated on the great Altar, as is that of our Savior, and yet they
distribute them to the people, in the same manner as they do the Body of Jesus
Christ, Mr. Arnaud's tenth Fallacy laid open. The eighth proof drawn from their
believing that the Eucharist Consecrated on Holy Thursday, has a greater virtue
than that which is Consecrated at other times. The ninth proof taken out of
several passages of their Liturgies 134 CHAP. VI. The tenth proof taken from
that the Greeks do often use an extenuating term, when they call the Eucharist
the Body of Jesus Christ. The eleventh from their not believing the wicked who
partake of the Eucharist, do receive the Body of Jesus Christ. The twelfth from
their believing the Dead, and those in Deserts remote from all Commerce, do
receive the same as we do in the Communion 143 CHAP. VII. That the Greeks adore
not the Sacrament with an adoration of Latria, as the Latins do, and
consequently believe not Transubstantiation. The thirteenth proof. Mr. Arnaud's
eleventh Illusion 152 CHAP. VIII. The fourteenth proof taken from that the
Greeks when ever they argue touching the Azyme, do carry on their Disputes upon
this Principle, that the Sacrament is still real Bread after its Consecration.
The fifteenth from the little care they take to preserve the substance of the
Sacrament. The sixteenth, from a passage of Oecumenius 169 CHAP. IX. The
seventeenth proof taken from the Dispute agitated amongst the Greeks in the
12th. Century touching the Eucharist, some of 'em affirming the Body of Jesus
Christ to be incorruptible, and others corruptible. The eigteenth from a
passage out of Zonarus a Greek Monk that lived in the 12th. Century 175 CHAP.
X. The nineteenth proof, that, we do not find the Greeks do teach the Doctrins
which necessarily follow that of Transubstantiation. The twentieth is, the
testimony of sundry modern Greeks that have written several Treatises touching
their Religion. The one and twentieth, from the form of Abjuration which the
Greeks are forced to make when they embrace the Religion of the Latins 185
CHAP. XI. The two and twentieth proof, taken from an Answer in Manuscript of
Metrophanus Critopulus, to some questions offered him by Mr. Oosterwieck. The
three and twentieth is, another Answer in Manuscript of Meletius Archbishop of
Ephesus, and Hieroteus Abbot of the Monastery of Cephalenia. The four and
twentieth, is, the testimony of Jeremias a Doctor of the Greek Church. The five
and twentieth, is, the testimony of Zacharias Gerganus 197 CHAP. XII. The
twenty sixth proof, taken from the Confession of Faith of Cyrillus Lucar,
Patriarch of Constantinople, and what followed thereupon 201 CHAP. XIII. The
real Belief of the Greeks touching the Eucharist 215
BOOK IV. Mr. Arnaud's Proofs touching the Belief of the Greek Church, refuted.
CHAP. I. MR. Arnaud's first proof, taken from Cerularius his silence,
Examined. The rest of his illusions discovered 241 CHAP. II. Mr. Arnaud's
second proof, taken from Cardinal Humbert's Dispute with Nicetas Pectoratus,
examined. His third proof from the testimony of Lanfranc, and silence of the
Berengarians, examined. The rest of Mr. Arnaud's Illusions considered 251 CHAP.
III. Mr. Arnaud's twenty first Illusion, is his charging me with maintaining
that the Latins never knew Transubstantiation. His two and twentieth consists
in offering the formulary of the reunion proposed to the Greeks by the Latins.
The three and twentieth in that he produces the passages of Latinis'd Greeks.
The four and twentieth in alleging supposed Authors, or at least doubtful and
suspected ones. The five and twentieth is his producing the testimony of
several false Greeks, linked to the interest of the Latin Church 258 CHAP. IV.
The testimony of some Protestants, alleged by Mr. Arnaud, touching the Belief
of the Greeks, answered 269 CHAP. V. Mr. Arnaud's negative Arguments, drawn
from the silence of the Greeks and Latins, on the Article of
Transubstantiation, examined 272 CHAP. VI. A farther examination of Mr.
Arnaud's negative Arguments. A particular reflection on what past in the
Treaties of R^union, and especially in the Council of Florence and afterward
293 CHAP. VII. Several passages of Greek Authors (cited by Mr. Arnaud) examined
306 CHAP. VIII. The Profession of Faith which the Saracens were caused to make
in the 12th. Century, considered. Several passages out of Cabasilas, Simeon
Archbishop of Thessalonica, Jeremias the Patriarch of Constantinople, and
several others, collected by Mr. Arnaud, out of Greek Authors, examined 319
CHAP. IX. Several passages of Anastasius Sinaite, Germane the Patriarch of
Constantinople, and Damascen, examined 429 CHAP. X. An examination of the
advantages which Mr. Arnaud draws from the two Councils held in Greece in the
8th. Century, upon the subject of Images; the one at Constantinople, the other
at Nice 339 CHAP. XI. Several circumstances relating to the second Council of
Nice, examined 355
The Second Part.
BOOK V. Wherein is treated of the Belief of the Moscovites, Armenians,
Nestorians, Jacobites, and other Churches, called Schismatics; of the Belief of
the Latins in the 7th. and 8th. Centuries; and of the Consequences which Mr.
Arnaud draws from the pretended consent of these Churches on the Doctrins of
the Real Presence and Transubstantiation.
CHAP. I. Of the MOSCOVITES. THat the Moscovites do not believe
Transubstantiation Page 1 CHAP. II. Of the ARMENIANS. That the Armenians do not
believe Transubstantiation: First proof taken from that the Armenians believe
the Human Nature of our Savior Christ was swallowed up by the Divinity 14
CHAP. III. The testimony of some Authors who expressly say, or suppose, that the
Armenians hold not Transubstantiation 26 CHAP. IV. Testimonies of several other
Authors that affirm the Armenians deny Transubstantiation, and the Real
Presence 38 CHAP. V. Mr. Arnaud's proofs touching the Armenians, examined 44
CHAP. VI. Of the Nestorians, Maronites, Jacobites, Coptics, and Ethiopians,
that they hold not Transubstantiation 50 CHAP. VII. Mr. Arnaud's eighth Book
touching the sentiment of the Latins on the mystery of the Eucharist since the
year 700, till Paschasius his time, examined 61 CHAP. VIII. An examination of
these expressions of the Fathers, That the Eucharist is the Body of Jesus
Christ, the proper Body of Jesus Christ, properly the Body of Jesus Christ, the
very Body of Jesus Christ, the true Body, or truly the Body of Jesus Christ 71
CHAP. IX. That the Fathers of the 7th. and 8th. Centuries held not
Transubstantiation, nor the Substantial Presence 89 CHAP. X. An Examination of
the Consequences which Mr. Arnaud draws from the pretended consent of all the
Christian Churches in the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and the Real Presence
98 CHAP. XI. Other Reflections on Mr. Arnaud's consequences 106
BOOK VI. Concerning the Change which has happened in the Doctrine of the Latin
Church touching the Eucharist. That this Change was not impossible, and that it
has effectually happened.
CHAP. I. THE state of the question touching the distinct knowledge of the
Presence, or Real Absence 119 CHAP. II. Mr. Arnaud's proceedings considered.
His unjust reproaches also examined 131 CHAP. III. A Defense of the second,
third, and fourth rank of persons, against the Objections of Mr. Arnaud 143
CHAP. IV. A Defense of the fifth rank against Mr. Arnaud's Objections 154 CHAP.
V. General Considerations on Mr. Arnaud's ninth Book. An examination of the
Objections which he proposes against what he calls Machins of Abridgment and
Machins of Preparation 163 CHAP. VI. Mr, Arnaud's Objections against what he
calls the Machins of Mollification, and the Machins of Execution, examined. The
state of the 12th. Century 172 CHAP. VII. Mr. Arnaud's Objections against what
he terms Machins of forgetfulness, examined. The examples of the insensible
changes alleged, in answer to the Perpetuity, defended 188 CHAP. VIII. That
Paschasius Ratbert was the first that taught the Real Presence, and conversion
of Substances. Mr. Arnaud's Objections answered 198 CHAP. IX. Proofs that
Paschasius was an Innovator 214 CHAP. X. Of Authors in the 9th. Century,
Walafridus, Strabo, Florus, Remy of Auxerre, Christian Drutmar 229 CHAP. XI. Of
other Authors in the 9th. Century, Amalarius, Heribald, Raban, Bertram, and
John Scot 242 CHAP. XII. Of Personal Differences which Mr. Arnaud has treated
of in his 11th. Book 259
An Answer to the Dissertation which is at the end of Mr. Arnaud' s Book,
touching the Treatise of our Lords Body and Blood; published under the name of
Bertram, and touching the Authority of John Scot, or Erigenus.
The first Part.
Wherein is showed that the Book of the Body and Blood of our Lord, Published
under the name of Bertram, is a work of Ratram a Monk of Corby, and not of John
Scot.

CHAP. I. AN Account of the several Opinions which the Doctors of the Roman
Church have offered touching this Book, to hinder the advantage which we draw
from it 277 CHAP. II. That what the Author of the Dissertation would reform in
the Opinion of Mr. De Marca, does not at all make it the more probable 282
CHAP. III. That Ratram is the Author of the Book of our Lords Body and Blood,
published under the name of Bertram 284 CHAP. IV. A Refutation of what the
Author of the Dissertation offers to persuade that the Book of the Body and
Blood of our Lord, published under the name of Bertram is of John Scot 292
CHAP. V. Other Difficulties which the Author of the Dissertation forms on the
name of Bertram, examined 299
The Second Part.
That the Authority of the Book of our Lords Body and Blood, Published under
the name of Bertram, will be still of great weight, if we suppose John Scot to
be the Author of it.

CHAP. VI. That John Scot was greatly esteemed, both in his own age, and in the
following ones 303 CHAP. VII. An Examination of what the Author of the
Dissertation alleges against the employs of John Scot 306 CHAP. VIII. That
John Scot was esteemed a Martyr 311
The end of the Table.
engraving of biblical scene 1683

Coenantibus ejs accepit Jesus panem, et benedixit at fregit, deditque
discipulis fuis, et ait, accipite et comedite, hoc est and And as they did eat
Jesus took the bread, and when he had blessed, he broke it and gave it to the
Disciples and said take eat this my body. Mat. 26.



AN ANSWER TO Mr. Arnaud's Book INTIT'LED, The Perpetuity of the Faith of the
Catholic Church, touching the Eucharist, defended.
BOOK I. Wherein is treated of the Method which the Author of the Perpetuity
has followed.
CHAP. I.
That I have reason to take for granted, as I have done, the Proofs of Mr.
Aubertin, against the Book of the Perpetuity, till Mr. Arnaud has showed them
to be Invalid.

ALthough the Passion, which appears throughout Mr. Arnaud's whole Book, does
in a manner persuade me that his Censures are not always reasonable, yet shall
not this hinder me from examining them with a composed Mind: If they are found
just, I ought to make my Advantage of them, without minding the sharpness which
accompanies them; and if they are not, the Interest of my Cause requires I
should endeavor to manifest the Injustice of them by a modest and Christian
Defense.

AND this Method I intend to use, not only in the beginning but likewise in all
the following parts of this Work, which I dedicate to the discovery of Truth,
and the advancement of Gods Glory, who is the Author and Father of Lights, and
of Truth.

IT is certain, says Mr. Arnaud, in the beginning of his Book, that provided
Mr. Claude may be granted the Privilege, which he immediately lays hold on, of
inventing, and supposing, what he lists, he takes a very sure way to conclude
from thence what he pleases. I only admire that while he fancies he has this
peculiar Liberty, he yet still busies himself in writing Books: For he can
absolutely determine all our Differences with a great deal less trouble. For he
has no more to do but only immediately to suppose that the Reason is on his
side, and that the Catholics are in the wrong, and so the whole Controversy
will be at an end, and thus may he satisfy himself with writing half a Page
instead of an entire Answer, for it decideth the whole; It Is but supposing that
Mr. Aubertin's Book has gotten the Victory over the Romish Schools, and that
he has manifested to all the World, the Change the Roman Church has made; That
the Proofs are clear, strong, and numerous, which make the Change sensibly
apparent, and that he has not been opposed with any other than false and
imaginary Reasonings: What need is there then of any other reply, and to what
purpose does Mr. Claude take upon him all this Trouble? Calvinism has now won
the Day, and Catholic Religion is utterly Routed.

THE right of opposing to the reasonings of the Author of the Perpetuity, the
Proofs of the matters of Fact contained in Mr. Aubertin's Book, and to speak
our Thoughts concerning it, is not so marvelous, nor such an extraordinary
design that Mr. Arnaud should need raise such a Contest about it. This Author
having undertaken to make us confess, if we are not desperately obstinate, that
the Belief of the Roman Church, touching the Eucharist, is the same with that
of all Antiquity, and having made use of no other reasonings for this purpose,
but those which are taken from the moral Impossibility of this Change which we
believe has happened; Common Sense convinces us that he is bound to examine the
Proofs of Matters of Fact on which the Opinion, he would root out of our Minds,
is established, for till then all his Arguings will be to no purpose. Neither
can we justly be denied the Liberty of mentioning these Proofs according to our
real Thoughts. For seeing we offer them against the Author of the Perpetuity,
only as a prejudication which hinders us from heark'ning to his Arguments, it
is therefore very requisite we should speak our Thoughts about them, to the end
that if this Author continues in the design of bringing us to an acknowledgment
of what he pretends, he especially take care to remove, as much as in him lies,
those things which render all his other Endeavors ineffectual.

I do not at all doubt if men's Minds were free from Prejudice, but it would be
granted that Mr. Aubertin's Book does perfectly decide the Controversy
touching the Eucharist. It being a complete Piece, in which this matter is
searched to the bottom. He has answered those who have treated on this Subject
before his time, and yet his Book has layn even to this present unanswered,
which is a sufficient Reason to presume he has gotten the better, and that his
Proofs, let Mr. Arnaud say what he will, are plainly evident and numerous; but
for as much as it is needful for the ending of a Difference, and quieting
Contradiction, to suppose Principles granted by both Parties, and seeing the
Church of Rome does neither agree in the Proofs nor in the Change, here in
Question, I do thereupon freely confess the Controversy lies still open in
this respect, and that in general we cannot stop any man's mouth by the simple
supposition of the Strength and Solidity of that Book, for every Man is at
liberty, and has Right (if he pleases) to examine and answer it.

BUT had not Mr. Arnaud suppressed a great part of what I wrote on this Subject,
as well in my first as second Answer, it would immediately appear, I have bin
so far from making such a claim as that wherewith he charge me, that I have
every where expressly maintained the contrary.

SEEING that Mr. Aubertin has made it appear, by express Passages taken out of
the Fathers (these are the Words in my first Answer.) That Transubstantiation
was unknown to the ancient Church, we may then well conclude there has happened
a Change, especially considering that this same Transubstantiation was not
heard of till the 11th. Century; Now considering this, for a Man to
Philosophize on the impossibility thereof, is to give himself a great deal of
Trouble to no purpose. If there yet remained any thing farther to be done, it
would be to show that the Passages produced by Mr. Aubertin are either false,
or alleged impertinently against Transubstantiation: but to pass by these
matters of Proof, which are clear, express and conclusive, to adhere to I know
not what kind of pretended impossibility, this is to trifle with the matter in
hand.

OBSERVE here again what I said in my second Answer. We had reason to hope that
the Author, treating my Abridgment in the respects and relations which the
sequel of its Reasons oblige him to, should have applied himself unto one of
these two things.

EITHER to make it appear that Mr. Aubertin' s Proofs, on which we have relied,
are false, and of no force, or that the Consequence, which is pretended to be
drawn from them, is untrue; That is to say, it does not follow a thing is
possible, although it be made apparent that this very thing has actually happened.

WHEN a man makes Suppositions of this kind, how absurd is it to say, such a
one puts himself in Possession of any Privilege, or usurps that marvelous
Right, of terminating Differences, or deciding Controversies by groundless
Suppositions? For I not only give this Author of the Perpetuity the liberty of
opposing Mr. Aubertin's Proofs, and to show, if he can, the falsity of them,
but I conjure him so to do, being engaged thereunto by the consideration of his
own Reputation, and the necessity of this Course to end the Controversy. Now
if this may be styled by Mr. Arnaud the deciding of a Difference, I am certain
that in the style of a more impartial Judge, this would be called, a
disengaging of the Debate out of an endless turning, to bring it back to a
necessary Discussion on which depends the decision of our Controversy. Mr.
Arnaud therefore unjustly charge me with intending to decide the Question,
and terminate the Difference by a simple Supposition, and it is through want of
Sincerity he has suppressed those Passages in my Answer, which plainly evidence
my real Design. But besides these two Defaults which immediately offer
themselves to be observed in his Proceedings, I must ingeniously declare that
it is very hard for me to comprehend what he would have me to do. He seems to
desire me to prove that the Proofs of Mr. Aubertin's Book are clear, strong and
numerous, before we suppose them to be such. But pray what means proving of
Proofs? How can a man otherwise prove them than in producing them, and engaging
to defend them when they shall be attacked? Now this has bin done, they have
bin produced, in referring to a Book which is easily met with, there has bin an
Abridgment made thereof, they have bin set forth with some Enlargments; The
Author of the Perpetuity has bin requested to show the insufficiency or
falsity of them. What can Mr. Arnaud desire more? Would he have Mr. Aubertin's
Book reprinted at the Head of mine, together with a Commentary on the Solidity
of his Proofs? But yet still perhaps he would not grant us the Liberty to speak
advantageously of it, we must have proved the Solidity of the first Commentary
by a second, and that of the second by a third, and so heap up Commentary upon
Commentary till Doomsday. For he that would have us prove the Proofs of Mr.
Aubertin's Book may, by the same reason, require us likewise to prove the
solidity of our Commentaries, and having set no bounds to his Demands, it is
probable he would have extended them farther. These are the first Fruits of Mr.
Arnaud's frollicksom Philosophy, the next time when he lights not into so
pleasant a Humor, we shall have others, but perhaps not such diverting ones.
But be it as it will, there is (I am sure) a great deal of disorder in this
proceeding, for the strength of a Proof is with good Reason supposed by that
Person who offers it, till it has received a satisfactory Answer, and so
likewise the solidity of an Answer is taken for granted by him who makes it,
till such time as it shall be opposed by a good Reply. And certainly such a man
would appear Ridiculous, who would offer to put a stop to a Dispute, and exempt
himself from replying thereunto, by saying, prove to me the solidity of your
Answer. If a Proof be not good, it belongs to him who answers it, to show its
Defects, and if an Answer be impertinent, it lies upon the Opponent to discover
the absurdity thereof. For till then every man is at liberty to speak his
Thoughts.

ALTHOUGH this is not a proper Place to treat on the different Use which may be
made of Suppositions in a Controversy, yet will I not forbear to speak
somewhat thereon to discover more plainly Mr. Arnaud's Mistakes.

THE Suppositions then commonly made use of, are of two sorts, some of them
tend absolutely to decide a Difference, others serve only to regulate it.

WHEN a man makes a Supposition to decide absolutely a Difference, there ought
to be supposed no other things but those which are acknowledged and granted to
be true by the Adversaries themselves, for these Suppositions are as common and
inviolable Prejudications which ought to serve as a Law to direct the Judgment
in the whole Controversy.

BUT when we make Suppositions only to regulate the form of a Controversy, and
hinder men from casting themselves into fruitless Contests, it suffices the
things supposed be esteemed true by them who suppose them, others remaining
still in the liberty of judging and opposing them, if they think fit. So that
after this manner each Party supposes his Sentiment true, and terms it his
Hypothesis, that is to say his Supposition; and if a man supposed it not true,
he would not maintain it. We suppose likewise at the same time the Sentiment of
the contrary Party false, for if we supposed it not false, we should not reject
it. And this is the true state of a Controversy. That every man be permitted
to suppose he has truth on his side, and act, or defend himself on this
Supposition, yet allowing others the liberty to suppose the contrary; And this
is not that which decideth a Debate, but that which forms it; For by this means
there is given to the Controversy its just Bounds, and a man avoids
wand'rings, in running after needless things; both parties have a just Equality
allotted them, and so far as this, a Person cannot be required to show his
Proof for what he supposes, provided he fully and unfeignedly declares his
Opinion.

IN the following Parts of a Controversy, there ought to be a distinction made
between that Person who opposes a thing, and he who answers or defends it.
The first of these designs so to order it that his Adversary shall be obliged
to change his Opinion, and therefore he ought not to propose any thing which he
makes not good by Proofs; but he has likewise Right (as I said just now) to
suppose his Proofs good, till such time as the contrary party has made some
Answer. And it would be very absurd to affirm such a one designs to end the
Difference by his Suppositions, or is obliged to prove his Proofs are good,
seeing he grants every one the Liberty to answer them, and in effect if there
appears no Answer, the Difference is decided.

NOW as to him who answers a matter, having upon this account no other aim
but that of rendering ineffectual the Attempt of his Adversary, he has always
the Right to suppose his Opinion true without proving it, being only obliged to
answer the Proofs which are brought against him, and discover either the
falsity or insufficiency of them. A man cannot perhaps fall into a greater
irregularity, than to constrain him that Answers, (and who has no more to do
than to refure the Arguments alleged against him,) to make Arguments himself,
and to pretend that he has no right to propose his Answers taken from the
Opinions themselves which he defends, if he has not before this proved his
Opinion. Either he who opposes must make apparent the falsity of the supposed
Opinion, or else he must yield it to be true.

I know that in a public Dispute, managed by writing, it commonly happens,
that the same Person opposes another and defends himself, propounds and
answers, according as the occasion and matter requires, but we are
notwithstanding obliged to distinguish these two Qualities, of Aggressor and
Respondent, and preserve to each his Right apart; for it would be a very
disorderly matter to expect a man should do that when he answers, which he is
not obliged to do but when he opposes, or to expect he should do that when he
opposes, which he is not obliged to do but in answering. It sometimes happens
that an Adversary makes an Exchange, and whereas he is obliged to answer
directly to the Proofs of the contrary Party, or to oppose others against him
of the like Nature and Force, he shifts them and falls into a Discourse to no
purpose, and all this while the contrary Proofs he should have answered, remain
firm. In such an occasion we have Power to reduce such a one from his affected
Wand'rings, by supposing the Proofs he has left unanswered, strong and sollid.
For in such a case they are not supposed good and firm, but only to oblige him
to answer them, and show their weakness or falsity, and if he answers them
not, we may reckon as to him the Question in effect is decided, because when a
man has nothing to say against the Method of proceeding, and that the
forementioned Proofs have bin proposed according to the exact Rules of
Disputation, a man must then either acquiesce in them or answer them, and to do
neither of these is mere wrangling.

NOW to apply these Maxims to the matter in hand, and to judge of Mr. Arnaud's
Censure, we need but consider first, That when I supposed Mr. Aubertin's Proofs
to be firm and good, I did not thereby propose to my self an absolute end of
the Question touching the Change which has happened in the Church of Rome, by
this simple Supposition; but only to regulate the Debate, and reduce it within
those Bounds wherein it ought to be. Secondly, that in supposing them good, I
have only delivered my Opinion which I take upon me to maintain against the
Author of the Perpetuity, without depriving him of the Liberty of defending the
contrary. Thirdly, that I have supposed them to be good without proving them
so, because we ever suppose Proofs sufficiently firm, till such time as
something at least is objected against them, and hitherto Mr. Aubertin's Book
has layn unanswered. Fourthly, that I made use of them as a means whereby to
resist the Author of the Perpetuity's attempt, and when a man only defends
himself in a Dispute, he is not obliged to prove any thing. Fifthly and lastly,
I did not offer them but only as Prejudices at his Opinion, which ought
necessarily to be removed out of our Minds, before the Arguments of the
Perpetuity be offered us; for as much as these Prejudices make the Author's
Reasonings ineffectual and improper to that design of making us acknowledge
there has bin introduced no Change into the Roman Church. From whence it
follows, that I may not only suppose these Proofs are clear, firm, and
numerous, seeing that it is under this Notion we have entertained these
Prejudices; but morever suppose them without proving them, and I do so, to the
end I may oblige the Author of that Treatise to show us (if he can) that they
do not amount to what we imagine.

IN short if he would obtain his end, he must show us that our Prejudice ought
not to hinder us from harkening to what he has farther to offer us, (which is
to say,) supposing our Proofs to be most firm and evident, yet ought they not
to avert our Minds from considering his moral Conjectures;) or show us that our
Prejudices have no grounds, and that our Proofs are neither plain nor
sufficient. The first of these is absurd, the second is what we desire him to
take in hand. But instead of this Mr. Arnaud has bethought himself, and
requires us to prove the validity of our Proofs.

IF our Proofs, being supposed good, are in effect the Calvinists Victory, and
the Romanists Defeat, as Mr. Arnaud himself grants, we have reason to admire
he should think he has overthrown them, by five or six Lines stuffed with
Raillery.

HAS he bin more concerned at the calling of the Reasonings of the Perpetuity,
imaginary Conjectures, than at the glorious Victory over the Romish Church
which has bin attributed to Mr. Aubertin's Book, and this Innovation brought
in by the Church of Rome, which is apparent to all the World? Does he more
value the Reputation he thinks he has gotten by writing a small Treatise, than
the settlement of the Catholic Church? and ought he, for the interest of a
particular work, to have rifled both East and West, whilst in the mean time the
Catholic Church perishes before his eyes, lying prostrate Mr. de Vence in his
Approbation.
at the Feet of Victorions Calvinisme. I will grant my Supposition resides but
in my own Imagination, and in theirs of the same Communion, yet certainly this
a man would think, should be sufficient to stir up the Zeal, of a Person whom
the Son of God has given to the Church to be a Teacher of Truth, and who has
bin enlightened by his Grace, and filled with his Spirit, on purpose to rescue
and vindicate Truth from the Subtilties, and false Glosses of Error, as
speaks one of his Approbationers.

THIS I think should be sufficient to make him prefer the Reputation of his
whole Church before that of a single Author, of whose name the greatest part of
the World is still ignorant. And moreover, as has bin already said, this
Prejudice under which we labor, whether true or false, makes a distinction
between the interest of this Treatise, and those of the Romish Church, for it
puts a stop to all the pretensions of the Author, and bereaves him of all the
Conquests he promised himself. For to regain the Author of the Perpetuity's
Reputation, will be to no purpose, seeing that Calvinisme will not give over
celebrating Aubertin's Victories, and stand firm to his Proofs. The Confutation
of Aubertin's Book would be to give such a mighty stroke, as would ever stop
the Mouth of Calvinism, and at the same time, raise up the Glory of the
Catholic Church out of the Dust. There ought to have bin no waverings between
these two Parties, and yet Mr. Arnaud, this Doctor who has bin given to the
Church furnished with such Gifts, betakes himself to the writing of a Treatise,
and sends the Church away till another time.

IN short, to finish the justification of my yet unproved Supposition, I need
but propose the Example of a man who, to show me the Victorys which the
Treatise of the Perpetuity has obtained against us, if we have any Reason left
us, supposes without proving it, that the Proofs of this Book are plain and
solid. If I should apply to him Mr. Arnaud's Maxims, and tell him that provided
he may have the Liberty which he immediately makes use of, inventing and
supposing what he pleases, he is in a sure way to conclude thence what he
will, that these kind of discourses founded on unproved Suppositions, are not
wholly judicious, and that they show he knows not how to distinguish between
the things which he is not permitted to assert till he has proved them, and
those which may be justly supposed without being proved.

IF this man reply to me, he has only made this Supposition to oblige Mr.
Claude to acknowledge he has no other means left to defend himself, but by
showing (if he can) the Reasonings of this Treatise are not just; May I not
then justly retort upon him, that I only suppose Mr. Aubertin's Proofs are
plain and firm, that I may thereby force the Author of the Perpetuity to
confess he has no other way left him to defend himself, but to show, if he be
able, that these Proofs are invalid? Mr. Arnaud perhaps would be so reasonable
as not to deny me the liberty of making use of these Principles, and so much
the rather because there is a very material and advantageous difference on my
side, seeing, as already mentioned, I am Respondent in this Dispute; whereas
this Person would be the Aggressor. But you will ask me, who this man is, that
is so little acquainted with Mr. Arnaud's Maxims? Even Mr. Arnaud himself, who
having produced a long train of Arguments in the fifth and sixth Chapters of
his first Book; to show us that the Learned, and Unlearned, the Simple, and
Obstinate, and all Persons in general ought to acquiesce in the Proofs of the
Perpetuity, he thereupon makes this Conclusion, It Is true, says he, that these
Arguments being applied to the Book of the Lib. 1. Chapter 6. page 62. page 63.
Perpetuity, suppose the Proofs are clear and solid; and therefore I make use
of them in this place to remove these vain Exceptions of Mr. Claude, who would
have them rejected without examining them, on this general Reason, That they
are Argumentative Proofs. Mr. Claude has no other way of defending himself
than by showing, if he can, the Arguments in this Treatise are not sound. We
shall see by what follows, whether he had reason to make this Supposition, I
shall content my self at present with concluding according to his Example, that
every man may make Suppositions, provided he intends not thereby to end the
Debate, but only oblige an Adversary to come to the Discussion of that Point
which he is not willing to meddle with. And thus does Mr. Arnaud censure in
another that which he does himself.

CHAP. II.
That the Author of the Perpetuity's Method may be justly Suspected to be
deceitful, and that his manner of assaulting Mr. Aubertin's Book is
Disingenuous.

THE Method the Author of the Perpetuity makes use of to make us confess, as he
says; that the Doctrine of the Roman Church, touching the Eucharist, is the
same with that of all Antiquity, has appeared so strange and irregular to me,
that I have made these following Reflections thereupon.

I. That it may be justly suspected of Artifice and Illusion.

II. That this way of Assaulting Mr. Aubertin's Book is Disingenious and
Indirect.

III. That the Author has bin to blame in pretending to show the Invalidity of
Mr. Aubertin's Proofs by Arguments which at most do amount but to mere
Conjectures.

IV. That to confute at once all these Arguments, we need but oppose against
them these same Proofs of matters of Fact, and by gathering them into an
Abridgment, to give a general view of them.

Mr. Arnaud confesses that I were not to be blamed for having in my Answer Lib.
1. chapter 1. P. 1.
fallen first upon the Faults which I pretend to discover in the Author of the
Perpetuity's Method, provided, says he, that I maintained Equity and Truth; It
may be, I think, then supposed I have so far done nothing contrary to Rule, it
only remains I make good the four abovementioned Reflections.

I shall not insist long upon the first of these, because Mr. Arnaud has
alleged The first Observation justified.
nothing against it, appearing undeniable in it self. It is grounded on this,
That when the Question concerns what we ought to believe touching the
Eucharist, the Author of the Perpetuity would have this Question decided, not
by the word of God, but the Churches Consent in all Ages, and Depositions of
the Fathers, and when it comes to the Enquiry after this Consent of the Church,
he would have this second Question resolved not by Passages taken out of the
Writings of the Fathers, but by Arguments. Now this is certainly a most tedious
and preposterous Course; it being a Principle of common Sense, that Questions
in matters of Right ought to be naturally decided by the Rule of Right, then
when the Rule determining that Right is distinct and separated from matters of
Fact, and that again naturally the Questions in matters of Fact ought to he
decided by an exact Consideration of the Facts themselves, or by Witnesses who
can make a lawful Deposition.

Seeing then the Christian Religion offers us a distinct Rule, and that too as
it lies separate from matters of Fact; (which is that holy Scripture, wherein
God has made a full Revelation of his Will;) it is in it we must search for
what we ought to believe, and not in the consent of the Church in all Ages. For
as the Fathers thought they were obliged to ground their Belief on the
Scriptures, so likewise we, who have the same Faith with them, ought to ground
our Faith on the same Principle. The Scripture has been given us to determine
thereby our Apprehensions of the Mysteries of Religion, but their Belief who
preceded us can be no more at farthest, than an Example for us to Imitate, and
an Example too submitted to the same Rule, which requires no farther our
Approbation than it agrees with that; so that to decide Questions of this
Nature by the Examples of former Ages, is to pervert the natural Order and
Design of things.

IT will be to no purpose to allege The Church of Rome will not allow the
Scriptures to be the only Rule of our Faith, seeing it likewise takes in
Tradition. Yet this Answer will not clear the Author of the Perpetuity from
that Reproach with which I shall charge him: For when a man lays down a Method
in a Controversy, and proposes it as sufficient to convince those who are not
of his own Opinion, he must ground this Method on Principles granted by both
Parties; for if his Positions are such as may be questioned, he is then obliged
to a solid Proof of them, before he can suppose them. For if he take not this
Course, he will quickly be at a loss, and his whole Work soon rendered
ineffectual. Now this the Author of the Perpetuity has not done, for he has not
proved that the Consent of all Ages ought to be our Rule in matters of Faith.
It Is true he has told us of the ill Consequences which would follow the
condemning the Ancient Fathers, and that we should do, if we suppose them
guilty of an Idolatrous Worship. But this reaches not our Question: for it does
not hence follow that their Writings are the Rule of our Faith, neither in the
matter of our present Debate, nor in any other: For the Fathers may be free
from damnable Errors in any Article of our Religion, by the agreement their
Doctrine has with that Rule which enjoyneth us to believe, without becoming a
Rule themselves and without arrogating this supreme Authority over men's
Consciences, which ought to decide all Questions of this Nature.

But perhaps it will be replied that, provided we attain the knowledge of the
Truth in what we ought to believe concerning so important a Subject as that of
the Eucharist, what need we matter, by what means we obtain it, whether by
means of the holy Scripture, or by Consent of the ancient Church? If we follow
not the Fathers as the Rule of our Faith, let us follow them then as an Example
held out for us to imitate. To which I answer, That the cause which I have
taken upon me to defend would in the main lose nothing, though we should take
the Belief of the Ancient Church in this matter for the Model and Rule of ours,
so that this does not at all trouble us.

BUT be it as it will, we must not forsake the Word of God, nor wholly build
our Faith on any other Principles but those which are drawn from the Holy
Scriptures. Our Faith would not then be what it ought to be, that is to say, A
Divine Faith, were it but an imitation of the Belief of the Fathers. This Maxim
of regulating our Religion by an Imitation of them who have preceded us,
without having any fixed Principle, is certainly of very dangerous Consequence.
For 'twould happen at length after some Ages, that the last would have no
resemblance with the former, because that humane Imperfections which commonly
mix themselves in such an Imitation, would never be wanting to disorder and
corrupt it, as is commonly seen in the drawing of a Picture, Draughts of which
being taken one from the other, become still every time less Perfect, as they
are farthest distant from their Original.

THE Author then of the Perpetuity cannot be excused for his perverting the
order of the Dispute with which I charge him, that he would decide this
Question of Right by matters of Fact; Neither is he less inexcusable when he
would have the Question of matter of Fact, to depend on the force of his
Reasoning. The matter before us is to know what has bin the Opinion of the
Fathers touching the Eucharist, and he pretends to decide this Question not by
the Testimony of the Fathers themselves, but by certain Impossibilities he
imagines in the change which we suppose. I know very well that there are
sometimes Enquiries made into matters of Fact, the Truth of which cannot be
attested by any Witness, and I confess in this case, no man can be blamed for
having recourse to Reasonings, because there being no other Evidence to help us
in our Search, even Necessity warranteth this way of Proceeding, although it be
indirect. But we are not in these Circumstances, seeing we have the Writings of
the Ancients, and those no less considerable for their Number than for the many
clear Passages they contain touching the Eucharist; which if we will apply our
selves unto, we shall soon discover their Opinions about it. What need is there
then, for us to leave our enquiries into the Opinion of the Fathers, to hearken
to the Author of the Perpetuity's Arguments? May we not now justly complain of
him, and answer him, this is the way of Inquiry which Nature it self has
prescribed us, and comparing these two ways, the more natural appears to us
to be the more direct and certain. From whence it immediately follows, That his
manner of proceeding, may well be suspected as artificial and deceitful, for it
is usual with us to suspect that Person who leaves the common Road, to walk in
Bypath.

MY second Observation on the Author of the Perpetuity's Method, respects The
second Observation justified, Lib. Chap. 1. p. 4.
the manner of his Assaulting Mr. Aubertin's Book. And seeing Mr. Arnaud has
charged me with falsity, for affirming Mr. Aubertin's Book has chiefly
occasioned this Controversy, and that the Author of the Perpetuity has set
upon it after an indirect manner. I am thereupon obliged to divide the Subject
of my justification under two Heads. I shall first then make it appear that Mr.
Aubertin's Book has bin assaulted, and has bin the first occasion of this
Debate. Secondly, that his Book has bin Assaulted after an unjust manner.

THE first of these Particulars shall be dispatched in two Words, for on one
hand I have no more to do, but only desire the Reader himself to peruse the
second Section of the first Treatise of the Perpetuity, where he shall find
that in fifty one Pages which it contains, his whole design is only to refute
Mr, Aubertin's Account of the Innovation which has happened touching
Transubstantiation: And on the other, I have no more to do but declare to the
World, That from the first Moment of our Debate, which was precisely then when
I began to answer this Treatise, I proposed to my self not only particularly to
maintain the Truth of this Account, but defend in general the whole Book,
against the indirect attempts of that Treatise. Now if this may not be called
the first occasion of this Contest, I know not any longer how to name things.
For what is there which makes a Book the first occasion of a Debate, which is
not here? Must a Book be assaulted? this has bin so. Must it be defended? this
has bin so. Ought he who takes upon him the Defense of it, to do it with a
design of keeping up its Credit? This has bin likewise my Design, because its
Interests have appeared to me to be the same with those of the Truth. Where
then is this notorious Falsity with which Mr. Arnaud charge me?

THE Author of the Perpetuity, says he, never pretended his Treatise was Lib.
1 Chap. 1 Page 4.
a refutation of that Ministers Book, and in a matter as this is, which
depends on the Intention of a man yet living, it were sufficient to convince
Mr. Claude of rashness to tell him, as from him, he is mistaken, and that this
Author never designed what he charges him with. Moreover he adds, That this
Treatise was primarily intended only as a Preface to the Office of the blessed
Sacrament: and that we seldom find any man undertake to refute a Book in Folio,
in a Preface: That he handles the Question of the Impossibility of an
Innovation: That he refuteth Blondel and Aubertin by the way, who had imposed
fabulous Relations on the World: And that he directly indeed argues against
Mr. Aubertin' s pretended Innovation, but medleth farther with no other part of
his Book.

Mr. Arnaud I hope will pardon me, if I affirm that there is not one word of
Truth in all this. For, to speak properly, the occasion of this Contest can be
no other but that taken from the Obligation I had to enter into this Dispute,
seeing our Debate began but from that time I interposed. For had I not stepped in
between, the Author had talked only to himself, and when a man does so, we are
not wont to say, such a one is in a Dispute. To find then the real Occasion,
Mr. Arnaud should have sought it in the causes moving me to interpose, and not
in the Author of the Perpetuity' s Intention. Mr. Arnaud has not considered
there is a Difference between the Occasion of a Debate, and whether the Subject
of it be real or imaginary. For to decide the latter of these Particulars, we
must look back to the Author of the Perpetuity, and consider what he has done,
and what he would do, but to be ascertained in the first of them, I ought
thereupon to be consulted: and when it shall appear I was deceived by a
groundless Imagination that Mr. Aubertin's Book has bin assaulted, then it
might be truly affirmed I raised a Quarrel to no purpose, seeing the occasion
of it only sprang out of my own Fancy, but yet what I have said since cannot be
charged with notorious Falsity, viz. That this Book was the first occasion of
the Debate betwixt us, seeing that in effect I only engaged in this
Controversy to defend it.

THERE is moreover in Mr. Arnaud's Discourse a false Supposition in the Term of
Refuting, for he supposes I charge the Author of the Perpetuity with a design
of formally and directly refuting Mr. Aubertin's whole Book, and it is thereupon
he tells us, that seldom any man undertakes to refute a large Folio in a
Preface. But he does not consider, that I did not for this reason use the Term
of Refuting, but Assaulting, and that far from charging the Author of the
Perpetuity with this Design of a Refutation, my complaint has bin on the
contrary, that he has not refuted this Book, and which has been grounded on
the Necessity urging him to have done it, as I shall show hereafter. Now to
justify what I said, that Mr. Aubertin's Book has been the first Occasion of
this Debate, and at the same time, that this is not an ill grounded
Supposition, I need not repeat that the Author of the Treatise designed to
refute that whole Book, it appears to me sufficient he has assaulted the last
part of it, and undertaken to answer it throughout the second Section of his
Treatise. It suffices me that his first Section tends to render incredible
Mr. Aubertin's account of an Innovation. It suffices me, the drift of his
whole Work is to make Mr. Aubertin's Proofs of matters of Fact altogether
useless to us. And this is more than need to be said to refute this fierce
Accusation of notorious Falsity, with which Charge Mr. Arnaud has begun his
Book. Now this is apparently true, and a man needs but his Eyes and common
Sense to be satisfied in it.

Mr. Arnaud may tell us what he pleases concerning the Author of the
Perpetuity's real Design. Yet shall I answer him, that when men judge of a
Work, their Judgment is guided by what appears in the Work it self, and not by
the secret Intentions of its Author. For men's Designs many times lie hid, but
the drift of their Work lies open. I do not pretend to penetrate into men's
Hearts, yet cannot I be withheld from judging of the Treatise of the
Perpetuity, because it is before my Eyes.

THAT this Treatise was at first, but a simple Preface, or that it was not, it
avails me little to know, for I am not usually so much in Love with Rarities,
as to extend my Curiosity into the Author of the Perpetuity's disavowed
Designs. If this Work has been heretofore but a Preface, and that it has been
since raised to the dignity of a Treatise, there has been reason perhaps for
its ennobling, its Desert has made it worthy of this Honor; and they are at
this day to blame who have reproached it with the meanness of its former
Condition, in an occasion, which called for the establishment of its Glory. But
be it what it will, Preface, or Treatise, it is all one to me, it assaulteth
never the less for this Mr. Aubertin's Book.

BUT says Mr. Arnaud, he refutes it by the way. By the way, of four score and
eight Pages which it contains, there are one and fifty of them employed in a
formal Refutation of Mr. Aubertin's account of an Innovation, and the drift of
the rest, as I have already said, is to show that this Account is incredible,
because it is impossible, and indirectly to overthrow the whole Work. So that
here I think the charge of our first notorious Falsity, appears to be untrue.
Let us see the second, which is that I affirmed, The Author of the Perpetuity
has assaulted Mr. Aubertin' s Book after an indirect manner. But to apprehend
thoroughly the truth of this Observation, Mr. Aubertin's whole Book must be
granted to be a Discourse only touching the Eucharist, and which is divided
into three Parts. In the first he handles this Subject by Arguments drawn from
Scripture, and humane Reason. He produces the Passages thereof, and Arguments
fetched from thence, and refutes the Answers made thereunto, nay he near upon
answers whatsoever Controvertists have stated hitherto considerable on this
Subject. In the second, he examines the Churches Belief, during six Centuries,
by an exact Discussion of all Passages produced on either side, makes it
plainly appear that Transubstantiation, and the real Presence are Doctrines
which have bin unknown during all that time. And in the third, he gives an
account after what manner their Doctrines have been introduced.

THE first part treats of the Question of Right, showing the true Rules of
it, and serves as a Foundation to the second. The second Part handles the
Question of matter of Fact, by a faithful deposition of Witnesses, that is to
say, by the Fathers from Age to Age, and serves as a Foundation to the third.
And the third Part shows the Degrees of this Innovation, the Time when it
begun, its Authors, and the Opposition which it has met with.

THIS being so, I say, it is an indirect Proceeding, to single out this last
Part from the second, and attempt the refuting of it alone, as the Author of
the Perpetuity has done. And the Reason is manifest, because the only
Foundation on which the last Part is built, and which communicates to it all
its force of Persuasion consists in its second. For wherefore do we believe,
for Example, what it says concerning the Innovation which Anastasius Sinaite
has introduced, in reference to Expressions, he having bin the first that
rejected the Terms of Type or Figure on the Subject of the Eucharist? It is
because he shows us in his second Part, that the Fathers who preceded
Anastasius, ever made use of this manner of Expression, for we find not any one
of them who rejected them. Wherefore do we take Paschasius to be the first who
ever thought of the real Presence? The Reason, is because we never meet with
any before his time, who thus deliver themselves. So that the second Part of
Mr. Aubertin's Book does necessarily prepare the Reader for the third. In the
second Part he shows the State of the Church, for the six first Ages, to be
quite different from what is seen at present in the Church of Rome: The Reader
then thereupon finds there has bin an Innovation, and supposes it to be not
only possible, but that it has actually happened, so that it only remains to
know, when, by whom, and by what Degrees this Change has bin introduced, and
this is sufficiently set forth in the third Part. It cannot therefore be
singled out from the second to be opposed alone, without the greatest Injustice
and Disingenuity; for this is to strip it of all its Strength, and to deal with
it, as the Philistims did with Samson, cut off his Hair before they set upon
him.

Mr. Aubertin offered not his Account to the Reader till he had prepared him by
a necessary Premonition to receive it; Whereas the Author of the Perpetuity
would have it considered and examined with an unprepared Mind, or rather, to
speak better, with a Mind filled with contrary Dispositions. Now this is not
fair Dealing. For to proceed orderly, he ought to have begun with these first
Preparations; and made it appear (if he could) that they were fallacious, and
so discover the unjustice, falsity, or weakness of them, and afterward set
upon the Account he gives us. Had he taken this Course, we should have had
nothing to charge him with, touching his Method; but to stifle these
Preparations, and cut 'em off from the Dispute, and fall immediately upon his
Account of the Innovation, is that which will ever deserve the name of indirect
Dealing.

AND if we consider likewise the manner after which the Author of the
Perpetuity has endeavored to overthrow this Account, it will be found his
Proceedings are in this Respect as disingenious as in the former. As for
Instance, Mr. Aubertin observes that Anastasius Sinaite has bin the first who
varied from the common Expressions of the Ancients, in saying, The Eucharist is
not an Antitype but the Body of Jesus Christ. Now to refute directly this
Historical Passage, (being agreed as we are in this Particular relating to
Anastasius) there ought to have bin the like Passages produced of them who
preceded him, and to have made it thence appear he was not the first who thus
expressed himself. But instead of this, the Author of the Perpetuity takes
another Course, for he demands, how this can be, That Perpetuity of the Faith,
P. 50. 51. etc.
Anastasius, who could not be ignorant of the Churches. Belief in his time,
should offer an Opinion which would be formally opposed, and this without
acknowledging, he proposed a contrary Opinion? He endeavors to show this
Innovation could not overspread either East or West, and that Anastasius's real
meaning, and that of them who spoke like him in this particular, could not be
the Impannation of the Word with which Mr. Aubertin seems to charge them. And
the same does he, in respect of Paschasius, whom Mr. Aubertin Affirms to be the
first Author of the Real Presence, for instead of showing others held the same
Opinion, and that he did not teach a new Doctrine, he sets himself upon
showing, that if Paschasius had bin an Innovator, he would have bin taken
notice of in some one of the Councils held in his time, that he would have bin
opposed, and never offered his Opinion as the received Doctrine of the Church,
as he has done. I will not now enquire into the strength of his Arguments,
neither will I say they ought to be rejected for this Reason alone, that they
are indirect, The Question is here whether this course of refuting Mr.
Aubertin's Book be warrantable, and it must be granted, it is not; for the
chief design of this his Account being only to demonstrate, that Anastasius,
and Paschasius introduced Innovations; Now to make it appear they were not
Innovators, there ought to have bin produced several Passages out of the
Writings of those who preceded them, which should come near the same
Expressions, or at least amounted to the same Sense as that of theirs, which
the Author of the Perpetuity has not done.

LET Mr. Arnaud consider again then, if he pleases, the Question, and whether I
have broached two notorious Untruths, the one, that Mr. Aubertin' s Book was
the first occasion of this Contest, the other, that the Author of the
Perpetuity has attacked it after an indirect manner. Now to the end I may have
from him a second Sentence more favorable than the former; it will not be
amiss to answer his Objections, and show him first, That I pretendnot to hinder
any Person from choosing those Points or Matters for which he has the greatest
Inclination: for, provided he handles them in a regular manner, he will thereby
oblige the public. Secondly I do not so much as pretend to hinder any man from
refuting part of a Book, and leaving the other, provided this Part may be well
refuted alone, and there be no cause to complain that the force of the
Arguments is spoiled by such a separation. Thirdly, Neither do I take upon me
to call the Author of the Perpetuity to account about his employing himself,
and require of him two Volums in Folio. For I am willing to believe his Employs
are great and difficult, and therefore afford him not time enough to make a
direct and complete Refutation of Mr. Aubertin's Book.

AND as to what he tells us, that we cannot reasonably require more from Lib.
1. Chapter 1. Page 7.
a Person who handles any Subject, than that he suppose nothing which is
False, or Obscure, and draw not from thence ill Consequences, seeing the truth
and clearness of Principles, and the justness of their Consequences are in
themselves sufficient, to assure us of the Truth, and gives us a clear and
perfect notion thereof. To which I answer, This is true, when Persons are
agreed to treat on this Subject, and do take this course to decide the
principal Question of it, for in this case, only the Principles and their
Consequences ought to be examined. But if this be not consented to, but on the
contrary there are general Observations made upon the Method, then it is not
particularly minded Whether the Principles are disputable or not, nor Whether
their Consequences are true or false, for this follows afterward. The Method
of handling the Subject is only considered, without regard to the Principles or
Conclusions; That is to say, Whether it is direct or disorderly, natural or
against Nature, sufficient to persuade, and end the Controversy or not, and on
this account, it may be justly expected from a Person that he take a right
Method rather than a wrong, one which is a Natural, rather than that which is
not so. For such a one may well be told, He spends his time to no purpose, that
takes not a right way to obtain the end of what he designs. Now this is exactly
what we have to allege against the Author of the Perpetuity, as will appear in
the following Chapter. We have reason to wonder that Mr. Arnaud should deny us
the liberty of making these general Reflections, he I say, who confessed in the
second Period of his first Chapter, that I am not to blame for having grounded
my chief Accusations against the Author of the Perpetuity's Method, upon the
Defects I found therein, provided I establish Truth and Reason. But this does
not well agree with what he says here. That there cannot be any thing justly
required of a man who treats on any Subject, but only this, That he lay down
good Principles, and draw thence true Conclusions. For the falsity of
Principles, or Consequences, proceeds rather from a defect in the Matter, or
Form of an Argument in Particular, than in a Method in General.

CHAP. III.
THE third Observation justified, viz. That the Author of the Perpetuity has
bin to blame in pretending to overthrow the Proofs contained in Mr. Aubertin's
Book, by Arguments which can amount to no more than mere Conjectures.

MR. Arnaud seems unwilling to grant, That the Author of the Perpetuity has
endeavored to invalidate our Proofs of Matters of Fact contained in Mr.
Aubertin's Book by his Arguments, and thereupon has only proposed the Question
in these Terms: viz. Whether a man may not argue against matters of Fact: And
takes it for granted Lib. 1. Chapter 2.
he may in some particular Cases. It is then our part to show, he wanders from
the Point, and that the Author of the Perpetuity has not only designed to
oppose, but even overthrow by his arguings our Proofs of Fact, so that the
Question now is whether this Endeavor of his is just or unjust, whether
according to a regular Course or contrary to it.

AND for this purpose, I shall only desire Mr. Arnaud to consider, That the
Design of the Method, or advantage expected by it, as it has bin expressly
declared in the fourteenth Page of the first Treatise, Is to bring any
unprejudiced Person, to acknowledge the Church of Rome' s Belief touching the
Eucharist to be the same with that of all Antiquity; and this new Method is
proposed to remedy an Inconveniency, usually attending that ordinary Method,
called Discussion, wherein it frequently happens, that men seldom sufficiently
comprehend the strength of Proofs; because they are not considered in their
right order, which ever so places them as that they mutually assist and
fortify each other. I need but entreat him likewise to remember the first
Title of the Treatise, before it was printed, when it was put into my Hands to
be answered; which was as follows, A Treatise containing an easy Means to
convince Heretics, by showing them there has no alteration bin made in the
Churches Belief touching the Eucharist, as I already observed in the Preface
before my Answer. Lastly I have no more to request of him, but only to remember
the new Title under which the first Treatise, and them which followed, were
published, which is; The Perpetuity of the Faith of the Catholic Church
touching the Eucharist. For what else can be expected from a man that promises
to make us confess, the Church of Romes Belief is the same with that of all
Antiquity, and hopes to convince us of the Truth of this, but that he should
invalidate all our Proofs of matters of Fact, by which we think we have
established the reality of an Innovation? Would Mr. Arnaud grant me the favor
to suppose a while that I am not obstinate: and I will likewise on the other
hand suppose I was mistaken in Mr. Aubertin's Book, and that the Persuasion I
had of the truth of his Proofs concerning an Innovation has bin false. Now
should the Author of the Perpetuity pretend, that his Method is able to
undeceive me and dissipate all the false Impressions which Mr. Aubertin's
Proofs have wrought in my Mind; should he, I say, pretend to this, he has
imagined, as I have already mentioned, that he is able by his Arguments, to
invalidate our Proofs; and again on the other hand, if he pretends not to do
this, he has bin certainly to blame in saying, He would convince Heretics,
and make them acknowledge, (if they are not Invincibly Obstinate) the
Perpetuity of Transubstantiation, and the Real Presence. We shall see by what
follows, whether or no Mr. Arnaud has upheld the honor of so great a Design,
or whether he has not abated something of it. I shall content my self at
present with only showing the pretension of the Author of the Method.

IT cannot be alleged in his behalf, he had not these aforementioned Proofs
in his Mind, but only offered his own; which he judged conclusive; for besides
that when a man lays down a Method as sufficient to produce an effect, he ought
consider whatsoever may hinder the producing of this or the contrary Effect. We
may farther observe he assaults Mr. Aubertin's Book in this Treatise, wherein
are contained these Proofs, concerning which he could not pretend Ignorance,
seeing they make up the greatest part of that Book. It ought moreover to be
considered, that he refuteth, as I already said in the foregoing Chapter, an
Account whose whole strength is grounded on these Proofs of matters of Fact, an
Account which takes them for its Foundation, and borrows from them
whatsoever it would persuade, and refutes it not in opposing other Proofs after
the same manner, but by Arguments. Whence it follows he imagins his Arguments
are sufficient to overthrow these Proofs, it being impossible if they stand
firm, but that the account of the Change or Innovation should do so too.

Mr. Arnaud's way of shifting the Question that he might draw on the Reader to
another matter, is so plainly evident, that I need not give him the least hint
of it. For there is certainly a great Difference betwixt barely Opposing
Arguments against our Proofs, and pretending to invalidate them by Arguments.
The first of these may be done without thinking on the second; these Arguments
may be examined and compared with our Proofs, without any other Pretense than
the keeping the Mind in Suspense, and hindering it from determining on either
side. Had the Author of the Perpetuity kept himself within these Bounds, we
should have answered him after another sort; but he has extended his design so
far as to bring us to a final Acknowledgment. The Question then is not so much
about his bare Opposition; although that shall be showed him at length to be
useless, and that he cannot expect any advantage from it, for the Debate at
present consists either in the Justice or Injustice of his Design, when he
imagined this Opposition was sufficient to convince us, notwithstanding our
Prejudices against it, occasioned by Mr. Aubertin's and other Ministers Proofs.

BUT to state the Question clearly, it ought to be farther supposed, that we
compare not here the Proofs drawn from Arguments, then when they are made use
of to establish Matters argued, with Proofs of matters of Fact, which are
intended for a confirmation of the same matters of Fact. For I am far from
denying, but there may be at some times Proofs drawn from Arguments, which are
as conclusive in their kind, and bring along with them as much certainty of
Evidence, as Proofs of Fact do in theirs. The Debate concerns the comparing
these two sorts of Proofs, in respect of a matter of Fact; for the Principal
Question betwixt us, is whether the Doctrine of the ancient Church is the same
with that of the Church of Rome at present, now this is a matter of Fact, which
on one side is demonstrated by Proofs of Fact, and which the Author pretends on
the other side to demonstrate by Proofs drawn from Arguments; which two sorts
of Proofs form contrary Conclusions on the same subject.

IT is farther to be considered, the Question lies not in supposing our Proofs
are frivolous, or uncertain, for then they might be opposed by Proofs drawn
from Arguments; by pretending that the Fact would be more plainly demonstrated
by this means than by the other. Had the Author of the Perpetuity made this
Supposition and well grounded it, we could not any longer keep to our Proofs of
Fact, of whose weakness and insufficieney he had already convinced us, we must
then have hearkened to his Arguments. But we are not in this case, for he leaves
our Proofs of Fact untouched in their whole strength, and we are persuaded of
the truth and solidity of them. It being then thus with us, it remains to
enquire, whether his Proofs drawn from Arguments can be sufficient to make us
alter our Judgments. The Author of the Perpetuity pretends they are, and I deny
them to be so, so that to decide clearly this Point, we must compare these two
ways of Proving, one with another.

I affirm then first of all, our Proofs of Fact are regular and natural, as I
made apparent in my second Chapter: whereas those of the Author of the
Perpetuity are unjust and preposterous. Now to compare these two Methods one
with another, that which is natural is least suspicious, for there can be
nothing said against it, common Sense leads us to it, but the other is ever
liable to Exception, by reason of its contrariety and obliquity. The latter of
these leads a man's Mind by several Turnings and Windings, and the other makes
it go straight.

MOREOVER, our Proofs of Fact demonstrate the matter immediately in it self;
but Proofs drawn from Reason cannot do this, but by a Prospect through other
things, and by means of Connexions and Consequences; Now it cannot be denied,
but of these two ways of knowing things, the one being immediate, and the other
mediate; the one near, and the other distant, but that the first of these is
the most distinct and certain: for not to say, that the Ideas of things grow
weak, when they are discovered by a Medium, and that the Mind is more
attentive, and so by consequence more distracted, and less able, when it is
forced, to apply it self at the same time to three different Objects, viz. on
the Conclusion, Principle, and Dependence which the Conclusion has on its
Principle, than when it has but one only Object to consider; besides this I
say, the orderly Connection of things being less known to us than the things
themselves, it is easier to take for a Consequence what is not one, than to
take one thing for another. It is easier to deceive us by affirming, if an
Alteration has happened, there must such and such Accidents have followed it,
than it is by only telling us, Lo here the Alteration, and certainly a man is
in less danger of being deceived this way than the other.

WHEN two Methods are offered as proper to demonstrate a Question in Debate, it
seems to me, that a man's Reason will incline him to choose that way which
brings him to the consideration of the Point debated in all its several
Relations and Circumstances, rather than that which shows it him but in one.
The Mind must be permitted to make several Reflections, because diverse
Reflections strengthen one another, and uniting together, they form a more
extended and perfect Knowledge, even as several Rays united give the greater
Light. Now it cannot be denied but our Proofs of Fact have this Advantage over
them of the Perpetuity. For the latter of these respects no farther than the
only impossibility of an Alteration; and concludes from thence, that the
Doctrine of the Ancient Church has bin the same with that of the Church of
Rome at present. But our Proofs examine the Belief of the Ancient Church, in
all the ways it can be examined in it self, by its necessary Consequences, by
its Consequences of Congruity, by way of Negation, and Affirmation, by
Circumstances of Time, Places, Persons, and Occasions, and in a word, after all
manners imaginable, whereby the Mind may form a more solid and certain
Judgment. What likelihood is there then, that being already persuaded by a
considerable number of Proofs, which this Method draws from all these
Particulars, we should receive a contrary Impression by the Author of the
Perpetuity's Arguments?

A greater humane Certainty than that of Sense cannot be found, now that of
Reasoning falls commonly under this Degree, especially when we apply it to
matters of Fact.

BUT when Proofs drawn from Arguments shall be extended to the same Degree of
Conviction, as those of the Eyesight, and common Sense, they can never ascend
higher, or proceed so far as to convince us, and make us renounce their
Evidence. It seldom happens that these two Lights justle one another, but when
this falls out, a man's Mind never fails of taking one part or the other, it may
remain for some time interdicted and astonished; but unless some vain
Philosophy, as that of the Academicks, or Pyrrhoniens has corrupted it, and
made it wander, it will soon rally it self on the side of common Sense. I will
produee an Example drawn from Physics. Our Eyes and Senses show us that a
grain of Sand is not only finite, but far less than a Mountain, or the whole
Globe of the Earth; yet there are People who endeavor to demonstrate by the
force of their Arguments, that this little grain of Sand comprehends an
infinite number of Parts actually existent, because it may be divided ad
infinitum, and it is not, say they, well conceivable how a thing can be so
divided, if there be not in it actually an Infinity of Parts, seeing each
Division supposes the actual Existence of its Parts, from whence it seems,
that this grain of Sand is as bigg as a Mountain, and the whole World besides,
it being impossible, say they moreover, there should be a greater and larger
heap than that which actually contains an Infinity of Parts. I doubt not but a
man's Mind would be soon entangled in this Labyrinth, but he would extricate
himself thence, not by the help of his Senses but his Reason, he will turn it
on every side, and invent Distinctions which will signify nothing, as are the
greatest part of them which have bin made on this Subject; yet will he still
keep firm to his Eyesight and common Sense.

IT will be replied perhaps, that unless we are extreme Obstinate, we cannot
pretend our Proofs of Fact are of this kind, which is to say, that they have
the certainty of our Senses; for they are taken from the Testimony of the
Fathers, whose Faithfulness may be called in question, by setting up this
fantastical Hypothesis, mentioned by Mr. Arnaud, which is, That all our
Passages are false, and invented by the Disciples of John Scot, or else in
saying, that the Fathers are mistaken, or some such like matter, which may Lib.
1. Chapter 2. Page 1.
make the Truth and Validity of these Proofs to be called in Question; and
moreover that our Passages are not so plain, but they may well be questioned,
seeing there have bin great Volums written concerning them on both sides. To
which I answer, in supposing two things which seem to me, to be both undeniable
by Mr. Arnaud, we can pretend against him our Proofs of Fact have such a kind
of Certitude, as is that of our Senses.

MY first Supposition then shall be, That the Writings of the Fathers are
faithful Witnesses of the Belief of the Ancient Church. He cannot disagree with
me in this Point, for we have not received it but from them of the Church of
Rome, they produce it themselves, and we use it only out of Condescension to
them, not having need, as to our own particular, of any thing but the Word of
God to regulate our Faith in this Mystery of the Eucharist. And when this Point
should be questionable, yet must then the Author of the Perpetuity put it out
of Question by his refuting of it, before he proposes to us his Arguments, and
not having done it, we are at liberty to act against him on this Principle. The
other Supposition we must make is, That we know very well, what is the Church
of Romes Belief touching the Eucharist, and that we rightly apprehend it, so
that there is no danger of our Mistake in this matter, and this is that which
has never yet bin disputed against us. In effect, we neither say, nor imagine
any thing on this Subject, more than what we find in Books, and hear discoursed
on every Day, which is, that the whole Substance of Bread is really converted
into the Substance of the Body of Jesus Christ, and the whole Substance of Wine
into the whole Substance of his Blood, there not remaining any thing more of
the Bread and Wine but their mere Accidents, which are not sustained by any
Subject; and further, that the Substance of our Savior's Body, is really
present at the same time both in Heaven and Earth, on all the Altars whereon
this Mystery is celebrated: that they which communicate, eat and drink this
Substance with the Mouths of their Bodies, and that it ought to be Worshipped
with the Adoration of Latria. This is undeniable.

I say then, on these Grounds, we have reason to presume our Proofs of Fact are
evident even to Sense it self. For we read the several Passages of the Fathers
which speak of the Eucharist, our Eyes behold them, and our Senses are Judges
of them. But there are not any of these Articles to be met with, which do
distinctly form the Belief of the Roman Church, neither in express Terms, nor
in equivalent ones. We are agreed in the Contents of these Articles, and in
what they mean; we are likewise agreed of the Place where they were to be
found, in case the Ancient Church had taught them. We know likewise, that it
belongs to our Eyes and common Sense to seek them, and judge whether they are
there, or no; for when a Church believes and teaches them, she explains them
distinctly enough to make them understood, and we must not imagine they lie
buried in far fetched Principles, or couched in equivocal Terms which leave the
Mind in Suspense; or wrapped up in Riddles, from whence they cannot be drawn but
by hard Study. If they are in them they ought to be plain, according to the
measure and Capacity of an ordinary and vulgar Understanding. Yet when we seek
them, we cannot find 'em: if they were set down in express Terms, our Eyes
would have discovered them; had they bin in Equivalent ones, or drawn thence by
evident and necessary Consequences, common Sense would have discovered them.
But after an exact and through Search, our Eyes and common Sense tell us, they
are not to be found in any manner. This although a Negative Proof, yet is it of
greatest Evidence and Certainty. After the same manner as when we would know
whether a Person be at home, we are agreed both touching the House and the
Person, that one might not be taken for the other; and after an exact Search,
if a man's Eyes and Senses tell him that he is not there, the proof of a
Negative Fact has all possible Force and Evidence. Yet we are upon surer
Terms, for a man may easily hide himself in some corner of his House, and steal
away from the sight of those that seek him; and therefore the Negative Proof
serves only in this Respect, to justify we have made a full and through Search.
But if the Articles of the Romish Creed were established in the universal
Consent of all Ages, (as is pretended,) it would not be sufficient they were
hid in some one of the Fathers Writings, they must near the matter have
appeared in all of them; whence it follows, our Negative Proof is yet more
certain, by the Confirmation it receives from an Affirmative Proof, which
consists in that our Eyes and Senses find out many things directly Opposite
to these Articles, and these two Proofs joined together do form one, which
appears to be so plain and entire, that there needs nothing to be added to
it. And yet this is it which the Author of the Perpetuity does pretend to strip
us of by his Arguments. But let him extend his Pretensions as far as he will, I
believe he will find few Persons approve of them, and who will not judge, that
even then when our Eyes should have deceived us, which is impossible after so
diligent and careful a Search, the only means to disabuse us would be; to
desire us to return to the using of them again, and to convince us our Inquiry
has not bin sufficient, we should at least have bin showed what we our selves
were not able to find. For whilst nothing is offered us but Arguments, they
will do us no good, we may be perhaps entangled with them, if we know not how
to answer them, but they will never make us renounce the Evidence and Certainty
which we believe to be contained in our Proofs of Fact.

WE are confirmed in this Belief, when we consider the Nature of the Author of
the Perpetuity's Arguments. For they are not Demonstrations which convince a
man's Mind, or of equal force with them which appear in our Proofs; being at
farthest but mere Probabilities. They are Moral Impossibilities which he finds
in the Alteration we suppose; as tho it were not possible but that the Bishops
and others of the Clergy, together with the People, would have opposed these
Innovations, and disturbed the Peace and Unity of the Church, under so great a
Contrariety in their Opinions; and many such like things does he allege, which
are not grounded on any certain Principles, nor drawn from undeniable
Consequences. In general, its a hard matter to determine which are impossible
Events, if you except them which carry along with them a palpable
Contradiction; for the Causes or Principles of things are at a great distance
from us, we know little of them but by their Effects, and these Effects not
always show themselves at the Bottom, so that a man cannot positively say, this
can be, or this cannot be. Moral Impossibilities are for the most part
doubtful, especially those grounded on the Inclinations of the People, whose
ways are many times so uncertain, and have so little of Uniformity in them, and
so great Dependence on particular Circumstances, that we cannot take any
certain Rules from thence. Had the Author of the Perpetuity showed us, That the
Alteration we speak of, does imply a Contradiction, That it is contrary to the
Nature of things, That there follows from it evident and intolerable
Absurdities, we should then have examined his Arguments without troubling our
selves with his Method. But to tell us what the Clergy and People would do in
this, this can amount to no more, at farthest, but mere Conjectures, and even
Conjectures very uncertain; for he is not the Arbitrator of all humane Actions,
neither does he know all their Principles and different Interests, nor
understands all the Causes which concur in great Accidents, or all those things
which hinder them from hap'ning.

IT is then a great piece of Injustice to desire, our Proofs of Fact should
yield to his way of Reasoning, and I hope Mr. Arnaud will not take it ill that
in making use of his own Terms, and accomodating them to my Subject, I tell
him, That it is in vain that he contesteth, and heateth himself about Lib. 10.
Chapter 7 Page 55
this Subject of an Alteration. Arguments signify nothing in matters which are
obvious to Sense, and we can make them appear to be so in this Case.

IT remains, for the finishing of this Chapter, I should satisfy some of Lib.
1. Chapter 1 P. 10.
Mr. Aruands's minute Observations. The first of which is, That it is every
whit as bad to oppose vain Arguments against Proofs of Fact which are firm and
solid, as to object solid and convincing Arguments against vain and Frivolous
Proofs. But there is no body who doubts of the Truth of this, and this is not
the matter in Question. When he shall have made it appear our Proofs are vain
and frivolous, he shall be permitted to oppose against them his Arguments: Yea,
and call them solid and convincing ones, 'till such time as they be refuted.
But our Proofs must always be begun withal, their weakness and vanity laid
open, for without this we shall still be at liberty to hold them for good, firm
and Conclusive.

HE adds, That not only Proofs of Fact are Invalidated by Proofs of
Reasoning; But likewise, that Proofs of Fact are reducible in some sort to
Proofs of Reasoning; and even all of 'em grounded on Arguings like unto those
of the Author of the Perpetuity, that is to say, on the impossibility of
certain Events, and that it is from these Arguings they borrow whatsoever they
have of Solidity. And this he proves by the Example of the literal Proofs taken
from History, to establish certain matters of Fact, and by the Proofs of
Moses's Miracles, and the Refurrection of our Savior; concerning which the
humane Certitude depends on a Moral Impossibility, which yet is not perceivable
but only by force of Reasoning. From thence he concludes, That a Proof is not
to be Rejected, because it is called a Proof drawn from Reason; no more than it
is to be believed, because it is called a Proof of matter of Fact; but that both
one and the other are contemptible, or estimable, accordingly as they are
Obscure or Evident, True or False, Slight or Solid, and that it is on the
Quality of a Proof and not by its Kind, we ought to form our Judgment.

TO which I answer, we must distinguish two kinds of Proofs of Fact, the one
Immediate, the others Mediate; the Immediate depend on our Senses, the Mediate
consist in the Deposition of Witnesses. The certainty of the first of these
does not depend on Arguments, it being evident in it self by its own Nature and
Original; for in that we believe our Senses; this Persuasion comes not simply
from Reasons dictitating this to us; but because their Testimony is persuasive
in it self, and that we cannot doubt of the things we see, unless we have
corrupted our own Natures by a strange Extravagancy.

AS to the second kind of Proofs, we must consider them either absolutely, or
in their Circumstances; if absolutely it is clear, their Certitude depends on
Arguments, for we do not give Credit to Witnesses, but only upon the account
that Reason dictitateth we ought to believe them. Yet does not this hinder them
from being commonly stronger, in respect of the Fact they prove, than the
Reasoning grounded on the same matter of Fact; and that which distinguishes
them is not their simple kind, but the Matter, or Subject to which they are
applied, seeing that an Argument is more Just and Certain, when it establishes
the Fidelity of Witnesses, than when it would decide the Fact it self
concerning which the Witnesses make their Depositions, whence it follows that
the Testimony authorized by stronger Arguments, ought to be preferred before
those which are weaker. And after this manner do we prove the Truth of our
Savior's Resurrection, beause the Testimony of the Apostles, being grounded on
mighty Arguments, stands more firm, than all that the Wit of man is able to
devise against it. But if the Proof taken from Witnesses is attended with this
Circumstance, that is to say, that the Fidelity of the Witnesses be agreed
upon, and that this be an acknowledged and uncontrollable Principle, then, I
say, this is no longer a Mediate Proof, but an Immediate one, it depending no
longer on Arguments. For the Validity of a Testimony being a Point once
decided, which ent'reth not into the Proof, but only as an undoubted Principle,
it then remains only to know what the Witnesses depose, and this is a Matter of
which we may be informed by our Senses, whence it follows, we must examine
their Testimony, and that this way is to be preferred before that which is
Argumentative on the same Fact.

IF we consider the Fathers, not in respect of their own Belief, but as
Witnesses of the common Belief of the Church, I confess, their Authority
depends on Reasonings, and that it may be questioned; but besides, it would
not hence follow that the Proofs drawn from Arguments in this matter, that is
to say, on the Churches Belief, would be more certain than their Testimony,
seeing their Testimony may be established on a Reasoning stronger than these
Proofs, and consequently may be preferable to them. I say, besides all this,
this Point of the Fidelity of the Fathers is a Principle, we have the Advantage
of supposing against Mr. Arnaud, seeing that hitherto the Church of Rome has
never questioned it, and that we take the Fathers only from his Hands, and
descend to the Examination of their Testimony only out of compliance with him,
as I have already mentioned: so that to speak properly, we have no more to do,
but only to know what has bin their Doctrine. Now this is another matter of
Fact, of which we think we can be informed by our Eyes, and by the Light of
common Sense, and we cannot imagine without a great Mistake, that there has
bin more perspicuity and certainty, in the Proofs drawn from Arguings; whence I
may conclude again, that we are at Liberty to reject these Proofs, without
troubling our selves with any farther Examination of them.

IT appears then clear enough (I think) that Mr. Arnaud's second Chapter is
but a vain Amusement. And I cannot but be troubled, finding my self obliged to
alleadg several things which cannot but be grievous to them who shun
Contention. But I could not but mention them, to follow Mr. Arnaud, to the end
he might not take Advantage by my leaving him unanswered.

WHAT he says concerning pretended Proofs of Fact, viz. That they are often
invalidated by Proofs fetched from Arguments, touches not our Question. For
there is no body denis that Reason does not sometimes correct a Mistake in
Sense; and sometimes again invalidates the Deposition of Witnesses, whether by
making it appear that these are False-Witnesses who impose on us, or else in
showing they themselves are mistaken, or lastly that their Testimony contains
quite another thing than what is pretended. But although that Proofs of Fact ought
to be tried by Arguments, to know their Goodness, yet does it not follow that
when the Question respects a matter of Fact, but that the way of Proofs is to
be preferred before that of Arguments, on the same Subject; it does less follow
that when Persons are prevented by Proofs of Fact, that they can be made to
alter their Judgments, by simple Proofs drawn from Arguments, without showing
them that their pretended Proofs of Fact are not good. What he adds
concerning the Proofs of Fact, that they are all of 'em reducible in some sort
to Proofs of Reasoning, is not true, in reference to immediate Proofs, and
whatsoever there may be of Truth in this, yet is it useless, because the
Question is not about a general Comparison of Arguments with Proofs of Fact,
but concerning the Comparison applied to the Fact it self, which the Proof
establishes, and which lies now in Debate. All the following Discourses,
touching the Fidelity of Historians, the Battle of Canes, of Pharsalia, of
Philippes, Actium, Caesar, Pompey, and the City of Constantinople, are
Digressions which our Dispute has nothing to do with. The Proofs of the Truth
of Moses's Miracles, and them of the Resurrection of our Savior, are good, but
they belong not to our Subject. If the Question concerned the proving the
Fidelity of the Fathers Testimony, we would consent to the making use of
Arguments, after the same manner as they are made use of to prove the Fidelity
of Moses and the Apostles Testimony. But this is not the Point, our whole
Question is only to know what the Fathers have believed; and for this,
Arguments are far less fit than Passages faithfully collected from their own
Writings. Mr. Arnauds Hypothesis, that all our Quotations of the Fathers have
bin foysted in them by John Scot and his Followers, is, as he is pleased to
express it on another Occasion, a Fantastical Hypothesis, from whence he can
draw no Advantage, and what at farthest can have no Ground but in the
Disquisition of the Passages themselves. And lastly his Conclusion that the
Proofs of Fact, and the Proofs taken from Arguments, are either to be valued or
slighted, as they are either Obscure or Evident, False or True, Vain or Solid,
and that it is by the Quality of the Proof, and not by the kind of them that we
must judge, this is I say a disingenious Conclusion, for it is true that Proofs
are estimable or despicable by their Quality, and not by their Kind: but their
Kind and the Matter to which they are applied serve to foreshew us their
Quality, and their Quality being foreknown, renders them Estimable or
Contemptible. A Proof drawn from Arguments, being made use of to subvert a
matter of Fact, which is found established by the sight of our Eyes and common
Sense, bears, in this simple Comparison, a sufficient Number of false
Characters, to make us conclude that it belongs to the number of those subtle
and loose Proofs Mr. Arnaud mentions, which evaporate of themselves, and vanish
out of the Mind, Lib. 1. C 2. P. 10.
as the Air does out of our Mouths, it not being necessary to enter into a more
particular Examination of them. Seeing then we have Reason to suppose our
Proofs are good and Substantial, as I made it apparent in my first Chapter, we
may likewise well conclude in this, that the Author of the Perpetuity's
Reasonings are vain and groundless, and consequently to be rejected without
troubling our selves any farther with them.

CHAP. IV.
My fourth Observation Justified; viz. That we need but oppose our Proofs of
Fact against the Author of the Perpetuity's Arguments, to make them Invalid.

IT will be needless to prove this Observation, seeing Mr. Arnaud acknowledges
enough to establish the Truth and Justice of it. We do not in any wise pretend,
says he, to deny him (he means me) the use of his Proofs of Fact, (if he has
any) provided he makes a right use of them, and follows the Rules of Reason, in
so doing. He may then Conclude Lib. 1. C. 2. P. 15.
as long as he will, that the Alteration in Question is possible, in making it
appear if he can, That it has actually happened. He may deny the Impossibility
of a thing, by proving its actual Existence. All this is allowed him, neither
are we so unreasonable, to deprive him of these kind of Proofs. He wrongs the
Author of the Perpetuity, in charging him with such a Thought. This
Acknowledgment is not of so small Importance, but that it deserves to be
considered; for it perfectly overthrows the Author of the Perpetuity's real
Design, and makes all those great Hopes he conceived of his Method, to vanish
away, in two or three Periods. We have already seen that he has offered it,
as a sufficient Means to convince us; and make us confess, by the Evidence of
Truth, if we are not desperately Obstinate, that the Church of Rome' s Belief
touching the Mystery of the Eucharist, is the same with that of all Antiquity.
But this Discourse does not well agree with that of Mr. Arnaud's. For, if this
Method will lead us so far on one Hand, as the making of us come to this last
Confession, mentioned by the Author of the Perpetuity, the Dispute ends there,
and our Proofs of Fact are Insignificant, seeing they are Succors which will
stand us in no stead, being already overthrown. And on the other, if we may
employ our Proofs of Fact against the Method, provided we make a right use of
them; if we may deny the Impossibility of an Alteration, in showing it has
actually happened; we have at least the Power to Suspend this Acknowledgment, to
which the Author of the Method would oblige us, until such time as it is
examined whether we make a right Use of our Proofs of Fact, and draw a true
Conclusion from them. But how shall we make these two Gentlemen agree? Seeing
one of 'em would have the Dispute ended by his Arguments; and the other would
have us keep it still up by our Proofs of Fact. The one pretends, we ought to
reckon our selves Vanquished as soon as ever he has done speaking, and the
other gives us time, and allows us to produce our Passages. If we Expound the
Author of the Perpetuity's Meaning by Mr. Arnaud, he has undertaken no more
than the bringing us to make this forementioned Acknowledgment, Exclusively;
for between his Proofs and our Confession, we may put in our Proofs of Fact,
which is to say in short, that he has supposed his Method able to effect any
thing, but what it ought. And if we expound Mr. Arnaud's Meaning, by that of
the Author of the Perpetuity, he designs, that we shall not make use of our
Proofs of Fact till such time as we acknowledge there has no Alteration happened;
which is to say, that he will not grant us the use of them, til we confess,
they are of no use to us. So that should we comply with both these Gentlemen,
we oppose and contradict our selves; for we must then acknowledge that we have
bin to blame, and yet at the same time maintain that the Reason is on our side:
And so again we shall acknowledge, the Doctrine of the Church of Rome is the
same with that of the Primitive Church, and yet still prove that there has bin
made an essential Alteration. And thus are we guided by these Gentlemen's
Speculations.

TO speak ingenuously, I take Mr. Arnaud to be a very bad defender of the
Method; for he not only forsakes it in a Capital Question, wherein its Honor
is chiefly concerned, (which is to know whether it be sufficient to Convince us
in the State we are in, and make us confess the Truth of what it proves) but he
moreover exposes the Uselesness and Vanity of it; for if after all his
Endeavors, we may still return to our old Proofs of Fact, I see not any Use
that can be made of it; unless it be to entangle and lengthen out our Debate,
wherefore I think it may well be laid aside, and the Author of it content
himself with his Method of Discussion.

NOW to clear up this Dispute, it will not be amiss to examine here, what Mr.
Arnaud tells us touching these two sorts of Methods of Prescription, and
Discussion. The Method of Prescription, says he, is that in which, by the
Examination of certain principal Points, the Controversy is decided, Lib. 1. C.
3. P. 16.
the other is that in which is particularly laid down the Proofs of all the
Matters debated, and all the Objections against them answered, From thence he
takes occasion to discourse of the Advantages which the Church has over us by
these Methods of Prescription; and afterward coming to a Conclusion, It is
necessary adds he, For the Method of the Prescriptions keeping its
Advantages, and producing the Benefit expected from it, that it remain separate
from the Method of Discussion, because otherwise we should inevitably fall into
Prolixity, and the Perplexity of particular Examinations, which we intend to
avoid. So that, whereas the Discourses designed for the Discussion of
particular Matters, ought to be written with the greatest Exactness, no
difficulty, which may perplex the Mind being omitted in them; So on the
contrary, those which are made according to the Method of Prescription, ought
precisely to contain no more than may serve to illustrate the Proof which a Man
intends to make use of, and it would certainly be a great Defect to join
thereunto the Examination of particular Questions, which do but confound the
Mind by their Multiplicity. At length he concludes, That the Author of the
Perpetuity could not with Prudence undertake to answer Mr. Aubertin' s chief
Difficulties in his Treatise. That had this Treatise bin made according to the
Method of Discussion, he had bin in a manner obliged thereunto, but being a
Method of Prescription he could not do it without spoiling his Design, and
evidencing he understood not the Nature and Advantage of the Method he
followed, which was short, perspicuous, and accommodated to all Capacities.

ALL this Discourse is nothing to the Purpose, for by it we understand no more
than this, that when men consent to make use of the Method of Prescription,
they must only serve themselves with it according to the Rules which it
enjoyneth. Very good! But this decides nothing if we are not agreed, but on the
contrary, dispute against it, for then the Question is no longer, how we ought
to use the Method of Prescription, nor whether it ought to be joined with that
of Discussion, this is no longer the Point, but the Question is only whether we
ought to use it or not. Mr. Arnaud perpetually imposes on his Readers, he
carries them off from one place to another, from the matter in Question, to
that which does not concern it, and thereupon entertains them at his Ease. We
do not dispute the manner after which the Author of the Perpetuity ought to
have ordered his Method of Prescription, supposing this were a proper Place for
it, this is one of Mr. Arnaud's Delusions; but our Dispute lies, whether he
could reasonably use it against our Proofs, even so far as to promise the
Effect which he has pretended to draw from thence. Now this is a Difference
which has bin already dispatched by what I represented in the foregoing
Chapters. And in effect, seeing he would convince us there has bin no
Alteration made touching the Eucharist, notwithstanding we are prepossessed to
the Contrary, by literal Proofs, how can he, I say, take from us this
Persuasion, and give us another quite contrary to it, unless his Method of
Prescription has an Evidence and Certainty beyond that of the Proofs
aforementioned? This he ought to show us, and not straggle into the common
place of Methods of Prescription. But this would be to undertake to show a
thing impossible; for a Method made up of Proofs taken from Arguments: all of
'em drawn from a genere probabili, as the Schools term them, could not surmount
the strength of our Proofs of Fact, which depend on the sight of our Eyes and
common Sense, a great part of which propose the thing imediately in it self.

BUT how then? may we never establish our Sentiments by a Method of
Prescription? We do not say so. We only mean thus much, that when the
Sentiments of Persons are opposed, which are grounded on Proofs of Fact, and
which they believe to be (as I have already said) as certain as any thing which
falls under the Judgments of their Senses, it is then I say an unreasonable
thing, to pretend to make them alter their Opinion by a Method of Prescription,
grounded on moral Impossibilities. This is the Knot of the Question. If a man
has to do only with People prepossessed in favor of his Opinion, he may then
use his Method of Prescription, to confirm them in the thoughts they have
already entertained. There could nothing be alleged against his manner of
Proceeding, the strength of his Proofs are in that Case only to be considered.
If he has to do with indifferent Persons, that is to say, with such who have
not yet taken any side, and desire to be instructed, he might then likewise use
a Method of Prescription, provided his Principles be well grounded, and his
Conclusions more decisive, than any thing which can be alleged against them;
There need then be nothing to be replied, unless there were something indirect
in his Method; but this could do no more at farthest, but only oblige People to
examine with greater Care the Truth of his Principles, and that of its
Consequences, and not make them reject them; for indirect Arguments conclude
sometimes with as great Evidence as direct ones. Nay I will not fear to say,
that when he should have to do with Persons prepossessed with Opinions contrary
to what he would persuade them, he might then lawfully use a Method of
Prescription, for it would not be sufficient to say that a man is prepossessed
by another Method, nor object that that of Prescription proceeds indirectly,
or follows not the Order of Nature, these kind of Objections may cause
Suspicion; but they ought not to proceed so far, as to make men absolutely
reject Arguments, which perhaps, are attended with a greater Perspicuity and
Certitude, than those which have occasioned the Prejudice. But as to what
concerns us, against whom the Author of the Perpetuity has written, we are in
none of these Circumstances; being not only led by a natural and direct Way in
my Hypothesis, and by Proofs which propose us the Point in Question immediately
in it self; but by Proofs which we believe to be above all Contradiction, and
yet he would have us change our Minds, by Proofs which are not only indirect
and mediate ones, and which at farthest can amount to no more but mere
Probabilities, being applied to the Subject in hand. We have then Reason to
say, that these are mear Chimeras in our respect, and that without considering
them any otherwise than in their own kind, and in the matter on which they
treat, they cannot make such a strong Impression on us, as to deface that which
we have already received; for it is not likely that any rational Man will be
more affected with Probabilities, than with solid Proofs which are grounded on
common Sense.

MOREOVER this is not the proper Place to make Comparisons, of the Methods of
Protestants with them of the Church of Rome. It may be made apparent that we
have surer and shorter ones than those which it proposes. But this is not our
Question, and I am resolved not to follow all Mr. Arnauds fruitless
Digressions. His Words cost him nothing, and People are disposed to receive
them, be they what they will, as Oracles. But it is not the same with me, for,
should I wander from my Subject as often as he does, there would be few Readers
who would not be tired with our Debate. I shall only tell him, he is mistaken
when he imagines that to be of our Communion, a man is obliged to an
examination of all the Controversies which to this day have perplexed the
Christian Religion. We have the holy Scriptures which every man may read, or
hear them read publicly: Which do fully and clearly contain whatsoever is
necessary to Salvation, and by the Concurrence of Gods Grace, even the most
illiterate may judge whether the Minister, under whom they live, is able and
willing to show them the way of Life, and whether our Society be the true
Church. For in this Case we need but examine two things. The first whether we
are taught in it all things clearly contained in the Word of God, and secondly,
if there be nothing taught which corrupts the Strength and Efficacy of these
things; for if we find in this Communion wherewithal to satisfy our
Consciences, and to live in the fear of God, and to ascertain our selves in our
Saviors Promises: and moreover, if nothing be taught or practiced which
overthrows the fundamental Doctrines of Christianity. For if nothing does
offend the Conscience, we ought to be persuaded, we are in the true Church, it
being needless for us to enter into a Discussion of all the Errors which have
troubled, or still perplex the Christian Religion. After the same manner as
it is not necessary to Salvation, for a man to know all the particular Heresies
which have troubled the Peace of the Church, nor to make a formal and positive
Renunciation of them, for it is sufficient that we are not tainted with any of
them, and firmly to believe the fundamental Truths of Religion, neither is it
likewise necessary to assure our selves, we are in the true Church, that we
inform our selves of the several Opinions of men: It may suffice us to know
that the Church of which we are Members, teaches what it ought, concerning
Gods Glory and our Souls Edification, and maintains nothing which does not
answer these Ends. Now this every man may find in our Church, for if he compare
his Ministers Doctrine with the Word of God, he will be satisfied that what he
teaches is exactly contained therein, he shall perceive likewise that we mix
no Doctrines of men with it, which overthrow its Foundation. This way of
Examination is short, easy, and proportionable to the Capacity of all People,
and thereupon there may be made a Judgment, as certain as if every single
Controversy had bin examined apart.

THE most simple then among us may live in perfect Peace; But it is not so in
the Church of Rome; for these Methods of Prescription, mentioned by Mr. Arnaud,
are not built but upon one of these two Principles, either that the Church,
which is to say, the Body of the People, cannot err, nor cease to be the true
Church, in ceasing to believe what it believes, or in beginning to believe that
which it did not believe; or that the representative Church, that is to say,
the Councils, or the Pope, cannot err. The first of these two Principles is
natural; the second is of a Supernatural Order. I handle not at present this
Point, whether they are false or true at the Bottom, it suffices me to say
that they are in their own Nature so difficult and require so much time, that
to expect ordinary Apprehensions to examine them, is plainly to deride them: I
shall speak of the first of these in the sixth Chapter: where I shall make it
appear that it is impossible for a man to extricate himself out of those
Perplexities wherein the Author of the Perpetuity engages him, or to rest
secure on the Grounds on which it is built. It suffices me to say, that People
are not commonly so regular in things, which they believe by a distinct Faith,
but that they are willing likewise to receive new Doctrines, and enlarge by
this means the number of popular Mysteries. The Author of the Perpetuity tells
us, that the Truths of Divine Grace were never popular in all the Consequences
drawn from Theology: and yet we know that all imaginable care has bin taken to
make these Consequences popular. There has bin made on this Subject, I know not
how many Books adapted to Women's Capacity; there have bin Catechisms compiled,
intit'led Catechisms of Grace. Which evidently show, it has bin believed, that
it was not impossible to make the People recieve by way of Illustration or
Addition, Articles which they knew not before, whence it follows it has bin
supposed they are capable of Change; for else to what purpose serve these
Catechisms, if the People cannot of themselves, either diminish, or augment the
number of Mysteries which they hold by a distinct Faith. This Principle is not
then so certain, but that it may be doubted of, nor so clear, or evident in it
self, that the most simple may be ascertained in it, having before their Eyes a
Matter which appears so contrary to it.

AS to the second, it is evident that the Question of the Infallibility of
Councils, or Popes, is not so easy, that the most simple People may master it.
All Societies separate from the Church of Rome oppose it. If this Church has
this, she has it by a particular Privilege, which must be examined before it
be received. For it cannot be entertained on the bare word of this Church,
without falling into an extravagancy and ridiculous Circle, which is, that we
believe the Church of Rome to be Infallible, because she says so; and we
believe what she says in this matter to be true, because she is infallible.
Before that the most simple People can acquiesce in its Authority, this
Authority must also appear to them to be undeniable, by things independent on
the Church of Rome, and which may be judged of distinctly by themselves.
Otherwise this would be to begin an Argument by its Conclusion. For this would
be near the matter such a kind of reasoning as this is. That the Church of Rome
is Infallible in what she says; now she affirms she is infallible, from
whence it follows that she is so. A person in whom we suppose there is the
least Dram of Sense, will never be convinced by this Argument. The Church of
Rome then must first make out its privilege of Infallibility to the most
simple man living, before it can be supposed that such a one, or any other will
receive its Doctrine, founded on this Principle. Now I affirm that this
Disquisition is beyond the reach of mean Capacities, for if it be proved by way
of Scripture, it is not so plainly described therein, but that the Places on
which it is grounded may be capable of another Sense. They are controverted
Places, and a man must read whole Volums to prevent his being rash or
passionate in his Judgment. Now if a man be able to make such a Disquisition,
and a Judgment accordingly, he will then be able to enter upon the Examination
of particular Doctrines, and to discern the Conformity which each of 'em has
with the Scripture, in relation to what is produced on either side.

NOW if this Doctrine be attempted to be proved by Arguments: he that
endeavors to do this, engages himself yet farther into tedious Prolixities,
and Difficulties, which surpass ordinary Apprehensions. In a word Mr. Arnaud
does himself decide the Question. This Infallibility, says he, Lib. 1. C. 7.
P. 66.
is not a thing clear in it self, seeing it depends only on the Will of God,
which he has made known unto us by the Scripture. The Church not being
naturally Infallible, we must prove that it is supernaturally so, either by the
Principles of Faith, or by a long Series of Arguments. Ordinary Capacities are
not able to examine this long sequel of Arguments, nor sufficiently to discuss
the Principles of Faith, to discern if this pretended Infallibility may be
drawn thence. And it is for this Reason, that the Author of the Perpetuity has
chosen rather to take the popular Infallibility for his Principle, than that of
Privilege. Mr. Arnaud testifies as much; for speaking of the Impossibility of
the Churches altering its Belief on the Articles which are not popular, that is
to say, of this Infallibility of Privilege now in Question. Reason, says he,
does not clearly show us this Impossibility. So that this Author (meaning the
Author of the Perpetuity) being desirous to ground his Arguments on Lib. 1. C.
7. Page 68.
a Principle of Reason and humane Evidence, and not on a Principle of Iradition
and Authority, or on abstracted and remote Arguings, he must then necessarily
contain himself within the reach of things, in which the Impossibility of a
Change appears plainly by Reason. There are particular ways of proving that
the Church never fell into an Error, on any Point which it proposes. But it is
evident to Sense, that the whole Church cannot fall into Errors, relating to
matters of Faith, seeing they are distinctly known and understood by all the
Faithful. The Infallibility then of Privilege is not a thing which is
immediately apparent to Sense, there needs more abstracted and remote Arguments
to prove it, whence it appears that Persons of ordinary Capacities are not able
to do this. Much less are they fit for this, should this Point be undertaken to
be proved by the way of Tradition, for it would be to send them far enough, in
obliging them to read the Fathers and Councils, to be informed in this matter;
besides that the Fathers and Councils are themselves the representative Church,
and whose Authority is now in Question and so consequently, their Testimony
upon this account would signify nothing.

IT is then manifest, that common Apprehensions not being able to ascertain
themselves in the Infallibility of Privilege, as I come now from proving, nor
in the Point of popular Infallibility, as I have already hinted, and which I
shall do more fully in the end, they cannot remain in the Church of Rome, with
a safe Conscience, there being nothing which holds them in it but deceitful
Bands, such as are, Birth, Education, Interest, Custom, and the Example of
others, which are things very unproper to determine an honest Mind in matters
of Salvation. They are then obliged to range themselves on the side of the
Reformists, from whom they receive for a Rule, things clearly contained in the
Holy Scripture, and where they may be assured there is none of them withheld in
the public Ministry, and moreover, where there is nothing taught which
corrupts the Efficacy of Gods Grace. If it be replied, that we must first,
satisfy such Persons by proving the Divinity of the Scriptures. I answer first,
that this Principle does not fall under Debate, seeing the matter in hand
relates not to the several Religions in the World, but only to the particular
Opinions of Christians, for they all in general acknowledge the Divine Authority
of the Holy Scriptures. Secondly, I answer, that the Church of Rome is no less
obliged to prove this Authority of the Scriptures, than other Churches, seeing
that before she can make her self acknowledged as Infallible, she must evidence
her self to be a Church, which she cannot do, if the Divinity of the Scripture
be denied her, and she will not take the Pains to prove it; besides that all
the Proofs by which she pretends to establish her Infallibility, depend either
mediately or immediately on the Scripture, and consequently they suppose its
Divinity. But in fine, I say the Characters of Divinity, which shine in all
parts of these Writings, are so lively, and so many in Number, that the most
ordinary Capacities cannot but be affected with them, if they apply themselves
to the Consideration of them, with a pure Heart and unspotted Conscience. Now
this is it, to which the meanest Capacity is obliged, as well as the greatest,
and if they do it not, their Damnation is just, and their Impiety without
Excuse.

AND this is what I thought I was obliged to speak, briefly on these pretended
Methods of Prescription, this not being a proper Place to handle this Point
more largly. But to return to the principal Subject of our Dispute, we are
obliged to Mr. Arnaud, in that he takes it not ill, I endeavor to prove by
several Passages, that the Alteration pretended to be impossible, is real and
true. The Author of the Perpetuity must likewise consent to this, seeing Mr.
Arnaud has said it; and if he does agree to it, he must suffer me to draw this
Consequence, that I could have hindered the Effect he promised himself from his
Method, which is, to make us confess if we are not extreme Obstinate, that the
Doctrine of the Church of Rome, touching the Sacrament, is the same with that
of all Antiquity. This Confession cannot be justly extorted from us, as long as
there shall be any reasonable Occasion of disputing this Point between us, and
the Production of some Passages of my Writings, starteth a particular Debate,
which Mr. Arnaud approves, for he only complains, I have not produced them in
a right manner, but mained, and dislocated from their Consequences, and that I
have concealed all those which might be opposed, and understood. But this
Complaint is Unjust, and he should not conceal the Reason I alleged to justify
the form of my Abridgment, which is, That that Book was made in Relation to
that of Mr. Aubertins, whose Proofs I take upon me to defend. If he did not
like to insert two large Volums in Folio, into a Preface, neither have I liked
to put a great Volum into a short Answer, which contains no more than thirty
Pages.

I never pretended that my Abridgment alone, should absolutely determine his
Thoughts. I know this cannot be expected; but I was willing to show the way
which must be taken for the finding out of the Truth, which is to make an exact
Search into the Belief of the Fathers; I designed to show them of my Communion,
what might be objected against the Author of the Perpetuity's Arguments, and
thereby obliged him to dispute henceforward in a regular manner, we may be
permitted to make Abridgments of this kind, and that of mine has nothing but
what distinguishes it from that which we call A Heap of Difficulties, the
matters of Proof with which it is furnished, their Nature and Force, do
contribute that Truth to it, which an Abridgment ought to have, and the
relation it has to Mr. Aubertin's Book makes it evident and certain. There can
be nothing more required to conclude that the Doctrine of the Church of Rome,
is not the same with that of the Fathers, and that there has bin made an
Alteration, for the Principles of this are marked out, and their Consequence
does plainly appear, that exact perspicuity which ought ever to accompany
Arguments is in the Book to which we refer the Reader; Mr. Arnaud need not
conclude then, Lib. 1. C. 4. P. 30.
that there are Difficulties in the Doctrine of the Eucharist, for we may
easily conclude from what I said, that the Doctrine of the Ancient Church has
not bin the same with that which is taught at this Day by the Church of Rome.
His Mistake lies in that he has only read these kind of Abridgments, which
allways refer to another work, in supposing that the Principles they mark out
are clearly established in that Book, to which they refer, and from whence they
draw their Conclusion. And this is all that can be desired in this matter, but
yet this is a way of concluding; and concluding too quite another thing than
what Mr. Arnaud imagined, viz. That there are Difficulties in the Eucharist. I
confess that to determine his Judgment, we must not regulate our selves only by
this Conclusion, we must go to the Spring, and see whether what is supposed
issues thence; but it does not thence follow, that the Abridgment is in fault,
nor that it should be esteemed as a Heap of Difficulties; and indeed it would
not be an Abridgment, if in effect it did not abridge some other work, wherein
the Matter is handled at large.

A Heap of Difficulties, to speak properly, is a Collection of several
Objections which are formed against a Doctrine, without examining either the
Grounds on which this Doctrine is established, nor the Proofs or Arguments by
which it is recommended, nor the Answers which may be made against these
Objections, and in short, without supposing any other work wherein all these
things are handled. It is certain that in a Controversy, this manner of
proceeding is confused and captious, and ought not to make any Impression on a
rational Mind. But it belongs to Mr. Arnaud, to say whether the Treatise of the
Perpetuity is not of this Kind; for as to my part, I find that it has all the
Characters of it. For being a Collection of Objections against our Belief,
touching the Change which has happened concerning the Eucharist, of moral
Impossibilities heaped up one upon another, without any examination of the
Grounds or Proofs of our Belief, nor of the Answers which may be made
concerning these Impossibilities, and without any Supposition of another Work.
For to tell us, as Mr. Arnaud does, that he sends us back to all the Catholic
Books, this methinks, seems to be a kind of shifting and evading, and is not
sufficient to protect the Treatise of the Perpetuity, from that just Title I
have given it of a Heap of Difficulties. Now if this Author means all the
Books written by Catholics, when shall I be able to judge of them? This will
be perhaps when I have run through above two hundred Volums. And if I should say
on the other side, that my Abridgment after the same manner, supposes all the
Protestant Books, and I send all Persons to them; Our Readers without Question
would be very well informed and edifyed.

BUT says Mr. Arnaud, People do not use to call Matters which are perfectly
handled, a Heap of Difficulties, but those things which are hard to be Lib. 1.
C. 4. P. 31.
judged of, whereas the Author of the Perpetuity has handled whatsoever
relates to his Design in an orderly length. I answer first that this Author
very imperfectly handles what respects his Design in General, which is to make
us forsake our Belief, concerning the Church of Rome's changing the Primitive
Doctrine: And secondly that he yet more imperfectly handles what respects his
Design in particular, which is to show the Impossibility of a Change; for he
does not consider of any Answer which may be given his Arguments: so that to
speak truly, it is nothing else but a Heap of Difficulties. It can bear no
other Title until such time as shall be published the two Volums in Folio,
which Mr. Arnaud mentions to us. We will receive them whenever he will please
to give 'em us; but we shall not be in haste to make that Confession, to which
the Author of the Perpetuity has promised to oblige us, till we have seen
them; and in the mean time, because Mr. Arnaud will have it so, we will have
once more the Pleasure, or rather the Pain of examining (although it be needless)
the Author of the Perpetuity's Proofs. I say because Mr. Arnaud would have it
so, and not because the reason of the thing requires it; for what he alleges
concerning the Passages of my Book, that they contain but an indirect Answer to
the Author of the Perpetuity' s Lib. 1. C. 3. P. 24.
Argument, and therefore it is necessary immediately to examine what I have
answered directly. This I say is not a sufficient Cause, we ought to see rather
which of us two is first found in the Possession of this Argument, that is to
say, which of us has bin first answered indirectly, and it will appear without
doubt that it has bin my self, seeing the Author of the Perpetuity has
assaulted Mr. Aubertin's Book, and that he has assaulted it indirectly. Whence
it follows that he ought at least to have begun by the Examination of our
Proofs.

CHAP. V.
The pretended Advantages of Mr. Arnaud attributes to the Treatise of the
Perpetuity Examined.

ALTHOUGH the Conclsion which I have drawn from Mr. Arnaud's Confession, in the
preceding Chapter, is clearly enough established, yet do I not think he will be
satisfied, till I have examined what he says in the fifth and sixth Chapters
of his first Book. He will tell us without doubt, that it does not hence follow
we should defer the rendering our selves up to the Arguments in the Perpetuity,
although I have still the liberty of opposing against them our Proofs of Fact, and
that this he has clearly showed in these two Chapters I last mentioned. Let us
then see what he says in them; and judge of them without Partiality.

Mr. Arnaud imediately meets with a Difficulty, For I much marvel, says he,
Mr. Claude has not observed when a point of Doctrine, as this in Question, Lib.
1. C. 5. P. 32.
is established on one side by considerable Proofs, and on the other by Proofs
which are believed to be valid, that we must if we intend to judge aright,
compare these contrary Proofs together, and prefer the strongest before the
other; from whence we may conclude, that it will always be necessary to come to
that which the Author of the Perpetuity will not yield to, which is, to examine
our Proofs of Fact; For to solve this Difficulty, he supposes; first, that
they who read the Treatise of the Perpetuity, have their Sentiments already
wholly formed on the Proofs of Fact, produced by Mr Aubertin and other
Ministers; but that these Sentiments are not Uniform, because some judge of
them from what they are in themselves, others by what they have heard of them,
and by external Circumstances, which give them to understand what they ought to
believe concerning them. That some do esteem them, others on the contrary
slight them, and others again are in a Disposition of Indifferency, He
afterward represents us with a Calvinist or Religionary, (for so is he pleased
to call us) who being dissatisfied with the Scripture and Fathers, by reason of
the uncertainty wherein he finds himself, by harkning to different Voices,
which call to him from all sides; and moreover less satisfied with the Divines
of either Party, who cannot content him in the Solutions which they give to the
Passages of their Adversaries; he thereupon turns himself toward the
Treatise of the Perpetuity, which shows him, that the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation and the real Presence, have bin received by the Greek and
Latin Churches, and in all other Societies, which are equally Enemies both to
the Latins and Greeks, together with the Impossibilities which are in this
insensible Change, which the Ministers have invented; whereupon this Calvinist
determines, in forsaking all these Doubts, to believe the same which is
believed through out all the Earth, seeing the whole World would never believe it,
if it had not derived this Faith from the Channel of Tradition. And for as much
as this Contrivance could not be well ended, unless I were brought in as a
Party, he therefore introduces me, with my Aubertin in my hand opposing this
Resolution. But my Mouth is imediately stopped, being told, that these Proofs are
Unsatisfactory, and thus am I sent away with my Rhetoric and Enthusiasmes.

BUT this being no more than a Supposition, it must be established. And for
this Effect, Mr. Arnaud calls to his Assistance several learned Divines from
Germany, Switzerland, France, and Holland, by whose Suffrage he concludes, that
the Fathers are rather against us than for us, in what concerns the Eucharist,
or that at least, the Proofs taken from Passages out of their Writings are very
uncertain. And so here is already the understanding People among us convinced,
and as for others that are not able to make a Judgment themselves, they must
have recourse to Persons of greater Knowledge, by which means both the one, and
the other, are obliged to render themselves up to that Evidence which appears
in the Treatise of the Perpetuity, because our Proofs of Fact cannot be
accounted by them, but as unevident and uncertain* and moreover this Treatise
being fitted to all Capacities, and grounded on the Light of common Sense, it
may be understood by all in general. This is the Summary of the fifth Chapter.

IN the sixth Chapter, he extends his Pretention a great way farther, for
having gained the Learned and Unlearned to his side, he will not suffer even
those who are obstinate amongst us to escape his Hands, It not Lib. 1. C. 6. P.
53.
being necessary for this, says he, to enter into an Examination of all those
Passages, without which Mr. Claude would make us believe that the Treatise of
the Perpetuity can prove nothing. But lest this Pretention should at first
amaze People, observe after what sort he declares his meaning. He says then,
that our Proofs of Fact appearing to us evident on one hand, and the Proofs of
the Treatise of the Perpetuity on the other; these two contrary Evidences
necessarily cause a suspension of our Judgments, and hinder us from
determining, and throw us upon Doubts and Uncertainties. And thus far tends the
Treatise of the Perpetuity, which leading us hither, Mr. Arnaud takes us in
hand and tells us, we cannot any longer refuse to leave our Sect, and pass over
to the Catholic Religion, first because the Church of Rome is the Maternal,
Original, Successive, and Catholic Society, from which we must never make
aschisme. Secondly, because we must ever be fully convinced of this Churches
Errors, before we separate from it, and at the same time have a full certainty
of the Purity of that Society we are of, to keep in it. Thirdly, because the
Church is in Possession of the Ministry, of the ordinary Vocation, and
Authority, and that the Ministers who have not been above a hundred years
standing, have none of these things. Fourthly, because that People of ordinary
Capacities amongst us, being obliged to yield themselves to the Proofs of the
Perpetuity, and consequently to return to the Church of Rome, they ought to
serve for Examples to the Judicious, it being impossible for us all not to
return to this Society, to which the greatest part of Men must necessarily
belong. Lastly he confesses, that all these Arguments suppose the Proofs of
the Treatise are clear and substantial, and maintains that be may reasonably
make this Supposition, to convince me I have no other way left to defend my
self, than by showing these Proofs of the Treatise are Invalid, and so by
consequence I ought not to beat the Air as I have done, by declaming against
the Author of the Perpetuity's Method.

AND thus have I Epitomized these two mighty Chapters, in which Mr. Arnaud has
taken care to illustrate the glorious Designs of the Author of the Perpetuity,
and this perhaps being one of the most important Points in his whole Work, he
has therefore spent thereupon the greatest part of his Wit and Eloquence. Yet
howsoever it comes to pass I know not, we are so different in our
Apprehensions, that having beheld the explication of all this curious Project,
I have found nothing at all therein of Reason, nor coherence of Parts, neither
in his Suppositions nor Consequences, and this I shall briefly and clearly
manifest.

FIRST, methinks that Mr. Arnaud imposes on the World, in proposing as it were
from us, a Difficulty, which weakens our Cause, although it does not concern us.
For I do not pretend that one of our Communion, into whose Hands shall be put
the Treatise of the Perpetuity, and who is able to read it, is absolutely
obliged, before he forms his Judgment thereupon, to make a particular
Comparison of our Proofs, with those of that Treatise; I maintain that he may
reject these last, by the general Consideration alone which he may make,
without entering into the Examination of each Particular, because that in this
general View he will find sufficient Grounds for rejecting them, viz. That they
amount to no more but bare Probability, nor cannot equal our Proofs of Fact in
Clearness and Solidity, which are grounded on common Sense. Whence it follows
that the Proofs of this Treatise ought not to be admitted, and that if we take
the trouble to examine them, it is out of Condescension, not Necessity.

IN the second place Mr. Arnaud has not exactly reckoned up the several ranks
of Men, who may profitably read the Treatise of the Perpetuity. For the
greatest part of them in our Communion, judging this Perusal needless, will not
mind it, for they will neither have Leisure nor Curiosity enough for this; the
Title alone will disgust them without proceeding any farther. But then he will
say that these are unjust and obstinate Persons. We believe it a Point of
Rashness to judge of a piece of Ground before we have Lib. 1. C. 6. P. 26.
heard the Owners Experience of it; would it not then be a more inexcusable
Rashness to pretend to judge of a Difference which respects our Salvation, by
Arguments offered only on one side, in suffering our selves to be transported
by the first Impressions? The least which ought to be done by them, who pretend
to judge of Differences in Religion; is to hear both Parties, and weigh their
Reasons. I answer, that these Persons I mentioned, will act very Justly and
Reasonably in doing what I said. For there being two Questions, the one
touching what we ought to believe concerning the Eucharist, and the other
touching what has bin believed by the Primitive Church. The first Question
being once dispatched, we need not trouble our selves about the second. Now as
concerning the Persons in our Communion, the first Question is solved to them
by the Word of God. For this is the Fountain and Rule of our Faith. This is it
which judges us all, and had the Author of the Perpetuity guided his
Reasonings by this Principle, there is not one of us but would gladly hearken
to him; but instead of this, he immediately tells us of nothing but the Consent
of all Ages, and persuades himself, that henceforward the Ministers will be no
more hearkened to, when they say in general, that we must only apply our selves
to the Word of God.

THIS Question touching the Consent of all Ages, may be decided three ways;
First, by the Rules of Christian Charity; Secondly, by the Confidence we ought
to have in our Saviors Promises, and cares of his Providence; Thirdly, by an
exact Knowledge of the History of all Ages. Now this last means being above the
Capacity of most People, is needless. It is enough to a well meaning Person,
that he sees in Scripture what he ought to believe, touching the Eucharist, and
thereupon charitably presumes, that the Fathers have not deviated from this
Faith into Capital Errors. It suffices him to believe that our Savior's
Promises to the Church, that he would never forsake it, have had their
accomplishment, and whatsoever Clouds have fallen on the Ministration of it, by
the mixture of men's Devices with Gods everlasting Truths, yet has our Savior
taken care to preserve the Faithful, and execute the Decree of his Election. So
that such a one has no need to perplex himself with History, nor with reading
over of three or four hundred Volums, which will not yield him the least
Satisfaction, much less need he entangle himself in the Author of the
Perpetuity's Method, which is a fourth way the World has yet never been
acquainted with. When such a Person hears of Mr. Aubertin's Book, and the
account he gives of the Change which has happened, I doubt not but he is glad to
hear that even by this way, which is only proper to the Learned, the Truth he
believes has bin illustrated, neither do I doubt but he believes with a humane
Faith, what is told him concerning it; but we must not imagine that his Belief
touching the Eucharist has changed its Foundation, and left its Relyance on
the Word of God, for it remains still where it was; so that when he should be
questioned concerning the solidity of Mr. Aubertin's Proofs, or that of any
other Minister, relating to this Subject, he will not be troubled about it, nor
farther concern himself in these Debates, for he knows his Incapacity. He will
content himself with a favorable Opinion of the Fathers, and with his
Confidence in God, leaving these Debates to those that have Skill to manage
them.

NOW as to such as contemn Mr. Aubertins Book, I know none in our Communion of
that number, and perhaps in the Church of Rome, there will be found as few of
that Mind, if we except Mr. Arnaud and his Friends, who have given their
Judgments about it, after a very slighting and peremptory manner. But I shall
not take any farther Notice of this here, but continue my Observations. I do
affirm then, I never yet had the Luck to meet with this wretched Calvinist whom
he has described in such pitiful Strains. I was never yet told, That the
Scripture fills the Mind with Doubts, Lib. 1. C. ^. P. 34.
which it does not resolve, and that such a Person finds the Writings of the
Fathers Obscure, and that the Divines of either Party could not satisfy him,
and there was nothing but the Arguments of the Perpetuity which could win his
Heart. Is not this such a Model of Calvinism as Mr. Arnaud desires, drawn from
an Idea of his own Conceiving, and offered to them who would henceforward be of
the number of its Proselytes. But what likelihood is there that any man to
become Mr. Arnaud, or the Author of the Perpetuity's Proselyte, would Sacrifice
the Scriptures, Fathers, and Divines of both parties to them. What Probability
I say is there that their Pretention should so far prevail upon any man?
Howsoever it be, it is an idle Fancy to imagine that a Person who is really of
our Communion can fall into this Condition, and thereupon take up a Resolution
of changing his Belief; and the Proof which Mr. Arnaud gives us is entirely
faulty, for it can at farthest but conclude an Uncertainty, touching the
Fathers, but not at all as it relates to the Word of God, from which a good man
will never depart, even when he shall fall into Doubts touching the Opinions of
the Fathers.

BUT let us see who these Persons are, who are represented to us floating on
Doubts and Scruples. They are two sorts of Person, the most knowing Ministers
on one hand, and all the unlearned Calvinists on the other. It is Lib. 1. C. 5.
P. 36.
most False, says Mr. Arnaud, that the most able Ministers are persuaded the
Fathers are manifestly for them. To which he adds, that all Protestants of
mean Capacities, who are not able to make this Search, are rash in believing
it, and cannot be persuaded of it but by a fond Humor. The former of these
Points is grounded on slight Proofs. Observe here the first of them. Lewis
Lavater relates that Oecolampadius began to doubt of the Truth of
Transubstantiation and the Real Presence, in reading St. Austins Works; that he
was strengthened in his Doubtings by reading of the Evangelists; that he
immediately rejects his first Thoughts, by considering these Doctrines were
generally entertained; yet being willing to overcome this weakness of Mind, he
applied himself to the reading of the Fathers; but could not be fully satisfied
by them, because he oftentimes met in their Writings, with the Expressions of
the Body and Blood of Christ in the Sacrament. Whereupon at length rejecting
the Authority of men, he wholly applied himself to the Word of God, and then
the Truth appeared more clearly unto him. This Testimony concludes nothing
unless it be this, that it is not easy for a man that has imbibed the
Principles of the Romish Church from his Infancy, to discover immediately the
Truth, seeing that Oecolampadius who perceived the first Beams of it shining in
St. Austins Works, and afterward received deeper Impressions by reading of the
Holy Scriptures, was puzzled by reading the Fathers, till such time as he wholly
applied himself to the studying of the Word of God, by which he was put out of
Doubt, and afterward came more easily to the Knowledge of the real Doctrine of
the Fathers, whose Writings from that time he vehemently urged against all
opposers of the Truth. This shows us the strength of Prejudice, and how
necessary it is for the Understanding of the Fathers, to become first well
exercised in the Holy Scriptures.

AS to the Centuriators of Magdebourg, it is known they held the Ausbouyg
Confession, and taught the Doctrine of the Real Presence, and consequently are
not competent Judges in this Controversy. For they have bin greatly concerned
to have the Fathers on their side, some of them choosing rather to impose the
Sense of Transubstanciation on the indefinite general Expressions, which import
that the Bread is made the Body of Jesus Christ, or that it is changed into the
Body of Jesus Christ, rather than to understand them in a mystical Sense, which
would overthrow their Doctrine. Howsoever it be, they are not of the number of
our Ministers, and Mr. Arnaud ought not to stray thus beyond the Bounds of this
Controversy.

THAT Passage of Scaligers which he urges against us, is taken out of one of
the most impertinent Books as ever was written, and Mr. Arnaud has more
Leisure than he pretends, seeing he sets himself upon inquiring after such kind
of Proofs. This Book being a Collection of what Scaliger is pretended to have
discoursed in a familiar Colloquy, which is stuffed with all manners of
Fooleries, and Absurdities. For the School Boys, from whose Memoirs these
Exercitations were committed to the Press, have inserted whatsoever came into
their Heads, after a childish and inconsiderate manner, which shows us they had
not yet arrived to years of Discretion. Moreover Mr. Arnaud informs us himself
that one of these Youths who helped to make this Rhapsody, turned Roman
Catholic, which might well transport him by a Zeal common to young Converts,
to make his Master speak a word or two in favor of Transubstantiation, Mr.
Arnaud seems moreover to speak of Ministers, but it is known by every one that
Scaliger was none.

WITEMBOGARD was one of the chief of the Arminian Party, interessed against the
French Ministers, neither is he a Witness to be fully believed in what he tells
us concerning Casaubon; yet if what Spondanus has written of Casaubon; be true,
we must acknowledge that this Person, who although otherwise was extraordinarily
learned, did not excel in Judgment. He was a man, says he, of a fickle Mind,
and ever wavering in matters of Religion, Annals Eccl. ad An. 1600, art. 12.
he was willing to please both Parties, and by that means pleased neither. It
is very likely that near Familiarity he had with Cardinal Perron, drew him into
this ambiguos Humor, which ought not to be made use of against us, much less
to be proposed as an Example for the regulating of our Conduct. And besides he
may more justly be said to be Critic than a Minister.

I shall not here trouble my self with what is alleged concerning Socinus and
his Followers; for there is a great deal of Passion and Injustice showed, in
Confronting them with us, seeing the Point here in Question is what our most
knowing Ministers hold about this matter; I confess the Socinians reject
Transubstantiation and the Real Presence, but it is moreover so much their
interest to decry the Doctrine of the Fathers, that it is no marvel if they
speak so unjustly of them. They have built on the ancient Heresies of Photinus,
Macedonius, and Pelagius, and seeing themselves opposed by Councils, and by the
writings of the Fathers, this has moved them not only to have no respect for
them; but likewise to lay to their charge things which they never believed; to
the end they might render them odious, and mar their Credit. So that Mr.
Arnaud, imposes on us (when he tells us) that the Socinians have no interest in
acknowledging that the Writings of the Lib. 1. C. 5. Page 41.
Fathers favor the Catholics, and that it would have bin more to their
Advantage to deny this. The contrary of which is apparent.

WHEN he should produce some of our Ministers who doubted whether the Writings
of the Fathers favor us in the point of the Eucharist, or who even believed
they were against us, should this appear so strange to us? It is not an easy
matter for a man to disentangle himself out of all the corrupt passages which
are fasly attributed to the Fathers, and set forth under their Names, and from
all the Artifices made use of to disguise their Doctrines. I have written a
Chapter on purpose in my Answer to Father Noiiet, wherein I produce several
Examples of this, which the Readers may peruse at their Leisure. Even Casaubon
himself whom I now mentioned, is one of them who has fallen into this Snare,
for he has taken two preparatory Prayers for the Mass, to be the true and
undoubted Works of St. Ambrose, although that in effect, they are composed by
Anselme Bishop of Canterbury. Now if any Person has bin deceived like Casaubon,
and doubted whither the Fathers were for us, must this be used as a Proof
against us, ought such a ones Mistakes to be the Rule of our Thoghts, this
certainly is contrary to reason.

BUT for one Minister or two whom Mr. Arnaud can bring against us, we can
produce a great number who have not hesitated in this matter. Calvin himself,
who lived in a time when these Fopperies were scarely discovered, yet asserts
that the Fathers have retained the pious and orthodox Sense of this Mystery,
and affirms, that not having found them at all to derogate Inst. Lib. 4. C. 18.
from the only Sacrifice of Jesus Christ, he could not therefore consent to the
charging of them with Impiety, although he does not think them wholly excusable in
the form of the Action. To Calvin we may add Cook (who was Tutour to King
Edward of England, and supposed to be Author of a Book intit'led Diallacticon;)
Thomas Crammer Archbishop of Canterbury; Bp. Jewel, Peter Martyr; the Author
of the Orthodox Treatise; Andrew Volan, the Divines of the University of
Heydelberg; Du Moulin, Chamier, Rivet, Faucheur, Mestresat, and Blondel; not to
mention Du Plessis, and Mr. De Saumaise, nor several others who have written on
this Subject, by the Testimony of the Fathers; which shows with how great
precipitation Mr. Arnaud has asserted: that it is most false, the most knowing
Ministers are persuaded the Fathers are manifestly for them, and the Solutions
they give their Passages are good and Solid.

WHAT he mentions concerning Mr. Daille, is taken in a contrary Sense; for he
never designed to deny the Advantage we have in the Fathers touching the
Eucharist, nor leave it to be questioned. His Book against Mr. Adam, and
Cottiby is an authentic Proof of this, and being as yet through Gods Grace, in a
Capacity to declare his own Thoughts, there needs no more but to ask his
opinion touching this Point, and see what Answer he will make. There will
appear no Difference betwixt his Opinion and mine, provided his Words are
understood as he meant them.

Mr. Daille sais, it is a hard matter to gather from the Writings of the
Fathers, De usu Pat. C. 2
their Opinions touching those Articles in Religion, about which we differ,
because the matters they treat of are for the most part very remote. His
meaning is that it is a hard matter to find a formal and express Declaration of
their Sense in these matters; which should be declared in such Terms as these,
I deny, or affirm, I approve, or condemn, I reject, or receive; and the Reason
he alleages does sufficiently confirm this: for he says, That the Matters they
treat of are remote from our Controversies, and that they thought not of us
when they wrote.

MY Sense differs not from his, and therefore I shall not fear to say with Ibid.
him, that they that expect to find the Belief of the Fathers clearly set down
in their Writings, are generally mistaken, even as he who thinks to meet with
the Affections and Desires of his Mind amongst the sound of Bells. And indeed,
if we expect to find a positive and precise Rejection of the Romish Doctrine in
the Writings of the Fathers, like unto that which is at this day amongst us, we
shall be much mistaken, and the Reason is apparent, in as much as the Doctrine
of the Church of Rome being not extant in the time of the Fathers, they have
not expressly condemned it, for men are not wont to condemn Opinions before they
appear. Yet does not this hinder but that the Fathers are against
Transubstantiation, by way of Negation, that is to say by their Silence,
because they never inserted it amongst the Articles of their Faith, they never
propounded it to their Hearers, nor unfolded the Mysteries of it, nor defended
its Consequences, as does the Church of Rome, as they had without question
done, had they believed it. And this is what I say; and Mr. Daille dos not
gainsay it; but on the contrary a few lines after what Mr. Arnaud has recited,
he lays down this general Proposition: That the silence of the Fathers on the
controverted Points which they so much value, is of some weight, and amounts
perhaps to a clear Proof; but surely not in favor of them Ibid.
who hold the Affirmative. So far Mr. Daille and I speak precisely the same
language. But I affirm likewise, that besides the silence of the Fathers there
is to be found several things in their Writings; inconsistent with the Belief
of Transubstantiation, and the Real Presence, and I hold this Proof does
evidently conclude they did not believe these Doctrines; Mr. Daille speaking in
general of this Order of Proofs, says, he freely confesses that every wise
man's Faith is as a Body, whose parts have a dependence on each other. So that
we Ibid.
may know by the things he expresses, what he thinks of those which he
expresses not, whether he does believe them or not, it being unlikely he would
admit what does evidently oppose his Opinions, or reject their necessary
Consequences, to which he adds, that he does acknowledge that this way of
handling the Writings of the Fathers would be most profitable, and more proper
to dive into their bottom, than any other, provided we suppose two things, the
one, that the Belief of the ancient Doctors is all of a Piece, and does no way
contradict it self, and the other, that he who would judge after this manner,
must have a piercing Wit, a good Memory, and a Judgment free from Prejudice.

AS to the first of these Suppositions, he says, that it is not absolutely out
of doubt; and as to the other, that all these Qualities do seldom meet in one
man. What he says is true, in this general Consideration. But this does not
hinder me from adding, that in the particular case of Transubstantiation, and
the Real Presence, the first supposition is out of doubt; and the second is not
absolutely necessary. To make this apparent, we need but consider, on one hand
the rank these Doctrines hold in a Church which believes them, and on the
other, the number and nature of those things which oppose them in the Writings
of the ancient Fathers. The Example of the Church of Rome shows us, that they
that believe them, respect them as inviolable Mysteries which must not be
called in question, and such as are of greatest Importance in Religion, and
which must be defended against the Contradiction of Sense and Reason, and for
which we ought to be armed with the greatest Caution; as being in short,
Mysteries which are daily represented us, in their Celebration and
Participation of them, which should be distinctly known by all the Faithful,
and clearly and plainly taught the People, to the end every one may know that
what he receives is the proper Substance of his Savior, and give him the
Worship due to a Creator. Whence it follows, that if the ancient Church
believed these things, it has believed them in this Degree, and that it is not
possible but the Fathers in general would take such care as not to maintain
things which overthrow them, or reject others which are the necessary
Consequences of them. It is not possible I say, that they should all of 'em be
thus inconsiderate as to assert several things which may justly scandalize
their Followers and that in so ticklish and well known a Point, as is that of
the Substance of Jesus Christ, which they every day received. On the other
hand, if we consider the Nature and Number of things to be met with in the
Writings of the Fathers, contrary to Transubstantiation and the Real Presence,
we shall observe they are contrary to them by a primary, immediate and evident
contrariety, for which there is no need of a sharp Wit, nor great Memory, but a
sound understanding, and disinteressed Judgment: we shall find that these
things are in great Number, and as well prevail over a man's Mind by their
Multitude, as their Quality. And this Mr. Daille has not denied, so that as I
do not thwart his Rule, so he does not oppose my Exception, therefore there is
no Contradiction betwixt us.

BUT Mr. Arnaud will reply, Mr. Daille does oppose our Exception, for he
applies his Rule to the Subject of the Eucharist, acknowledging that as there
are Passages in the Fathers Writings, which seem to be inexplicable, in C. 1.
the Church of Romes Sense, so there are likewise some which can in no wise
admit the Sense of the Protestants, as them which expressly import that the
Bread changes its Nature, that by the Almighty Power of God it becomes the
Flesh of the Word: and such like. If Cardinal Perron, says he, and other
sublime Wits on both sides, protest they find no Difficulty, we must acknowledge
they said it only out of a Bravadoe, turning the best side outward, or else
that the rest of the World are very dim sighted to perceive nothing but
Darkness, where these People behold nothing but Light. And elsewhere, taking
notice of some Passages (which seem to deny the Consubstantiality of the Son,
determined in the Council of Nice,) which are to be met with in the Writings of
the Fathers who preceded that Council. Let the Fathers, adds he, affirm or
deny that the Eucharist is really the Body of Christ, they will not for all
this contradict thy Opinion, whosoever thou art, whether Romanist or
Protestant, more strongly than the Fathers of Antioch did in appearance
contradict them of Nice. To which we may now add, that as the Arians had no
reason to draw to their Opinion, and allege, as decisive parts of their
Question, such transient Discourses as were innocently meant by the ancient
Fathers, without any Design of treating on this: so likewise we have no cause,
neither thou I say nor I, to allege as Sentences pronounced in our case, which
has bin stated but of late, the sayings of the Fathers, which were written by
them on other matters, several Ages before our Controversies began, concerning
which they have expressed themselves very differently and obscurely, and even
sometimes in appearance contradictorily. Having shown afterward that the
Fathers designed to be obscure in their Discourses concerning the Eucharist, to
hide this Mystery from the Catecumenists.

SEEING then, says he, that in this and other Matters, they designed to
conceal their Thoughts, we must not therefore wonder, if their Expressions have
bin oftentimes obscure, and that which commonly is an effect of Obscurity, if
they seem sometime to differ and contradict one another.

I answer that this being well understood, does not at all obstruct my
Exception, nor what I said in my Answer to the Perpetuity. Mr. Daille speaks of
the particular Judgment which we may make of some Passages of the Fathers
produced by both Parties; and I speak of the general Judgment which ought to be
made on the whole Body of our Proofs, and Difficulties brought against them;
and as to what Mr. Arnaud alleges concerning my Answer, wherein I speak
touching the Sense which People Assisted by the light of Answer to the
Perpetuity P. 192.
Scripture, strength of Reason, and plain Instructions of their Ministers, may
give to the mystical Expressions, which were then in use. These are things
wholly different. I do not deny but that there are several difficult Places in
the Writings of the Fathers. Some of which Mr. Daille has taken Notice of. He
needed not be brought in question for this, seeing I plainly delivered my Mind
touching this matter, in the beginning of my Answer. I affirm that the way of
seeking the Truth touching the Eucharist, by the Doctrine Answer to the
Prpetuity P. 34.
of the Fathers, is in it self a way which is indirect, preposterous, and very
tedious, wherein we have great cause to fear Mistakes and Wanderings. These are
my Words, and Mr. Daille has said no more, and I do still affirm, that if a man
examines these Passages apart, and protests he finds no obscurity in them, we
cannot but take these his Protestations for Bravadoes. But this does not hinder
but that the general Judgment we ought to make of the Belief of the Fathers
touching the Eucharist, and which resulteth from an exact consideration of the
Proofs relating both to one side and the other, is undoubtedly on our side,
whether these particular Passages, which seem at first to be difficult, are
illustrated by others which show the real Sense of them, or when their
Difficulty should remain, it is overcome by the Number and Evidence of the
contrary Proofs. The Considerations which Mr. Daille makes on these difficult
Places, do in themselves contribute to the Establishment of the certitude of
this general Judgment, which I mentioned: for they discover to us the Causes of
this Obscurity, they give us the like Examples in other Matters, and by this
means lessen the Offense which may be taken at them, and satisfy a man's Mind.

BUT he says, that neither the Romanists, nor the Protestants have any reason
Ibid.
to allege as Sentences pronounced on our Differences which arose but of la^e,
the Discourses of the ancient Fathers, written by them upon other matters,
several years before. What he says is true, for we should be to blame, should
we take them for declaratory Sentences. But this hinders not but we may still
conclude, they held not Transubstantiation, and the Real Presence, because that
if they had held these Doctrines, they would not have expressed themselves as
they do. Neither does this deprive us of the Liberty of proceeding by way of
Negation, which is to conclude by their Silence in these Doctrines, that they
held them ^ot. Neither does this moreover hinder, but that after a due
Consideration of all these affirmative and negative Proofs, we may make a
certain and decisive Judgment on the Question touching the Doctrine of the
ancient Church in our own Favor. So that Mr. Arnaud has spent his time to no
purpose, when he undertook to show this pretended Contrariety, which he affirms
to be between Mr. Daille and me.

But Mr. Daille' s Design, says he, is to show in general, that we must not
take the Fathers for Judges of Controversies, and especially in that of the
Eucharist. Lib. 3. C. 5. P. 47.
I acknowledge it, because these Difficulties he mentions, do show this way is
long and troublesome; and that we meet in it such Entanglements as are hardly to
be surmounted, and therefore this is not a proper means for all sorts of
Persons, but only for those that have time and all other necessary helps. This
I do not deny, but on the contrary do ever affirm, that the holy Scripture is
the only certain Rule, and our having recourse to the Fathers is but by way of
Condescension. I say farther that if they to whom this way does properly
belong, would proceed in it with that Sincerity and Diligence which is
necessary, they would easily be able by the Guidance of common Sense, to make
this Evident and certain Judgment; That the ancient Church believed not what
the Church of Rome does at this present: and this Mr. Daille will acknowledge as
well as I.

IF I have insisted too long on this Subject it is because I believed I ought to
reprehend Mr. Arnaud for his Injustice toward two Persons whom he would fain
set at Variance, by making of them contradict one another. But return we to the
rest of our Observations.

CHAP. VI.
A farther Examination of the pretended Advantages which Mr. Arnaud attributes
to the Treatise of the Perpetuity.

THE Subject of my fourth Observation is taken from what Mr. Arnaud assures us,
viz. that all that are of Mr. Daille' s Mind (that Lib. 1. C. 5. P. 47.
is to say, who are persuaded they must not decide the Question touching the
Eucharist, by the Writings of the Fathers, (seeing they are so obscure and
intricate, that it is a hard matter to make them agree,) cannot refuse to
render themselves up to the Proofs of the Perpetuity, in case they judge them
evident; whence he concludes that all-knowing Persons who are sincere, on the
one hand, and on the other, all they who cannot judge by themselves, will
acquiecse in these Proofs. This Pretension is as ill grounded as the former.
For there being, as I already said, two Questions before us, the one, touching
what we are to believe concerning the Eucharist, and the other concerning what
has bin believed by the ancient Church, the first of these, which is that of
Right, respects in general all them of our Communion; but the second, for as
much as it may be decided by History, only respects them amongst us, who have
sufficient Leisure and Curiosity to inform themselves. So that the Prolixity,
Difficulty, and intricacy which we meet with in the Writings of the Fathers, do
sufficiently evidence that their Books are very improper for the Decision of
the first of these Questions, whereon depends that of our Controversies, seeing
these Difficulties will be insuperable to the greatest part amongst us; although
they will not render them unfit to decide the second, because they are not
insuperable to them who would apply themselves thereunto as they ought, to
satisfy their Curiosity, neither will they hinder them in short from making a
most certain Judgment in our Favor. If then the Treatise of the Perpetuity be
only offered to them to whom the first Question belongs, they will answer they
have no need of it, being satisfied with the Word of God; and if they be
demanded what they believe touching the ancient Church, they will answer, that
they judge of it according to the Rules of Christian Charity, and our Saviors
Promises. But if we proeeed farther, and suppose it be enquired of them, how it
has come to pass that the Church of Rome has altered the ancient Doctrine; they
will answer, their Salvation depends not on this Knowledge, but that it must
needs be, it has made an Alteration; seeing it believes at this day what it
ought not to believe, and which without doubt has not bin believed heretofore,
as they judge out of Charity to the Ancients. Should they be urged to tell how
this has happened, they will answer again, this is not an account wherein their
Salvation is concerned, and that this Question ought to be proposed to those
Persons who know it, and in all this they will have Reason. If this Treatise be
offered to those of the second Rank, that is to say to them who are learned,
and have had the Curiosity of informing themselves, and to whom properly the
second Question belongs; they will likewise answer, they have no need of this
Method, having already informed themselves by a natural and direct way, which
is of more value than all these Conjectures, or if they have not done it, they
will do it, being not so silly as to shut their Eyes, and reject the Evidence
of their Senses, to betake themselves to a Method wherein there can be nothing
but Confusion to be expected, and these last will have Reason too.

BUT says Mr. Arnaud, we must suppose that the Proofs of the Treatise are
evident, for they cannot be supposed false, till such time as they are
examined. You ought then to have begun here, wherefore your Exceptions signify
nothing. I answer that these Suppositions are not juster than his Arguments.
For if these curious Persons whom I mentioned, have already taken the Pains
they ought, whereby to ascertain themselves in the Proofs of Fact, they will be
prepared to judge, that the Arguments of the Treatise are false and captious,
because that moral Impossibilities, such as these are, and in such a Subject as
this, cannot subsist against Proofs of Fact, which are immediate, certain, and
evident as ours are. If they have not yet taken this Pains, I say that without
examining whether the Proofs of the Treatise be good or bad, they will only
mind the Method, and by comparing it with that of Discussion, if they are men
of Reason, they will prefer this last before the other, because that it is in
effect most natural in it self, and more certain in its Proofs.

WHAT shall we do then with the Treatise of the Perpetuity, which has made such
a Noise in the World? Will it be of no use? There are a crew of People in the
World, who are curious and idle both together, who are willing to know the
Opinions of former Ages on these famous Articles, about which Europe is at this
day divided; but yet will be at no Pains for this, because Labor is
distasteful to them, and they have other things to do. It is then for such
Persons as these, this Treatise has bin written. For it courteth them, and
presents it self to 'em, whether at Ease or in Business; it only desires them
to spend two Hours on its Reading, whereby to decide a Point of this
Importance. The Style of it is curious and enticing, and its Expressions
emphatical, it wins on the Mind, and leads it insensibly where it pleases.
All this flatters men's Curiosity and Lazyness both together. But if this sort
of People loved their Salvation, as we may suppose they ought, we should then
have but two or three things to say to them. First, that they beware of these
short Methods, which favor at the same time two Inclinations, which seldom
agree, I mean Idleness and Curiosity. For we cannot arrive at any certainty in
these kind of Questions, if we do not earnestly apply our selves to them, for
Labor and Knowledge do always go together, and it commonly happens that they
who thus promise us such great Knowledge, without any trouble, do cheat us two
ways, for they lead us into tedious Prolixities, and dreadful Difficulties, and
at last having tired us, they leave us as wise as we were at first.

AND this is exactly the case of the Treatise of the Perpetuity, if we rightly
consider it; for it promises us immediately, nothing but Perspicuity,
Facilities, and Convictions, it being made up of undeniable Truths. Yet let a
man take but the Pains to examine only his fixed Point, which is his first
Supposition, on which the whole stress of his Book lies; and he will find that
it is impossible to be certain in it. I mean the Year one thousand fifty three,
wherein Berengarius was at first condemned, and in which time the Author of the
Treatise pretend's the universal Church was agreed in the Belief of
Transubstantiation and the real Presence. Now to be satisfied in this
particular, we should have an exact Knowledge of the eleventh Century, to the
end we may discern whether this Condemnation of Berengarius was the real Effect
of the Churches Union, or only that of a Party, which was then the strongest at
the Court of Rome. We should know each particular matter of this great Affair,
that we may be able to judge whether humane Interest had no share in it:
whether those that were concerned in it did not act against their Consciences;
and whether the Procedings were just and regular. We must examine the State of
Princes, Ecclesiastics, and People, to be satisfied in this supposed Union. We
should have before us the Writings of Berengarius and others who held the same
Opinions, to understand their Arguments and Defenses. But all these things are
impossible. We have no other account of this History, than what some interessed
Writers have bin pleased to give us, and in which there are Relations justly
suspected to be false. The secret Designs and Motives which then prevailed are
out of our reach. We know scarcely any thing more of the Persons who then made
up the Church, but that they were the greatest part of them buried in profound
Ignorance. The Writings of Berengarins and his Followers are lost, for there
has bin Care taken to extinguish the Remembrance of them. In short, this is an
Abyss wherein we behold nothing, whereby we may be able to affirm with any
certainty, that the whole Church was united in the Belief of Transubstantiation
and the real Presence. For a man to give Credit to any Relation of
Berengarius's Adversaries; (who bragged that their Opinion was that of the
whole World,) it would be to be over Credulous, in any Affair of this
Importance, and so much the more, because the contrary appears by substantial
Proofs, which should be examined, before we rest satisfied in them.

SO that here we are already sufficiently perplexed in the first Particular,
and shall be no less in the others. If we would be ascertained in the Proofs of
the Treatise, we should know perfectly the Tempers of the People, their
Condition and principal Circumstances, in the Ages which preceded the eleventh
Century. We should know, how the Body of the Ecclesiastics was composed, what
was the Humor and Temper of them who held the first Rank, even how far their
Credit and Authority reached, what kind of Instructions they gave the People,
and after what manner the People received them. We must likewise examine the
nature of the Change we speak of, by what degrees we suppose it has bin
introduced, by how many ways and means it may be said to be possible. For if
all this be not distinctly known, how can it with any Confidence be affirmed,
that this Change is impossible. Moreover before it can be affirmed as an
undoubted Truth, that had an Innovation touching the Eucharist bin attempted,
the People would have risen into Tumults, the Religious clamoured against it,
the Ecclesiastics opposed it, and the Councils taken notice of it, and in
short the Bands of an external Communion would have bin broken; how many
particulars must be cleared up first! We ought to know what kind of Zeal People
had for the Glory of God in those Days; whether the effects of this Zeal could
not be hindered by I know not how many things which occur in these different
Orders of men, whom I mentioned, as Ignorance in some, simplicity and meanness
of Spirit in others, the fear of disturbing the public Peace, the Favor or
Hatred of Persons, and several other humane Causes, which set men on acting or
desisting from it. We should likewise have a true and particular Account of the
Condition of the schismatical Churches at that time, when Berengarius was
condemned, which is not an easy matter, as will appear in the sequel of this
Discourse. In a Word, to attain the ends of the Design of this Treatise, when
even its Proofs should be Substantial and Conclusive, a man must be more
knowing than an Angel; for unless we knew the Thoughts of all mankind, for the
space of two hundred Years together, or could raise the Dead to inform our
selves by them of what they have done; and what they have not done, it is not
otherwise possible to be at any certainty. But it will be perhaps answered, we
must judge according to the Light of common Sense, and what we see in our
times* to which I reply, that even common Sense shows us, that there is no
certainty in these kind of Proofs, and that the Experience of our own Age
contradicts them. And when it should be imagined that all these Difficulties
are surmounted, I come then and trouble this Victory with my Aubertin, and
Proofs of Fact, requiring, before the Question be decided, that my Objection be
answered. Now should Mr. Arnaud pretend my Objection is groundless, and that I
should be silenced in being told, that these Proofs have bin considered, and
their pretended Clearness appears only to them, who suffer themselves to be
transported by the Enthuthiasms of my Rhetoric, I shall make him answer, that
I speak here only of curious and lazy People, to whom the Treatise of the
Perpetuity is offered as a short Method* to ease them of the lengths of a way
of Discussion: which sort of Persons cannot say they know all our Proofs.

I shall tell him moreover, that the reading of my Book, has not yet so far
transported People with Enthusiastical Raptures, as the reading of his has done
to his immortal Praise. For there are Latin Verses under this very Title of
Enthusiasms, which Mr. Arnauds Friends its seems have not bin ashamed to print,
in which there appears all the lively Characters of a Poetical Fury. For they
speak of his Book, as of the Sun, which contains in it self a great measure of
the Divine Light: His Lines are called new Darts of the Sacred Cupid; and his
whole Book is said to be full of God. Puro Numine, mi Libelle, Plenus. It is
compared to our Savior himself, when he came down from Heaven; and is said to
have done the same Miracles; there is one of its Readers introduced, who being
filled with its Divinity, cries out, Numen ecce Numen, ibi Numen. Mr. Arnaud is
termed, Vir sacro and numinis entheatus oestro, and his Wit, Mentis vigor
entheus, and again he is set forth to us as an Hercules armed with Celestial
Weapons, trampling all things under his Feet, conquering the Conquerours
themselves, and triumphing over the Triumphers. In short, France is
congratulated upon the Glory it receives. Tanto prodigio superba fulge, felix
prodigio futura tanto. All which considered, has not Mr. Arnaud pertinently
mentioned Enthusiasms? Certainly never the Tripos of Delphos, nor the Grove of
the Sibyl Cumee, inspired such like Ravings.

BUT to return to the matter in hand. Is it not possible will some say, to be
ascertained of the matter in Question, by some way less tedious and intricate,
than the examination of such a great Volum as Mr. Aubertin's Book? Yea without
doubt; for, to know as much as is necessary, to the satisfying of a man's Mind,
he need but judge according to the instincts of Charity, and the Confidence he
ought to have in our Saviors Promises. Now if a man keeps to these Principles,
he will draw a Conclusion as satisfactory as can be desired. The Promises of
our Savior assure us that his Spirit shall be with the Faithful to the end of
the World; and Christian Charity obliges us to believe that the Fathers are of
this Number. From whence I conclude; that there has ever bin a considerable
number of true Christians, whose Faith has not bin corrupted by damnable
Errors. This is a sure Conclusion, and sufficient to satisfy my Mind. I
conclude likewise, that the Fathers have bin of this Number, this is a Judgment
of Charity, and is sufficient to acquit me of my Duty. Should it be told me, if
I proceed farther, it would be to give my self a great deal of Trouble, viz. to
Read, Study, and Meditate, to compare the Proofs of both Parties, and if this
offends me, I can complain of no body but my self, that is to say of my own
Lazyness or Curiosity.

IT is then neither just nor necessary to require any other abridged Methods,
than those which I now observed. Yet it must not be thought but that there may
be such offered, it being no difficult matter. For it is but loosing from the
Body of the Dispute, one of those captious Arguments, which seem to decide the
whole Controversy by the Decision of one only Point. Which the Author of the
Perpetuity has done, for he has singled out Bellarmins Argument of the
Impossibility of a Change, and proposed it with greater Enlargments, tho with
less Force than he, and this is all the Mystery of this great Method of
Prescription. So that this is not such a famous Undertaking; seeing every
little Sophister could do as much. Take the Argument of the silence of the
Fathers on Transubstantiation and the real Presence; insist largely thereon,
write a Treatise on it; and here is then an abridged Method. Take the Argument
of the certainty of our Senses; show that the Fathers supposed it as an
inviolable Principle of the Christian Religion; show the Absurdities which
would follow, had they believed that what we see in the Sacrament is not real
Bread; here is then another Method of Prescription. Take likewise if you will,
the Argument of the Silence of the Heathens, and accommodate it to the Treatise
of the Perpetuity; and you will make another Method. It is the same with the
Argument of the Accidents without a Subject, in respect of Transubstantiation;
and of that of the Adoration of the Sacrament; and almost of all others.

TO speak my Sense of these Arguments reduced into Methods, I think they must
be considered either absolutely, or in relation to some Circumstances. If we
consider them absolutely; we must not reject them, for this only Reason that
they are called Methods of Prescription. A rational Man will accept of them in
a Controversy, as Arguments, he will weigh their Force; but whatsoever Strength
they may have, he will not form his Judgment by them alone, because perhaps
there may be on the other side things more considerable. What is there, for
Example, of greater Force than the Argument taken from the Silence of the
Fathers, touching the Existence of Accidents without a Subject? Yet is it
certain that this Argument alone must not determine a Man; for should it be
demonstrated that the Fathers expressly taught the Adoration of the Sacrament,
and Conversion of the Substance, with all the other Consequences of
Transubstantiation, excepting this Existence of the Accidents without a
Subject, our Argument would not be strong enough to invalidate these contrary
Proofs. They must then be ranked in the order of the Controversy, to the end
they may be considered in a decisive Judgment.

THERE is not, to speak properly, but one particular case wherein we ought to
be determined by a Method of Prescription, which is when God does or does not
declare his Will in Points of Religion; for what is there in the World that can
excel, or equal the Validity of his Testimony or Silence. In matters of
Religion, it is the Word of God which determines us to believe positively such
and such Points, and it is its Silence which determines us to reject others. Our
Faith imitates the Wise Men of the East, it follows the Star that conducts it,
(which is the Heavenly Revelation) and stops where this Star settleth, as
knowing 'twould be to wander, to go farther. This then is the only true Method
of Prescription in Questions of this Nature.

BUT supposing the Argument was taken from the Evidence of all the Senses, and
in the Circumstances which make this Testimony Valid and Infallible, may we not
determine our selves, without proceeding any farther? I answer that to speak
absolutely, the Senses may be deceived, even with all the Circumstances which
render their Testimony allowable, for the Devil may impose upon them by his
Illusions; yet because a judicious man must judge of things, not out of regard
to these extraordinary and rare Cases, but according to rule and common use, it
is certain, that such an Argument must decide the Question of Fact.

THE same may be required touching those Arguments which are called in
Philosophy, by the name of Demonstrations. If a Method was grounded on a Proof
of this Force, would it not wholly decide the Question? I answer there are few
Demonstrations, so evident and certain, that nothing can be opposed against
them. Yet were there one offered which convinced the Mind, by an immediate and
uncontrollable Evidence, (as those which manifest an apparent Contradiction,
and a formal Incompatibility in the Terms; or those which are established on a
necessary and inviolable Dependence, and which cannot be hind'red, or which
suppose one only Cause, without which it is not possible that a thing should
exist; or lastly, such as are grounded on an indissolvible connection of two
Subjects which cannot be one without the other;) I confess we ought then to
yield; as when it is said, the Sun is risen, it is then day, or it is day, the
Sun then is risen; there is a Son, there must then be a Father; I say, we
cannot but acquiesce in these kind of Arguments. But because in things about
which we dispute, these sort of primary and immediate Demonstrations are very
rare, a judicious Person will not suffer himself to be surprised with every
thing which bears the Name of Demonstration, or that has the Color and
appearance of it, and especially when it relates to a matter belonging to
another Light than that of Reason, as are the Objects of Sense, and those of
Faith: he must then suspend his Judgment, and reduce his pretended
Demonstrations into the Order of the Dispute, to be compared with the contrary
Proofs, to the end he may make a right Judgment.

AND this is what may be said in general of these abridged Methods. In their
Circumstances, they are to be considered, either as relating to the Persons
they are offered, or to the Question which they decide, or the Rank which they
hold, and according to the quality of their Proofs. If they be offered to
Persons to whom the Question does not belong, it is in their Power absolutely
to reject them, in alleging, that this concerns not them, and they cannot
justly be blamed when they should do thus. Should they be offered to Persons
interessed in the Question, or who would take part in it, they ought ordinarily
to proceed according to the Rules I have laid down, and especially if the
Question which they decide is of that importance, as that it ought not to be
slightly handled. But if we do suppose on one hand, that the Order of these
Methods is indirect and unnatural, and that their Arguments are not taken but
from Probabilities, and on the other, that we may be informed by a more natural
Course, and a more certain and infallible Means. I say, that a wise Man ought
to prefer this last way before the other, although it be more tedious and
difficult, for tho he cannot answer these Arguments, yet this does not argue he
must be determined by them; for it will be time enough to consider them, when
after a due Examination of every thing that may be alleged on both sides, he
shall make his decisive Judgment. In fine, I say, that if we suppose a man
already ascertained in the Question, by an orderly way, by numerous and
conclusive Proofs, and by a Knowledge humanely Certain, and Infallible, as is
that of his Eyes and common Senses on their proper Objects, he cannot
reasonably be desired to change his Opinion by an indirect Method, which is
from hence suspected to be artificial and deceitful, in that the Proofs which
it offers can amount to no more than Probabilities. If he be wise, he will keep
to his first Conclusion, and reject this Method as useless, without troubling
himself with a particular Examination of it, unless to give himself the greater
Satisfaction, he determines to discover the falsity of it.

WE see already what use must be made of the Treatise of the Perpetuity,
together with all its long train of Arguments and Suppositions, which Mr.
Arnaud has made in its Favor. For first, there is little Sincerity in the
Objection he stated in the beginning, in which he does not explain our real
Pretension. Secondly, He passes over in Silence, amongst the Number which he
makes of the Persons of our Communion, several who trouble not themselves with
the Dispute touching the Question of matter of Fact, that is to say touching
the Belief of the ancient Church, and in relation to these, who are the
greatest number, we may already affirm that the Treatise of the Perpetuity is
of no use. Thirdly, He has very ill proved that the most knowing Ministers do
doubt whether the Fathers are for us, whence it follows, that not being able to
find his Proselytes, neither amongst the (...)k of the Illiterate People, nor
amongst that of the Learned, it is to be feared he will find them no where.
Fourthly, He has bin showed, that when it should be granted, there were
Ministers, who doubted whether the Fathers were for us; yet would it not
follow, that they would leave the Word of God, on which alone their Faith
depends, to yield themselves up to the Arguments of the Perpetuity. Fifthly, He
has bin showed that when one or two should be of this Opinion, yet could they
not carry it away from all the rest who have bin, or are of a contrary Mind:
whence it follows, that if the least judicious among us regulate their Opinions
on this Point by that of the most knowing, they will it is probable range
themselves on the side of the greatest Number, rather than on that wherein
there is but one or two; so that here is almost all of 'em escaped the
Treatises Conquest. Sixthly, It has bin likewise showed him that the Prolixity
and Difficulties to be expected in the common way, which is that of Discussion,
yield no advantage to the Treatise to make it received under the Title of an
abridged Method. Seventhly, He has bin moreover showed the insuperable
Perplexities wherein this Method engages People: So that those who are most in
Love with short Ways, and new Fashions, cannot but be disgusted at this.
Eighthly, It has bin demonstrated, that Persons who were never informed of the
real Doctrine of the Fathers, and would willingly be ascertained of it, ought
in all Reason to prefer a Method of Discussion, whatsoever tediousness and
difficulty there may be in it, before that of the Perpetuity. We have likewise
manifested that the Proofs of his Method, have not that just and due extent,
necessary to the forming of a judicious man's Mind: and which ours have.
Tenthly, and lastly, It has bin proved to him that discreet Persons, who know
our Proofs of Fact, and have examined them, may justly reject this Treatise as
useless.

WHAT he then says concerning these two contrary Evidences that hold the Mind
in suspense between our Proofs of Fact, on one hand, and the Arguments of the
Perpetuity on the other, is a mere Fancy. For this Unresolvedness is impossible
in a man of Judgment. And Mr. Arnaud does not ground it but only on a
Supposition, which he has no right to make, That Lib. 1. C. ^^ P. 54.
the Proofs of the Treatise intimate the impossibility of a Change, to that
degree of Evidence, as will convince the Mind as much as the contrary Evidence.
Which I deny him, and that with good Reason, when I compare his Proofs with
ours. His Proofs are grounded on a Supposition, in which it is impossible to be
ascertained, they are of the kind of moral Impossibilities, which never carry
in them a Certitude beyond Exception, and moreover, the Subject or Matter they
handle, makes them still a thousand times more uncertain and doubtful; for what
is more uncertain than that which depended on Peoples Inclinations, who lived
seven or eight hundred Years ago, and on the Conjunction of a thousand things,
of which we scarcely know one. We need but consider these Proofs in this
respect, to declare them uncertain; But to demonstrate the falsity of them, we
must compare them with ours, against which there can no general Objections be
made, seeing they are numerous, and thoroughly handle the Question, and which
taken severally, have all possible Strength and Evidence.

TO find out distinctly and clearly the knot of this whole Controversy, and
judge of it with less Trouble and more Solidity, it needs only be considered
that Mr. Arnaud and I do make almost the same Suppositions, and draw the same
Consequences, but each of us in his own Favor. He supposes my Proofs of Fact
are uncertain, and I do not only suppose they of his Treatise are so, but that
they are moreover False. He supposes that they of the Treatise are Evident. I
suppose that mine are so. He concludes mine are to be Rejected, and them of the
Treatise Embraced. I conclude that they of the Treatise are to be Rejected, and
mine Entertained. For to judge aright so far, it needs only be considered which
of us two has most reason to make these Suppositions, and settles them on
surest Grounds; for he that does so, has the Consequence for him. Mr. Arnaud
grounds his on the Enthusiasms of my Rhetoric, on some pretended Testimonies
of the Learned, and his own Judgment on Mr. Aubertin's Book, and that of the
Perpetuity. I build mine on the Right a Respondent has to suppose his Opinion
in a Dispute. Whence I conclude, I may suppose my Proofs of Fact to be good and
firm; I ground them on a general Comparison I make of his Proofs with ours, and
manifest that ours are according to a natural and direct Method, and his
according to an indirect and forced one; That ours are sufficient to enable a
man to make a sound and solid Judgment, and that his are not so, that ours are
obvious to Sense, whereas his are but mere Conjectures. And it is upon this we
ought to be judged. But we must proceed farther; for Mr. Arnaud goes so far as
to suppose his Proofs and mine appear equally evident, and it is upon this that
he grounds the whole Argument of his sixth Chapter. He would have that these
two contrary Evidences forming a Suspension of Mind, a rational Man is thereby
obliged to determine himself by the Advantages which appear moreover in the
Church of Rome, and here we begin to take two different ways, for I will not
grant him the Evidence of his Treatise, as he grants me that of my Proofs. And
in effect no man may make groundless Suppositions, which being impossible,
cannot therefore be reasonable. Now it is not possible that a man who is
persuaded of the Evidence of our Proofs, can find any Evidence in his, being
such as they are, because they have a Defect in their kind, which makes them
vanish before ours. It Is moreover on this we ought to be tried.

YET let us suppose, by way of Divertisement, these two contrary Evidences
which hold us in Suspense, what follows thence? that we must be determined by
the Authority of the Church of Rome. This indeed Mr. Arnaud says: and I
maintain we ought wholly to apply our selves to the Scriptures, and leave those
Perplexities touching the Opinions of the Fathers, that we may ground our Faith
only on the Word of God; and I pretend by this means we shall adhere to the
reformed Church. What must we then do about this new Difference? Mr. Arnaud and
I must Dispute concerning the Scripture and Church of Rome, to know which of us
two has most reason. And these are the Effects of this admirable Method, the
Glory of our time, and Quintessence of Humane Wit, which after several windings
and turnings, several hot Debates and sharp Disputes, and after an Invitation
of all France; and all them of either Communion to the beholding of this famous
Contest, refers the matter at length to the Holy Scripture and the Church. And
this is the fruit of the Treatise of the Perpetuity. And indeed if we continue
to dispute after this manner, I think the World has little reason to concern it
self in our Debate, seeing it is a vain amusement. We wrestle against one
another with all our Might, we sweat, and take a great deal of Pains, and make
our Books be bought dear: and after all we are to begin again. For if we must
now dispute concerning the Holy Scripture and the Church, wherefore did we not
do so in the beginning? Wherefore must the Treatise of the Perpetuity be for a
Preludium to this? Is it because the Gate of this Controversy is not yet wide
enough of it self, but that the Treatise of the Perpetuity must introduce us?
Or is it not worthy our regard, and therefore the Treatise of the Perpetuity
must be its Mediator. Is it that either the Church of Rome, or the Scripture
have need, (to the end they may be recommended to us,) the one of the Treatise
of the Perpetuity, and the other of my Answer, and that no man can betake
himself to either of these without our Guidance. For my part I pretend not to
this, and therefore think it beside the Purpose to begin a new Controversy.

CHAP. VII.
The six last Chapters of Mr. Arnaud's Book Examined.

MR Arnaud's last six Chapters of his first Book being only as loose Pieces,
which relate not to the Method of the Perpetuity, nor our Proofs of Fact; and
the greatest part of them consisting in fruitless Digressions, which have no
connection with the Subject of the Eucharist: it seems thereupon he has intended
them only as an enlargment to his Book, and as a means to tire his readers
Patience. Which will oblige me to make only a succinct Answer, it being
unreasonable to carry off the Debate to other Subjects, and charge my self with
unnecessary matters: but howsoever concise my Answer may be, yet will it
manifest the weakness and folly of all these tedious and troublesome Discourses
of Mr. Arnaud.

HIS seventh Chapter respects an Objection I made against the Author of the
Perpetuity, concerning the Infallibility he attributes to the People; which he
grounds on this, that People naturally will not suffer their Opinions to be
snatched from them, nor Novelties introduced in matters of Religion; for I had
intimated that this would oppose the Infallibility which the Church of Rome
attributes to the Popes and Councils. The remaining part of the first Book is
spent in treating on some other Innovations, which we suppose to have
insensibly crept in, as that in the Establishment of Episcopacy, praying for
the Dead, the invocation of Saints, and prohibition of certain Meats. These are
the things I intend to treat of in this Chapter. That I may proceed orderly, I
shall first examine this pretended popular Infallibility, by comparing it with
the Infallibility of Popes or Councils, for we must see whether I had not
reason to make against the Author of the Perpetuity the Objection contained in
my Preface. This Question will be soon ended, if it be considered that I have
alleged some Examples of the Insensible Alterations which actually happened in
the Church, in several Points, as Perpetuity of the Faith, Part 2. C. 7.
well Practical as Speculative, and that the Author of the Perpetuity could not
defend himself but by protesting. That he has not offered in general this
Maxim, that there could not happen in the Church any imperceptible Change, in
the use of Ceremonies, or in Opinions which are no ways Popular, but
Speculative, that he has bin cautious of proposing of it in this generality,
and therefore has restrained it to capital Mysteries, which are known to all
the Faithful, by a distinct Faith. To answer after this manner, what is it but
to confess a Change has happened in Points, which are not popular. Which
Confession absolutely overthrows the Infallibility claimed by the Church of
Rome.

IT is to no purpose that Mr. Arnaud distinguishes betwixt an Infallibility
Lib. 1. C. 7.
of Grace or Privilege, and a humane and popular Infallibility, and to assert
that the Author of the Perpetuity does in no wise pretend to disavow the
Infallibility of the Church and Councils, as it respects all kind of Mysteries,
whether Popular or others. For these Examples I produced, do equally oppose all
manner of Infallibility, and to acknowledge it in any kind, would be to let go
this pretended Infallibility of Privilege. I will suppose the Alterations I
mentioned to have happened in Points not Popular, yet are they Innovations
nevertheless, and when they were not contrary to the natural Infallibility, yet
would they be to that which is termed of Grace, seeing that they are actual
Alterations in Points of Religion. Whence it follows, that a man who believes
them to be true, cannot deny but that he acts contrary to the Principle of the
Church of Rome, which is, that the Popes and Councils are only Infallible, and
that Mr. Arnauds Distinction is a mere Illusion: for if the Church of Rome has
admitted an Alteration in Points not Popular, she is not then Infallible in
respect of these Points. It Is certain that the Author of the Perpetuity was
minded to wrangle about some of the Examples I produced, pretending the
Doctrine of Faith has not bin altered, although the Practice of it has bin so; but
he does not oppose what I alleged touching the Doctrine of Grace, which is not
a Point of Practice but Belief, contenting himself only with saying, That the
Truths of Divine Grace have Perpetuity of the Faith. Part 2. C. 7.
never bin popular in all the Consequences which have bin drawn from them in
Theology, and that it is false, they are not still the same in principal and
essential Points. But is not this still to acknowledge that in respect of Points
not Popular, and which are neither principal, nor essential, in the matter of
Grace, there has happened a Change. Now these Points whatsoever they be, whether
principal or not, great or small, are Doctrinal Points which cannot be altered,
without passing over from Truth to Error, or from Error to Truth. If then it be
true, as I have already said, and as the Author of the Perpetuity has not
denied, that the Church has bin several times of contrary Opinions, upon which
account it is impossible, but she has bin in Error, and consequently she is not
Infallible in this Infallibility of Grace, and Privilege attributed unto her.
The Author of the Perpetuity's Answer does evidently suppose the actual reality
of this Change; it has then given me just Occasion to make this Objection I
have made, and Mr. Arnaud's Distinction comes too late.

IT is in vain, he assures us, that the Author of the Perpetuity never had the
least thought of denying this Infallibility of Privilege and Grace; The
Question here is not to know absolutely what that Author believed, or not
believed, what he thought, or did not think; when this shall be questioned, we
shall always be ready to hear Mr. Arnaud's Relation of that matter; but here it
concerns us to enquire into the Consequences which may be drawn from his Terms,
and whether he has given me a just occasion to make that Objection against him
in my Preface. It will not be sufficient to make Declarations on this Matter,
it must be showed that the Consequence is not true.

Mr. Arnaud imagins, he has sufficiently justified his Friend, in asserting, he
made not use of the Infallibility of Privilege, because it is a Privilege to be
proved, and not supposed, and the Calvinists denying it, it is thence clear,
that to make an advantageous use of it, it should have bin established before,
which is to say, there ought to have bin an entire Treatise made of the
Churches Infallibility, before it could be made use of in this Dispute. But,
says he, to conclude from thence, he has denied it, and does not acknowledge
it, is one of the most rash Consequences as ever was drawn, although that Mr.
Claude has done this in the Preface of his Book.

AND this is Mr. Arnaud's true Character, that he is never more fierce, than
when he is Gravelled, or alleges things wholly besides the Purpose. We have
not grounded our present Objection on the Author of the Perpetuity's not using
the Infallibility of Privilege for his Principle, this is a wilful mistake. For
it has bin grounded on this, that the terms of his Answers to the instances of
a Change, which I had affirmed, do oppose this Infallibility which the Church
of Rome pretends to, and acknowledge no other but that of the People. Now it is
to this he should apply himself, and not continually entertain us with
impertinent Digressions.

MOREOVER, what signifies his telling us, that the Infallibility of Privilege
is a Principle to be proved, and not supposed, and that the Reason dissuading
the Author of the Perpetuity from making use of it, is because we deny it. We
no less deny the pretended popular Infallibility, which is a Principle needs
proving, as much as the other. He himself tells us, in the beginning of his
eighth Chapter; that the Principle of insensible Alterations, which is directly
opposite to that of popular Infallibility, is a necessary Foundation to the
Calvinists, whereon to build the greatest part of their Doctrines, and that all
this great Machine of the pretended Reformation, consisting of so many
different Opinions, has almost need upon all Occasions of this Supposition,
That the contrary Opinion which it undertakes to overthrow, has bin insensibly
Introduced into the Church. And thus does he speak, when he would have us deny
him his Principle; but when he would have us grant it him, he then holds
another Language. The Author of the Perpetuity, Lib. 1. c. 7.
sais he, does not design to attribute to the People any other Infallibility
than that which all the World allows them, and which Mr. Claude does himself
grant. Never any Person disposed more freely of other men's Thoughts then Mr.
Arnaud. We Deny, we Confess, according as he pleases, he brings us on his Stage
as often as he list; making us say sometimes one thing, and sometimes another,
and is not this to Dispute successfully? But whether we Confess or Deny this
his popular Infallibility, it is all one to me, for here the Question is not
about this, but to know whether the Author of the Perpetuity has not opposed
the Infallibility, attributed to the Pope and Councils; this is the true State
of the Controversy, and Mr. Arnaud is at a loss how to defend himself from it.

WHAT signifies his telling us, that there are an infinite number of things,
Lib. 1. C. 7.
wherein not only the whole Church, and all the People of the Universe, but a
particular number of People, a Province, a City, a Borough, a particular
Person, is Infallible, that is to say wherein it cannot happen he should be
deceived himself, nor would deceive others? Wherefore must we have the Gazetier
brought in for an Instance of this, who is Infallible, when he tells us any
considerable News, such as is the Kings going into the low Countries, the
taking of Cities in Flanders, the Canonization of St. Francis de Sales, the
Death of Pope Alexander the seventh, and the Election of Clement the ninth; If
he relates this News only, to advertize us, he began his Book after the Kings
Victories in the low Countries, every man may believe as much as he thinks
fitting, for we know it is no hard matter to add a Period or two to the
beginning of a Book, although it is already far advanced; but be it as it will, I
dare say, that Mr. Arnaud's Victories will not be so certain as those of our
Monarch. If in effect he has not mentioned this to us, but to confirm by
Examples his popular Infallibility, I have reason to tell him, that these
Instances are besides the matter in hand, for there must be a distinction made,
betwixt an Infallibility grounded on the Testimony of a single Person, or a
particular sort of People, and that which is grounded on a whole Body of
People. I would call the first if you will an Infallibility of Testimony, and
the second, an Infallibility of Perseverance in one and the same State. There
is a Difference between these two. The first of these may be attributed to a
People, a Church, a Province, a City, or a particular Person, without the
second. I will grant likewise it is impossible, in certain Cases, for the whole
Body of a People to be mistaken in the News it relates, tho to speak the truth
even this happens not seldom, there being nothing more usually false than
popular News. But tho I grant this is Impossible in some Cases, yet this is far
enough from acknowledging, that a People governed by certain Persons, may not
insensibly without any Noise, alter their Sentiments, and pass over into an
Opinion which they knew not before. For to make such a kind of Change as this
is, there needs only the Concurrence of two or three great Persons in
Authority, to whom all Businesses are referred. We have seen that the face of
things in the Church of Rome, has bin changed not long ago, and which has bin
surprising to several Persons; Mr. Arnaud himself has bin interessed in some of
these Changes, and I suppose he would be sorry if the Infallibility of
Perseverance in the same State, should have bin as firm and unmovable as the
Account which the Gazetier gave us of the Death of Pope Alexander. But after
all, this does not hinder but that the Author of the Perpetuity has opposed the
Infallibility the Church of Rome ordinarily pretends to.

AND this is what I would have told Mr. Arnaud, had he done me the Honor he
mentions, which is, to have conferred with me about my Objection, and perhaps
my Answers would have satisfied him. I would have added two Observations, which
would have made him better comprehend that his pretended popular Infallibility
does not well accord with that which he terms of Grace, or Privilege. The
first of these Observations is, that popular Mysteries being only necessary to
Salvation, if sufficiently preserved by natural means, that is to say, by the
inviolable Inclinations of the People, there is no great need of the
Infallibility of Grace; which will be at farthest, only necessary to the
Doctrines which are not popular, that is, to the Questions of the Schools,
which the Church may well be without, and which are but (as speaks the Author
of the Perpetuity,) Theological Consequences. The second is, that the Reason
wherefore he says the Author of the Perpetuity chose rather the popular
Infallibility for his Principle, than that of Grace, supposes that this latter
is absolutely less evident, and harder to be proved than the first. This
Infallibility of the Church, says he, being denied by the Heretics, cannot be
made use Lib. 1. C. 7.
of as a Principle against them, unless we establish it by separate Proofs. For
the Calvinists without doubt would not take themselves to be sufficiently
refuted, upon the Subject of the Eucharist, if we only contented our selves
with bringing these Arguments against them. All Doctrines which are condemned
by an Infallible Church are false: But the Belief of the Calvinists on the
Sacrament is condemned by the Catholic Church, which is Infallible: Therefore
it is false. Not but this Reasoning is good: but the minor Proposition which
says that the Catholic Church is Infallible, being a controverted Point, it
is thence plain, that before it can be made use of, it must be proved, that is
to say, there ought to be made an entire Treatise touching the Churches
Infallibility, before this Point could be used. For this Infallibility is not a
thing clear in it selfs seeing it wholly depends on the Will of God, reavealed
in Scripture, The Church not being naturally Infallible, it is then by the
Principles of Faith, or by a long Train of Arguments, that it must be proved
she is supernaturally so. Now to make this Argument good, we must suppose that
this Infallibility of Grace cannot be proved but with a great deal of
Difficulty, whatsoever Course is taken, whether by Scripture or Reason, for if
it could be clearly and briefly proved from Scripture, Mr. Arnaud's Excuse
would be vain, for he would be demanded wherefore the Author of the Perpetuity
has not done it, seeing we require not Arguments where the Scripture plainly
expresses it self. His reasoning then to be conclusive, must suppose it is
impossible for the Author of the Perpetuity to prove the Infallibility of
Grace, without engaging himself in Prolixities and Difficulties. Whence it
plainly appears, that this is not a proper Principle for the Unlearned, who are
not able to go through with a long and difficult Discussion. It is of no use to
them, according to Mr. Arnaud, and that so much the rather, that he himself
has told us that short and easy ways are needful to such, whereby they may
discern the true Church; Ways, says he, which Lib. 1. C. 3. P. 17.
free men from those painful Dicussions, which Ignorance, dullness of
Apprehension, and the Exigences of Life, do make so many Persons incapable of.
So that this Principle of the Churches Infallibility, being not to be proved
without a great deal of Difficulty, will be only serviceable to the Learned,
and of which in effect they have no great need, seeing they can of themselves
attain the Knowledge of particular Doctrines, without the help of Authority. And
to this is reduced, through Mr. Arnaud's means, this Infallibility of Grace and
Privilege, which has made such a noise in the Romish Communion.

THE remaining part of Mr. Arnaud's Book, treats, as I already said, on several
other Alterations, which we pretend, have insensible crept into the Church. But
seeing these are Points which do not at all belong to the Eucharist, and cannot
be well examined without writing a great Volum on each of them, Mr. Arnaud
therefore may take the Liberty, of saying what he pleases concerning them, for
I think my self no ways bound to answer him. When he shall assault the Books of
Mr. Saumaise, Blondel, or Daille, after the manner he ought, he will not
perhaps want an Answer. It is an easy matter, to join three or four Passages
together, on any Controversy, and thereupon make Declamations. For this is the
common course of the World. People usually begin where they will, and end when
they please: but were one of these Books I mentioned, examined to the Bottom,
and every particular undertaken, I am sure this would not be such an easy Task.

THE supposition of insensible Alterations, is a Principle the Holy Scripture
establishes, which right Reason allows and Experience confirms. St. Paul
tells us of a Mystery of Iniquity, which began to appear in his time, and which
would, in the end, produce this great effect, he calls a Revolt, or Apostasy;
which has all the Characters of an insensible Change, seeing that the
Foundations of it were laid in his time, and at length these mysterious
Projects should come to their Perfection. Our Reason likewise tells us, that
important Alterations which happen in Societies, are never introduced all of
'em at one time, but are brought in gradually; and that it is easier to join
succesfully together several particular Innovations, each one of which apart
seems inconsiderable, and to make thereby a great Alteration, than if this
should be undertaken all at once. This is a Maxim amongst all Politicians, and
Persons who are capable of prosecuting any Enterprise, but this many times
happens of it self without any Design. Experience it self confirms this by
sundry Examples; for it is after this manner several Arts and Sciences arrive at
Perfection: Languages and Customs of Countries are altered; It Is after this
manneer the Power of Princes and other States are increased or diminished; and
not to seek for Instances of this kind, any farther than in the Church, and
Christian Religion, by this means has the Authority of the Romish Prelacy
arrived through several Ages to that Degree wherein we now see it. Thus were
the ancient Ceremonies in the administration of Baptism abrogated, and other
new ones adopted in their places. Thus has the Opinion of the absolute
necessity of the Eucharist to the Salvation of little Children, bin abolished,
and we have passed over into a contrary Opinion. Null us, says St. Austin, Qui
se meminit Catholicae Epist. 106.
fidei Christianum negat aut dubitat parvulos non accepta gratia regenerationis
in Christo, sine cibo carnis ejus and sanguinis potu non habere in se vitam, ac
per hoc poenae sempiternae obnoxios. There is no Christian who holds the
Catholic Faith, that either denis, or doubts but that little Children, who
have not received the Grace of Regeneration in Jesus Christ, nor participated
of the Nourishment of his Flesh and Blood, are deprived of everlasting Life,
and consequently liable to eternal Damnation.

LET Mr. Arnaud inform us how this public Belief came to be changed. St.
Austin tells us that it is an Article of the Catholic Faith, he assures us
there is no Christian who doubts of it, that is, it was a popular Opinion: And
yet at this day the contrary is held in the Church of Rome: how comes this
Change? We might produce several other Instances, if they were necessary: but
at present one Example is sufficient, to overthrow this false Principle of Mr.
Arnaud's, and to establish that which appears to him to be so Unreasonable.

YET to speak a word, on each of these Points he has handled, does he think,
that on the Subject of Episcopacy, his Discourses will carry it away from St.
Jerome, who tells us, That before there were partialities in Religion, Hier.
Com. in Epist. ad Tit. C. 1.
and that the People cried out I am of Paul, and I of Cephas, the Church was
governed by a Common Council of Priests, but since, every one esteeming them
whom he had baptized belonged to him, and not to Christ, it was ordained
throughout the whole World, that one alone chosen from amongst the Priests,
should be set up above the rest, and have the Charge of the Church committed to
him, to take away thereby all Occasions of Schism.

DOES he think that in the Point of Praying for the Dead, we will abandon the
Doctrine of St. Paul, who tells us in his second Epistle to the Cor. Chap. 5.
That if our earthly House of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a Building
of God, an House not made with Hands, eternal in the Heavens. These Words do
not suffer us to doubt but that they who dye in the Faith of Jesus Christ do
enjoy his glorious Presence in Heaven, whence it follows they have no need of
our Prayers. That if the Ancients have mentioned the deceased in their Prayers,
it is certain they never designed thereby to deliver them from the Pains of
Purgatory which they undergo to satisfy for their Sins, which is the end the
Church of Rome does at this day propose in its Prayers. We Celebrate, (says an
ancient Author in his Commentaries Com. in Job L. 3.
on Job, which are thought to be Origens) Not the Day of our Birth, but that of
our Death; for the day of our Birth is an Entrance into Sorrows and
Temptations; but that of Death is on the contrary, the end of Sorrows, and a
Freedom from all Temptations. We commemorate then the Day of Death, because
they who seem to dye, do not so. And for this reason we celebrate the memory of
the Saints, and devoutly commemorate our Fathers, or Friends who have departed
in the Faith, as well to refresh our selves by the remembrance of the Felicity
which they enjoy, as also to desire of God, that we may continue in the same
Faith.

DOES Mr. Arnaud expect in that Article of the Church of Rome's touching the
Invocation of Saints: that we should believe him rather than Origin, who speaks
in the Name of all the Christians in his time, in his Dispute against Celsus,
who would have them to worship the Sun, Moon and Stars, seeing they are
Celestial Angels. We believe says he, we ought not Origin Cont. Col. L. 5.
to pray unto Creatures, who do themselves pray unto God, especially
considering, they had rather we should offer up our Petitions to him, whom they
likewise serve, than to them, not being willing we should after any sort share
our Devotions.

AND as to the abstaining from certain kind of Meats, Tertullian who was a
Montanist, will show us better than Mr. Arnaud can, the Judgment Tertul. de
jejun. C. 1.
of the Catholics in his time. Arguunt nos, says he, quod jejunia propria
custodiamus, quod stationes plerumque in vesperam producamus, quod etiam
Xerophagias observemus, siccantes cibum ab omni carne, and omni jurulentia, and
uvidioribus quibusque pomis, ne quid vinositatis vel edamus vel potemus. They
censure us because we observe particular Fasts, that we make them last till the
Evening, that we observe Xerophagies, using dry Meats without Flesh, and Juice,
and in that we abstain from Fruits which have over much Juice in them, to the
end we may not eat or drink any thing which has the quality of Wine. And a
little farther, as to Xerophagies, they say, that it is the new Name of C. ^^
an affected Devotion, and which comes near the Heathenish Superstitions, such
as the Mortifications of Isis, Apis, and the Mother of the Gods, which purify
by abstinence from certain Meats. And this is in few Words what I had to say on
those four Particulars.

WOULD we keep to the exact Rules of Controversy, we need not proceed to any
farther Examination of the rest of Mr. Arnaud's great Volumn, which may be
said, without breach of Charity, equally to offend both in its quantity and
quality. For having showed, as I have done, that the Treatise of the Perpetuity
of the Faith ought to be rejected, upon the only consideration of its Method,
it is hence evident I am not obliged to follow Mr. Arnaud in his Voyages to
Greece, Muscovia, Persia, Syria, Egypt, Aethiopia, and the Indias. Seeing we
will never part with our Proofs of Fact, what need has he of traveling through
all these Countries? Neither the Greeks nor other Christian Nations, considered
from the eleventh Century, or from the seventh, will decide the Question
touching what has bin believed in the ancient Church, to the Prejudice of the
Fathers and their Testimony. Yet shall I make him an exact Answer, not out of
any Necessity, but only out of Condescension, and upon condition he will
remember that I have proved in this first Book these following Particulars.

I. That his Censure touching what I said concerning Mr. Aubertin's Book, is
grounded on an extravagant Fancy; That it cannot bear a rational
Interpretation; nor is made with any kind of Sincerity; that it supposes a
great Mistake; that we may conclude thence a Prevarication against the Church
of Rome; and in fine, may be refuted by Mr. Arnaud's own Example. Which is the
Summary of the first Chapter.

II. That the Author of the Perpetuity's Method is Indirect, and contrary to
Nature, seeing he would decide Questions of Right by Matters of Fact, and
Questions of Fact by Proofs drawn from Arguments: which is such a disorderly
way of Proceeding, as makes his Method justly suspected to be artificial and
deceitful.

III. That the Author of the Perpetuity has openly assaulted Mr. Aubertin's
Book, and that after an indirect and artificial Manner, which lies as a
Prejudication against him. Which is the Summary of the second Chapter.

IV. That the Design of the Author of the Perpetuity, being to destroy the
Impression which the Proofs of Fact, or the Passages out of the Fathers have
made on our Minds, does nothing less than this, whence it follows that his
Treatise is wholly Useless. Which are the Contents of the third Chapter.

V. That Mr. Arnaud contradicts the Author of the Perpetuity, in pretending to
defend him, and ruins the whole Design of his Treatise.

VI. That these Methods of Prescription, which Mr. Arnaud so much glories in,
are vain and ineffectual, and that the Course we take to confirm People in the
Doctrines of our Church is short, certain, and easy to the meanest Capacities:
whereas those Mr. Arnaud offers, are tedious, difficult, uncertain, and
unintelligible to ordinary Apprehensions: Whence it follows they cannot with a
safe Conscience remain in the Communion of the Church of Rome.

VII. That the Abridgment of our Proofs of Fact, which I offered in my first
Answer, has bin regular; and that the Treatise of the Perpetuity is but a mear
Chaos of Confusion. These three last Particulars are contained in the fourth
Chapter.

VIII. That all those pretended Advantages Mr. Arnaud hopes to obtain by means
of the Perpetuity, in relation to the Learned and Unlearned, and to those he
terms the Obstinate; are groundless Imaginations, which in fine do only
manifest the Unprofitableness of that Treatise. Which is the Subject of the
fifth and sixth Chapters.

IX, And lastly, that he cannot excuse the Author of the Perpetuity, nor
himself from the Charge of Contradicting and Opposing the Infallibility of
Popes and Councils, it being an avowed Doctrine of the Church of Rome; Which is
the Contents of this seventh Chapter.

BOOK II.
Wherein is shown, that when it should be true, that those which are called the
Schismatical Churches believed Transubstantiation; yet would it not thence
follow, that this Doctrine was always held by these Christians.

CHAP. I.
Containing the chief Heads of this whole Controversy touching the Eastern
Churches, and their Opinion from the eleventh Century to this Present. Mr.
Arnaud's Artifice laid open.

WE are now come to treat of the Belief of the Greek, and other Eastern
Churches, touching Transubstantiation and the adoration of the Eucharist, and
must endeavor to shelter our selves from the violent Insultings of Mr. Arnaud
and his Friends. We need not mention how this has bin the Subject of their
Triumph, seeing all the World knows it. For the Author of the Perpetuity has
2d. Part of the Perpetuity. C. 5. P. 256.
already thereatned us with producing of twenty Millions of Witnesses on his
side; and Mr. Arnaud who is not a Person of that Humor as to abate any thing,
is continually charging us with Absurdities, Rashness, Confidence, Convictions,
Demonstrations, and telling us of Ministers confounded by the number of his
Proofs. He tells the World in his Preface, that he has left us no reason P. 11.
to doubt, in a matter so apparent as is that of the Consent of all these
Christian Churches, in the Doctrine of Transubstantiation. He tells us moreover
in L. 2. C. 2. P. 113.
another place, that this is a Point most clear and evident, and that were we
not withheld by Obstinacy, we should confess as much our selves, and not let
our Tongues thus belly our Consciences. Nay even before Mr. Arnaud's Book
appeared abroad in the World; it had already gotten the Name of Invincible,
like to that Legion of old, under the Emperor Marcus Aurelius, which caused
Fire from Heaven to fall down on the Heads of its Enemies. And we may truly
affirm the World has not bin wanting to usher in this his pretended Victory
with their Shouts and Acclamations. Now if it be enquired of Mr. Arnaud, what
Advantage he can expect from this whole Controversy; He will tell us, it is the
Interest of the Catholic Church, and that be L. 2. C. 2. P. 115.
will never be persuaded to suffer one of its clearest Proofs to be snatched out
of his Hand, seeing it establishes the Faith of a Mystery, wherein consists
the Object of its Devotion through the whole World. That God preserves all these
Christian Societies, although divided from his Church, and suffers not the Tyranny
of Infidels wholly to swallow them up, nor the knowledge of principal Mysteries
to be quite extinguished amongst them, to the end they may remain as Witnesses
for the Catholic Cause, in testifying the Antiquity of those Doctrines which
the new Heretics deny. If he be demanded whether none of the Doctors of the
Church of Rome, have hitherto made use of this Argument; he will tell you, that
no In his Prefa. P. 10.
one yet has exactly handled this matter. Which is to say that this great
Interest of the Catholic Church, and this Proof, which is one of the most
famous she has, whereby to establish her Faith and Devotion, in respect of
this Mystery, was reserved for Mr. Arnaud, and that the Divine Providence has
not withheld, for so many Ages the Violence of the Infidels, nor put a stop to
the Progress of the Mahometans, nor preserved these Relics of Christianity in
the East, but only for the sake of Mr. Arnaud's excellent Treatise, which was
to be the Admiration of the Universe. You must not then think it strange, if he
himself after this, has judged it worthy to be Presented to Kings and Princes,
and Dedicated even to the Head of the Romish Church, and suffered so many
Doctors to make Panegyricks in its Praise. What farther remains but that it
should be compared to the Savior of the World. And this Honor has not bin
wanting to it.

THE Author of the Enthusiasms says, that as the Son of God before his Birth,
purifyed John the Baptist his Forerunner, and having wrought this Miracle,
left the Virgins Bosom, to publish to Men the glad Tidings of Peace; So
likewise Mr. Arnaud's Book, when as yet in the Bosom of its Author, has
replenished a great Man with its Divinity, and having begun its Miracles by
this Conversion, was published in the time of this late Peace, made in the
Roman Church. So far have they carried it on beyond Reason and Christian
Modesty.

NAMQUE si liceat pusilla magnis plenum and numine numini libellum aequare, ut
gravibus licet Poetis. Iis omnibus diem subibis, O quantum omnibus Libelle
faustis, quibus Sydereus subit puellus, qui dum delituit tenebricosus sacris
visceribus Sacrae Puellae, quot miracula sunt secuta natum? Hoc monstro fuit
auspicatus uno quod cum numinis ad sui perenne lumen and prodomo suoque Vali
futuro ingenitas fugasset umbras, purgasset veterique labe foedum, nil beatius
aestimarit ille quam per pacificos subire plausus diem, and Virginis sinu
Parentis involare sinum recentioris pacis. Quid melius beatiusve iis ominibus
diem videbis? O quantum ominibus libelle faustis, ex quo, dum latites
tenebricosus, absque sole, tui in sinu Parentis Dius -- immigravit ardor
affulsitque viro undequaque numen quod imas animi in sui medullas, quando
ambilius vir ille sensit chartis gliscere de tuis libelle magis gliscere quo
magis magisque lustraret latebras sinusque rerum tua luce, liber, nitoribusque
raptus numine quo tumebat intus raptus numine, numen, ecce numen, ib numeni
ait, severiorque in se se exerit hoc sides libello, Enthusiasmo.

TO all which I have no more to say, but only that I am not at all concerned at
this pretended Divinity, and that Mr. Arnaud's Thunder has neither scared nor
hurt me, his twenty Million of Witnesses are no more in my Apprehension than
twenty Millions of Phantasms; and in short I doubt not but I shall prove the
Truth of these three Propositions. First, supposing that Mr. Arnaud is able to
make good his Pretenses concerning the Greek and other Eastern Churches, from
the eleventh Century to this present, it would not hence follow, that either
the Alteration here in Question must be impossible, or that it has not
actually happened, and consequently, that this tedious Dispute on this Subject is
vain and useless, in respect of the main of the Cause which I defend. Secondly,
That the true Greek Church, and others whom the Latins call Schismatics have
never reckoned Transubstantiation, nor the Adoration of the Sacrament amongst
the Articles of their Creed. Thirdly, That all Mr. Arnaud's Endeavors to prove
the Affirmative, are Ineffectual, and that even the greatest part of his Proofs
conclude the contrary of what he pretends. And for as much as it may not be
amiss to enquire into the Reasons of this his pretended Triumph so loudly
proclaimed, we shall therefore in confirming these three aforementioned
Propositions, observe likewise how Mr. Arnaud imposes on the World, to the end
his Proceedings may be the better laid open.

TO Evidence then the Truth of the first of them, we must begin from the State
of the Eastern Churches, since the eleventh Century, that is to say from the
time Berengarius was condemned, to this present, for by this means we shall
come to know those happy Fields which have furnished Mr. Arnaud with so many
Laurels, and at the same time discover the first of his Artifices, whereby he
would conceal the Condition of those Churches, to the end he might make the
World believe the Argument he draws from their Consent, has all the Weight and
Strength which it is possible for Arguments of this Nature to have. I say since
the eleventh Century to this present, because that Mr. Arnaud having divided
his Discourse touching the Greeks into two parts. The first from the seventh
Century to the eleventh, and the other from the eleventh to this present, and
having begun with this latter part, I am thereby obliged to follow his order,
that I may accommodate my self as much as in me lies to his Method. It must
then be remembered, the present Question only concerns these Churches, and
especially that of the Greeks, from the eleventh Century to this present; for
we shall examine in its place this other part of Mr. Arnaud's Discourse, which
reaches from the seventh to the eleventh Century.

IT must not be imagined, these Christian Churches are now in as flourishing a
Condition as they have bin heretofore. For they lost soon after the eleventh
Century their ancient Splendour, being fallen into a most profound Ignorance,
and corruption of Manners, and a horrid Crowd of Superstitions, and Disregard
to the Mysteries of Religion; Which State of theirs instead of being amended by
time, has grown every day worse.

WILLIAM Archbishop of Tire, describing the Causes of the Inundations of the
Barbarians into Syria, and the Holy Land, and of this long Bell. S^cr. L. 1. C.
8.
Servitude of the Eastern Christians; The Faith, says he, and fear of God
departed the whole Earth, and especially from amongst them who styled
themselves the Faithful. Justice and Equity were no longer to be found amongst
them, for Fraud and Violence reigned everywhere, and Malice had taken up the
Place of Virtue, so that the World seemed to be at its Period, and the time of
the coming of the Son of Man at hand. For the Charity of many waxed cold, and
there was no longer Faith to be found on Earth. The whole Face of things was
changed, and a man would have thought the Universe to be at the point of
falling into its ancient Chaos. The Princes instead of keeping their Subjects
in Peace, broke their Allyances and made War upon every frivolous Occasion.
Wasting whole Provinces by their Violences, and exposing the Goods of the Poor
to the fury of the rude Soldiery, there being nothing which could be preserved
from their Snares. Men were haled into Prison, and suffered the most exquisit
Torments to make them confess and resign up their Estates. Neither could the
Churches Treasure, nor Monasteries escape their Hands, although their Privileges
and Immunities had bin granted by Princes. The Sanctuaries were Violently broke
open; the Vessels dedicated to Gods Service, together with the Sacerdotal
Vestments and Ornaments were forcibly carried away. The Churches were no longer
a shelter to the Miserable. The Highways were filled with Robbers, who spared
neither Pilgrims nor Religious. The Towns and Cities were as little free from
Danger, being full of Cutthroats who la^d wait for innocent Blood. Fornication
in all kinds was common, and suffered without shame or Punishment, as a thing
lawful. Men added Incest to their Adulteries, and Chastity which is a Virtue so
acceptable to God, was grown out of use amongst them, as well as Moderation and
Sobriety, which were forced to give Place to Luxury and Drunkenness. And as to
the Ecclesiastics, they lived no more regularly than the others, it was the
same with the Priest as with the People, as speaks the Prophet. For the Bishops
growing careless, became dumb Dogs, having Respect to Persons; They besmeared
their Heads with the Oil of Sinners, like Hirelings abandoning their Flocks,
and leaving them to the Mercy of Wolves; and becoming Simonists they forgot the
Word of God, freely you have received, freely give. The Almighty then being
provoked by so many Crimes, did not only suffer the Faithful in the Holy Land
to remain in Bondage, but farther to Chastise them who were at Liberty, he
stirred up Belpherus the Satrapas of Persia and Assyria against Romainus
Sur-named Diogenes, Emperor of the Greeks.

JAMES de Vitry, who makes almost the same Observations touching Jacobus de
Vitriac^. L. 1. C. 14.
Gods Displeasure against his Church, adds moreover a thing very likely,
which is, that the Carelessness and Ignorance of the Prelates, and the several
Heresies, which had then Infected the East; occasioned the succesfulness of the
Mohammedan Religion.

LEO Allatius, discoursing of the State of the Greeks during the twelfth Allat.
de Eccle. Occid. and Orien. Perpe. Consens. L 2. C. 13.
Century, tells us that, after the Death of the Emperor Emanuel, the Grecian
Empire began every Day to Decay, either by the Incursions of them of the West,
and the Barbarians of the East, or else through the softness and delicacy, or
Tyranny of the Emperors, or Avarice of their Ministers; and frequent
Insurrections of the Nobility, till such time as at length, this Empire was
miserably oppressed by the Armies of the Latins. Religion it self likewise was
involved in the Ruin of the Empire, for matters were no longer determined by
Reason and Honesty, but by Rage and Hatred, which transported men's Spirits into
Rashness and Fury. At that time all things were in Confusion, Divine and
Profane, the Just and Unjust were mixed together without any Discrimination,
and these Christians (who had indeed no more of Christianity but the Name)
instead of obeying the Doctrine of the Church, minded nothing but how to be
revenged on their Enemies.

WILLIAM de Rubruquis an Emissary sent by Pope Innocent the fourth Ru^^n qu^s
his Voyage. C. 13.
to the Tartars, in the Year 1253. Relates that the Allains, which are says he
a kind of Christians that speak the Greek Language, and have Grecian Priests,
but are so Ignorant, that they know not any of the Ceremonies belonging to the
Christian Religion, and scarcely have learned any thing more than the Name of
Christ.

THE Author of the History of the Council of Florence, relates a matter
Syropul. Sec. 3. C. 7.
which sufficiently shows the Ignorance and small Capacity of the Greeks, for
he tells us, that when the Emperor John Paleologus determined to go in Person
to the Council, and take along with him some of his Clergy, he sent for Marcus
of Ephesus and George Scholarius, who although they were the most Learned in the
Empire, yet were fain to apply themselves to the studying of Cabasilas's
Treatise, and to sent to Mount Athos for Books, to the end they might be
instructed in the Points Controverted between the two Churches.

AND it is in effect in the Monasteries of this Mount, wherein has for a long
time bin confined all the Knowledge and Learning of this Church, to Lib 4. C. 8.
P. 400.
which Mr. Arnaud Consents; for he tells us, that this Place is the Seminary of
all the Religious in the East, because they who are there Educated, do
afterward disperse themselves over all the Provinces of the Patriarchate of
Constantinople, and are usually settled as Superiors over the rest. So that
adds he, the Doctrine of Mount Athos, is the same of that of all the Religious
of the East, and the Belief of the Religious of the East, is the same with that
of all the Bishops, who are all taken hence. Whereupon we may conclude I think
from Mr. Arnaud's own Testimony, that the Knowledge at Athos is that of all
Greece, and consequently to understand wherein consists this Knowledge, we need
but Read what they Relate who have traveled into these Countries. The Greeks
belonging Belon's Observatiuns. L. 3. C. 39, and 40.
to the Monastery of Mount Athos, says Belon, have bin far more Learned
heretofore than at present. There are not any of them now but are very
Ignorant, there being not to be found above one knowing Calojer in each
Monastery. He that desires to have Books of Divinity, in Manuscripts may be
furnished with some, but as for any Books of Philosophy or Poetry they have
none. We must attribute this loss of Greek Books to the Carelessness and
Ignorance of that People who are totally Degenerated. And not only within our
own Memory, but for a long time there has not bin any Learned Man through out all
Greece. Amongst the six thousand Calojers that Inhabit the Mountain, in so
great a Multitude I say, scarcely can we find above two or three in a Monastery
that can Write and Read.

JOHN Cottovic speaking of the Monks of this Mount, and others that inhabit
Itinebar. Hi^rosol. and Sir. L. 2. C. 6.
the Mountains of Sinay and Olympus, tells us they apply themselves
particularly to Husbandry, that they Live on their Labor, and that there are
few of them addicted to Study, the greatest part of them being very Stupid and
Ignorant.

HE that wrote the Voyage of Mr. De la Hay who went Ambassador from the late
King to Constantinople, gives almost the same account of the Learning Mr. Hays
Voyage. Paris Edit 2. 1629. P. 338.
of those good Religious: we Visited, says he, Mount Athos, which they of that
Country call the Holy Mountain, because of five thousand Calojers who live in
great Austerity in twenty three Monasteries about it; these Religious are of
St. Basils Order, and acknowledge the Patriarch of Constantinople for their
Head. They are greater Lovers of an Active than a Contemplative Life, for there
are few of them that can read; so that the greatest part employ themselves in
Tilling of the neighboring Grounds, which are very fertile. De Graecor.
recentior haer. ad Greg. XIII. L. 6. Ms. ex biblio. Reg. P. 75.


ANTHONY Caucus Archbishop of Corfu, giving an Account to Pope Gregory the
thirteenth, of the State of the Greek Church in his time, describes it after
this manner. There is no body but knows, says he, that the Arts and Sciences
came from Greece, as the Hero's out of the Trojan Horse. But it is now much
otherwise, for I found so much Ignorance of all things amongst these modern
Greeks, and especially the Priests that have the charge of Instructing the
People, that scarcely do they know how to read the Church Service. And we need
not be astonished at this: for those that are called to the Exercise of the
Ministry are Tradesmen, who leaving their Shops and Trades become immediately
Papa's. It is ordinarily observed in Greece, that to day you may see a man who
is a Tailor, to become to morrow a Priest. To day he is a Perfumer or Barber,
who the next day is a Papas. To day a Goldsmith, and to morrow a Prelate. If
you ask them concerning their Belief, or Ceremonies, and require a Reason for
their Customs, they return no other Answer, but they follow their Predecessors.
If you proceed farther and ask who these Predecessors were, they become mute.

THE same John Cottovic whose Testimony I already produced concerning the Monks
of Mount Athos, Olympus, and Sinay, affirms the Religious through out all Greece,
to be no better learned than those aforementioned, That It n^r. L. C. 13.
which I find, says he, most despicable in this Nation, is, they have no town
nor City, wherein there are any Schools or Colleges for the bringing up of
their Youth. Neither take they care to form their Childrens Minds, to Arts or
Sciences. They are so averse to Learning, that they seem as it were to be
afraid of it: So that we may truly affirm, Learning is wholly banished from
Greece, which was heretofore the Mother of it. For at this day there is not the
least Trace to be found of it, the Greeks becoming Barbarians with the
Barbarians.

BELON made the same Observation before him: All the Greeks, says Observat. L.
1. C. 3.
he, as well those under the Venetians, as them under the Turkish Empire, are
so marvelously Ignorant at this day, that there is not a City through out all
their Country, wherein there is any University; for they care not to have their
Children Instructed.

EUGENIUS Roger, a Francisan Friar, who was an Emissary in Barbary, Holy Land.
L. 2 C. 2.
tells us (in his Description of the Holy Land, That the greatest part of the
Religious and Secular Priests (he means of the Greeks in Palestine) are
extremely Ignorant, and apply themselves to mean Exercises, and mechanical Arts.

Mr. Thevenot confirms the same, in his Voyages, where speaking of the
Thevenot's Voyages Part 1. P. 188.
Greeks of the Isle of Chios. Learning, says he, is a Stranger to them of that
Country, being all extremely Ignorant. And a little farther, speaking of the
Island of Nixia, and of a Church there, it is served, says he, by Monks, who
are all of 'em Peasants, void of Learning, and it is not only so there, but it is
the same in all the Islands of the Archipelago, they are so Ignorant that it
may be truly said of them, they Worship the unknown God.

FRANCIS Richard the Jesuit, in his Relation concerning the Isle of Relation of
the Isle of St. Erini C. 9.
St. Erinis, makes the same Observation, the Ignorance, says he, of our
Mysteries is so great in Turkey, especially where the Emissari's have not
frequented, that I wonder, considering the several particular Difficulties in
our Faith, and the Temptations they have offered them to leave it, that all of
'em do not take the Turbant, after the same manner as them of Candia, where
above sixty thousand Persons have already done it.

DU Loir, discoursing of the Arnautes, or Albanoises, (that are a kind of
People Loir's Voyages. P. 303.
whose Original is scarcely known,) they are, says he, dispersed over the
Campains of Greece and call themselves Christians, but yet know nothing of our
Religion more than the Name, and exercise no more of it but the Sign of the
Cross.

BUT it may be perhaps answered, there ought not to be the same judgment made
of the Greeks at Constantinople; seeing the Patriarchal Church being there, it
is likely they are not so Ignorant as the others, where the same Care has not
bin taken for the Preservation of Religion. I am willing to believe that if
there be any Knowledge left in Greece, the Church of Constantinople has it, and
yet if we would know the Condition of this Church we need but read John
Barbarean's the Jesuits Letter which was written from Foreign Letters sent to
the Procur of the Emiss. printed at Paris, 1688. Let 1. P. 3.
Constantinople, the tenth of July, 1667. The Schismatical Greeks, says he,
which are in this City to the Number of three hundred Thousand, are so many
Souls to be won to our Savior, because that in effect, after they have told us
they are Christians, and for a Testimony thereof have crossed themselves, there
is no other sign of Christianity to be expected from them: for as to what
concerns Prayers and other religious Exercises they are Names and Things
unknown to them. I have oftentimes asked Persons whom I took to be the most
intelligent amongst them, whether there were more Gods than one, and whether
Jesus Christ from whom they derived their Name, was God and Man, and several
other Questions which are put to Children in France, when they learn their
Catechism. But they all of 'em answered they were not so deeply learned in
Divinity as to answer such great Points, and when I told them they were bound
to know these things under Pain of Damnation, I perceived they were not much
troubled thereat, for as they believed nothing, so they feared nothing. Now not
only the common People and Seculars are no better Learned, but most of their
Prelates, and others of the Clergy. I have oftentimes asked the Priests of
religious Orders, who were brought up all their life times in Monasteries,
concerning their Belief, whether they thought there was more than one God, and
whether Jesus Christ was the true God, and other principal Mysteries, but I
could not find one amongst them able to answer me. And some of 'em being
ashamed of their own Ignorance and Stupidity, made this Excuse, that their
Abbot knew all these things, but for their parts they never studied Divinity.
And demanding how it was possible they could live twenty or thirty Years in a
Monastery, without hearing any Mention made of these necessary Points, they
thereupon told me, that in Monasteries and in all other places, all their
Endeavors are laid out in getting their Living; (He afterward tells us) that
one of the chiefest Causes of this Disorder is, that the Patriarch buys his
Patriarchate, and sells all other Ecclesiastical Promotions, and that the
Archbishops, and Bishops do the same to their inferior Clergy. Neither must
we imagine other Eastern Christians in a better Condition than the Greeks.
Pietro Della Valle a famous Traveller, assures us, that the Christians at
Bagdad, being of several Communions, know nothing of Religion, but its Name,
and Pietro Della Valles Voyages. Tom. 1. P. 76.
to make the sign of the Cross, having no Churches, Sacraments, nor Persons who
can administer them, or if they have, their Priests are so Ignorant that it is
impossible for them to instruct the People in those things, they themselves do
not understand.

THE same Author speaking of the Christians of Presbyter John, there Tom. 4. P.
434.
are, says he, I know not how many Chaldean Christians, called Christians of
St. John or Sabea, but have no more of Christianity than the name, for they
have no other Church but the Lodgings of a Priest, a very ignorant man, which
place they had in my time, and where scarcely any body assists at Divine
Service. They keep no Fasts, nor observe any Abstinence from Meats, Eating
indifferently of all sorts, neither have they scarcely any thing like a
Sacrament amongst them. He observes the same concerning the Georgiens, they
are, says he, less infected Tom. 3. P. 188.
with Errors than others, and being less addicted to Learning than the Greeks,
they have less Malice, and more Ignorance.

THOMAS Herbert, a famous English Man, (whose Voyages are Translated into
French, by Mr. De Vicqfort) speaking of these same Georgiens, in Herbert's
Voyages L. 2. P. 244.
the City of Assepose, says he, and thereabouts, dwell near forty thousand
Georgiens, and Circassians, who all of 'em profess Christianity, but live most
miserable Lives, being Slaves, and destitute moreover of all Knowledge of the
Christian Mysteries, only they have a great Veneration for St. George, who was
Bishop of Cappadocia, and their Apostle.

AS to what concerns the Coptites, they are said to be as Ignorant as any of
Thevenot's Voyages Part 2. C. 75.
the rest. These Coptites, says Mr. Thevenot, are a sort of very dull and
stupid People, so that there can be hardly found a Person amongst them who is
fit to be a Patriarch, Montconys, after the same manner tells us, that the
Coptites Montconis Voyages. P. 129.
hold the heretical Doctrine of Dioscorus, Patriarch of Alexandria, and are
very Ignorant in matters of Religion.

EUGENIUS Roger, a Franciscan Friar, one of the Popes Emissaries Description of
the Holy Land. L. 2.
in Barbary, speaking of these Coptites, tells us, That this Nation is the most
dull and Ignorant of all the Eastern Christians. They are never heard to
discourse concerning Divine Mysteries, or Religious Matters. The greatest part
of their Priests can neither Write nor Read, and seem to act with as little
Reflection as bruit Beasts, as far as I could perceive, all the time I
sojourned in Egypt, He adds, that the greatest part of the Religious, who dwell
in Monasteries in the Deserts of Thebes, are extreme Brutish, and work like
Horses.

Mr. De Sponde Bishop of Pamiez, giving an Account in his Annals of a Spond.
Ann. Tom 3. Ann. 1561.
pretended Union of the Coptites with the Church of Rome, made in the Year
1561, Pius the fourth being Pope, he tells us amongst other things, that their
Patriarch whose Name was Gabriel, was a very ignorant Man, and one of their
Errors was, they reckoned seven Sacraments, and instead of those of Marriage,
Confirmation, and extreme Unction, they substituted Faith, Fasting, and Prayer,
which they adopted into the Number of Sacraments. The Armenians are no less
Ignorant, for Anthony de Gouveau tells us Gouveau's Relations. L. 3. C. 3. P.
368.
they are a Peope wholly Unlearned and Simple, and that moreover David their
Patriarch knew no more than only to Write and Read in his own Language, which
is, adds he, a thing very common amongst them.

JOHN Barbereau, a Jesuit whom I already mentioned, says they are in
Constantinople to the number of above sixty Thousand; and are, if possible,
more Ignorant than the Greeks. They hold the same Errors with them, and have a
particular Heresy which distinguishes them from the rest. Their Ignorance,
adds he, is so great, that I have heard themselves say, they never go to
Church Foreign Lettors Let. 1.
but when they Consecrate, knowing neither the Use nor Design of that Mystery,
and who can instruct them in these things? their Patriarchs and Prelates are
busied in getting Money, like the Greeks, that they may have whereon to live.

VINCENT le Blanc, speaking of the Christians of the India's, called the
Christians of St. Thomas, and who follow the Nestorian Heresy, the Le Blanc's
Voyages. Part 1. P. 115.
Christians of these Places, says he, have still retained some part of the
Instructions left them by St. Thomas, but they are extreme Ignorant in the
principal Articles of Faith, and know not how to sing in their Churches, so
that it is a hard matter to keep them in any kind of Tune.

THE Inhabitants of the Isle of Socotora, says Du Jarric the Jesuit, call
themselves Christians (being likewise Christians of St. Thomas, that is to say
History of the East Indias. L. 1. C. 6. P. 84.
Nestorians) they very much honor and reverence the Cross. They are all of
them very Ignorant, so that they can neither Write nor Read, and it is the same
with their Caciques (that is to say their Priests) who having learned certain
Prayers by rote, sing them in the Church, and often repeat a Word which comes
near to our Halleluja.

THIS same Du Jarrick, who wrote the History of the Reduction of the Nestorians
of Malabar to the Obedience of the Pope, which was brought to pass by Alexis de
Meneses Archbishop of Goa in the Year 1599, does sufficiently set forth the
Ignorance of this People. For he tells us, that there was so great Confusion
amongst them, in respect of the essential form of Baptism, that every Cacanar
(for so do they call their Priests) baptized after a several manner, and the
greatest part of them, (adds he) cannot be said in any kind to administer the
Sacrament, seeing they use not Words essential thereunto. So that the
Archbishop found one of the greatest Towns of this Bishopric of (Angomale) to
have bin deficient in this important Point of our Religion, whereupon he
privately Baptized the greatest part of the People, after a right and due
manner. He relates moreover that there were several amongst them who were not
Baptized at all, and yet received the Eucharist, which was a very common thing
amongst them, that they usually did not Baptize their Children till some Months
or Years after their Birth: and that there were some at ten or eleven years of
Age Unbaptized. That they were wont every Sunday to kindle a Fire in the middle
of the Church, and having cast Incense thereon, every one drew near to take of
the Smoke with his Hand, with which carrying it to their Breasts, they thought
thereby their Sins were chased out of their Souls. He adds, that the Latin
Bishop which was sent them, after their Reduction, visited several Places of
his Diocese, in which there had no Prelate bin for this thirty Years, where he
found such a Degeneracy both as to Points of Faith and Manners, that most of
them had no more of Christianity in them but the Name.

ALTHOUGH the Maronites have bin long since reconciled to the Church of Rome, yet
are they not better Instructed than the rest. Joseph Besson in his Treatise of
the Holy Land, says, They are stricken with four Plagues worse than the Plagues
of Egypt, viz, Ignorance, want of Devotion, Usury, and Injustice, they can
scarcely be persuaded, says he, that the second Person of the Trinity is the
Son of God; and that Jesus Christ who is God, dyed, and that God ever had a
Son. It is incredible say they with the Turks; How can he have a Son seeing he
was never married? and if he was God how could he dye?

I could easily produce several Testimonies touching the State of the
Moscovites, Abyssins, and Jacobites; for their Condition is no better than the
rest, God having suffered all these Churches which were heretofore so favored
with the Light of his Truth, to fall insensibly into so great Darkness, that a
man can scarce perceive the least Mark of Christianity amongst them. There is
not in Moscovia, says Possevin the Jesuit, any Greek Books or Academies;
having made diligent Search for some that understood Greek, I could find none.
They have heaped up Error upon Error, and although they brag of their Bibliot.
Select. L. 6. C. 5.
Christianity above other People, yet do they refer all things to the Wisdom of
their Prince as to an Oracle, having imbibed this Principle from their Infancy.
They value not Strangers nor suffer them to come into their Country unless they
be Polanders, Germans, or Portugaises, for they despise all others. He says
moreover Derebus Mosco. P. 2.
the Moscovits have such Confidence in their Prince, that when they are asked
touching any Point, they commonly answer, God only and our Prince know that.
Our great Czar knows all things, he can immediately solve all Difficulties.
There is no Religion whose Ceremonies and Opinions he is not acquainted with.
Whatsoever we have or are, whether on Horsback, or in Health, it is all owing to
our great Prince, he says farther, they have neither Schools nor Academies
amongst them, only bringing up their Children to Write and Read, learning them
the Gospels, the Acts of the Apostles, a certain Chronicle which they have,
with some of St. Chrysostom's Homelies, and the Lives of some of their Saints,
that should any Person endeavor to make a farther Progress in Learning, he
would be in danger of being punished. As to their Priests and Monks, he assures
us, they are prodigiously Ignorant, for having demanded of them who was the
founder of their Order, not one of them could answer him; and as to the People
he says, they work at all times, not excepting Sundaies and Holydaies, and
think it belongs to Gentlemen, and not to them to frequent the Church. That
they are very well pleased with their own Simplicity, and often make the Sign
of the Cross, and are great Worshippers of Images. As concerning the Russians,
which are under the King of Polands Government, he says, that sometimes their
Bishops perform the Divine Service in Greek, although few of them, if any, do
understand that Language, and that they are very Ignorant in Divinity.

AS to the Abyssins, the Relation of the Jesuit Paez, which Du Jarrick has
inserted in his History of the East Indias, gives us sufficiently to understand
their Ignorance. For he tells us, that the Spiritualities of the Empire, depend
wholly on the Emperor. That the Ecclesiastics do nothing but what he would
have them, and that should he command them all to turn Catholics, they would
not disobey him. He tells us he disputed with one of them, upon occasion of the
legal Ceremonies which they observe, and that this Person could not tell how to
answer him otherwise, than that there were some who could satisfy him on that
Point. He farther adds, That these People knowing little, there was immediately
spread a Report concerning me, that I was a great Doctor, and thereupon never
came any Person afterward to dispute with me. Du Jarric observes that the
Jesuit Paez having taught some Children their Catechism, the King and all his
Court were so astonished at the matter, that he told those about him, saying,
what should our Monks dispute with this Father for, who are not able to answer
these little Children, the plain Truth of it is, we have neither Doctrine, nor
Instruction, neither any thing more than the Name of Christians.

MAFFEUS the Jesuit, relates, that a Priest named Gonsalvus Rhoderick, sent
from Goa to Claudus King of the Abyssins, in the Year 1556. Found History of
the Indias. L 16. P. 938.
him and his greatest Courtiers very Ignorant both in the Knowledge of Councils,
and all kinds of Divine and Humane Learning. These are his own Words.

Mr. De Sponde, relating in his Ecclesiastical Annals the principal Articles
Annal. Eccl. ad ann. 1524.
of their Belief, according to the Confession of Zaga Zabo, concludes in these
Terms. They have so many ridiculous Fopperies amongst them, that they have
scarcely any thing more of Christianity than the Name.

MOREOVER they are not only Ignorant of the Mysteries of Religion, but likewise
in all kinds of Learning, which made Besson the Jesuit say concerning Syria.
That the Sciences are more rare in the Eastern Parts than the Phoenix, and
mechanical Arts more prized than Sciences, wherefore, adds he, the continual
multitude of Books which increase every Day in Europe, continually decrease in
Syria. The best of them have already passed the Seas, several of which are to
be seen in the Libraries in France, so that those which remain are very
ordinary ones.

TO this gross Ignorance, we may join their Superstition, the usual attendant
of Ignorance; for it is certain these People are incredibly guilty of His^r.
Eccl. L. 18. C 53.
it. The Armenians according to the Testimony of Nicephorus, still Celebrate
Easter after the manner of the Jews, slaying Sheep and Oxen, and sprinkling the
Posts of their Doors, with the Blood of a Lamb, and instead of communicating of
the Blood of our Savior, they Sacrifice a Lamb, which being Roasted they
divide it amongst them. This Custom being a very ancient one, is yet in use
amongst them.

BESSON the Jesuit tells us, They call this Sacrifice Korban, and that he that
offers it, causes a Sheep to be brought to the Church Porch, where the Priest
Holy Syria. Part 1. of the Armenians. P. 48.
blesses Salt, and puts it down the Throat of the Sacrifice, afterward
Consecrates the Knife, and then lays his Hand on the Head of the Sheep and
cuts its Throat, The Bishop and Priest take their Share, one part whereof is
distributed to the Poor, and another serves for the Feast, which is Celebrated
with all public Testimonies of Rejoicing. The same Emissary informs us, that
the great Disorders of the Levant are its Superstitions, and the Peoples
Recourse to Magicians, the number of whom is very Considerable amongst
Christians, whose Poverty and Sicknesses make them use these wretched Remedies,

THE Coptites, and Abyssins, besides Baptism, use Circumcision, which they
receive the eighth day, after the manner of the Jews. The Abyssins Boucher
Bouquet sacr. L. 4. C. 7. Brerowood' s Inquiries. C. 22, 23. Villamont, and
alii passim de reb. Mosco. P. 6.
Baptize themselves every Year on Twelfth Day, in the Lakes or Ponds, in
remembrance of our Saviors Baptism. Possevin relates the same of the
Moscovites. For he tells us that twice a Year, viz. on the day of the Epiphany,
and that of the Assumption, the Metropolitan Blesses the River of Mosco; and
that the Priests Bless after the same manner other Rivers, that several Men and
Women Wash themselves therein with the Ceremony of a triple Immersion; that the
Horses and Images are Baptized in like manner, and that this in their Language
is called Baptism. Christoph. Angel. Stat. and rit. Eccl. Graec. C. 25. vide
Annot. Geor. Felsau. Eucholog. Goar P. 689. Allat. Epist. de quorun^. Graecer.
opin.


I scarce know what to think of that Custom amongst the Greeks, of taking up
their Dead, a Year after they are buried. If they find their Bodies are not yet
consumed, they examine what remains of them, and if it does not stink, but has
a good Color, they esteem that Person a Holy Man: But if on the contrary, the
Corpse be Black or Swelled, they repute him to have bin an ill Liver, and an
Excommunicated Person. Wherefore it is, that in their form of Excommunication,
one of their Imprecations is, that such a Person may not be consumed after
Death, neither in this World nor in that which is to come, but that he may be
swelled like a Drum. They verily believe this is perfectly accomplished: And
Leo Allatius tells us several Stories of those Phantasms which they call
Burcolaques, which are says he, Excommunicated Persons, who being deceased
torment the living, and of whom the Greeks are as much afraid, as our Children,
when we tell them of Friar Bourru's Ghost. Nay so greatly are they Prepossessed
with false Opinions, as to imagine an Excommunication pronounced by a Christian
that afterward turns Turk, produces the same Effect, that is to say, keeps the
Body from Consuming, and causes it to grow hard and swell, till such time as
this Excommunication be taken off by him who pronounced it, although never so
great an Infidel. Which is confirmed by Leo Allatius concerning the Patriarch
Raphael, who to dissolve Christoph. Angel. C. 42.
the Body of an excommunicated Person, was forced to apply himself to a
Renegado for his Absolution.

WE may reckon in the Number of the Grecian Superstitions, the belief they have
long held, touching a Miracle that happens every Year, in the Sepulcher at
Jerusalem, on the Saturday before Easter, which is, That all the Lamps being
extinguished, the Patriarch enters alone into the Sepulcher, and God sends a
Beam of Light from Heaven, wherewith he kindles the Torch he holds in his hand,
and therewith lights all the rest. Which is performed Annot. Allat. de quorund.
Graecor. opinat. and alii passim.
with great Ceremony, and public Acclamations of Rejoicing, not only by the
Greeks, but all the Eastern Christians which are at Jerusalem, for they all
hold this Miracle to be true.

NEITHER do they at all suspect the Truth of another Miracle, which Christoph.
Angel. C. 42.
they say happens once a Year in Caire, near the River of Nile, and which lasts
from Holy Thursday to Ascension Day. Which is, that in several Countries the
dead Bodies arise out of their Graves: But this Miracle only happens when they
celebrate Easter according to ancient Custom; Whereas should they Celebrate it
according to the new Calendar, the Miracle would infallibly cease, as it fell
out about fourscore or a hundred Years since, when the Greeks altered the time
of the Celebration, upon which the dead Bodies arose no more, and the Sacred
Fire was also withheld from the Sepulcher, which obliged them to the Observance
again of the former Day, whereupon the Miracles returned. And this Relation we
have from Christophorus Angelus, and some others. We might give a farther
Description of the Ignorance and Superstition of these poor People, were not
what has bin already mentioned sufficient to inform the World of M. Arnaud's
vain Triumphs. For when it should appear that all these Sects held
Transubstantiation and the real Presence, what Advantage would accrue to him
thereby? Would it hence appear impossible that these Doctrines have crept in
amongst them, by the same means the true Mysteries of Christianity have slipped
out; for Ignorance and Superstition are but sorry keepers of Evangelical
Truths. It is easy to impose on these People whose Minds have bin so darkened
with Errors, all marks of Christianity having bin long since lost amongst
them. They may be made believe any thing, being in this respect as white Paper,
whereon men may write what they please. There needs but one man's falling into
an Error, to draw all the rest after him. And this Mr. Poulet has well
Relation of the Levant, or the Sieur of Poulet's Voyage. Part. 2. C. 28.
observed in the Account he gives us of the Nestorians, who still obstinately
retain their old Errors, for which Reason they are hated by all the Levantine
Christians, They know not what they Believe, says he, being ready to receive
any new Opinion, be it what it will, provided it includes not a Submission to
the Holy See. Which is as much as to say, they are not firm or Precautioned,
against any Article but that of Obedience to the Pope, having bin oftentimes
tempted, and sometimes surprised into an acknowledgment of his Supremacy, but
as to other Points, they are very Ductil, being ignorant of their Meaning. And
these are such People Mr. Arnaud desires, and who seem to him fit Objects to
ground his Dispute on. He thought to make his Advantage of this Confusion; but
certainly he ought to give the World a true account of these Matters, and not
so highly to extol his own Victories, seeing the Honor of them is much
diminished by what I have already offered.

CHAP. II.
That the temporal State of the Eastern People since the eleventh Century, and
the Efforts the Latins have ^ade to communicate to them their Religion, do
invalidate the Proof which is pretended to be drawn from their Belief. Mr.
Arnaud's Artifice discovered.

HERE is then Mr. Arnaud's first Deceit detected, which consists in the
concealing from us the real Condition wherein this People have so long layn, as
to Religion, to the end the weakness of his Arguments may lie undiscovered.

The second consists in setting before us several impertinent historical
Passages, on purpose to avert his Readers Mind, from a due Consideration of
those things which he knows would prove disavantagious to him. It is without
doubt a very disingenuous Artifice, thus to change the natural Use and Order of
things, and snatch out of men's Sights the true and important Consequences may
be drawn thence, by substituting others which are but mere Amusements. And yet
this Mr. Arnaud has done: for not being able to deny that the temporal State of
the Eastern People, since the eleventh Century, has very much facilitated the
Attempts of the Latins, establishing their Doctrines in those Parts; He
thereupon supposes I affirm the Greeks never knew the Latins believed
Transubstantiation: and under pretense of opposing this Fancy sprung from his
own Brain, he retails out the History of the East, to show that the Greeks
could not be ignorant of the Belief of the Latins touching the Eucharist. I
will not insist at present on the little reason he had to charge me with this
Opinion; I shall make it appear in the following parts of this Discourse, that
this is his Chimera and not mine. I shall only represent here the same
historical Passages, Mr. Arnaud has produced, in that manner wherein they ought
to be proposed, to make a right Judgment of this Dispute, and not in that false
View wherein he has represented them. In a Word, I pretend to manifest by those
very things he has offered and Perverted, That if the Greeks and other Eastern
Christians do believe Transubstantiation, as fully as the Church of Rome, yet
does it not thence follow that this Doctrine has bin perpetual in that Church:
seeing they might have received it from the Latins.

FIRST then Mr. Arnaud takes a great deal of Pains to prove, there has bin a
frequent Commerce between the Greeks and Latins, for he tells us that L. 2. C.
8. P. 172.
Pisa, Venice, Rome, and several other Cities of Italy were full of Greeks,
That Constantinople was full of Latins, and Latin Churches; that the Armies
were usually made up of Greek, Italian, and French Soldiers, which were
continually in great Numbers at Jerusalem, where they communicated in the same
Churches from the Hands of the Patriarch, and Priests of that City; That so
great was the multitude of Pilgrims, that they administered the Sacrament every
Day, that Persons of the greatest Quality, namely Kings, Princes, and Prelates,
and Ladies of the highest Rank, undertook these Pilgrimages, and that Jerusalem
was then, that is to say in the eleventh Century, a place whereunto all the
Nations of the World resorted.

I shall not now enter into a Debate concerning what he tells us touching the
Christians receiving the Communion at Jerusalem, from the Patriarch and Priests
of that City. He affirms it without proving it, for there is very little
likelihood that ^ersons of different Churches, who were so greatly divided,
would receive the Communion together from the same Person. But be it as it
will, I am so far from raising a Contest about this frequent Commerce of the
Greeks, with the Latins, that I take it for granted, to the end I may thereby
demonstrate to Mr. Arnaud the weakness of his Argument. For when he shall
prove, that the Greeks believe the Conversion of Substances, and adore the
Sacrament, he may then well conclude against me, that I have bin guilty of
Rashness in denying it: but he cannot any ways thereby advantage his Cause,
seeing it will remain still to be examined, whether these People did not
receive these Doctrines from the Latins, by means of their mutual Commerce
since Berengarius was last condemned. What I related in the preceding Chapter
touching the Ignorance which has reigned for so long a time in those
Countries, and the foolish Superstitions which were introduced, even without
our Knowledge of their Original, will ever render this Supposition probable, it
being no difficult matter to conceive that a Doctrine of this Nature might
creep in, in the Dark amongst ignorant and superstitious People, who held a
perpetual Commerce with others, that make open Profession of this Doctrine.

Mr. Arnaud proceeds farther, and relates the History of the Croisado's toward
the end of the eleventh Century, and in the twelfth, for the Conquest L. 2. C.
10.
of the Holy Land; and this History does well deserve our Notice; For there
will result from it these two Truths, the one, that the bad Condition of the
Greeks, and other Eastern Christians obliged them, how Proud and Haughty soever
they might otherwise be, to a servile Complacency with the Latins, and to an
accommodation with their Humors and Interest: And the other that the Latins
have not neglected this favorable Occasion, which the Conjuncture of Affairs
then offered them, to establish their Religion in the East.

WE all know in what Condition Palestine, Syria, and Egypt lay, when Guilliel.
Tyr. Bell. Sacri. Lib. 1. C. 1.
those of the West went thither. The Saracens had overrun these Countries from
Heraclius his time, that is to say from the seventh Century, and the Power of
these Infidels grew formidable to all the World, whilst the Greeks strength
continually decayed, whether by the Supinity of their Emperors, or by the
horrible Crimes with which the same Emperors dishonored their Throne. The
Turks, having subdued Persia, overspread the whole East, and possessed
themselves of Palestine, Syria, Cilicia, Isauria, Pamphilia, Idem L. 5. C. 9.
Lycia, Pisida, Lyconia, Cappadocia, Galatia, Pontus, Bythinia; and moreover of
a considerable part of Asia minor, and so greatly terrified the Greeks, as
relates Wm. of Tire, that scarcely did they repute themselves safe within the
Walls of Constantinople, although the Sea was as a Rampire betwixt them. The
Christians in the East had already received the Benefit of Charlemain's
Intercession for them to Aron, under whose Government they then Idem. L. 1. C.
2.
lived. But this lasted not long, for the Miseries into which they fell
afterward became so intolerable, that toward the end of the eleventh
Century, Simeon Patriarch of Jerusalem, according to the Relation of Wm. of
Tire, Gill. Tyr. L 6. C. 11. Jacob. de V^^r. Hist. Orient. C. 16.
and James de Vitry, resolved to procure the Assistance of the Latins, and
write to Pope Urban the second, and the Western Princes, as well in his own
Name, as in that of the whole Church, by means of a French Pilgrim called Peter
the Hermit, a Native of the Diocese of Amiens. Wm. of Tire observes that in the
Conference the Patriarch had with this Hermit, he told him, amongst other
things, That they could expect no help from the Greeks, although of the same Blood
with them, and their Neighbors, because they could hardly preserve themselves,
having fallen into such a Declension, that within a short time they had lost
above half their Empire. In effect, Mr. Arnaud has himself very well observed;
that the Emperors of Constantinople finding themselves P. 192.
unable to withstand the Turkish Power; implored the Assistance of the
Christian Princes in Europe and especially that of the Pope, who at that time
was the most Powerful even in Temporals of all Christendom, and that Alexis
Comnenus sent for that Purpose Ambassadors to the Council of Plaisance.

THIS then was the true State of Affairs amongst the Greeks, and other Eastern
Christians, which forced them to a great Compliance with the Latins, from whose
Assistance they expected their Establishment.

THESE Letters of the Patriarch of Jerusalem, and the Entreaties of Alexis,
together with the Solicitations of Peter the Hermit, procured the Expedition
of the Latins into Syria and Palestine. The Success is known; I shall say no
more but that the Christians of that Country, only changed their Masters; for
the Lattins settled themselves there, not only as Friends, and Deliverers, but
Conquerors, which made all things depend on their Will, for as soon as ever
they possessed themselves of Syria and Palestine, they established Latin
Bishops there, and drove out the Greek Bishops from their Churches that would
not yield Obedience to the Roman Church, nor accommodate themselves to its way
of Worship. Mr. Arnaud does not wholly accord with me in this. We must imagine,
says he, there was a million L. 2. C. 10. P. 193.
of Transubstantiators that passed over from Europe into Asia, and made
themselves Masters of a great part of these Eastern Provinces. As soon as they
took any City, there was established in it a Bishop of the Latin Communion with
a sufficient Clergy for the Service of that Church. Sometimes the Christians of
the East ranged themselves under his Obedience, and othertimes they were
permitted to have a Bishop of their own Choosing. He farther adds, that after
the taking of Antioch, there was no other Patriarch established than him that
was there before, and that he remained for the space of two Years. That after
the taking of Jerusalem and other Cities of Syria and Palestine, there was
another Patriarch made, and several Latin Bishops, the Greeks and other
Christians of Syria being left at their own Liberty as to their communicating
with the Latins.

THIS pretended Moderation of the Latins is first of all refuted by the same
Author whom Mr. Arnaud quoted, who is James de Vitry. James de Vitry, says he,
Testifies that the Christians of Syria, who were of the same Religion with the
Greeks, had Bishops of their own. It Is not possible for an Ibid.
Author to be cited with less Sincerity; for these are James de Vitry's Words;
The Syrians exactly observe the Customs and Ordinances of the Greeks in the
Celebration of Divine Service, and other Spiritual matters, and obey them as
their Superiors. But as to the Latin Prelates in whose Diocesses they live,
they Hist. Orient. C 75.
freely affirm they obey them with their Mouths, but not in their Hearts,
superficially, and for fear of their temporal Lords. For they have their own
Greek Bishops, and would dread neither the Excommunications nor other Laws of
the Latins, did they not fear our Laymen would break off all Trade and
Commerce with them. For they say amongst themselves the Latins are
Excommunicated. Now where I pray is Mr. Arnaud's Sincerity in thus alleging
James de Vitry's Testimony to prove the Moderation of the Latins, who obliged
not the Syrians to communicate with them unless they pleased themselves. These
Words of his declare the Syrians did still acknowledge their Greek Bishops: But
then again on the other hand, that they were constrained for fear of their
temporal Lords to acknowledge the Latin Prelates; and render them an external
Obedience: which is expressly contrary to what Mr. Arnaud concludes. And yet he
has not contented himself with thus alleging James de Vitry, in a contrary
Sense, but has made a Principle of it; From whence he draws this Consequence,
concerning the other Christians: We ought, Ibid. P. 194.
says he, to conclude the same of the other Sects of Armenians, Jacobites, and
Nestorians, with which all Syria was at that time filled. This seems to me, to
be a too free disposal of Principles and Conclusions.

IN the second place, this pretended Moderation is refuted even by those very
Letters which Pope Paschal the second wrote to the Latins in the East, after
the taking of Jerusalem, in which he tells them, he has charged his Legate
Baron. ad ann. 1100.
to endeavor the regulating of the Church, which God has delivered by their
Hands, and that which should hereafter be delivered by them, to correct
whatsoever should be found contrary to sound Doctrine, to Plant and Edify
whatsoever he judged fitting, by their Assistance; which plainly shows that the
Latins, after they had freed these Eastern Christians from the Tyranny of the
Infidels, suffered them not to live according to the form of their own
Religion, and that in this respect they subdued them to themselves.

ALLATIUS a Latiniz'd Greek, and keeper of the Popes Library, has bin more
ingenuous than Mr. Arnaud, for he freely confesses that the Latins De Eccl.
Occid. and Orient. Perp. Consens L 2, C. 13.
established Prelates of their own in the East, and drove out them of the
Greeks, when they could do it with safety, and severely chastized Schismatics
and Obstinate Persons. And as to what Mr. Arnaud alleges out of Balsamon,
That Antioch only excepted, in all other Cities the Latins permitted Ibid. P.
194.
the Greek Bishops to exercise their Episcopal Functions, although they had
established Bishops in the same Places. I have not met with any such Passage in
his Nomocanon of the Parisian Edition printed in 1620. Those that published it
relate this Passage in a Supplement annexed to the end of the Book, and tell us
that these Additions are not to be found in any Greek Copy, but only in the
Latin Version of Gentian Hervetus; so that the Truth of this Testimony is
doubtful, and Mr. Arnaud that seems to have taken his Quotation from Baronius,
ought to have more certainly informed himself. Howsoever it be, Balsamon lived
toward the end of the twelfth Century, about a hundred Years after the
entrance of the Latins into the East, in a time wherein their Affairs were in
Disorder; for the Infidels had retaken Jerusalem with a great part of those
Places which were held by the Latins: So that we need not wonder if the Latins
slackned their Rigor toward the Greeks, and so much the less, because it
appears by this same passage of Balsamon, that the Infidels gave the same
Liberty to the Greek Bishops, to exercise their episcopal Functions in their
Dominions.

IT is certain, this Moderation Mr. Arnaud speaks of, is a mere Chimera
Guilliel. Tyr. L. 6. C. 23. and L. 7. C. 8. and L. 9. C. 15. and L. 10. C. 16.
and L. 11. C. 12. and L. 1. C. 2^. and L. 15. C. 11.
of his own. For immediately after the taking of Antioch, there were Latin
Bishops put into all the neighboring Cities; the Patriarch for some time kept
his Dignity, but at length was forced to withdraw to Constantinople, and a
Latin Bishop was substituted in his room. After this Dabert Bishop of Pisa was
made Patriarch of Jerusalem; Baldwin Archbishop of Cesarea, William
Archbishop of Tire, Adam Bishop of Paneada, and all other Diocesses furnished
after the same manner, as it appears by Wm. of Tyre's Account.

WE may then I think, without farther Trouble, conclude that the Latins did not
omit so favorable an Occasion of Introducing their Religion and particular
Doctrines in the East. We may moreover consider another historical Passage of
which Mr. Arnaud makes use according to his ordinary manner, which is to hinder
us from beholding the just Consequences may be drawn thence: This History
concerns the subjecting of the Grecian Empire to the Latins.

IN the Year 1204. The Latins took by Assault the City of Constantinople, and
seized almost at the same time on the greatest part of the Grecian Empire,
which they bestowed on Baldwin Earl of Flanders. They kept it fifty eight Years
till Michael Paleologus retook Constantinople, and drove the Latins out of
Greece. The Greeks were no more moderately dealt with after this Conquest, than
they were after that of the Holy Land. The Latins, De Eccl. Occ. and Orient.
Perp. Consens L. 2. C. 13.
says Leo Allatius, established in the places they Possessed Priests and
Prelates of their own, who ruled the Church after their manner, and drove away
the Greeks, whenever they could do it with safety; and as to the Rebellious
and Obstinate Greeks, who would not relent and embrace the Truth, they severely
punished them, as they had done heretofore in the East, and especially at
Antioch. He afterward produces the Testimony of an Anonymous Greek Author,
which I shall here set down, and so much the rather, because of the Consequence
which may be made of this History. Since the Emperor Porphyrogennetu' s Ibid.
time, to that of John Batatza' s the Latins did nothing else but Plunder
Cities and Islands. They expelled the Orthodox Prelates from their Seats, and
substituted Cardinals in their Places who were of the same Belief with them.
And this they did at Constantinople, Cyprus, Antioch, and other Cities, and not
content with this, they constrained all the People, not excepting the Priests
and Monks, to be of their Opinion, and Communion, and commemorate the Pope.
They were Friends to those that obeyed them; but as to them that reprehended
them, they treated them as Heretics, and those that abhorred their Communion,
were punished openly, even to the making them suffer Martyrdom; and used in the
same manner as the Kings and Tyrants handled the Primitive Christians. Witness
the holy Monks of the Isle of Cyprus, whom they kept three Years in Prison,
because they would not Communicate with them, Inflicting on them all manner of
Torments, and in fine, not being able to make them acknowledge their Doctrine to
be good, being possessed with Rage they fastened them to their Horses Tails,
and drew them over Precipices, causing othres to be burnt alive. John their
Abbot having remained some time in the midst of the Flames calling upon God,
one of these furious Latins struck him down with his Mace into the Fire. And
thus did this Holy Man render his Spirit unto his Creator. He farther adds,
that the Pope having sent some Monks as Spies, under pretense of a Pilgrimage
to Jerusalem, they saw the Patriarch Germain at Nice, who complaining of these
Cruelties, received for Answer, that the Pope was troubled thereat, and if the
Greeks would send any to make Peace they would be kindly received, It was only,
says he, to deride and impose on us, that they would have us send first to
them, as it were to accuse our selves, and acknowledge our Error, which plainly
appeared afterward by their Letters.

BUT to the end, we may not think Leo Allatius, who relates this Complaint of
the Greeks, is suspected by the Latins, under pretense that he himself is a
Greek by Birth, it will not be amiss to see the Answer he makes. If this
Author, says he, means the Greeks, who remaining fixed to their Ceremonies,
embraced otherwise the Truth, he is mistaaen; For the Latins have Ibid.
bin so far from driving them away, that they have made use of them, as often
as they have Occasion. If he means the Schismatics, and those that maintained
the Errors of the Greeks, he trifles; for how can he imagine, the Catholics
who are so Zealous for the Roman Church, should suffer in a Country, they had
Conquered with the loss of their Blood, the Greeks their Enemies and
Adversaries to their Faith, to live unpunished? These erroneous People must be
reduced, being Rebels to their own Faith, not only by simple Banishments, but
by Fire and Sword. And this is Allatius his Moderation, which does not well
accord with that which Mr. Arnaud attributes to the Latins.

BUT we need not oppose Allatius against him, we need but hear himself, to know
whether the Latins did not use all manner of Violences, to settle their
Religion amongst the Greeks. After the taking of Constantinople, L. 3. C. 1.
says he, the Latins possessed themselves of all the Churches; they
established a Latin Patriarch, they filled Constantinople with Latin Priests,
they created a Latin Emperor, who was Baldwin Earl of Flanders, and prosecuting
their Conquest in Greece, they brought under their Obedience almost whatsoever
appertained in Europe to the Emperors of Constantinople. The Grecian Emperor
fled into Asia, having but three or four Cities left him, which were all that
for a long time remained under the Obedience of the Greeks. Behold here then
all Greece subdued not only to the Temporal Authority of the Latins, but
likewise to the Spiritual Authority of the Popes. He adds a little after, that
the Popes Legates used such hard and rigorous Courses to constrain the Greeks to
Communicate with the Pope, that at length the Emperor Henry, Baldwin' s
Successor was forced to take them off mauger the Legate Pelagus. He tells us
likewise L. 3. C. 7.
in another place, that Greece was at that time filled with Dominicans, and
Friar Minorites, that is to say, Inquisitors as he himself calls them, who had
often performed this Office in France, and Germany, and signalized themselves
by punishing an infinite number of Heretics, who made it the greatest part of
their Skill to discover them, and a great part of their Piety to have them
severely Punished, that these Inquisitors were in several places Masters of the
Greeks, and were ordered by the Pope to Confer with them, and examine their
Doctrine.

WERE not them of the Church of Rome fully persuaded of Mr. Arnaud's good
Intentions toward them; these historical Passages he has offered, were enough
to make him suspected. For this deplorable Condition of Greece and all the
East, and the violent Means the Latins here used to plant their Religion, for
several Years together, that is to say, for near two hundred Years in the East,
and fifty eight in Greece, might well introduce amongst these People, the
Belief of a substantial Conversion, and there is methinks, more reason to
admire, if this has not happened, than if it has.

WE are not yet gotten to the end of Mr. Arnaud's Histories. He tells L. 3. C.
7.
us three things worth our Observation. The first is, that although Constantinople
was retaken from the Latins by Michael Paleologus, yet they kept still several
places in Greece, and even whole Provinces, as Achaia. Secondly, that the
Latins were still Masters of diverse great Islands, as Cyprus, Crete, Eubee
Rhodes, and diverse other Places. Thirdly, that the Necessity the Emperors of
Constantinople lay under of obtaining the Assistance of the Western Princes,
caused them to keep a continual Correspondency with several of them, and to be
in sundry particulars subservient to the Latins which remained at
Constantinople, so that there was always a great number there, who made
Profession of the Romish Religion. Here is then the Latins again not only mixed
with the Greeks in their ordinary Commerce; but in several places their Lords
and Masters, and in a fit Capacity to make them receive their Religion.

LEO Allatius, tells us likewise that, when the King of England had Possessed
De Perp. Consens. L. 2. C. 15.
himself of Cyprus, and given it to the King of Jerusalem, that he might return
home, the whole Country was immediately filled with Priests and Latin Bishops,
to bring over the People to Piety and Orthodoxy.

WHEREUNTO Mr. Arnaud Consents, and says, That they were L. 3. C. 1. P. 256.
more rigorously handled for their Religion in Cyprus, than in Greece, that
several Greek Authors have grievously complained of these Cruelties; and that
Germain the Patriarch of Constantinople, residing in Asia, most pathetically
laid open their Sufferings to Pope Gregory the ninth.

FRIAR Stephen, a Portugais, in his History of the Kingdom of Cyprus, General
Hist. of the Isle and Kingdom of Cyprus. Fol. 71.
Relates that although Guy de Lusignan, was King of Jerusalem, yet was he forced
to be contented with being King of Cyprus. He brought along with him several
Greeks, Armenians, Coptites, Maronites, Jacobites, Indians, Nestorians,
Iberians, and Georgians, who would not acknowledge the Roman Prelacy, each of
these having their own Patriarch. It Is true, says he, that the Kings of
Lusignan would not permit their Bishops to exercise any Jurisdiction over them,
Ibid.
but ordered they should only administer to them the Sacraments, leaving the
Overplus to the Jurisdiction of the Latin Archbishop, to whom these Nations
in this respect were Subject. He likewise Relates, that about the same time,
there was published the Revelation of Jesus Christ to St. Bridget, in which our
Savior himself exhorted the Greeks to submit to the Roman Church. Let Ibid.
the Greeks know, (these are the Words,) that their Empire, Kingdoms, and
Lordships, will never be in Peace and Security, but always subject to their
Enemies, from whom they will continually receive exceeding great Damages, and
perpetual Miseries, till such time as they submit themselves to the Church of
Rome with a true Humility and Charity, obeying its Holy Constitutions, and
Ceremonies, and wholly conform themselves to her Faith. And after this manner
did they make Heaven and Earth meet, to cause these People to change their
Religion.

WE may then I think plainly enough see, that it has not bin the Latins Fault,
if the Greeks have not received their Doctrines, from whence it follows that if
it dos appear they have from that time Believed Transubstantiation, and it not
appearing they held it before, we may then reasonably conclude, they received
it from the Latins. This is a Consequence which follows naturally of it self.
The Testimony of the Greeks cannot be any longer produced as that of the pure
Greeks, after so many endeavors to make them embrace the Doctrine of the
Church of Rome, and the more Mr. Arnaud strives to prove the Intercourse of
these two Nations, the greater hold he gives us to contest with him the
Advantage he pretends to have obtained from hence. But he uses an admirable
Expedient, to hinder us from minding this Consequence. For having seen on one
hand, that these Histories were too well known, to be passed over wholly in
Silence; and on the other, that if he should sincerely produce them as they are
in themselves, they would certainly make for our Advantage, as it has bin
already observed; he has thereupon bethought himself, and presented them in
another kind of Dress, whereby he may insensibly turn aside his Readers Minds,
and amuse them by an agreeable Diversion. And to this end has thought good to
suppose, I denied the Greeks knew what was the Belief of the Latins, and to
employ all these historical Passages in opposing this Fantastical Supposition,
that is to say, in manifesting the Greeks could not be ignorant of the Belief
of the Latins touching the Eucharist, I shall make appear in its proper place,
that this is but a vain Pretense, and a mere quibling on Words, which he has
designedly taken in a Sense contrary to my meaning. Wherefore I here declare it
never entered into my Thoughts to deny, what he makes me deny. For this is an
Invention he has used on purpose to conceal his indirect dealing.

CHAP. III.
That the Greek Emperors, led by politic Interests, have themselves favored
the Design of the Latins, in Introducing their Doctrines into Greece. Mr.
Arnaud's third Artifice discovered.

IT has not bin only the Latins that earnestly endeavored to make the Greeks
receive their Doctrines. For even the Grecian Emperors themselves have favored
this Design; induced by politic Respects, which put them upon seeking the
Friendship of the Western Princes, and especially that of the Popes, who in
those times, as speaks Mr. Arnaud, gave Laws to all the rest, and that even in
Temporals. We all know what a great Influence the Inclinations of Princes have,
not only on the People, but Ecclesiastics and Prelates. It is usual with
Subjects to turn themselves on that side which is most pleasing to their
Sovereign, and there are few Persons who make it not their Business so to do,
especially when Princes openly declare their Minds, and make use of their
Authority in punishing those that withstand them, and rewarding those that
approve them. Now this the Grecian Emperors have often particularly done, in
favor of the Church of Rome, to which they have endeavored to unite their
Subjects.

POSSEVIN the Jesuit, reckons up fourteen of these interessed Reunions, De reb.
Moscovit. P. 7.
the Greeks, says he, have bin reunited to us fourteen times, by public
Confessions, and have so many times departed from us. And it is certain that as
they have ever known the Popes earnest Desires to submit them to the Sea of
Rome, so likewise have they not failed to flatter this Desire by fair Promises,
when they needed that Churches Assistance, either for the obtaining of some
important Design, or for the averting of some dangerous Tempest which threatened
them. But as soon as ever these have bin over, they have returned to their
first State, and slighted these Reunions. I know not how it has come to pass
that the Popes having bin so often deceived, should still continue so Facile;
but perhaps it was not a single Interest, but be it as it will, the Popes have
never bin backwards in these Matters.

MY Design is not to set down here all these Reunions, one after another, and
relate their particular Circumstances, seeing an Account thereof is to be met
with in sundry Historians, but more especially in the Book Leo Allatius wrote
touching the Agreement of these two Churches. I shall only here take notice of
some of them observed by Mr. Arnaud, and which will be sufficient to show after
what manner the Greek Emperors have proceeded in Favor of the Latins, when
they wanted the Pope's Assistance.

MICHAEL Cerularius the Patriarch of Constantinople, and Leo Bishop of Acrida,
having written some Letters against the Church of Rome, to Peter the Patriarch
of Antioch, thereupon caused the Latin Churches to be shut up at
Constantinople. Pope Leo the Eleventh was greatly moved at it. He therefore
wrote to Cerularius, and Leo of Acrida a long Letter, wherein he answered their
Objections, and accused likewise the Greek Church of Lightness, Rashness, and
Presumption. This happened about the middle of the eleventh Century. The Emperor
Constantin Monomaque who then Reigned, seeing this Difference, did not stick to
take the Church of Rome's part: he commanded therefore Cerularius to write back
to the Pope, Letters of Reconciliation and Peace; and the Pope sends thereupon
to Constantinople (in order to the Churches Reunion) his Legates, Humbert, and
Frederic, Cardinals, and Peter, Archbishop of Melphus, with Letters to the
Emperor and Patriarch. The Emperor granted to these Legates whatsoever they
desired, even to the constraining Nicetas Pectoratus, a Greek Monk, that had
written against the Romain Church, to burn publicly his own Book, and
anathematise all those that would not acknowledge the Pope's Supremacy, or dared
in any wise censure the Doctrines of the Latins. This Protection so raised the
Legates Courage, that coming into the Patriarchal Church, in the presence of
all the People and Greek Clergy, they Excommunicated the Patriarch and Bishop
of Acrida, and all that took their Parts; which raised such a Tumult in
Constantinople, that the Emperor had much ado to save the Legates from the
Popular Fury, who after this returned into Italy; whereupon the Patriarch
Excommunicated, on his Side, the Legates, and rased the Popes Name out of the
Diptyches, which are Tables, wherein the Names of those that are prayed for in
the Divine Service were set down. Some Authors say, that he Anathematised the
Pope, and all the Latins, as Heretics; but Leo Allatius cites the Testimony
of an anonymous Author, by which it appears, that the Emperor hindered, by his,
Authority this Excommunication. In the time, says this Author, that Michael
Cerularius Anonym. apud Allat. de perp. Cons. L. 2. C. 8.
held the Sea of Constantinople, the four Patriarchs rased the Pope's Name out
of the Dyptiches, and yet did they not fully pronounce the Anathema against the
Latins, being hind'red by the Emperor, who considered them as a great and
mighty Nation, and therefore was afraid of their usual Incursions.

IN the Year 1071, Michael Parapinacius was made Emperor, being a Prince that
loved his Ease, and therefore withstood not the Turks Progress into Europe. He
observed the usual Policy of the Greek Emperors, which L. 2. C. 8. P. 173.
was, to favor the Latins; and Mr. Arnaud observes from Baronius, and Leo
Allatius, that Pope Alexander the second, sent to him Peter, Bishop of Anagnia,
Allet. de Perp. Cons. L. 2. C. 9.
as his Nuncio. Allatius adds that Peter remained a Year at Constantinople.
Which shows us, says he, This Emperor was in the Communion of the Roman
Church, and in effect, Gregory the seventh Excommunicated, upon his account,
Nicephorus Botionatus, who had usurped the Empire, and shut up Michael in a
Monastery.

IN the Year 1081 Nicephorus Botoniatus, was handled by Alexis Comnenus, in the
same manner that Michael was used by Nicephorus, that is to say, he was
deprived of the Empire and shut up in a Monastery. But Alexis getting into his
place, varied not from the Custom of his Predecessors: the necessity of his
Affairs obliging him to turn himself on the Side of the Latins, more openly
than others had done before him, and observe their Measures, although inwardly he
did not affect them. He obstructed their Designs on the Holy Land, as much as
in him lay, and hind'red their Passage thither, obliging them sometimes to turn
their Arms against him, and chastize him Rationar. temp. Part 1. L. 8. C 13.
Baron. ad ann. 1095.
severely; which caused Pelavius the Jesuit, to say, That it was impossible for
a man to be more deceitful and unjust than this Emperor was toward the Latins
in this whole Expedition. Yet had he sent his Ambassadors to the Council of
Plaisance to solicit the Pope and Western Princes to undertake the War
against the Infidels. He flattered the Romain Church on all Occasions, sending
Allat. de Cons L 2. C. 10.
oftentimes Presents to the Monastery of Mount Cassin, using likewise the same
Liberality toward the other Latin Churches, and especially that of St. Marc
at Venice, on which he bestowed considerable Revenues, as it is observed by
Allatius, who alleges for this the Testimony of the Princess Ann Barron. ad
ann. 109^.
Comnenus the Daughter of this Emperor. He likewise gave his helping Hand
toward the Essay of a Reunion made at the Synod of Bary in the Year 1097. He
sent Ambassadors to Rome in Behalf of Pope Paschal, the second Baron. ad ann.
1112 and ad ann. 1118.
who obtained the Papacy, two Years after the Synod of Bary, and this Pope in
the second Year of his Popedom, sent him the Archbishop of Milain. Eo solo
nomine quod ipse existimo, says Allatius, ut si quid erat in Graecia Allat.
ubi supra.
noxium ex Cerularii Schola radicitus extirparet, Graecosque alios contineret
in fide. To the end he might utterly Extirpate, whatsoever remained of
Cerularius his Doctrine, and keep the other Greeks in the Faith.

JOHN Comnenus, who succeeded Alexis, was yet more favorable to the Latins
than Alexis, for this I suppose is the Jesuit Peteau's meaning, when he says
that he was, Patre aliquanto commodior, a little less troublesome than his
Father. I do not observe there has bin any thing more said of him on this
Subject, unless, that he received a Letter from Peter the Abbot of Clugny, in
which he entreated him to surrender a Monastery belonging to them of his Order
at Constantinople, and which had bin taken from them, promising he should
participate of all the Merits of that Order, if he reestablished them. Baronius
says likewise that Anaclet the Antypope to Innocent Baron. ad ann. 1130.
the second, wrote to this Emperor, informing him of his Promotion to the
Popedom; and that he called him his most dear Son.

AFTER John succeeded Manuel Comnenus, a Prince very much addicted to
Dissimulation and double Dealing, who on one hand did the Latins all the
Mischief he privately could, by the Secret Intelligence he held with the
Sarracens, and on the other, earnestly endeavored at a compliance with the
Desires of the Church of Rome, touching the Reunion of the Greeks. Allatius
tells us, that he sent Ambassadors to Pope Alexander the Allat. de Perp. Cons.
L. 2. C. 11.
third, to treat with him concerning this Reunion, and that the Pope sent John
the Subdeacon of the Church of Rome, to Constantinople, to reduce the Greeks
by his Sermons. He likewise tells us, 'twas this Emperor that obliged Hugo
Eterianus to write against the Greeks, touching the Procession of the Holy
Ghost; that the Empress his Wife (as Mr. Arnaud himself observes) after him,
was a Germain and of the Romish Religion: and that he bestowed great Gifts on
the Latin Churches: whereupon the Latin Bishops for an acknowledgment of his
Munificence, set up his Image in their Churches. It is difficult to Imagine how
a Prince who in his Heart so greatly hated the Latins, that the Jesuit Peteau
has not stuck thereupon to call him, hominem subdolum and Christianis rebus
quae ad Latinos spectabant infestum and iniquum Ration. Temp. Part 1. C. 8. C.
21.
adeo, ut cum Saracenis in eorum conspiraret exitium, that is to say, a Person
so deceitful and cruel to the Latin Church, that he conspired its Ruin,
together with the Saracens, yet should favor the Latins in his Empire, and
endeavor to procure the Reunion of its Church with the Roman. But Allatius
unties the Knot, by showing us in the Acts of Alexander the third, that the
Allat. ubi Supra.
Design of this Emperor was so to bring it about, that the Pope who was at
Variance with the Emperor Frederick, should take away from him the Latin
Empire, and render it to the Greeks, to whom Manuel affirmed it did justly
belong: and for this Effect he sent Ambassadors to the Pope; and the Pope sent
back together with his Ambassadors the Bishop of Ostia, to negociate this
Affair at Constantinople. Howsoever it was, it sufficiently appears that all
these different Interests yielded the Latins fit Opportunities to plant their
Doctrines amongst the Greeks.

EMANUEL'S Intrigue was so far carried on, that he assembled a Allat. de Perp.
Cons. L. 2. C. 2. Idem. Ibid.
Council at Constantinople, where the Reunion of the Churches was proposed.
Some say, the Latins required no more of the Greeks, but the Acknowledgment of
the Popes Authority, the grant of Appeals, and the Commemoration of him in the
public Prayers of their Church: Others say, the Latins would have entirely
subjected the Greeks to their Wills and Customs. That which is certain is, they
could not Agree, and that the Emperor himself lent his helping Hand to separate
them, yet not daring to Anathematise Ancyr an. apud Allat. Ibid.
the Latins, because, says a Greek Author, Cited by Allatius, they were a
great and famous People.

AFTER the Latins had established their Empire at Constantinople, the Greeks
withdrew into Asia, where they chose an Emperor and Patriarch, and the Affairs
of the Latins falling to decay, there was an after Trial made upon the Greeks,
touching a Reunion. Mr. Arnaud observes, that the Pope wrote about it to
Germain the Patriarch of Constantinople, and it is very L. 3. C. 2.
likely he forgot not to solicit the Emperor, who was then John Ducas. He
sent two Dominicans, and two Franciscans, who caused an Assembly to be called
for this Effect, but to no purpose. For each of them had his particular
Interest and Design in this Affair.

THE Pope intended to subject the Greek Church to himself, and the Emperor
endeavored to hinder the Pope from favoring the Latins, who held
Constantinople, and to Regain this City, as the Greeks did some time after;
Matthew Paris gives an account of these Letters of the Patriarch to the Mat.
Par. in Henrico. 3.
Pope, and of the Popes to the Patriarch, concerning this Negotiation.

THEODORUS Lascaris succeeded John Ducas, in the Year 1255. Raynald. ad ann.
1256. numb. 47.
Pope Alexander the fourth failed not to solicit him to a Reunion: he sent
him an express Legate for that purpose; but this Emperor soon died, whereupon
this Affair was no farther prosecuted.

ALLATIUS observes there was then a Greek Patriarch, Named Blemmida, Allat. de
Cons. Perp. L. 2. C. 14.
who was a Learned Man, and very Zealous for this Union with the Latins.

MICHAEL Paleologus, obtaining the Empire, and having a while after made
himself Master of Constantinople, endeavored above all others at L. 5. C. 1.
P. 255.
a Reunion with the Latins, Mr. Arnaud acknowledges, that having united
himself to the Church of Rome, he forced, by all manner of Severity, the
Bishops and Religious Greeks to do the same. This Prince Contracted a
particular Friendship with Gregory the Tenth, before he came to the Popedom,
according to Allatius, which gave him the greater Facility to Negociate with
the Allat. de Perp. Cons L. 2. C. 15.
Church of Rome. He sent several times his Ambassadors, and the Pope his
Legates in order to a Reconciliation. He held several Councils on this
Occasion, Ibid.
and Inflicted the greatest Torments on those that had the Courage to resist
him, and promoted others who embraced this Union; these are Allatius his own
Words. He falsely accused John Veccus, Treasurer to the Church of
Constantinople, and caused him to be Imprisoned; because Veccus had said in his
hearing, that although the Latins were not respected as Heretics, yet were
Pachymer. Hist. Lib. 5. C. 12.
they such nevertheless; which so greatly provoked this Emperor, as caused him
to think of nothing but Revenge; And for as much as Veccus had sheltred himself
in the Temple of St. Sophia, and the Emperor daring not to Violate this Asylum,
he wrote to him very kind Letters, entreating him to come to him, which Veccus
had no sooner endeavored, but was apprehended, and carried to the Tower, where
he was solicited to join with the Idem C. 13.
Latins.

THIS Prince made and unmade Patriarchs at his Will, he usurped, says the
Historian Raynaldus, the Ecclesiastical Authority, placing and displaing
Raynald. ad ann. 261. Number. 32. Vide. Pach.
Patriarchs at his Pleasure. He first of all constrained Arsenius to resign up
his place to Nicephorus; and after the taking of Constantinople, he recalled
the same Arsenius, who had excommunicated him, for what he had done against
John Lascaris the Son of Theodorus, to whom the Empire did of Right belong; and
whose Eyes he had caused to be put out; and seeing he could not prevail on this
Patriarch, he raised up false Witnesses against him, and caused him to be
deposed in a Synod, and Germain chosen in his place. Germain not being suitable
to his Humor, he so far prevailed with him as to obtain a voluntary
Resignation to Joseph; but Joseph not consenting to the Reunion with the
Latins, nor the sending of Deputites to the Pope, with whom the Emperor had
charged them to conclude this Affair, he caused him therefore to retire into a
Covent, upon Condition that if this Matter broke off, he should enter again
into his charge of Patriarch. Now the Deputies being returned with the News of
the Reunion accomplished, the Emperor chose this same above named John Veccus,
who at length suffered himself to be won, either by the reading of some Books
put into his Hands, or by the Miseries he had suffered during a long
Imprisonment, and hope of a contrary Usage: Yet Veccus did not please him long.

IT would be a difficult matter to relate here all the Violences and Cruelties
of Michael, against those that withstood the Reunion of the two Churches. It
will be sufficient to relate here two or three of them, by which we may judge
of the rest. He Imprisoned Holobulus Rhetor of the Church of Constantinople,
whose Office, according to Codinius, was to Interpret the Holy Scriptures, and
caused him to be cruelly Scourged, and at length a Pachymer. L. 5. C. 20 Codin.
de Officiis Constable. Cap. 1.
Rope to be fastened about his Neck, and to be thus exposed through out all the
City, with his Wife and Niece, together with ten others, bound after the same
manner, causing the two former of these to be flapt ever and anon on the
Cheeks, with the Entrails of a Sheep, which is amongst the Greeks, a kind of
Infamous Punishment, wherewith only the Vilest Offenders are treated, and those
who add Obstinacy to the Crimes of which they have bin Guilty. He likewise
Imprisoned four of the Chief Officers of his House, two of which were his
Kinsmen, and there kept them a long time laden with Idem. L. 6. C. 16.
Irons. This Severity seemed very great, but not content therewith; when the
Pope sent Legates to Constantinople, to Confirm the Greeks in their Obedience
to him, he made them Witnesses of his Cruelty toward the Opposers of this
Union, commanding a certain Bishop of Ephesus, to conduct them to the Prison,
and show them these four Persons, who were of the chiefest Rank in Greece, they
were in a square Room, each of 'em chained to a corner thereof, and laden with
Irons, and that which was an Aggravation of their Misery, was to be thus
exposed a Spectacle to their Enemies.

WOULD we know the Motives inducing this Prince to use so great Idem. L. 3. C.
18.
Severity in this matter. Observe we then what Pachymerus tells us. He sent
oftentimes Ambassadors to the Pope, and endeavored to gain him by Presents.
For he plainly perceived the Danger lay on that side, and that the Italians
could not lie long Idle; Wherefore he made Proposals of Union, to the end he
might be secure as to them, and the better Dispose of his other Affairs. These
Embassies then were frequent, and the Presents Magnificent, not only to the
Pope, but likewise to several Cardinals, and others whom he judged powerful in
the Court of Rome. In effect as soon as ever Pope Urbain the fourth, received
Raynald. ad ann. 1262. number. 3. etc. ad ann. 1262.
the News of the re-taking of Constantinople, and the Progress of the Greeks,
he earnestly endeavored to stir up the Princes and People to assist the
Latins; he wrote for this Effect, to the Friar Minorites in France, and
enjoined them to Preach a Croisado on this occasion, with the same Indulgences
which had bin granted them that undertook the Holy War; he wrote likewise to
King Lewis upon the same account; and threatened the Genoises who favored
Michael, (being at Varyance with the Venetians) that if they forsook not his
Alliance, he would excommunicate them, he wrote to the Prelates of England and
France, exhorting them to contribute to this War, in short he forgot nothing he
judged necessary in this Occasion. Michael then seeing that the only means to
shelter himself from this Storm, Raynald. ad ann. 1263. number 22.
was to fly to the usual Policy of the Greeks, that is to say, to negotiate the
Reunion of the two Churches; he thereupon wrote to the Pope, Letters full of
Respect and Affection to the Roman Church, and having received such an Answer
as he desired, he earnestly applied himself to this Business. Mr. Arnaud
himself is agreed on the Motives which set this Emperor at work. Foreseeing,
says he, the Popes would not fail to arm the Western Princes L. 3. C. 2. P.
266.
against him, and that he had a potent Enemy, in the Person of Charles D'Anjou,
King of Naples, and Sicily, with whom the Emperor Baldwin, being driven from
Constantinople was allied, he resolved thereupon to reunite the Greeks with the
Roman Church, that he might by this means deliver himself from the fear of
those dreadful Croisado's, which made the Greek Emperors tremble at that time
in Constantinople, the Sultans in Babylon and Grand Caire, and the Tartars
themselves as far as Persia. It is certain, adds he, that this Reunion was
carried on upon politic Respects.

AND these in effect were the true Reasons of Michael's Undertakings; which
being his greatest Interest, he therefore left no means unattempted whereby to
accomplish it. Which Mr. Arnaud does still grant; We may read, says he, in
Pachymerus, that he endeavored too violently, to bring the Bishops over to his
Will. But did he not acknowledge it, we need only L. 3. C. 3. P. 274.
read what Michael himself says in his harangue to the Greek Clergy, assembled
upon this Occasion. I must acknowledge, says he, that I have stisled within me
the most tender Sentiments of Nature, to accomplish my design. You know Pachym.
L. 6. C. 15.
I loved a Person, with the same tenderness and Respect, as if he had been my
own Father, and I believed I owed him more than my Father, seeing he gave me
the Communion, and received me into the Bosom of the Church, which I esteem
more than the giving me Life, and yet have I Sacrificed him to this Interest.
It Is the Patriarch Joseph I mean. I have violently handled several others, even
my intimate Friends, and oppressed diverse among your selves. I have moreover
several of my near Kinsmen in Prison, there having bin no other Reason for
their opposing me, or my punishing them, than only this Reunion with the
Latins. I think this is sufficient to Convince us, that this Emperor abused his
Power in Favor of the Court of Rome.

I confess those that succeeded him, although they had the same Opinion touching
the Reunion, yet used not the same Extremities, nevertheless John Paleologus
Raynald. ad ann. 1370.
endeavored earnestly to effect this, and therefore went in Person to Rome in
great Pomp, to make his Declaration.

EMANUEL the second who succeeded him, trod in the same Steps, addressing
himself to Pope Boniface the ninth, who published a Croisado for his Assistance
against the Turks; and a while after, he treated with Martin the fifth,
touching the Reconciliation of the two Churches. In Fine, John the seventh,
Paleologus came to the Council of Florence, and Syrop. Hist. Council. Flor.
Sect. 2. C. 5.
sent his Clergy thither on the same Design.

WE may then well conclude the Latins wanted not Opportunities to introduce
their Religion amongst the Greeks. For first it is not to be supposed but that
this great Passion these Emperors showed toward this Union, inclined the Minds
and Hearts of several Persons, as well of the Clergy as Laity to favor the
Roman Church, to embrace its Interests, and accommodate themselves to its
Doctrine. We all know how weak and fickle the greatest part of mankind are,
they approve and esteem whatsoever is in Favor and Credit, there being few
whose Minds are not Biased even in Religious matters, by temporal Advantages.
Men commonly in such cases endeavor to Mollisy and take in a good Sense, that
which before was a Subject of Scandal: they enlarge or diminish Objects, to
bring 'em to the Point they desire; they hearken to nothing but what is
pleasing, and behold whatsoever opposes their Interest in such a manner as
shall be sure to render it unjust and odious.

IN the second place, we need not doubt but this same Passion of the Emperors
obliged several others to manage these Controversies, and let go diverse
Articles as being but of small Importance. All the Schismatical Greeks, De
Perp. Cons. L. 3. C. 12.
says Allatius, are not like minded toward the Latins, some of them are more
moderate than others, making the Difference consist only in one or two Points;
others more Rigorous, for whatsoever the Latins do, which agrees not with the
Ceremonies and Rites of the Greeks, they Condemn and Reject, as an Abomination.
He Confirms afterward what he says, by a Passage taken out of Demetrius
Comatenus, which tells us, that several moderate Greeks, agreed with the Latins
in diverse Particulars, acknowledging the proud and fierce Humor of their
Nation, which has almost become Barbarous by their frequent Commerce with the
Barbarians, and that these aforementioned have only stuck at the single Article
touching the Procession of the Holy Ghost. Mr. Arnaud himself says, 'twas L.
2. C. 10. P. 200.
observed the Greeks were of different Dispositions in those times (he means in
the twelfth Century) for some of 'em maintained the Latins ought to be treated
as Heretics, and others blamed these Transports of Passion. But it is certain
even the most rigorous amongst them, only stuck to those Points which were
openly debated by the two Churches, amongst which the Principal were touching
the Procession of the Holy Ghost, and the Azymes. The Constancy they showed in
Reference to these Articles, sufficiently exposed them to the Hatred and ill
Usage of their Emperors, so that we need not descend to the Examination of
other Particulars, which broke not out into Disputes on either side.

NEITHER need we any more doubt but that several condescended to the Will of
their Emperors, upon this Consideration, that although they were Reunited to the
Church of Rome, yet should they suffer no Alteration, either in the essential
Parts of their Religion, or Ceremonies, and that there was no hurt in cheating
these Latins, by this Fancy of a Union, which signified nothing at th'bottom,
but which yet would yield them great Advantage in their Affairs. And this was
the chief Reason which Michael Paleologus offered to his Clergy, according to
Pachymerus his Relation, he showed them, says he, that the only Cause moving
him to procure this Peace with the Latin Pachym. Hist. L. 5. C. 1.
Church, was to hinder those Cruel and Bloody Wars which threatened them, and to
spare his Subjects Blood. That as to the rest, they might assure themselves,
that after the Reunion, their Church should remain as it was, without any
Innovation? That he himself would take care of it. That the whole
Reconciliation with the Church of Rome, might be reduced to these three
Articles, viz. The Primacy, Appeal, and Commemoration, all which signified
nothing, if rightly considered. For when, says he, will the Pope come to
Constantinople, to take Possession of this Primacy! who will make Appeals, to
end them in so far a Country, who will Cross the Seas for this. And as to the
Commemoration of the Pope in our Patriarchal Temple, and your other great
Temple, (when the Patriarch shall Officiate there,) being prudent as you are,
can this appear such a strange thing to you. Do you not know the Fathers have
often made use of Dispensations, and frequently submitted themselves for the
public Good. Pachymerus adds, that there were some in effect who let go these
two Articles touching the Primacy, and Appeals, upon this Consideration, that
the Pope would have only the Name and Shadow of the thing, but never enjoy the
thing it self.

BUT in fine, we need not question, but this Carriage of the Emperors, much
encouraged and imboldned the Latins, to endeavor effectually to insinuate
their Opinions into the Minds of both Clergy and Laity, under pretense of
instructing, and making them capable of this Union. We know what a Religious
Zeal can do, and especially when it is countenanced by Power, and seconded by
hopes of Success. Had the Greek Church remained but some Years in this
Condition, it might be said, that these have bin but slight and transient
Attempts, which have not had time to produce any great Effects. But it is
certain that since the eleventh Century, which is to say, since the time
Berengarius was last Condemned, till now, she has bin continually as it were
under the Roman Yoke, and they have had all desirable Opportunities to
introduce their Doctrine of Transubstantiation; and it is a kind of Miracle if
they have not obtained their Ends. For when men have had to do with an ignorant
and gross People, in matters of Religion, as the Greeks are, and have bin for a
long time, when Persons have had a familiar and ordinary Commerce with them,
and have besides all proper means to prevail on them, as Power, Authority,
Mildness, the way of Instruction, Fear, Hope, and moreover upheld by the
Emperors, Patriarchs, and Bishops; it is so far from being difficult to do what
one will, that it is on the contrary very difficult not to do it. Whence it
follows, that even when Mr. Arnaud should make it appear that
Transubstantiation, and the Adoration of the Eucharist, have bin established
amongst the Greeks since the eleventh Century, his Proofs would be useless and
of no Consequence, as to our Debate; for it might always be answered, that this
Doctrine has bin communicated to them by the Latins, and the ways of this
Communication are not hard to be understood. Mr. Arnaud has bin very sensible
of the truth of what I say, and therefore was willing to relate, himself the
greatest part of these Historical Passages I mentioned: But he has otherwise
represented them, to the end he might draw fruitless and impertinent
Conclusions from them, and by this means hinder us from making a just and right
use of them. This Deceit of his, is like to that he has used in the foregoing
Chapter.

WE shall in the ensuing part of this Discourse, overthrow his pretended
Consequences. It may suffice at present to observe the Circuit he has taken, on
purpose to divert his Reader from discovering the real Truth. For I do not
believe there is any rational Man but will judge, that seeing these Doctrines
appeared not in the Greek Church, before these Disorders; if they should appear
afterward, they must be introduced by them. This is a natural and plain
Conclusion.

CHAP. IV.
That the Monks and other Emissaries, with which the Eastern Countries have bin
for a long time Replenished, do Invalidate the Proof taken from the Belief of
these People. Mr. Arnaud's fourth Deceit laid open.

MR. Arnaud's fourth Artifice consists in concealing from us, the Care taken
for several Ages, to fill Greece, Asia, Egypt, Ethiopia, the Indias, and in a
word, all the Countries wherein there is any People professing Christianity,
with Religious, and other Ecclesiastical Persons, sent expressly to plant the
Roman Religion, and even to establish fixed Seminaries, who are charged to use
their utmost Endeavors to Instruct and Reduce these Schismatics. This
Artifice of his, is not of small Importance: for he thereby deprives us of the
Knowledge of several Particulars; without which it is impossible to make a true
and right Judgment of this Controversy. And in truth we have reason to admire
Mr. Arnaud's Ingenuity. For when there are any Historical Passages which seem
to favor us, if they are so publicly known that 'twill be to no purpose to
conceal them, he then produces them, but in so doing, applies them to other
matters, on purpose to make us lose the Consequence may be drawn from them: and
on the other hand, if they are Passages less known, and that he may well
conceal them; he then either not mentions them, or but lightly touches on them,
to the end they may not be thoroughly considered. He has taken this last course
in what concerns the Missions. Having prudently foreseen that this Mystery
could not be handled without discovering at the same time the weakness and
folly of his Proofs drawn from the Schismatical Churches; he has therefore
thought good to make no mention of them, or if at all, so slightly that they
could scarcely be taken Notice of, lest he should be charged with discovering
the Secret, and overthrowing himself, what he has taken upon him to defend. But
seeing he has no reason to expect his Silence should set Bounds to men's
Curiosity; and that they must know no more but what he tells them, so he must
not take it ill, if I relate what he would have concealed.

I say then, that since the Latins Conquered the Holy Land, and made 'em selves
Masters of the Grecian Empire, all Greece and other Eastern Nations, have bin
filled with Monks, or Emissaries, whose only design and employment has bin to
Insinuate the Doctrines and Customs of the Church of Rome in those Countries.
Mr. Arnaud, who commonly takes things in the worst Sense, will be sure to tell
me I am to blame, in blaming this Design; Seeing it is an effect of that Zeal
the Latins have ever showed for their Religion, it being usual with Persons who
are persuaded of the Truth of their own Faith, to do all they can, to make
Schismatics, and Heretical People to Embrace the same. To which I answer, I do
not at all blame the Endeavors of the Roman Church, to win these People.
Seeing she believes they are in an Error, and therefore would undeceive them,
and so far is Christianly and Charitably done; but as to those artificial Means
the Emissaries use, which savor so much of worldy Policy, they are in no wise
to be commended. I do not, I say, blame them of the Church of Rome for
laboring to propagate their Faith; seeing they believe there is no Salvation
out of their Communion.

YET I cannot bear with Mr. Arnaud, who knows full well, what the Monks and
Emissaries have done, and do still in the East. That he I say should attempt to
prove the Perpetuity of the Doctrines of the Roman Church by this Reason, That
they are to be found established amongst these People. For seeing their
Conversion has bin endeavored time out of mind, no means having bin left
untried to effect this; how then can it be affirmed that if at this Day they
Believe Transubstantiation, this Doctrine has bin received by them, at the
same time when Christianity was first planted amongst them? Who sees not the
Absurdity of this Consequence? Let the Business of the Emissaries be termed a
Reduction, Instruction, Conversion, or what else he please? Yet would I by no
means have Mr. Arnaud attempt the persuading us, That if the Greeks and other
Eastern Christians, for whose sake the Emissaries have taken such Pains, do
believe Transubstantiation, it thereupon follows that this Doctrine has bin
ever held by those Churches, for this is a way of Arguing, which will never
prevail on rational Men. For any Man's Reason will tell him, that if these
People believe Transubstantiation, it is because the Emissaries have taught it
them, unless it be showed that they held this Doctrine before they came amongst
them. And this is the Contents of this Chapter. The Consequence I pretend to
draw hence, is clear enough in it self, and we need no more but only represent
what I already hinted touching the Employment of the Monks, and Emissaries in
the Levant.

FIRST then, it is evident, that after the Conquest of the Holy Land, both
Palestine, and Syria were filled with Monks of every Order. Mr. Arnaud himself
acknowledges it, and thereupon alleges the Testimony of James de Vitry, who
tells us, that multitudes of People resorted from all parts L. 1. C. 10. P. 194.
of the World, to the Holy Land, being allured thither by the Odor of those
Venerable and Holy Places, where they repaired the decayed Churches, Built new
ones, and founded Monasteries in several Places, by the Liberality of Princes.
In effect William of Tire makes mention of several Abbots and Priors, who were
present at the Councils held at Napolis, a City of Samaria, and at Antioch.
Guill. Tyr. L 12. C. 1^. L. 15. C. 16. and L. 12. C. 25.
He likewise remarks some who signed the Articles of Agreement made between the
Venetians, and Patriarch of Jerusalem. Mr. Arnaud himself says, there were
built Monasteries of the Order of Cistern Monks, together with others of St.
Norbet, and St. Bennet, in several Commodious Places.

NEITHER need we any more doubt, but after the Latins had made themselves
Masters of Greece, the Monks dispersed themselves over all the parts thereof,
to which Mr. Arnaud consents, and tells us, That Greece was filled with
Dominicans and Friar Minorites, that is to say, Inquisitors who had often
performed this Office, in France and Germany. He farther says, that the Pope
had given them in Charge to confer with the Greeks, and examine their Doctrine;
which is not a difficult matter to believe.

IN the Year 1177 according to Baronius, Pope Alexander the third sent Baron.
ad ann. 1177.
a certain Physician, called Phillip into Ethiopia, to convert the Christians
of that Country, and Instruct them in the Romish Religion.

NOT long after, Innocent the third obtained the Popedom, and immediately
effectually endeavored to bring the Heretics and Schismatics over Raynald.
ad ann. 1193. number. 55.
to the Roman Church. And sent for this Purpose John, and Simon, into Dioclia
and Dalmatia, and some others into Bulgaria, Albertus, and Albertinus, to
Constantinople, and the Arch Bishop of Mayence, into Armenia.

GREGORY the ninth his Successor, continued the same Design. Raynaldus Reports
in his time, all Asia was full of Religious, who went up and Raynald. ad ann.
1233.
down, Preaching from place to place. He produces likewise a Letter from a
Dominican named Philip, which he wrote to the Pope, in which he gives him an
account of the Progress he made in the Conversion of the Patriarch of the
Eastern Jacobites, of two Arch Bishops, one a Jacobit, and the other a
Nestorian, of the Conversion of the Patriarch of the Nestorians, and of an
other Patriarch of the Jacobits in Egypt. He added farther that all these
Nations, viz. the Christians of Chaldea, Media, Persia, Armenia, Syria,
Phenicia, India, Ethiopia, Libya, and Egypt, yielded themselves to their
Exhortations* there remaining none but the Greeks that persevered in their
Malice, and who every where withstood the Doctrine of the Roman Church, either
privately or openly, in blaspheming all its Sacraments.

INNOCENT the fourth who succeeded Gregory, wrote to the Prince Raynald. ad
ann. 1245. number. 11.
of Bulgaria, Soliciting him to embrace the Religion of the Latins, and for
this effect sent him several Monks and Friars, entreating him to give them a
favorable Hearing. In the Year 1246 he sent Friar Ascelinus, Simon of St.
Quentin, Alexander, and Albertus of the Order of Preachers, and John du plan
Carpin, with Friar Bennet a Polander, of St. Francis's Order, to the Tartars,
to persuade them to receive the Christian Faith; they passed through Russia, and
delivered to Duke Daniel, to Basil his Brother, and the Bishops of that Country
the Popes Letters, which conjured them, to forsake the Greek John du Plan's
Voyage C. 9. and C. 24.
Religion which they professed, and unite themselves to the Roman Church; they
likewise endeavored with all their Power to effect this, and the Success of
their Negotiation was, that the Russians sent Deputies to Opizon, who was then
the Popes Legate in Poland, offering to submit themselves to the Roman Church,
provided the Pope would raise their Countries into a Kingdom, and bestow the
regal Crown on their Duke. Opizon gladly received them, and granted what they
demanded. The Pope sent the Arch Bishop of Prusia in quality of a Legate, and
ordered for their Instruction in the Romish Religion, a Mission made up of as
many Secular Priests, as Religions, of the Order of Preachers, and Friar
Minorites, amongst whom there was chosen a certain Preaching Friar named
Alexius, who was particularly to attend the Prince. The Arch Bishop of Prussia
reconciled King Daniel, his Brother Basil, who was King of Laudemirie, and
likewise their People to the Church of Rome.

BUT whilst Innocent, endeavored the Conversion of the Russians, he neglected
not the rest of the Christians in the East. He earnestly labored, says
Raynald. ad ann. 1247. number. 30. and ad ann. 1253, number. 38.
Raynaldus, to Reduce those People, how far distant soever they were, and for
this purpose sent them several Religious, who were Learned and Zealous for the
propogating of the Faith, whom he honored with the Title of Apostolical
Legates. He farther says, that he gave to Lawrence his Penetentiary a large
Commission, for the same purpose, injoyning him to take care of Armenia,
Iconia, Turkey, Greece, Babylon, and endeavor to gain the Greeks, who were in
the Patriarchate of Antioch, Jerusalem, and Kingdom of Cyprus, as well as the
Jacobites, Maronites, and Nestorians.

IN the Year 1253, the foresaid Innocent the fourth, sent William de Rubruquis,
Voyage of Rubriq. C. 1. etc.
and Bartholomew de Cremone, who were of the Order of Friar Minorites, into
Tartaria, where they found several Christians of the Greek and Nestorian
Religion, for the Reduction of whom they labored with all their Power.

URBAIN the fourth imitating in this his Predecessors, sent in the Year 1264
Nicholas Bishop of Crotonia, with Gerard and Rayner, Monks of the Raynald. ad.
ann. 1264. number. 64. 65.
Order of Friar Minorites, to Michael Paleologus the Grecian Emperor, who had
re-taken Constantinople, To the end, says Raynaldus, he might be instructed
together with his People, in the Orthodox Religion. It appears by the Letters
of Clement his Successor, that Urbain, sent moreover other Monks to
Constantinople, on the same Design, to wit, Simon, Peter de Moras, Peter de
Raynald. ad ann. 1267. numb. 73. Ibid. number. 81.
Crista; and Boniface, and Clement sent Dominicans.

IN the Year 1276, two Bishops, and two preaching Friars went into Greece, by
order of Pope Innocent the twenty first, to instruct farther the Idem. ad ann.
1276. number. 45. and ad ann. 1277. number. 20. 21.
Greeks, and confirm them in Obedience to the Roman See, to which the Emperor
Michael Paleologus had obliged them to submit themselves.

A little while after, there was another Mission of Friar Minorites to the
Tartars, to instruct them more fully in the Articles of the Roman Faith, who
Idem. ad ann. 1278. number. 17. 18. etc.
had embraced the Christian Religion. This was in the Year 1278, under Pope
Nicholas the third.

TOWARD the end of this Century, Nicholas the fourth sent others Idem. ad ann.
1288. number. 29. 30. 31.
after the same manner, for the Reduction of those People who professed the
Greek Religion. Raynaldus tells us, that this Pope made use of Dominicans
particularly for this purpose, and sent them to preach through out all the East,
Ibid. number. 32.
in Greece, Bulgaria, Valachia, to the Syrians, Iberians, Allains, Russians,
Jacobites, Ethiopians, Nestorians, Georgians, Armenians, Indians, to the
Tartarian Christians, and generally to all strange Nations, separated from the
Roman Church. And for this purpose, he likewise made use of the Friar
Minorites, of whose Order he had bin himself, that he sent to several Eastern
Ibid. number. 33.
Bishops a Summary of the Christian Faith, according to which he would have the
People instructed; and earnestly recommended his Emissaries to Kings and
Princes, to the end that being respected by them, their Labors might be the
more Effectual.

BONIFACE the eighth, renewed these general Missions into the East, and to
encourage them the more, to acquit themselves well in their Employ, Idem. ad
ann. 1299. number. 39. 4041.
he augmented their Privileges after a very considerable manner. This was in
the Year 1299; These continued under the following Popes, as it appears by the
Letters that John the twenty second sent them, in the Year 1318, wherein he
gives God thanks for the Progress the Friar Predicants had made, and exhorted
them to continue there. The same appears by other Letters, of Gregory the
eleventh toward the end of the fourteenth Century.

THERE are likewise two other Relations of the Voyages of two Dominicans, The
wonderful History of the great Cham of Tartaria, Paris 1529. Fol. 40.
one named Brother Bieul, the other Brother Oderick, who went by the Popes
Command to preach in the East. The first of these does not set down the time,
but I suppose 'twas about the fourteenth Century, for therein is mention made
of the Death of Argon King of the Tartars, which happened toward the end of the
thirteenth Century. The second bears date 1330. It appears by the first of
these, that there was at that time Houses of Dominican Friars, set up in Asia,
for the Conversion of the Schismatics. We came directly, says this Author, to
the stately City of Baudas, where the Friar Predicants of our Order who dwelt
there, came out to meet us, Receiving us with great Joy. And by the second, it
appears likewise, that the Emissaries of the Order of Friar Minorites, had
already gotten as far as the Indias, for Fol. 55.
there is Mention made of three Friars, who after a long Dispute against the
Nestorians, were put to Death for speaking against Mahomet.

IN the Year 1369, Urban the fisth sent Friar Minorites, amongst all these
Raynald. ad ann. 1369. number. 14. Ray. ad ann. 1370. number. 8.
Nations, with the same order to Preach, and propagate the Catholic Faith. He
sent likewise four Bishops into Albania and the neighboring Provinces, to
reduce these Schismatical People to his Obedience. He took the same Care for
the Instruction of the Russians, Moldavians, and Valaquains, to whom he sent
twenty five Religious of the Order of Friar Minorites. Anthony Bishop of Mileve
was ordered to instruct the Georgians, and other Eastern Christians, together
with twenty five other Monks, who were joined to him. Under Gregory the
eleventh, there were several Convents Founded in Bosnia, Bascia, for the same
Design of Converting the Schismatics. This Pope enlarged the Privileges of
the Eastern Missionaries, on Condition Idem. ad. ann. 1372. number. 32.
they would remain in those Countries, and not return into the West, under
Penalty of being deprived of all their Privileges.

IN the fifteenth Century, Martin the fifth took Care again of the Missions,
which had bin in some sort Interrupted during the Troubles of that great
Schism, which began under Urbain the sixth, in the Year 1378, and Idem. ad
ann. 1418. number. 19. 20.
which ended not till after the Council of Constance in the Year 1414, wherein
Martin was chosen. He made the King of Poland his Vicar, through out the whole
Extent of his Dominions, to the end he should endeavor the Reduction of the
Greeks, giving him for this purpose full Authority over the Ecclesiastics and
Monks. He conferred the same Power on the Duke of Lituania, giving him an
express Charge to endeavor to propagate the Catholic Religion.

EUGENUS the fourth, Martin's Successor, set forth a new Mission, which
consisted of twenty Religious of the Order of Friar Minorites, together Idem.
ad ann. 143. number. 29.
with a Bishop, whom he sent into Asia, for the propogating of the Roman Faith,
and the particular Instruction of the Christians that dwelt in the Caspian
Mountains. He employed Gregory Arch Bishop of Moldoblachie, who was a Latinized
Greek, for the Reduction of the Bulgarians, Valaquians, Moldavians, enjoining
him to apply himself thereunto with all possible Care and Diligence. He sent
Andrew Arch Bishop of Colossia into Cyprus, to bring back to his Obedience, the
Christians of different Sects who Inhabited this Island, namely the Nestorians,
Armenians, Coptics, Chaldeans, Jacobites, together with the Greeks who were the
Natives of that place.

IN the sixteenth Century the Portugaises having settled themselves in the East
Indias, it is well known they established Missions and Seminaries in diverse
places, and earnestly endeavored to Instruct the Ethiopians, Nestorians, and
other Christian Sects which are in that Country.

LEO the tenth sent several to Instruct the Russians and Muscovites, he Idem.
ad ann. 1514. number. 87. 101. 102. and ad ann. 1519. number. 60. number. 60. Spondan.
ann. Eccl. ad ann. 1531. number. 13. Raynald. ad ann. 1515. number. 69. and 73.
took the same Care for the Abyssins, and Maronites; for these last, although they
had submitted to the Roman Church, yet retained their ancient Errors.

CLEMENT the seventh received an Ambassador from Basil, Duke of Muscovia, and
sent to this Duke a Legate to treat concerning his Reunion to the Church of
Rome. This was in the Year 1531, according to Spondanus, Raynaldus refers it to
the Year 1525.

IN fine, if we would know the present State of all the East in this Respect,
it is but considering that the Emissaries have so far overspread these
Countries, that scarcely is there any place where they have not settled
themselves, and wherein they do not exert all their Learning and Industry, not
for the Conversion of the Infidels, for this they cannot expect, but for the
gaining of these Schismatics, Insinuating the Roman Religion amongst these
Ignorant and Dull People, who still profess Christianity.

EUGENIUS Roger, a Recollet who was sent into Barbary, in his Description of
the Holy Land, tells us, That those of his Order have maintained Holy Land, L.
2. C. 3.
themselves in Palestine, from the Year 1333; to this present, and have two
Convents at Jerusalem, one at Bethlem, one at Nazareth, one at Rama, one at St.
John of Acra, one at Sydon, six in Egypt, two in the Isle of Cyprus, one at
Aleppo, one at Damascus, two at Mount Libanus, one at Alexandria, and one at
Constantinople.

JOSEPH Besson the Jesuit, in his Holy Syria, tells us, that the Society Holy
Syria. C. 1. and 3.
have five Seminaries in Syria, to wit, at Tripoly, Sidon, Damascus, Aleppo,
and at Questroan, which have bin settled there since the Year 1652, and sent
over by the Order of Urbain the eighth.

FRANCIS Richard in his Relation touching the Isle of St. Erinys, gives us this
Account. Since, says he, Princes have ceased to Succor this Letter to the
Clergy of France.
poor Eastern Church by Arms, our Kings continue to assist it by means, which
although not so Expensive and Famous, yet no less Effectual for the Salvation of
Men's Souls, which ought to be the chief end of such like Undertakings. And in
another place, Our Society being preserved in this Country by the Providence of
God, and Charity of the Faithful, have not ceased to continue their Services to
this desolate Church. And to the end the Fruit of our Labors may not be
enclosed within the Walls of Constantinople, our Society has extended it self
as far as Thessalonica, Patras, Athens, Naples de Romany, Milos, Paros, where
they have for some time Sojourned, and afterward settled themselves at Smyrna,
Scio, Naxie, Negrepont, St. Erinys, not to mention Syria, where they have four
other places of Residency, viz. Aleppo, Damascus, Seide, and Tripolys. And now
they design for Mount Athos, and all other parts where Schism and Heresy
reign. And certainly they have undertaken no easy Task, having so many and
distant Countries to Travel over, so many Errors to Oppose, and to Correct such
a number of Abuses, which Ignorance and Heresy have Introduced amongst these
People.

Mr. Thevenot informs us, that there is a Convent of Capucin Friars in the Isle
of St. Andra, which do very much help the Bishop by their Preaching, and
Thevenot' s Voyages. Part 1. C 13. and C. 61. and C. 66.
Discoursing of the Isle of Chios, he says, that besides the Jesuits, who have
a Church and College, there are also Capucins, who teach humane Learning and
Divinity, and also Jacobins, and Gray Friars, who have all of 'em beautiful
Churches. He tells us likewise, that in the Isle of Nixia, there are Jesuits,
Recollets, and Capucins, who make great Progress in the propagating of the
Catholic Faith. Besides the Jesuits and Capucins that are, according
Stochove's Voyage. P. 225.
to Thevenot's Relation, in the Isle of Chios, the Sieur Stochove tells us of
Carmelite Friars who are there likewise.

AT Smyrna there are both Capucins and Jesuits, says the Sieur Boulaye Boulay
Le Goux Part 1. C. 9. P. 20.
Le Goux, and Villamont observes that in the Isles of Cephalonia, and Zant,
there are Religious of the Order of St. Francis.

WE know that the Jesuits have settled themselves since the Year 1609 at
Constantinople. The Jesuits, says the Sieur Stochove, have St. Bennet' s
Church, where they are very well accommodated, having a fine Garden; The
Villamont's Voyages. L. 2. C. 4. Stochovie's Voyages. P. 98.
Church although it be but small, yet is a very beautiful one, being covered with
Mosaisk Work. These Fathers, says he, do make great Proficiency in the
Conversion of the Heretics and Schismatics, Instructing them in the Catholic
Apostolic Roman Faith. But besides the Jesuits, there are Jacobins, and
Cordeliers. The Cordeliers, says the Sieur Du Loir, are at St. Marys, the
Jacobins at St. Peter's, and the Jesuits at St. Bennets, which is a very fair
Church and Painted Loir's Voyages. P. 67.
also with Mosaic Work, very Rich, but not well Contrived. It is well known
there are Emissaries likewise in Hispaham in Persia, who have spread themselves
as far as the Borders of the Armenians. We have not seen any City in all our
Travels, says the Sieur de Bourges, which is better provided with Emissaries,
the Reverend Fathers the Austin Portugais Monks, Carmelites, and Jesuits, have
successively established themselves since some Years: and by the Permission of
the Prince, they exercise with a great deal of Liberty their Functions. The
Reverend Fathers the Jesuits, having settled themselves at Julfa, which is a
small City about a League distant from Hispaham, chiefly consisting of
Armenians, have a particular Convenience, for the Conversion of Schismatics.
He tells us likewise, That there is at Surat, a Mission of French Capucins, and
another at Babylon, and speaking of the former of these, These are, says he,
the only Emissarys in this City. We have been Witnesses of the Respect showed
them, and of the Fruit of their Labors, to bring home to the Church the
Armenians, Jacobites, and Nestorians.

I shall not trouble my self with mentioning the Missions of the Indias, nor
them of Ethiopia, for the relations of these are public, and known by all the
World. We may read what John Peter Maffee and du Jaric, both Jesuits have
written in their Histories of the Indias touching this matter. And likewise the
Relations of Ethiopia taken out of the Letters written to the General of the
Jesuits Viteleschy, and another History of the East Indias Printed at Arras
Anno 1628. but what I already mentioned is sufficient to discover the fallacy
of Mr. Arnaud's Argument, who pretends to prove the Perpetuity of his Faith
from the Testimony of the Schismatical Churches. For now after what I
represented, all which has been faithfully transcribed out of Authors never
suspected by the Church of Rome, what assurance can we have if the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, be found established amongst these people, that it has not
been communicated to them by all these Emissaries, who have been sent for so
many years, for no other purpose? It ought, methinks, to be showed us (to
color over this proof) that the sources whence they drew their Christianity
have not been adulterated, that these Springs have run clear, without being
troubled to this day; or at least the time of these Missions must be laid
aside, and Mr. Arnaud (if he intends to deal sincerely) must begin from the
Ages which precede them; for if it does not appear these Schismatics believed
the same as the Church of Rome concerning the Eucharist, before all this care
for their instruction, what likelihood is there we shall suffer our selves to
be surpised by so frivolous an Argument. I will suppose for once that I was
deceived, when I maintained that any one of these Nations who profess the
Christian Religion and submitted not to the Pope, did not reckon
Transubstantiation amongst the Articles of their Creed, nor the Adoration of
the Eucharist amongst their Rites and Ceremonies. Will Mr. Arnaud then imagine
that my mistake has prejudiced my Cause, or justified the Consequence he
pretends to draw from his Principle? This pretension of his in my mind, would
be very unjust and unreasonable. For whether the Greeks and other Eastern
Christians, do or do not believe Transubstantiation, this is only a question
between him and me, to which the Subject I defend has no relation, and
therefore he can expect no more at utmost than a Victory over me and not my
Cause, seeing the Consequence he would draw hence will be continually disputed
him, to wit, that Transubstantiation has been perpetually believed in these
Churches. Whence it follows that he has been to blame in passing over so
slightly as he has done, a point of this importance, on which depends the whole
force of his Proofs, and he may justly be complained of in the Church of Rome,
in that he has in his whole proceeding betrayed a greater care for his own
private Reputation, than that of the Church whose cause he takes upon him to
defend. As to what concerns my self I hope I shall be able to give the World a
good Account touching what I denied: and were I mistaken, I would not be
ashamed to make an open Recantation without the least apprehension that this my
Retractation would in any sort prejudice my Cause, seeing in effect, I do not
believe it follows that a Doctrine has been perpetual in Religion, although
Schismatical Churches now profess it as well as the Latins. This Consequence
must be proved, as well as its Principle, did Mr. Arnaud take a direct course
and argue in a requisite manner to satisfy judicious Persons. And therefore he
ought to have given a sincere account of this whole History of the Missions,
which I come now from representing in this Chap. for I cannot imagine how Mr.
Arnaud could pass over in silence as he has done, an History so important and
necessary for the making of a right Judgment of this whole Controversy; seeing
he could not be ignorant of it. If he believes he has done right, I must needs
say, he has a kind of sincerity different from that of all other people; and if
he believes he ought not to have taken this course, we must affirm, that his
silence is so much the more criminal, in that he has acted against the light of
his own Conscience.

CHAP. V.
That the means the Emissaries have used for the introducing of the Roman
Religion amongst the Schismatics, The Seminaries which have been set up for
the same design, and the particular Instructions given them touching the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation, do sufficiently show that there can no
Advantage accrue to Mr. Arnaud by their belief. Mr. Arnaud's fifth Artifice
discovered.

WHOSOEVER considers the foregoing Chapters will not I suppose overmuch value
Mr. Arnaud's Labors touching the Grecian and other Eastern Christians called
Schismatics. For it is certain there was never a more vain and fruitless
Amusement, than his whole Dispute on that Subject; at the end whereof I am much
mistaken if he finds not he has ill bestowed his time, having given no light at
all to the main Question, which is to know whether the Doctrine of the present
Roman Church is the same with that of all Antiquity. But besides what I already
offered, it remains, that I make some important Reflections on those things,
the most part of which Mr. Arnaud has past over in silence, and which I shall
recollect as briefly as I can in this Chapter, to the end I may not any longer
detain the Reader on a point, which I believe I have sufficiently evidenced.

First, Then I find in the Relation of the Emissaries of St. Erinys, that one
of the reasons for which they were sent, was to endeavor the Advancement of
the honor of the Holy Sacrament. The Author of these Relations desirous to
give the World an account of the Honors they have endeavored to procure from
the Inhabitants of this Island, to the Sacrament, begins thus, I believe, says
he, the Gentlemen of C. 20. P. 304.
the Confraternity of the August Society of the Holy Sacrament, having
testified so great Zeal for the Advancement of this Devotion, especially in the
Eastern Countries, will approve of these Discourses, seeing they will be
informed by them that the Prayers and Vows they have made for the Conversion of
these poor wretches, were not fruitless. These words sufficiently show (if I be
not mistaken,) that one of the chief ends which the Emissaries proposed to
themselves in the Conversion of the Greeks, is to give them those Sentiments
which they have not yet entertained concerning the Holy Sacrament, and it is
unto this whereunto tends the Zeal and Prayers of the Confraternity.

WHENCE it follows, that it is no great wonder if they have accomplished their
Design; and that if these people do at this day believe Transubstantiation and
Adore the Eucharist, it cannot be hence concluded that this Doctrine has been
amongst them ever since they first received the Christian Faith.

BUT the better to convince Mr. Arnaud of the vanity of his pretended
Consequence, and how little I would esteem his victory if it were as real as it
is false and imaginary; I need but set before him the means these Emissaries
have used whereby to insinuate the Roman Religion, in these Countries, in all
which I shall relate no more than what I learn from Authors no wise suspected
by the Church of Rome.

THE first instrument they use is Money, Francis Richard the Jesuit, in the
foresaid Relation of the Isle of St. Erinys, plainly tells us so. Above an
hundred poor Greeks, says he, became our own, being drawn over to us by C. 16.
P. 247.
some small Charity we bestowed on them. Money can do all things in these
parts, and we are certain that provided we had wherewithal to give the Greek
Bishops, they would suffer us, to Confess, Preach and Instruct them who are
under their Charge, in whatsoever we pleased. So that are not these very fit
people to determine the Antiquity of our Doctrines. Anthony de Gouveau one of
the Anthony Gouveau's Relation lib. 3.
Emissaries of Persia, in his History of the Reduction of the Armenians, which
were carried over into Persia, under the Conduct of the Patriarch David,
expressly observes, that one of the first courses the Missionaries took to draw
these people to them, was to distribute money amongst them, by which means they
were easily wrought on to come to Catechisings.

BUT besides Money, they make the practice of Physic, to serve as a pretense,
for the introducing of them into Houses, where they take their opportunity,
Relation of the Isle of St. Erinys C. 16. p 248.
to discourse of Religion. By this means, says the Jesuit Richard, we have
free admittance into the Houses of the Greeks, and many times gain by
Conversation what we could not effect by Preaching.

THE knowledge of the Mathematics draws to 'em several persons and furnishes
them with occasions of entertaining them. Besson the Jesuit, speaking of one of
their Emissaries at Damascus; he drew, says he, to our Holy Syria part 1. 3
Treatise c. 5.
house several Greeks, by the fame of his Skill in the Mathematics, which is a
Science in great Esteem amongst the Levantine People, and especially Astronomy,
upon which account our Emissaries have easy admittance into great Houses,
whether of Turks, or Christians.

THEY endeavor more especially to gain the Bishops and Patriarchs, and that
with success, as it will appear, by the Testimony I shall produce. Father John
Amien, says Besson speaking of the Emissaries of Tripolys, gained Ibid.
Treatise the 4. c. 4.
the Greek Bishop of Tripolys to the Romish Religion.

The same Besson, discoursing of the Mission in Aleppo, and of one of its
Fathers, he has entirely won, says he, Philip the Patriarch, who is Patriarch
Ibid. Treat. 1. C. 9.
of great Armenia whose Seat is in Persia, at Eschiniadzin. This venerable
Prelate being come to Aleppo, to visit the holy Places, received the Father
with great Expressions of good Will, and showed him that he was a Catholic in
hit Heart, being of a very frank Nature, he farther declared this in the
presence of another Patriarch. He says moreover that this same Emissary
converted an Armenian Bishop, who was afterward forced by the Schismatics to
leave his Country, and retire into a Monastery in Cappadocia, and would turn
Jesuit, but, says he, whatsoever great qualities he had, it was not judged
meet to deprive the Armenians of this Pastor.

Speaking in another place of an Emissary of Aleppo, he has brought over, says
he, to the Roman Church another Greek Bishop, and with this person endowed Ib.
chap. 10.
with such good Qualifications, he doubts not but he shall gain several others
who will it is likely follow so great an Example. Certainly, adds he, in these
Missions of the Levant there ought to be a particular regard had to the
Bishops, whose Example the people will not fail to imitate.

Discoursing elsewhere, of the Emissaries of Seyde. We are obliged, says he,
to the Bishop of the Greeks, who besides his being won to the Roman Church
Treatise 6. c. 7.
by one of our Fathers lays other Obligations on us. For he opens to us his
Heart as well as his Church, and publicly declares to his hearers that the
Frank's Church and that of the Maronites are, the true Churches. These
Conquests cannot be lost, unless by the ill conduct of the Pastors, and the
pernicious Maxims they may give out. Gain but one of them, and you gain them
all, but if one of 'em holds out and will not yield, what you have done already
signifies nothing.

Discoursing of the Mission of Aleppo, he says that the Bishop of the Syrians
at Aleppo, before his Ordination, conceived a great hatred against the Syrian
Heresy, and turned Catholic, and within a while, went to Rome, from whence
returning, he was Consecrated by the Patriarch of the Maronites, and settled in
the Syrian Church at Aleppo. From whence being constrained to withdraw, he was
brought there again at the request of the Curats and by the Assistance of Mr.
Piquet. He generously serves, adds he, Almighty God amongst his own people,
whom he exhorts to keep steadfast to the Church of Rome. And thus have the
Endeavors of our Emissaries, been assisted by the Divine Grace, which we doubt
not but will prove of great consequence to the Syrians, seeing that in gaining
a person of his merit, they have done as much as if they had converted a whole
Nation.

The Sieur Stochove, speaking of the Jesuits at Galata, These Fathers
Endeavors, says he, have not been ineffectual amongst the Heretics and
Schismatics, Stochovius' s Voyages p. 98.
for they converted several Greek Bishops and disposed others, in case of any
Revolution, to abhere to the Roman Church.

I acquainted my self, says Busbequius, the Emperor's Ambassador, with
Metrophanus the Metropolitain and Superior of the Monastery of Chalcy, he
Busbeq. Voyages lib 4. p. 5. 26.
is an honest and learned Man, and one that passionately desires the reunion
of the two Churches, contrary to the custom of his Nation, who detests them of
our Communion, as profane and impure Persons.

GOUVEAU the Monk relating how he and other Augustine Portugaises Gouveau's
relation lib. 5. 3.
proceeded in order to the Reunion of the Armenians in Persia to the Roman
Church, tells us, that they particularly applied themselves to the winning
David their Patriarch, making use of him afterward as an instrument to prevail
on the Bishops and all the rest of the People.

NOW tell me, I pray after this, with what sincerity the Greeks and other
Eastern Christians can be alleged in this matter? they are won by Money,
several pretenses are made use of by the Emissaries to introduce themselves
into their houses, they prevail on their Bishops, not making them publicly
change their Religion, but leaving them in the same Communion wherein they find
them, to the end that they may likewise endeavor the Establishment of the
Roman Faith. Now what can be said of these people, but that if they believe
Transubstantiation (it not appearing they believed it before all these
Intrigues) they have received this Doctrine from the Emissaries, by these
indirect ways which they practice.

BUT this is not all, for one of the most usual and effectual Courses they take
to establish insensibly, and without any noise, the Roman Religion in Greece,
and amongst all other Nations, is the instruction of their Youth, which
employment they commonly take upon them wheresoever they come; for under
pretense of instructing them in Human Learning, they instill into their minds
the Principles of the Romish Faith, so that a great part of the Greek Prelates
are of this number, that is to say their Scholars, having received from them
in their tender Age a favorable Opinion of the Roman Church.

WE are informed by the Author of M. de la Haye's Voyages who was Voyages of M.
de la Hay c. 5. page 125.
Ambassador to the late King of France, that the Jesuits at Galata, are very
succesful in their undertakings in this kind; for besides their Preaching and
Confessions, they instruct all the Youth, as also the Schismatics, whom they
have convinced (for the most part of them) of their Errors, so that several
Principal Greek Bishops and Archbishops, (who have been their Scholars) do
favor the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, and are capable of doing it great
Service.

THE Sieur Stochovius, speaks to the same effect, the Greeks, says he, do
Stochov. Voyages page 98.
not at all scruple the sending their Children to School (he means to that of
the Jesuits) wherein they are instructed as well in the Catholic Religion, as
in Human Learning. And discoursing of the Isle of Chios, he tells us, that the
Jesuits have a strong-built Convent there, besides a fair Church, that they are
twenty in number who are all of them naturalized, and take upon them according
to their custom the instruction of Youth, and bring diverse over to the true
Religion. The Carmelites, adds he, have a Church and Convent there, who
likewise apply themselves to the instructing of Youth, and convert diverse from
the common Heresy of the Greeks.

THE Sieur du Loir tells us likewise, that the Jesuits of Galatia, keep Loir's
Voyages page 67. Thevenot, part. 1 c. 61.
School for the Children of the Greeks and Armenians. And the Sieur Thevenot
informs us, that in the Isle of Chios, there is a Convent of Capucins who teach
human Learning and the Christian Doctrine, to several Children who repair
thither. He tells us in another place, that in the Isle of Andria the Capucins
do greatly ease the Bishop, by their Preachings and Confessions, and by Chap.
13.
their School, to which go all the Greek Children, and that some are sent from
Athens for that purpose.

LA Boulaye le Goux tells us, that the Jesuits have a convenient House at
Boulay's Voyages part. 1. c. 9. Relat. of St. Erinys c. 5.
Smyrna wherein they instruct the Greek Children. And the same do they at St.
Erinys, as appears by the relation of Richard the Jesuit, who introduces
another Jesuit speaking as follows, I set open my School every day to all that
will come and learn any thing, being ever ready and most willing to instruct
Youth, as well out of Obedience to my Superior, who earnestly recommended to
me this course, as for that likewise it has been revealed to me from Heaven,
that this is the surest way to reform by degrees the Greek Church, and perhaps
one of the most likeliest means to maintain us in these foreign Countries.

IT already appears, by these Testimonies, that one of the principal things
recommended to the Emissaries, when they are to be sent abroad, is the
Education of Children, as an infallible means to set up the Romish Religion in
the midst of these people, and that the Emissaries on their side do well acquit
themselves in this particular. But the Author of the Book called A Description
of the Holy Land, delivers himself more plainly. For discoursing how the
Jesuits employ themselves in the City of Aleppo, he tells us, that their chief
business is to instruct Youth, which has always been esteemed a matter of great
importance and highly conducing to the reformation of these Nations. Observe, I
beseech you, what he says, that the Emissaries do not only carefully apply
themselves to this, and that by order from their Superiors, but that this is an
especial means to make all these people in a short time to become insensibly
Roman Catholics.

BUT we must likewise take notice that these Gentlemen who leave no means
untryed, do wholly betake themselves to these two last ways, namely, that of
gaining the Prelates and that of instructing Youth. For when they have won any
Bishop to their Party, they oblige him to set them upon the educating of their
Children, making use of his Authority that they may manage their business with
greater success and security. Which the same Author of the Holy Land shows us,
Father Queriot, says he, was a fit person to offer his service to the Greek
Metropolitain, who was a good Catholic, Holy Syria part. 1. Treat. 1. c. 4.
and a man of a strict Life (he means the Metropolitain of Aleppo) he has
obliged him to trust us with the Education of the Grecian Children of that
Country, and to slight the discourses of the Enemies of the Roman Religion. And
a little farther, it is to be moreover observed, says he, that the Patriarch
of Constantinople reprehending him for employing a Religious Frank in the
teaching of the Greeks, even in his Episcopal House, this great man who is ever
like himself, does notwithstanding permit the Father to proceed on still in his
undertaking.

SPEAKING of the Mission of Damascus, this Mission, says he, is the work of
Father Jerome Queriot who was sent from Aleppo to Damascus, in the beginning of
the year 1643, by the Greek Patriarch Euthymius, who was of the Isle of Chios,
and of the Romish Religion, for the instruction of Youth, and especially of his
Nephew, and for the composition of his circular Letters and Greek and Arabian
Patents. Yet he tells us, this Father was forced to leave the place, the Greeks
growing jealous of him, in as much as that he being a Religious Frank was
employed in the chief affairs of the Patriarchate.

I cannot forbear mentioning what the said Author relates on the same Subject,
namely, the instruction of the Greek Youth. We must betake our selves to this
Course, says he, for the converting the Greek Schismatics. We are too old,
said Jerasimus an Archbishop and Vicar of the Patriarchate, to receive new
Impressions: but instruct our Youth, who by your care will be capable of trying
good things and prove a Seminary of perfect Christians; words, says he, which
he uttered in the hearing of the Youth on purpose to encourage them to make use
of the advantage offered them. It is certainly a great satisfaction to us when
we see young Greeks who are naturally eloquent, to instruct so handsomely their
Servants; and I had almost said, even their very Parents, who become as it were
their Disciples in Religion. Is there any thing more great and glorious than
the building of new Churches with the Apostles, and converting the World? For
new Churches are planted by the settlement of these Missions, and the old ones
repaired at the same time, by means of the Instruction of Children who teach
their Parents. This Jesuit lays open the matter plainly and sincerely, whereas
Mr. Arnaud does not so, for he would have these new Churches pass for old ones.

THE same Author relates that having observed John Damascen was esteemed in
this Country as an infallible Doctor, and that his Testimony against Heresies
was of great weight with them; One of our Fathers, says he, undertook to teach
this Saints Logic and Divinity touching the controverted Points. He says,
this invention took, and inspired the Scholars with great Zeal. But says he,
this their forwardness was taken notice of by some envious Persons, who
informed the Vicar of the Patriarchate of the matter, and so far incensed him
that he caused the young Students to be brought before him, and having
reprehended their Boldness, condemned their Opinions and charged them to desist
from such Discourses, adding therewithal, that if they obeyed not his Commands,
he would ruin them and their Families. These Arguments, says he, could not
prevail with the Scholars to change their Opinions, or break off their
Assemblies, and forsake their Masters, but they were more cautious afterward,
and did forbear publishing any thing in the Circles as they had heretofore done.

IT is is an easy matter to comprehend the Advantage the Church of Rome makes
of the labors of these Emissaries; and to be more particularly informed
thereof, we need but read what the Sieur Poulet has written concerning Poulet's
Voyages 2. part. C. 20.
the Jesuits, and their manner of proceedings in the East. They rightly
understood, says he, how difficult it is to work on the mind of a Person grown
old in his Errors, and that the first impressions being strengthened by a long
custom, become a new Nature in us, wherefore our instructions must be bestowed
on them whose minds are not yet corrupted by Maxims of Schism and Heresy. They
have therefore very advisedly, set up Schools, whereunto the Children of
Schismatics and sometimes of Turks too do resort. The desire of having some
Images, or Agnusses draws them to our Congregations, where hearing our
Doctrine, they become effectually Catholics without perceiving themselves to
be so: as for the other Schismatics, they hear our Sermons, and pretend to be
Catholics only in hope of some Advantage they expect by this their
Dissimulation.

WE need likewise but read what Besson the Jesuit has written, touching Part.
1. Tr. 1. C. 11.
the proceedings of the Society at Aleppo. The Religious Orders, says he, even
the most regular amongst them, have received from the Society at Aleppo not a
few Advantages, and the Eastern Church has had such Prelates from them as are
at this day the greatest lights of the Syrian Clergy. Whereupon he tells us in
another place, that the Greeks and Syrians admit Apostolical Men into Part. 1.
Tr. 1. C. 2.
their Houses. They likewise permit them the use of their Churches, and the
Curats accept of our help, the Bishops entreat us to prune their Vines, and
this Church in the East being now weary of its miseries, and blinded with its
tears, expects from the West the most pure lights of the Gospel.

I confess these Gentlemen have been very dext'rous and fortunate in performing
what has been given them in charge, and that the Church of Rome in general is
very much obliged to them, but I ^ind Mr. Arnaud to be more fortunate than
they: for it seems as if these persons had foreseen long before, by a
Prophetical Spirit, the book Mr. Arnaud was to make, and therefore would
prepare him Materials, and furnish him with this fine Collection of
Attestations and Testimonies. Who would ever have thought that these Gentlemen
the Jesuits should pass over the Seas and run to the farthest parts of the
World to do Mr. Arnaud honor? Yet is it true, that they have been his
Messengers, and a man would be apt to think, they went only into these Countries
upon his account.

NEITHER must we pass over in silence the Seminaries, established in Rome, and
other places, for the bringing up of Greek Children, wherein they are taught on
one hand the Rites and Ceremonies of the Greek Church, and on the other, the
Doctrines and Opinions of the Church of Rome: for leaving these Schools, they
betake themselves to the East, where it frequently happens they are called to
the Exercise of Ecclesiastical Functions, and these are as so many of the Court
of Romes Creatures, who endeavor to the utmost of their power to establish the
Doctrines and Maxims of the Latins. It is well known that during the Popedom of
Gregory the XIII, there was a College founded at Rome; to what end, we may be
informed by Leo Allatius. The College of the Greeks, says he, was built in
Gregory De Perp Cons. lib. 3. cap. 6. page 970.
the thirteenth's time, to the end the Grecian Children might learn the Arts
and Sciences, which are not now to be found in Greece, and also be instructed
in the Catholic Religion, that they may afterward communicate it to others,
and especially to them of their own Nation. And in the following Chapter,
relating what means has been used to propagate the Roman Religion in Greece,
since those Countries have been possessed by the Turks, he adds, Thus through a
long series of time has Religion made its progress in Greece. But at length
Gregory the XIII, desirous to quench the fire which wasted all Greece, and
remedy its miseries, has therefore caused to be built at Rome the Greek Church,
which he Dedicated to St. Athenasius. He bought likewise at the same time, the
neighboring Houses, for Dwellings to entertain the Greek Scholars which
should be brought over from Greece, being all the Children of Greeks. He gave
likewise a considerable yearly Revenue for their Maintenance; to the end that
they being instructed in the Greek and Latin Tongues might serve as an Ornament
and help to their distressed Country. Now this is not a matter needs proving,
seeing this Church continues even to this day at Rome, in the same use for
which 'twas intended.

THE Fruits gathered hence are not inconsiderable, for there has been and is
now every day sent, I know not how many persons, full of Zeal for the Roman
Church its Rites and Ceremonies, into the East, who spreading themselves over
all parts of it, and professing the Religion of the Schismatical Greeks, and
living in the same Communion with them, do not fail to insinuate the Doctrines
of the Church of Rome into their minds. Leo Allatius has made a Catalogue of
these Persons, which the curious may see, if they please, he has observed that
several of them have been made Archbishops, and a great number of others
promoted to Episcopal Charges: some of them having been too zealous, occasioned
the Greeks to rise up against them; and others have been so succesful in their
Endeavors, that they gained the very Patriarchs of Constantinople themselves.
He mentions amongst others one Josaphat Azales, who having finished his Studies
in the Seminary, was sent to Messene, a City of Pelopenesus, to instruct the
Monks of St. Basil who live there, and having been some time after made Papas,
that is to say, a Greek Priest, he went to Mount Athos, and there says
Allatius, he taught the true Faith. Now it is to be observed, that this Mount
Athos is the general Seminary of the whole East, as Mr. Arnaud tells us, it
being from thence the Religious do disperse themselves over all Greece; from
this place they have their Patriarchs, Archbishops and Bishops, so that to
carry the Roman Religion to Mount Athos, it is to go to the source, which is a
means to gain in a short time all the Greeks. He mentions another, whom he
calls Ignatius Mindon, who leaving the Seminary, returned into Greece, where he
taught several years; and from thence went to Trebizonde which is a City on
Pont Euxin, where as before he set himself to the instructing of people, and
that with such success, that he was taken by them for a Prophet; And in fine,
being sent for by Raphael the Patriarch of Constantinople, to be Rector of the
Patriarchal Church at Pera, he endeavored, says he, with all his power to
advance the Interest of the Church of Rome.

IT is in this Seminary wherein were brought up two Persons who made Arcudius
Epist, ad Sigism. Regem Poloniae de reb. Mosc. page 10.
a great noise in the World, to wit, John Matthew Caryophilus Archbishop of
Iconia, and Peter Arcudius; the first of these was sent into Greece, but having
not discreetly carried himself, was forced for his preservation, to return to
Rome, where he set himself to writing against the Greeks: and the other was
sent into Poland, Lituania, Russia and Muscovia, where he employed himself,
according to his own relation for the space of twenty years in the propagating
of the Roman Faith.

POSSEVIN the Jesuit writing to Pope Gregory the 13th, touching the means to be
used for the introducing of the Doctrines of the Roman Church amongst the
Moscovits, he so highly esteems Seminaries, that he advises him to settle one
at Rome for the Russians, and another at Vilna in Bibl. Select. lib. 6. cap. 1.
Lituania, where he says, that the Jesuits have likewise their College in
which there are many Scholars. He tells us in another place, that this Pope in
effect founded several Seminaries for the Russians in Lituania and other places.

M. the Bishop of Pamiez having told us in his Annals that Gregory founded
Spondanus. Annalaom. 3. ^d ann. 1584
a Seminary at Rome for the Maronites, says farther, that the same Pope founded
others for the Eastern and Northern Countries as well at Rome as in the
Provinces.

AS to what remains we must not imagine the Turks, under whose Government the
Greeks live, do hinder the Endeavors of the Latins; it was never heard of,
says John Cottovicus, that the Turks have been in any sort severe against the
Religious, who having finished their Studies at Rome, and taken Orders,
returned into their own Countries and were raised to Dignities, nor that the
Turkish Magistrate has upon this account made them suffer the least Damage.
In effect provided they oppose not their Religion, they are ready enough to
connive at all other matters. They favor them that give 'em most Money, and
from thence it is we see on the Patriarchal See of Constantinople, Persons who
keep a good Correspondency with the Court of Rome, or else such who have been
the Jesuits Scholars, who feeing themselves raised to this Dignity, do not
fail to favor, as much as in them lies, this change so long prosecuted: and
it is in this rank we must place Raphael, Neophytus, Timotheus, Cyrillus of
Berrhaea, and I know not how many others whom the Roman Party has at diverse
times helped to the Patriarchate, and who in requital did them afterward great
Service.

ALL this, me thinks, shows evidently that Mr. Arnaud has been very
dis-ingenuous in his whole proceeding, who concealing these Intrigues,
confidently undertakes to convince us, of the Antiquity of the Roman Creed
touching the Eucharist, upon this Principle, that this same Doctrine is held by
other Christian Churches, as if all the passages from Rome to Greece were so
blocked up that these Doctrines could never be transported thither, or as if
the Latins had never attempted this. Had these People received these Doctrines
elsewhere, or invented them themselves; Mr. Arnaud would have some pretense for
his Argument; neither could we then charge him with asserting things as we do
now against the light of his own Conscience: But seeing he knew well enough,
the Latins have been perpetually endeavoring to introduce their Doctrines in
these Countries, and constantly labored at this, since I know not how many
Ages; he therefore upon supposal they have effected this, comes and offers us
the belief of these People as an undoubted Proof of the Perpetuity of this
Doctrine, this is, to speak modestly, such a way of proceeding as will never be
approved by just and reasonable men.

IT will perhaps be objected, that I do indeed here show, That the Latins
endeavored to insinuate their Religion in the East; but that I do not make it
particularly appear, they at any time endeavored to introduce their Doctrine
of Transubstantiation. To which I answer first, this is not necessary; for
proposing only to my self at present, to show the Nullity of the Consequence
Mr. Arnaud pretends to draw in order to the proving of the Perpetuity of the
Roman Creed, touching Transubstantiation, in that he imagines the Eastern
Churches hold the same, it suffices me to show thereupon, That this Opinion
might be communicated to them by the Latins themselves, in their several
attempts to introduce their Religion into the East, especially considering that
Transubstantiation is one of the most important Doctrines of it. And if Mr.
Arnaud would have his Proof subsist, he must set aside all the time of these
efforts we now mentioned, and betake himself only to those Ages which preceded
them. For unless he proves, that Transubstantiation has been believed in these
Churches, before all these endeavors to bring them over to the Roman Faith,
there is no Person endued with sense, but will perceive how little strength his
Argument carries along with it, seeing he is ever liable to be told, they have
received it from the Latins, it not appearing amongst them before.

BUT in the second place, I will not have it stick here, to the end Mr. Arnaud
may receive full satisfaction touching this point. I say then, that in the Year
1627. Clement the Fourth intending to make his Advantage of that Raynald. ad
ann. 1267. number. 75.
great Earnestness Michael Paleologus showed for the Reunion of his Church with
the Roman (as it has been observed in the third Chap. of this Book) he
thereupon sent him a Confession of Faith, which he would have received by the
Greeks, because he found that which the Greeks sent him, not only deficient in
several things, but full of Errors, although the Friar Minorites then at
Constantinople had accepted it. Now Amongst other Articles in this Confession
there is one, which relates to the Eucharist, and which runs thus in Latin.
Sacramentum Eucharistae ex azymo conficit eadem Romana Ecclesia, tenens and
docens quod in ipso Sacramento panis vere transubstantiatur in Corpus, and
Vinum in Sanguinem Domini nostri Jesu Christi, which is to say, the Church of
Rome Celebrates the Sacrament of the Eucharist with unleavened Bread, Believing
and Teaching that in this Sacrament the Bread is really transubstantiated into
the Body, and the Wine into the Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ. He sent
afterward Dominicains to Confirm this Confession and procure its acceptance
with the Greeks.

IN the Year 1272, Gregory the Tenth sent Friar Minorites into Greece, Raynald.
ad ann. 1272. number. 27.
to endeavor afresh the Reduction of the Greeks, under the Authority of the
same Michael Paleologus, who resolved to finish this Affair at any rate, and to
whom he likewise recommended the same Confession of Faith.

IN the Year 1288. Pope Nicholas the Fourth sent Friar Minorites into Idem ad
ann. 1288. number. 30.
Esclavonia, to bring off these People from the Greek Religion to that of the
Church of Rome, he gave them Letters to King Urosius, and Helena the Queen
Mother; and recommended to 'em the same Form of Doctrine, containing the
Article of Transubstantiation, to the end this might be the Rule of their
instructions to the People.

THE same Pope sent it likewise to three Bishops in the East, who embraced his
Communion, exhorting them to instruct the People according Ibid. number. 33.
to the Doctrine contained therein, and at the same time he recommended to them
the Emissaries sent into those Countries, for the Conversion of the Greeks,
Bulgarians, Valaquians, Syrians, Iberians, Alains, Russians, Jacobites,
Nestorians, Georgians, Armenians, Indians; whence it is easy to conjecture,
that the Emissaries were likewise enjoined to use this Formulary.

IN the Year 1318. Pope Innocent the twenty Second sent this Confession
Raynald. ad ann. 1318. number. 13.
to the King of Armenia; And not only, says Rynaldus, The Armenians which
inhabited Cilicia, and Armenia embraced the Doctrine of the Roman Church: but
others also who being driven out of their Country by the Sarracens, had retired
into Chersonesus Taurique. They submitted themselves to the Roman Church, in
the presence of the Bishop of Capha, who was a Latin. The Pope, adds he,
congratulated them, and showed 'em, that in the Divine Mysteries, the Substance
of Bread is changed into the Body and Blood of Christ, the Species remaining
entire.

IN the Year 1338. Bennet the Twelfth received Letters from the Alains, Idem ad
ann. 1338. number. 77.
who were a sort of Christians, that professed the Greek Religion, and lived
under the Government of the Tartars. He returned them an answer, and sent the
Confession of Faith I already mentioned for their Instruction. Raynaldus
referrs this Letter to the Year 1338. But there is an old Book I lately cited
entitled The marvelous History of the great Cham of Tartaria, which referrs
this to the Year 1328. The Article of Transubstantiation is expressly mentioned
in it.

IN the Year 1366. John Paleologus the Grecian Emperor designing to Idem ad
ann. 1366. number. 6.
reunite himself to the Church of Rome, that he might be assisted against the
Turks, Pope Urbain the Fifth sent him, as his Predecessors had done to Michael
this same Confession of Faith.

SO that here then the Latins are not only enjoined to propagate their Religion
in general amongst the Eastern Christians, but particularly the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, and to the end it may not be said this Confession contains
the other Points of the Christian Faith, as well as that of the Substantial
Conversion, it is to be observed, that it has two distinct parts: in the first
of which the Articles of the Apostles Creed are explained, and in the other
there are several particular points expressly determined by the Church of Rome,
propter diversas Haereses a quibusdam ex ignorantia and ab aliis ex malitia
introductas, by reason of certain Heresies introduced by the ignorance of some,
and Malice of others. Now it is under these last points that the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation is contained; which plainly shows, that this Doctrine was
proposed to them as lately defined by the Church of Rome, and of which those
People had at that time no certain Knowledge.

MR. Arnaud then must seek elsewhere for Proofs whereon to ground his
pretension touching the Antiquity of the Opinion in question, and I will not
stick to affirm, he must be an extraordinary Person if he can solidly acquit
himself of what I have laid before him, and in all which I defy him to
produce a false Quotation. He has been showed five remarkable deceits whereby
he has imposed on the World, in concealing whatsoever was necessary to be known
in order to a right understanding of this Controversy, and in turning to a
vain and unprofitable use whatsoever concludes directly against him. He has
been showed the profound Ignorance wherein these People have lay'n from the
eleventh Century to this present, and the fond Superstitions reigning amongst
them, which makes them very unfit Judges of our Controversy. He has been
showed the miserable condition of these Churches in respect of Temporals, and
the Violences offered them by the Latins to make them change their Religion. We
have represented him with the Persecutions they suffered from their own Princes
upon this account; We have observed all these Countries ore-spread with Monks
and Emissaries, time out of mind, and that without interruption to this day; We
have represented him with a particular account of what the Emissaries do, and
what the Seminaries contribute toward the making them receive the Roman Faith.
And in fine, we have showed him, that one of their chiefest cares for these
People was to make them learn the Mystery of the Substantial Conversion. Now
after this, whether they do believe it, or not, it is an indifferent matter in
respect of the main of our Controversy. So that it only now lies upon me to
vindicate my own particular Reputation; that is to say, whether I have rightly
or no affirmed that they do not believe it, and which I shall demonstrate by
God's Assistance in the following parts of this Work, and that in such a manner
as I doubt not but will satisfy all reasonable Persons.

BOOK III.
Wherein is shown that the Greek Schismatical Church so called holds not
Transubstantiation.

CHAP. I.
The Question stated, and M. Arnaud's sixth Deceit manifested.

IT may be remembered, that at the beginning of this Dispute touching the
Schismatical Churches, I undertook to prove the truth of of these three
Propositions. First, that when Mr. Arnaud shall prove what he pretends
concerning these Churches, since the eleventh Century to this present, yet will
it not thence follow that the Doctrine of the Roman Church, touching the
Eucharist has been perpetual in the Christian Religion, or the change in
question impossible, or that it has not actually happened. Secondly, That the
true Greek Church and others which the Latins call Schismatics, never reckoned
Transubstantiation amongst the Articles of their Belief, nor the Adoration of
the Eucharist amongst their Rites and Ceremonies. Thirdly, That whatsoever Mr.
Arnaud has offered to prove the Affirmative, is void and ineffectual, and that
even the greatest part of his Proofs conclude the contrary of that which he
pretends. I have already made good the first of these Propositions in the
preceding Book, and shall in this inquire into the belief of the Greeks from
the eleventh Century to this present; that I may thereby accommodate my self to
Mr. Arnaud's Method. And as to the other Greek Churches, I shall treat of them
in my fifth Book. But it is first necessary to lay down the true State of the
Question, to the end, that what we undertake may be the better understood, and
Mr. Arnaud's Deceit more plainly detected. Who continually wanders from the
point in dispute, supposing impossibilities, proving impertinencies and
confounding what ought to be distinguished.

WE must know then there are two sorts of Greeks, the one reunited to the
Church of Rome, who acknowledge the Popes Jurisdiction, and receive the Decrees
of the Florentine Council, living in Peace with the Latins; The other
acknowledge only their own Patriarchs, having their Communion apart, and
separate from the Latins. And this I suppose Mr. Arnaud or his Friends will not
deny, seeing that in their Observations on the Request of M. the Archbishop of
Ambrun they have themselves made this distinction of the Greek Catholic
Church, and the Greek Schismatical one. It is needless to allege other Proofs
touching a matter of Fact so well known. In effect the Endeavors of the Latins
to subject the Greeks to themselves have not been wholly fruitless, for besides
that in Greece it self and other Patriarchates, they have acquired a great
number of Persons and entire Families, besides this I say, there are whole
Nations which observe the Decrees of the Council of Florence, and live under
the Jurisdiction of the Sea of Rome, who yet still observe the Rites and
Customs of the Greeks. We may place in this rank all the Greeks in Italy, Rome,
Venice, Tuscany, the Kingdoms of Sicily and Naples, which are called Italian
Greeks, we may also bring under this Rank a great part of them who live under
the Government of the Venetians. For Allatius testifies, that not only all
these do observe the same Ceremonies as them of the East, but that the Pope
likewise obliges them to an Observance of them, and therefore maintains a Greek
Bishop to confer Orders according to the Greek Mode, to hinder 'em from
receiving them in the East, from the hands of Schismatics. We must likewise
comprehend the Russians which inhabit black Russia, and Podolia, under the
Government of the King of Poland; who submitted themselves to the Church of
Rome toward the end of the last Century. Arcudius commends Sigismond the
Third, for that he did not only solicit but in a manner Arcud. Epist. ad
Sigismond.
constrain them to make this Union, ut ad Romanam, says he, hoc est ver am Dei
Ecclesiam se adjungerent excitasti ac pene dixerim impulisti. Our Question does
not concern them, their Submission to the Roman See evidently excludes them
from this Dispute, I expressly excepted them, when I denied that the Greeks and
other Christians held Transubstantiation, and Adored the Sacrament, having said
in plain terms, except those that submit themselves to the Pope.

SECONDLY, We must remember that one of the chief Advantages Answer to the
first Treatise toward the end.
the Church of Rome makes of these forementioned Seminaries, and Emissaries in
Greece, is the gaining of Proselytes and instructing young People in its
Doctrines, to use them afterward for the Conversion of others, as I showed in
the preceding Book. Now Mr, Arnaud cannot in reason bring these sort of People
into the reckoning, and I think it will not be taken ill, If I separate them
from the rest, for in effect the Abuse would be too gross to pretend to
determine this Question touching the Greek Church, by the Testimony of
Converts, or Persons brought up from their Infancy amongst the Jesuits and
other Religious Orders and Latin Doctors, who instructed them in their
Doctrines; and I have already shown, that the number of these is not small, and
Allatius himself assures us of it. The Greeks, says he, that reverence the
Pope and receive his Decrees as Oracles are more in number than we Allat. de
perp. cons. lib. 3. cap. 11.
imagine, and were they not with held by the fear of a most cruel Tyrant, and
that of the Calumnies and Accusations of some wicked People, we should see
every day, them who possess the greatest Dignities amongst the Greeks, come and
prostrate themselves at the Popes Footstool. This is the Fruit of the Missions
and Seminaries.

IN the third place, the Question is not here, whether the Greeks have the same
Opinion with us concerning the Sacrament? This is Mr. Arnauds continual device
to dispute on this Principle, to wit, that I affirm the Greeks to be of the
same Opinion with us. As for example, he takes a great deal Lib. 2. C. 12.
of pains to show that it is not likely we would make use of Euthymius his words
to instruct a man in our Doctrine, and that Euthymius has not taken the term
Est, in our Savior's words, This is my Body, in the sense of Significat. Lib.
2. C. 13.
He likewise takes a great deal of pains to prove that Nicholas Methoniensis
Lib. 2. C. 15.
was not a Berengarian and one that believed the Bread was the Figure of our
Savior's Body, that the Profession of Faith which the Saracens were caused to
make when they embraced the Christian Religion, was not in such terms as to
make them understand that the Bread and Wine were not really our Savior's
Body, but only the Figure or Representation thereof endued with its Virtue, and
that Pope Innocent the Third did not reproach Lib. 3. C. 1.
the Greeks with their believing that they eat only the Figure of Christ's
Body. All this is but a mere Artifice to impose on the World, and blind those
that have not continually the point in question in their minds; and suffer
themselves to be easily carried off from one Subject to another. I say then it
concerns us not to know, whether the belief of the Greeks touching the
Eucharist, is the same in every particular with that of ours, and whether they
explain themselves on that Subject in the same manner as we do. This we never
yet affirmed to Mr. Arnaud, but the contrary, viz, That several Answer to the
first Treatise.
of the Greeks have since the seventh Century rejected the terms of Figure,
Image, and Type, which the Ancients made use of and we use after their example.
The present Question is, whether the Greeks do believe concerning the Sacrament
what the Church of Rome does, this is the only point of the Dispute, to which
Mr. Arnaud ought to have stuck, and not to wander into wide Discourses and
fruitless Consequences. In effect the design of the Treatise of the Perpetuity
being to make us confess, that the belief of the Church of First Treatise of
the Perpetuity.
Rome touching the Eucharist, has been perpetual in all Ages, and that Author
having for this purpose made use of the Conformity of the Greeks with her in
this Point, and this Conformity having been denied, it is clear, that the
Question does not concern our Sentiment, but that of the Roman Church, to know
whether the Greeks hold and teach the same thing.

IN the fourth place, our Dispute hitherto has not been concerning the real
Presence, as Mr. Arnaud supposes, but only on the Subject of
Transubstantiation, and the Adoration thereon appendant; so that he has dealt
very dis-ingeniously, in making the World believe that our debate reached to
the Real Presence: Our Question, says he, is concerning the belief of all
these Lib. 2. C. 3. P. 128.
Sects and People touching Transubstantiation and the Real Presence. It Is yet
more absurdly he complains that contrary to the intention of the Author of the
Perpetuity, I have turned the Question upon Transubstantiation.
Notwithstanding, says he, that the Author of the Perpetuity has only in his
first Ibid.
Treatise discoursed of the Real presence, and contented himself with
maintaining that this Doctrine was received by all these Schismatical Churches;
yet Mr. Claude has continually turned the Question upon Transubstantiation,
which was not the point precisely in question. But in fine, it is the effect of
a most unwarrantable Lib. 2. C. 10. P. 191.
Liberty to write, that he knows not whether the boldness of a man can proceed
to that point where mine must needs be, in maintaining to the end that the Real
Presence and Transubstantiation are Doctrines unknown to the Greek Church. And
I dare to affirm that his cannot be greater than it is, for it is certain, that
here the Question only concerns Transubstantiation and the Adoration, and not
the Real Presence, concerning which I have not yet said any thing. 1. Let Mr.
Arnaud read the last Section of my first Answer, and he will find precisely
these words; I affirm that Transubstantiation and the Adoration of the
Sacrament, are two things unknown to all the World, the Roman Church excepted;
for neither the Greeks, nor the Armenians, Russians, Jacobites, Ethiopians, nor
in general any Christians but them who have submitted themselves to the Pope,
do believe any thing touching these two Articles. 2. Let the passages of my
second Answer be perused where I handle again the same Question, and it will be
found that they only concern Transubstantiation, there being no mention therein
of the Real Presence. 3. I desire the Reader to peruse the last Chapter of the
second Treatise of the Perpetuity, and he will find it contains these words for
its Title. That all the Sects separate from the Church of Rome are at accord
with her, in the point of Transubstantiation, and especially the Greeks. He
will find likewise that in the body of the Chapter there is not a word of the
Real Presence.

THERE is no body then but Mr. Arnaud, who has thought of bringing it into our
debate, and this without any other reason but that he will have it so, maugre
us, imagining he shall be able to save himself by the Ambiguity of the term of
Real Presence. For as to what he tells us, that the Author of the Perpetuity
speaks only in his first Treatise of the Real Presence, and contents himself
with asserting That this Doctrine was received by all the Schismatical
Churches, I am sorry I must tell him that I know not any man that writes things
on such slight grounds as he does; nor so easily exposes his Reputation in
asserting matters of Fact, of whose untruth he is liable to be convinced by
every one that can read. For not to go farther we need but read, to find in the
fourteenth Page of the first Treatise, that the Author proposes to himself, to
make any man confess who is not extremely obstinate by the evidence of truth it
self, that the belief of the Church of Rome touching this Mystery is the same
with that of all Antiquity. Now every body knows that the belief of the Church
of Rome reaches as far as Transubstantiation. We need but read moreover for
this purpose the eighteenth and nineteenth Pages of the first Treatise, wherein
the Author of the Perpetuity being desirous to show us the universality of the
Doctrine of the Church of Rome, tells us, that Lanfranc having explained the
Catholic Doctrine in these terms; We believe the Terrestial Substances of
Bread and Wine being divinely Sanctified on our Lord's Table by the Ministry of
the Priests, are CHANGED by the ineffable Operation, wonderful and
incomprehensible Power of God into the Essence of the Body of our Lord, adds
farther, Behold here the Faith which the Church dispersed throughout the whole
World, which is called Catholic, has held in all Ages and does at this time
hold, and that he confidently repeats this in the twenty second Chapter, and
presses Berengarius to inform himself of the Sentiments of all the Christians
in the World in the East and West. Ask the Greeks, Armenians, and generally all
Christians of what Nation soever, and they will all of them tell you they hold
the same Faith which we profess. We need but only read to be satisfied that the
Author of the Perpetuity produces afterward the Testimony of Guitmond in the
same Sense, and for the same end he cited that of Lanfranc, to wit, to prove
that the Greeks and other Schismatics do believe Transubstantiation, and that
in the twenty second Page he makes this remark, That Guitmond does not only
apply what he says to the Opinion which is contrary to the Real Presence, but
likewise to the Doctrine of the impanation which is that of the Lutherans,
which clearly shows us, that this Testimony of Guitmond respects not only the
Real Presence, but likewise Transubstantiation. In fine, to be ascertained in
this matter we need but read what the Author of the Perpetuity immediately adds
in his twenty third Page, after he had alleged that passage of Guitmond: All
the Books of the Schismatical Greeks, says he, which have come to our hands
since that time, do clearly testify they held the same Opinions as the Church
of Rome, touching the Eucharist. After this Mr. Arnaud comes and tells us, that
although the Author of the Perpetuity speaks only in his first Treatise of the
Real Presence, and contents himself with asserting that this Doctrine was held
by all these Schismatical Churches, Yet Mr. Claude turns aside the Question
upon Transubstantion, which Point this Author does not precisely Treat of. What
means then I pray these Quotations out of Lanfranc and Guitmond which he has
expressly produced to show that Transubstantiation was believed by the whole
World, both by the Greeks and Armenians, and generally by all Christians?
Certainly Mr. Arnaud does himself an irreparable Injury thus to maintain things
without consulting and examining them, flattering himself with the hopes of
being believed upon his own bare word. That which has deceived him without
doubt has been this: That he has observed in the Treatise of the Perpetuity,
that the Author having produced his Argument touching the Schismatical Churches
in the manner already mentioned, that is to say positively, in reference to
Transubstantiation, passing afterward to the proposing of some Arguments; by
which he pretends to show that the Mystery of the Eucharist is distinctly known
by all the Faithful, and that an insensible change is a thing impossible, he
restrains himself to the Real Presence, but there is a difference betwixt these
two points, and Mr. Arnaud ought to have considered this a little better. I say
then, that in this Dispute of the Greeks and other Christians separated from
the Roman Church, the question concerns Transubstantiation, and not the Real
Presence, as well for that the Author of the Perpetuity has expressly mentioned
Transubstantiation in his first Treatise as I come now from observing, and for
as much as I plainly kept my self in my first Answer to this Doctrine alone,
and that of the Adoration, whereupon it follows that the Debate has been
precisely continued on these two Articles. Yet do I here declare, to avoid all
Mistakes, that although our debate at present is not concerning the Real Presence,
yet do I not yield to the drawing of this consequence from hence, that I
acknowledge this Doctrine is believed in the Greek Church, in the same Sense as
the Latins understand it. This is not my Opinion, and I shall say no more of
it, but that this point is not the Subject of our present debate. It will
appear perhaps in the following parts of this Discourse, what ought to be
believed touching this matter, it not being needful for this to alter the State
of our question.

BUT besides the Observations I now made, we must likewise observe, that it
does not concern us to know whether the Greeks do expressly reject
Transubstantiation, or whether they have made it a point of Controversy
betwixt them and the Latins, but the question here is whether they do
positively believe it or no. For there is a great deal of difference between
Peoples absolute rejecting of a Doctrine, that is to say, the making thereof a
point of debate, and the not receiving and reckoning it amongst the Articles of
their Faith. Our debate concerns only this last, I mean whether the Greek
Church as it stands separate from the Latin professes the Doctrine of the
Substantial Conversion, or not: This is the true state of the question. Mr.
Arnaud maintains the affirmative, and I the negative, so that we must see now
who has the reason and truth on his side. Yet let me tell him, that designing
throly to handle this Subject, he ought to have laid down all these
distinctions and leave the Reader at his own liberty to judge of them. But
instead of this, there is never a one of these Articles which I now mentioned
that he has not manifestly perverted. 1. He makes advantage of all those
Parties which have been made from time to time, either by the Violence and
Authority of the Greek Emperors, or by the Intrigues of the Latins for the
Reunion of the two Churches. 2. He makes use of the Testimony of Persons won
to the Roman Interest, such as Emanuel Calecas, Bessarion, John Plusiadenus,
Gennudius Scholarius, Baronius Spatarius, Paysius, Ligardius, all of 'em
Persons manifestly engaged in the Opinions of the Church of Rome, as shall be
showed him in the Sequel of this debate. 3. He sets himself upon proving to no
purpose, that the Greeks do not believe as we do the Sacrament to be a Figure
or Representation, and that they are not Berengarians. 4. He maintains that the
Point in question is to know whether they believe the Real Presence, and that
the Dispute turns especially on this hinge. 5. He set himself to show that the
Greeks never made Transubstantiation a point of Controversy with the Latins.
Now all this is no more than a general Illusion, which alters the state of the
Question.

CHAP. II.
The first Proof taken from the Greeks refusing to use the Term of
Transubstantiation. The second from their not expressly teaching the Conversion
of Substances. Mr. Arnaud's seventh Delusion.

MY first Proof is taken from the Greeks not using the Term of
Transubstantiation, when they explain their belief touching the Eucharist. And
this Arcudius himself (who cannot be suspected by the Roman Church, seeing he
is a Person devoted to its Interests) is forced to confess in the same place,
where he would persuade us, that the Greeks believe the Conversion of
Substances. In the Sacrament of the Eucharist, says he, the Greeks
acknowledge, embrace and believe, with a firm Arcud. lib. 3. de Sacr. Euch.
cap. 2.
Faith, veram (...), a real Transubstantiation, as it appears by the Testimony
of the ancient Greek Fathers of all Ages, and lately by that of Jeremias the
Patriarch of Constantinople, in the tenth Chapter of his Censure of the
Lutherans. So far he agrees with Mr. Arnaud, but what follows does not well
accord with what he said before, And although they use not this Term, yet have
they invented others, by which they explain themselves as fully as can be
desired. Dicunt enim (...), aliaque id genus, we shall by what follows whether
he has reason to say these Terms signify and express areal Transubstantiation,
it suffices me at present to represent what he acknowledges, That they use not
the Term of Transubstantiation. This justifies it self by the Testimony of
Paysius Ligaridius, a real false Greek whom Mr. Arnaud produces with so great
ostentation, and that which shall be considered in its place; vox etenim, says
he, (...), transubstantiatio tametsi nova quodammodo videatur, and a pluribus
non libenter ut recens suscipiatur licet nihilominus, etc. This Term of
Transubstantiation although it seems in some sort new, and that several by reason
of its novelty do not willingly receive it, etc. These several he speaks of are
all the true Greeks, which is to say, all them which are not as Paysius, who
holds intelligence with the Latins.

I might likewise here produce the Testimony of Mr. Basire Archdeacon of
Northumberland, and Chaplain to his Majesty of Great Britain, a worthy Person,
exquisitely Learned, exemplary for his Virtue, and well versed in Languages,
who has not only voyaged into Greece and other Eastern Parts, but has lived
there a considerable time, and publicly Preached in the Greek Churches. For in
one of his Letters he sent me, and out of which I shall produce hereafter some
Articles, he assures me he has carefully read several public Writings of the
Greeks, as their Symbols, Confessions, and Catechisms, to see whether he could
find the Term of Transubstantiation in them, which he could not find in any of
them. He farther adds, that one of these false Greeks which the Latins make use
of for the propogating of their Doctrines in these Countries, having compiled a
Catechism, wherein he had inserted the Term of Transubstantiation, he was
censured for it by the true Greeks. But all these Testimonies are not
necessary, seeing we may read a great many of these authentic Pieces of the
Greeks, as their Canons collected by Balsamon, Zonaras, and several others,
part of their Liturgies inserted in the Library of the Fathers, their Euchology
given us by James Goar a Dominicain, their Pontificia published by Mr. Habert
Bishop of Vabres, the Confession of Faith which their Prelates make at the time
of their Ordination, the Typick, that is to say, the Book that regulates every
days Office, with their Festivals, Fasts and Solemnities, their Anthology which
particularly contains the Offices for Festivals, their Horologies consisting of
daily Prayers and many other Ecclesiastical Books, a great number of which we
find in the dissertation Leo Allatius wrote on this Subject. Mr. Arnaud who has
made an exact search by himself and Friends, cannot produce one passage that
bears the expression of Transubstantiation, which in my judgment is an evident
token that it is not in them. We may see likewise the Books of their most
approved Authors, as of John Damascene, Nicephorus the Patriarch of
Constantinople, Photius, Theophilact, Oecumenius, Zonaras, Germain, Balsamon,
Nicetas Choniatus, Cabisilas, Marc of Ephesus, Jeremias the Patriarch,
Metrophanus, and as many others whose works are extant, in which we find no
such expression as answers that of Transubstantiation. Neither can it be said,
that this expression being new and found out but since the Contest with
Berengarius, the Greeks have therefore no such word in their Language whereby
perfectly to express this, seeing they have the term (...), which signifies
properly Transubstantiation. We have already seen that Arcudius, and Paysius
Ligaridius, have observed it, in effect the Latinis'd Greeks do commonly use
it, and it was ever inserted in the Formulary of Abjuration, which the Greeks
make, when they embrace the Romish Religion, as I shall make it appear
hereafter. And Mr. Arnaud himself has been forced to acknowledge, this word
(...), is not Lib. 4. c. 6. page 387.
that which the Greeks ordinarily use whereby to explain Transubstantiation, He
should have said they used it not in the explication of their Creed. Moreover
he needed not insert the word, Ordinarily, for it is certain they do neither use
it ordinarily nor extraordinarily.

BUT it may be perhaps replied, It does not follow that they do not believe
with the Latins the Doctrine represented under this Term, although they use not
the Term it self. I answer first, that if we suppose the Greeks ever held this
Opinion, as Mr. Arnaud would persuade us, there could not be any reason given
why the word (...) has not been found all this while in use amongst their
Authors, and so much the more because we find that of (...) and (...) in them.
For the Latins who had not in common use either the Term of Substantiatio, nor
Substantiare, have therefore invented and admitted of that of
Transubstantiatio, and Transubstantiare, as most proper to express their
conceptions on that Subject, so that this very consideration, That we find not
these kind of expressions in the Writings of the Greeks, is a kind of proof
that they believed not the thing signified by them. Moreover, the Latins having
Invented the Term of Transubstantiation; how comes it to pass the Greeks have
not all this while, following their example used that of (...), to keep up this
perfect Conformity with the Church of Rome, which Mr. Arnaud has all along
supposed? How comes it to pass that when this Greek word has been known to 'em,
and even the Latins themselves have taught it them, yet they would not admit of
it? and I pray, what ill conveniences could they apprehend thereby, if they in
effect believed the conversion of the Substances? It cannot appear strange to
us, that there were heretofore Persons of sound Judgments, who scrupled to
admit the term of Hypostasis, because that in effect ignorant people would take
thence occasion to imagine, there were several Divinities; but there can be
nothing like this alleged in respect of Transubstantiation, for there is no
danger of giving this an excessive sense, beyond what ought to be believed,
supposing we admit the Substantial conversion. There is rather on the contrary,
a kind of necessity to make use of it, because it expresses better than any
other this kind of conversion, and the Terms, (...), being general expressions
are consequently defective, and suffer a man to deny the change in question,
and fall into Heresy; which is as much the Greeks interest as the Latins to
prevent, if it were so they had the same Sentiments in this Subject with them,
as Mr. Arnaud assures us they have. He mightily bestirs himself with his
Arguments, or rather Declamations on that the Greeks have never quarrelled
about this Doctrine, and finds it strange supposing they were of a contrary
belief to the Latins. But let him then tell us, wherefore they so obstinately
refused to use the word (...), Transubstantiation, and would never express
themselves on this Mystery in the same form as the Church of Rome; for I find
this far more strange, supposing they hold in the main the same Doctrine with
her. It cannot be alleged that their ignorance has hind'red them from finding
so proper a Term; for it has been made to their hands, or that they feared
thereby to offend their Emperors; seeing they were deeply engaged to favor
the Church of Rome, or feared thereby to incur a greater hatred from the
Latins, seeing they could not do 'em a greater pleasure.

HOW comes it then to pass, they never used it, but on the contrary, when the
Latins in these forced and interessed Unions I mentioned in the preceding Book,
have proposed to them the Article of the Eucharist under the Term of
Transubstantiatur, the Bread is transubstantiated, they kept to their general
expressions, saying, only (...), the Bread is changed, as I shall hereafter
make appear? Is not this an evident Testimony they would not adopt a Doctrine
unknown to their Church, and which they regarded as a Novelty?

THIS first Proof shall be upheld by a second of no less strength than the
former. Being taken from that the Greeks in the explicating of their belief on
the Eucharist, not only do not use the Term of Transubstantiation, but
whatsoever Terms they make use of, they signify not any thing which expressly
bears the real conversion of the Substance Bread of and Wine into that of the
Body and Blood of Jesus Christ. When Pope Gregory, toward the end of the
Eleventh Century was minded to show what his belief was on this Subject; he did
not indeed use the Term of Transubstantiation, because 'twas not then found
out, but explained himself in such a manner as was sufficiently clear and
intelligible. The Bread and Wine, says he, on the Altar are changed
substantially Mr. Arnaud lib. 2. chapter 8. p. 170.
by virtue of the mystical and sacred Orison, and words of our Redeemer, into
the true, proper, and lively Flesh, and real, proper, and lively Blood of Jesus
Christ our Lord, and after the consecration it is the true Body of Jesus Christ,
born of the Virgin Mary, and the real Blood which ran down his side, not only
in a sign, and by virtue of a Sacrament, but by propriety of nature, and
reality of substance.

WHEN Innocent the Third would have this same belief known in the Council of
Latran, he clearly explained himself, and made use even of the very Term of
Transubstantiation. In the Sacrament of the Altar, says he, the Council. Lat.
sub Innoc. 3. cap. 1.
Body and Blood of Jesus Christ are really contained under the Species of Bread
and Wine, the Bread being transubstantiated into the Body, and the Wine into
the blood, by the divine power. In the same manner was it in the Council of
Trent, which expressly declared their belief, and what they would have others
believe likewise. There is made, say they, by the consecration, a conversion of
the Sess. 13. cap. 4.
whole Substance of Bread into the Substance of the Body of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and of the whole Substance of the Wine into the Substance of his Blood,
which conversion is rightly and properly called Transubstantiation.

AND thus speak the Doctors of the Church of Rome, and thus in effect they
ought to express themselves for the forming the Idea of this Doctrine. But it is
otherwise with the Greeks: for besides what I said, that they use not the Term
of (...), but reject it, it will not be found they use any expressions which
come near them of the Church of Rome, or mention any thing relating to a
substantial conversion, or presence of substance under the accidents of Bread
and Wine, or change of one substance into another, which is what ought to be
said, to show they believed Transubstantiation. We see not any thing of this
kind appear in the Cannons of their Councils, Confessions of Faith, or
Liturgies, Books of Devotions, or any of their Writings, whether published by
their Modern or Ancient Divines, and certainly it is very strange these people
should believe Transubstantiation, and yet at the same time not so much as
declare in express Terms this their belief. For besides, that these Terms are
but few and easy to be found out, there being nothing more easy to a man who
believes the Substantial conversion, than to say, the Bread is substantially
converted into the Body of Jesus Christ, or the substance of Bread is really
changed into the substance of Christ's Body, in such a manner that the former
substance remains no more. Besides this, I say, they have in the Greek Language
words which answer exactly the expressions of the Latins on this subject, and
upon this account they would be inexcusable, expressing themselves as they do,
differently from the Church of Rome, were their belief the same with hers.

YET is it evident, that the expressions of the Greeks are no ways like those
of the Latins, and there needs only the comparing of the one with the other to
discern the difference. Compare for Example the confession of Gregory the
Seventh, with what Mr. Arnaud tells us concerning Nicetas Pectoratus and
Theophilact. Compare the Discourses of Urbain the Second in the Council of
Plaisance, of Innocent the Third in the Council of Latran, of Thomas Aquinas,
and all the Schoolmen, and in short of the Council of Trent, with what he
alleges out of Euthymius, Nicholas Methoniensis, Zonaras, Nicetas Choniatus,
Cabasilas and Jeremias; and you will find on the one hand the conversion of the
Substances clearly and plainly expressed, and on the other no such thing.

I have already mentioned Mr. Basire an English Divine, who had a particular
Commerce with the Greeks, and during the time he was amongst them carefully
applied himself to the reading of their Books; observe here then what he wrote
me from Durham December. 6. 1668. Dico 3. in specie Ecclesiam Graecam,
Transubstantiationem nullibi asserere, neque voce, neque re. De publicis
instrumentis, puta Symbolis, confessionibus, catechismis, etc. intelligi volo;
quorum plurima pervolvi ad indaginem, neque in eorum vel unico, (...) vocis, ut
and rei ipsius, priscis patribus Graecis prorsus ignotae, vel vola vel
vestigium. Privatos eorum Doctores nil moror, quoniam non sum nescius quemdam
ipsorum pseudo-Graecorum hieromonachum in suam cathechesin quam mihi videre
licuit Constantinopoli, illam vocem (...) intrusisse, qui vel ideo verorum
Graecorum censuram haud effugit: The Greek Church does no where teach
Transubstantiation. I mean in their public Symbols, confessions and
catechisms, etc. several of which I have upon this account carefully perused,
but could not find in any of them the least trace either of this Term of
Transubstantiation, or the thing it self signified thereby, which Doctrine was
altogether unknown to the Greek Fathers. I matter not some private Doctors
amongst them, for I know that a certain Monk, of the number of these false
Greeks, had secretly inserted the Term of (...) Transubstantiation in his
Catechism, which I saw at Constantinople, but he was severely checked for it by
the true Greeks. It will be perhaps replied, that Mr. Basire is a Protestant,
and consequently to be suspected in this case; but besides that he is a person
deservedly honored for his integrity, and whose testimony cannot be questioned
without the highest injustice, and moreover a Divine, and therefore not likely
to mistake in things relating to his own Profession, being a person of great
Learning, and one that dwelt long in those Parts, and had not only the
curiosity, but likewise the means and opportunities to inform himself exactly
in the truth of what he relates; besides this, I say, Mr. Arnaud cannot justly
reject his Testimony upon this only ground, that he is a Protestant; seeing he
himself has produced the Letters of Mr. Pompone his Nephew, and Mr. Picquet,
and the History of what passed at M. the Archbishop of Sens, touching the
Muscovits attested by Roman Catholics.

BUT should I lay aside Mr. Basire's testimony, that of Mr. Arnaud would serve
my turn. I suppose there is no body doubts, but that Mr. Arnaud has made all
possible search into these matters touching the Greeks, and it is certain, had
he found any passages containing in express Terms the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, he would not omit them. Yet it is evident that whatsoever
he has hitherto alleged, which seems to intimate the conversion of Substances,
in all this long dispute which takes up half his Book, is but a mere Sophism,
imposing on us by means of the reunion made between the Greeks and Latins by
Michael Paleologus, and some testimonies the ancientest of which bears date but
from the year, 1641. We shall examine these matters in their proper place, and
hope to undeceive men's Minds whatsoever impressions they may have made upon
them. In the mean time we may observe that instead of giving us express and
clear proofs, which are the only ones that can lawfully be produced on this
subject, he amuses his Readers with tedious Discourses, wide Consequences, and
negative Arguments, which at bottom conclude nothing. For the Point in question
relating to a Fact which ought to be decided by proofs of Fact, we expect
thereupon Testimonies conclusive in themselves without the help of Mr. Arnaud,
and the impossibility wherein he has found himself of satisfying the public
expectation, is in it self an evident proof of the contrary of what he
pretends. But this will appear yet more plain by what follows in the next
Chapter, wherein we shall more fully discover Mr. Arnaud's imposing on the
World.

CHAP. III.
The Third Proof taken from that the Expressions used by the Greeks are
general, and insufficient to form the Idea of a substantial Conversion. The
Fourth, that the Greeks only receive for Determinations of Faith, the Decrees
of the seven first General Councils. The remaining part of Mr. Arnaud's
Delusion laid open. The Fifth Proof taken from that the Greeks in their
Transactions with the Latins have ever kept to their General Expressions. Mr.
Arnaud's Eighth Delusion discovered.

THE Common Expressions the Greeks use in the explaining their Belief touching
the Mystery of the Eucharist, are these. They call the Symbols, the holy gifts,
the holy things, the ineffable mysteries, the body and blood of Jesus Christ,
the sanctified bread, the particle or parts, the pearl, and the like. They say,
that the Bread is the Body of Jesus Christ, that it is made the Body of Jesus
Christ, that it is changed into the Body of Jesus Christ, that it is the real
Body of Jesus Christ.

AND to express this change, they use the Terms of (...), which signify, to
change. Now it is certain these expressions, whether we take 'em severally, or
jointly, cannot form the Idea of Transubstantiation. For, besides that being
general, they are capable of several particular senses, and are found
indifferently used on other Subjects wherein there is no Transubstantiation
imagined, as may be justified by a thousand Examples, if it were needful;
besides this, I say, our reason guides us never to attribute a particular and
determinate sense to persons who explain not themselves otherwise than in
general Terms, unless it evidently appears from something else, that they had
this particular sense in their minds.

I confess that in this case, that is to say, if it appears they have had a
particular sense in their minds, we ought readily to take their Terms in this
sense, how general soever they may be, but if they come not up to this, we can
give them no more than a general and undeterminate meaning. We know for
example, that in the Church of Rome Transubstantiation is commonly believed,
when then we are told, that the Bread is made the Body of Jesus Christ, or that
it is changed into the Body of Christ; although these words are general, yet do
we immediately understand them in this particular sense, that the Bread is
changed substantially into the Body of Christ. But had she not elsewhere
expressed her self touching the change of the Substance, and had no Council
defined it, nor were it to be found in the Confessions of Faith, Catechisms,
and other Public Books, and taught by the Roman Doctors, it is evident we
should be unreasonable, in giving these general expressions any other than a
general sense, and this generality it self would be an invincible Argument that
she never descended so far as the distinct determination of Transubstantiation,
and consequently this would not be an Article of her Belief. Now it is after
this manner we ought to judge of the Greek Church, all its expressions are
general, there appearing nothing elsewhere which determins this generality, or
which engages us to attribute to her the particular and distinct sense of the
Church of Rome, and whatsoever Mr. Arnaud has alleged in the behalf of this,
is of no weight. It then necessarily follows, that we ought to attribute to her
no other than a general sense, and in no wise that of Transubstantiation, which
is evidently particular and determinate: And even this consideration, that they
of the Church of Rome are obliged to use Arguments to explain the common
expressions of this Church into a sense of Transubstantiation, is an infallible
mark that she does not believe it.

NOW seeing this Proof is decisive, and that it not only establishes my
Sentiment, but likewise overthrows Mr. Arnaud's whole dispute, it will not be
therefore amiss to illustrate it and consider well its Foundations, to the end
it may be manifested whether the conclusion I draw from hence is just and true.
First, then we must know that Transubstantiation is the precise and distinct
determination of the manner in which the Bread is made the Body of Christ, to
wit, by a real conversion of the substance of this Bread into the substance of
this Body; so that it is impossible to believe it without forming a distinct
Idea after this manner, seeing it is even this precise and determined Idea it
self. It is then absurd and contradictory to look for it in a general and
confused Idea, which determines nothing, for this is to seek for a
determination in a thing undetermined, and a distinct sense in a generality,
that is to say, light in darkness. And from hence appears what must be the
expressions of a Church which believes Transubstantiation, and teaches it, for
it is necessary she teach it in plain terms, which answer the distinct Idea she
has of it, and which may immediately form the like in the minds of those that
hear her. Now this cannot be done but by express and formal Terms, or by Terms
so equivalent, that they cannot be turned into a contrary sense. What I say is
verified by the example of the Roman Church, whose expressions are plain and
clear, and which immediately show her meaning.

MOREOVER we should consider that the Notion of Transubstantiation is not one
of those which are called Speculative, but Practical Notions, which engages
them that have it to several duties and performances, and especially to the
soverain adoration of this same substance, which before was the substance of
bread, but now the same proper numerical substance of the natural body of Jesus
Christ, as speaks the Church of Rome, whence it necessarily follows, that a
Church which thus believes it, teaches it in such a manner, that the act of
adoration follows freely and naturally of it self..

IT is likewise to be observed, that the matter here in hand concerns the Greek
Church from the Eleventh Century, which is to say, that since the contests with
Berengarius, the Roman Church has expressly determined the substantial
conversion, which drove the Greeks into a greater necessity of speaking clearly
on this point, either to show their conformity of belief with the Latins, or to
avoid the falling into the same inconveniences which the Latins endeavored to
avoid by this formal declaration. And this observation is the more considerable
against Mr. Arnaud, in that he grants the Greeks not to have been ignorant of
this circumstance touching Berengarius.

TO know then certainly whether the Greek Church believes Transubstantiation or
not, we need but see after what manner she explains her self concerning the
Eucharist; for if her expressions bear not a substantial conversion, either
expressly or equivalently, in such a sort, that they may easily and immediately
form the notion thereof, if they be I say general, and determine nothing of
themselves, it is a certain proof she does not believe it, for that Church
which believes it, and would have its Children do the like, cannot but explain
it self clearly and fully on that subject. If we examine Mr. Arnaud's dispute
on this Principle, which I esteem as the light of common sense, we shall
immediately deprive him of all his negative Arguments, taken from the silence
of the Greeks, and that of the Latins; for although these kind of Arguments are
very good in other occasions, yet it is apparent that to end a question, such a
one as this is, which is, Whether the Eastern Church believes and teaches
Transubstantiation, Mr. Arnaud should have taken a course more decisive than
that of considering what the Greeks have done in relation to the
Transubstantiation of the Latins, or what the Latins have done in respect of
the belief of the Greeks. It were better for us, directly to consider, after
what manner, they themselves do positively explain their belief, touching the
Eucharist. If we find Transubstantiation plainly declared in it; these
Arguments of silence are no longer necessary, and if we don't find it clearly
expressed, there will follow a Conclusion so greatly to my advantage, that all
Mr. Arnaud's negative Arguments will not be able to subsist before it, for
there is a thousand times more solidity in reasoning after this sort. A Church
does not clearly teach Transubstantiation, therefore she holds it not, than to
argue thus; A Church does not oppose Transubstantiation held by the Latins,
therefore she believes it. Besides that the first Argument concludes directly
and immediately what the other does not, there is a greater coherence between
believing Transubstantiation, and clearly teaching it, than there is repugnance
between not believing it, and yet not opposing it in persons who do believe it.
There is no reason can hinder the Greeks from distinctly teaching
Transubstantiation, supposing they believed it, but there may be several
reasons which may oblige them from making this Point a matter of dispute with
the Latins, although they do not believe it.

NEITHER must the Profession of Faith, which the Emperor Michael Paleologus
sent (as from the Greeks) to Pope John the XXI. to finish the work of the
Reunion of the two Churches be made use of against us; for besides that this
was an act extorted by force, which is not of any account amongst the Greeks,
we do not find that the Latin expressions which bear that the Bread is really
transubstantiated, do exactly answer the Greek expressions of the same act,
which according to all likelihood contained only, that the Bread is really
changed, as we shall make it appear hereafter.

NEITHER are the Attestations and particular Testimonies which are but from the
year 1641. to be urged against us, for not to allege that these pieces are
apparently the fruit of the Emissaries and Seminaries, and that the quality of
the Persons who make these attestations, does not furnish them with sufficient
Authority to decide our question, which concerns the body of the Greek
Schismatical Church, all these pieces are too new whereon to build alone, a
Tradition from the ^^^venth Century, that is to say, since six hundred years.

WE may then already see in general that Mr. Arnaud's whole dispute is reduced
to consequences, which will be easily overthrown by a particular examination of
them, which shall be done in its place; but in the mean time what I already
said is sufficient to establish the validity of my Argument, which is drawn,
from that the usual expressions of the Greeks, I mean the clearest of them, and
those which the Church of Rome believes to be most favorable to her upon the
account of the Eucharist, only consist in general terms. Whence I conclude they
hold not Transubstantiation; for there is nothing more opposite to this
Doctrine than general expressions, seeing the belief of the substantial
conversion, as I have already established it, is in it self the particular and
distinct determination of the manner of the Bread's being made or changed into
the Body of Jesus Christ, and that it is not possible but that a Church which
believes it, and would instruct its people in this Doctrine must explain this
Point clearly and distinctly: And thus in strengthening my own Arguments, I lay
open the weakness of Mr. Arnaud's.

BUT this Argument I now produced, ought to be attended by this following
consideration, which will farther evidence its strength and solidity. Which is
that the Greeks profess to receive only for the determinations of Points of
Faith, the seven first general Councils, to wit, that of Nice, against Arius
under the Emperor Constantine the Great, that at Constantinople against
Macedonius under Theodosius, that of Ephesus against Nestorius under Theodosius
Junior, that of Chalcedon against Eutychus and Dioscorius under Marcion, that
of Constantinople upon occasion of the quarrel of the three Chapters under the
Emperor Justinian, the third of Constantinople against the Monothelites under
Constantine Pogonatus, and in fine the second of Nice on the subject of Images
under Constantine, and his Mother Irena. Now it is certain, there is nothing in
all these Councils which determins Transubstantiation, for what is produced
concerning the first at Nice; That we must conceive by Faith, that the Lamb of
God that takes away the sins of the World, lies ou this holy Table, that he is
sacrificed without a sacrifice by the Priests, and that we do really receive
his precious Body and Blood: This I say, as any man may see, is not
Transubstantiation no more than what is offered us touching the second at Nice,
as will appear by reading the fifth Chapter of Mr. Arnaud's seventh Book,
wherein he relates it. And as to these Councils by which the Church of Rome has
determined the conversion of the Substances, as that of Gregory the Seventh,
held at Rome in the year 1079. that of Plaisance held in the year 1095. under
Urbain the Second, that of Latran in the year 1215. wherein Innocent the Third
declared the Doctrine of his Church on this Subject, that of Constance
assembled in the year 1414. wherein Wicliff was condemned for opposing this
Doctrine, and in fine that of Trent, which established the preeeding decisions,
the Greek Church receives none of these, nor makes any account of them. They
all commonly say, says Richardus the Relation of the Isle of St. Erinys, chap.
12. page 150.
Jesuit, in his relation of the Isle of St. Erinys, that the Decrees of the
seven first Councils ought only to be observed, and the Priests make the people
believe, that at the end of the seventh Council, an Angel descended from
Heaven; testifying that whatsoever concerned our Faith, was therein perfected,
and there remained nothing more to be added or decided. Leo Allatius likewise
only mentions seven Councils which they approve. They have, says he, in great
esteem Allat. de prep. cons. lib. 1. cap. 9.
the Decrees of the seven first general Councils, and hold them inviolable,
they receive their Canons for their Rule in all things, and the most Religious
amongst them do constantly observe them.

ALEXANDER Guagnin discoursing of the Religion of the Russians, Guag. in Mosc.
descrip.
which is the same as that of the Greeks, relates their Belief is, that 'twas
concluded in the seventh general Council, that the matters determined in the
preceding Councils should remain firm for the time to come, and that there
should no other Council be called under the penalty of an Anathema; wherefore
(adds he) they say, that all the Councils and Synods held since the seven
first, are accursed, perverse, and desperately defiled with Heresy. Sacranus
Chanon of Cracovia, tells us likewise, that they regard not any of those
Councils which have been held since Relig. Rutheni art. 9.
the seventh, saying, they are not concerned in them, seeing they were held
without their consent.

SCARGA the Jesuit sets down this as their sixth Error, that there De uno
past. part. 3. c. 2.
ought only the seven Councils to be regarded, and that whosoever receives the
Decrees of an eighth or ninth is accursed. Mr. Basire, whom I mentioned in the
foregoing Chapter, confirms me in this matter by his Letter. In publica, says
he, Graecorum professione, non nisi (...) recipient quas (...) nuncupant. In
the public confession of their Faith they only receive the Decrees of the
seven Councils which they call Ecumenical. And Metrophanus Confess. Eccles.
Or. cap. 15.
the Patriarch of Alexandria authorizes all these Testimonies by his express
Declaration: We only receive, says he, the seven Ecumenical Councils, and as
to the particular Councils, we receive from them what has been received and
confirmed by the seven Ecumenical ones. Should I conclude from hence they hold
not Transubstantiation for an Article of their Faith, this conclusion perhaps
would not be contemptible, for in fine not to receive for a determination of
Faith any thing else but what is contained in the seven first Councils, and at
the same time to believe the Doctrine of the substantial conversion, are two
things very inconsistent with each other, especially in reference to people
that utterly reject the other Councils, wherein this Doctrine has been
determined. And in effect, it seems to me that this Doctrine is important
enough to be inserted amongst the Articles of their Faith already decided or
confirmed by Councils, and not amongst the common customs, or practices which
are still observed, although not expressly determined, or amongst the Points, which
being minute and inconsiderable, are therefore left undecided, although they are
held. Let the Reader judge, whether it is likely a Church would only receive for
a determination of Points of Faith the Decrees of Councils, wherein there has
passed not a word concerning Transubstantiation, and reject others wherein
Transubstantiation has been established, and yet believe this Doctrine as
firmly as the Latins, and not dare to explain her self in clear and proper
terms, which would have eased Mr. Arnaud of that great pains he has taken to
fill three or four large Books with his long Syllogisms, the greatest part of
which are besides the purpose. What mean these Greeks by their general
expressions, which are good for nothing but to puzzle people? For according to
Mr. Arnaud, they distinctly believe the whole substance of Bread is changed
into the substance of our Savior's Body, and teach as they believe, it being
their interest to do so, to the end this Doctrine may prevail with the people to
adore this substance when changed. They are not ignorant of the manner after
which the Church of Rome explains it self touching this Doctrine. And yet are
they obliged not to receive any Doctrine as an Article of Faith, but what has
been already determined by the seven first Councils, in which there is no
mention of this Change of Substance, and to reject all those Councils which
expressly decreed it, and nevertheless they express themselves in general
terms, which signify nothing. And must Mr. Arnaud (to whose immortal praise
the Greeks are still in the World, and to whom they are obliged for their
preservation under the Turkish Empire) tire himself, his Friends, and his
Readers; exhaust his store of Consequences, that is to say, his stock of
Delusions, and be continually employing his invention to find some appearance
or shadow of Transubstantiation in the usual expressions of this People? To
speak impartially, he has reason to be angry with these Greeks, who are so
obstinate, or at least so lazy, that they will not be at the pains to express
plainly, and without ambiguity, a Notion so clearly and distinctly imprinted in
their minds. And moreover not only these Greeks have not explained themselves;
but even when moved by temporal interests and the politic intrigues of their
Emperors they consented to these patched re-unions with the Church of Rome,
they have changed the Latin expressions, and whereas in the Acts of these last,
it is expressly mentioned, that the Bread is Transubstantiated into the Body of
Jesus Christ, they have barely inserted, that it is changed, that it is
consecrated, and in a word, they have ever substituted their general
expressions, to the formal and precise expressions of the Latins. What can Mr.
Arnaud allege, when on one hand he sees in Raynaldus, this Confession of
Faith, about which he has made such a noise, and which was offered to the
Greeks by Clement IV. by Gregory X. by John XXI. and by Urbain V. as distinctly
and clearly containing the Belief of the Roman Church, and that he sees it, I
say, expressed in these Latins words, Sacramentum Eucharistae ex azymo conficit
eadem Romana Ecclesia, tenens and docens Raynald. ad ann. 1267. number. 77.
quod in ipso Sacramento Panis vere Transubstantiatur in Corpus, and Vinum in
Sanguinem Domini nostri Jesu Christi. The Church of Rome celebrates the
Sacrament of the Eucharist with unleavened Bread, holding and teaching that in
this Sacrament the Bread is really transubstantiated into the Body and the Wine
into the Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ; and when on the other hand he finds
this same Article in the Greek Copy produced by Allatius in these Words, (...).
Allat perp. cons. lib. 2. cap. 17.
(...). The Church of Rome celebrates the Sacrament of the Eucharist with
unleavened Bread, holding and teaching that in this Sacrament the Bread is
really changed into the Body, and the Wine into the Blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ. The Latins says, vere Transubstantiatur, it is really
Transubstantiated, and the Greeks (...), it is really changed.

Mr. Arnaud, who loves not to complain, when his complaints will do him Live. 3.
cap. 7. page 298.
no good, passes lightly over this difference, as if it were a trifle not worth
his notice, for having told us, that Raynaldus observes, some read in Latin
Transmutatur, and others Transubstantiatur, he adds, Allatius who has given us
the Original it self, makes it appear that these words, Transmutatur and
Transubstantiatur, are mere Synonimous Terms, seeing they have been substituted
by Interpreters to these Greek words, (...), etc. And this is what is soon
dispatched by the Rule of Synonimy, Transmutatur, and Transubstantiatur are
both the same, because Interpreters substitute both one and the other of these
words to the Term (...) (...). But who are these Interpreters, who thus render
Transubstantiatur, are they not such who find Transubstantiation every where,
and will have it brought into the Greek Church by force? If Transmutare and
Transubstantiare are Synonimous Terms, Mr. Arnaud may when he pleases render
Gregor. Naz. Ora. 40.
those words of Gregory Nazianzen, Christo indutus sum, in Christo
Transubstantiatus sum, for there is Transmutatus, and when he shall find in a
Homily attributed to Origin, Sanctus Theologus in Deum Transmutatus, he may
read, Him. 2. in diverse. Iren. ad Haeres. lib. 5. cap. 12.
in Deum Transubstantiatus, and when he reads in St. Ireneus Oleaster,
Transmutatur in bonam olivam, he may render this, Transubstantiatur in bonam
olivam. If we may as well substitute to the Greek word (...), these two Latin
ones, Transmutatur and Transubstantiatur, Mr. Arnaud may read in the Version of
St. Macairus, omnes in naturam Divinam Transubstantiantur, for the Interpreter
has set down Transmutantur, and the Greek imports (...), and when he shall find
in the same Author, that Jesus Christ came to change the nature, he may
understand it, that he came to Transubstantiate the nature, forasmuch as the
Latin bears Transmutare, and the Greek (...). It Is certain that a man who reads
good Authors upon Mr. Arnaud's credit, and follows his Synonima's, will make
abundance of extravagant Transubstantiations, and I do not believe Mr. Arnaud
will be willing to warrant them all. He will say these words are Synonimy's,
when they concern the Eucharist; for the Bread's being Changed or
Transubstantiated, is the same thing. It is so indeed with them that believe
Transubstantiation, but not with them who do not believe it. But the Greeks
believe it, says Mr. Arnaud, which he is obliged to prove before he affirms
it. Mr. Arnaud's Arguments are really admirable, for they are very conclusive,
provided we suppose the truth of what they conclude. If it be demanded of him
wherefore he makes such a noise with this Form of Faith, he will answer it is
because the Term of Transubstantiatur is in it. Tell him that in the Greek
there is (...), Transmutatur and not Transubstantiatur, he will answer that
(...), Transmutatur and Transubstantiatur are the same thing. But let this be
examined, it will be found to be indeed the same thing to them that believe
Transubstantiation, but as to others who do not, there is a great difference;
so that to speak truly, to make Mr Arnaud's Argument good, it must first be
supposed the Greeks believe the Substantial Conversion, as well as the Latins.

HE may adjust these matters when he pleases; but let me tell him in the mean
time, that the Greeks used the same expressions in the Council of Florence. The
Latins having demanded wherefore after the words of our Savior Council.
Florent. Sess. 25.
Jesus Christ, take, eat, this is my Body, which has been broken for you, for
the Remission of your Sins, etc. (they added this Prayer,) and make this Bread
the precious Body of thy Christ, and that which is in this Cap, the precious
blood of thy Christ, in changing them by virtue of thy Holy Spirit; they
answered they did acknowledge that the Consecrated Bread was made the Body of
Christ by these words. The Latin Decree has this expression, fateri nos diximus
per haec verba Transubstantiari Sacrum Panem, and fieri Corpus Christi, but the
Greek expressions are these, (...), The Latin says it is Transubstantiated, the
Greek that it is Consecrated.

MR. Arnaud has recourse here likewise to his Synonimy's; for he tells us, that
the Latins (to whom this answer was made) having taken it in the sense Lib. 4.
cap. 2. page 345.
of an acknowledgement of Transubstantiation, it is ridiculous to pretend there
was such a great equivocation between them and the Greeks, the one
understanding a change of Substance, and the others a change of Virtue. He
adds, That if the Greeks had not taken these words in the sense of the Latins,
Syropulus, and Marc of Ephesus would have observed that the Latins were derided
by this equivocation, and would have accused them who made this answer of
prevarication and deceit. In fine, he says, that Andrew de S. Cruce (who
deserves as much to be credited, as any of the other Historians, who wrote on
this Council, because he was there present) relates this acknowledgment of
Transubstantiation, which Bessarion made in the name of all the Greeks, in a
manner more precise, distinct, and with greater circumstances, and that he
attributes to him these words, we have learnt that these are the words of our
Lord, which Change and Transubstantiate the Bread into the Body of Jesus
Christ, and the Wine into his Blood, and that these divine words have the full
force of Transubstantiation.

I answer, the more I study the Character of Mr. Arnaud, the more clearly I
perceive that these things are no otherwise ridiculous and affrightful, but
only as they agree not with his designs. For it is certain that (...), and
Transubstantiari, are two different Terms, which signify not the same thing;
the first is applicable in general to all Mysteries, and signifies only, to be
conjecrated, or perfectly consecrated; the second signifies a Change of one
Substance into another. It is moreover certain, that when the Latins wrote
Transubstantiari, the Greeks have only set down (...), why then will he have
it, that the Greeks took not this Term in its natural signification, and in the
usual sense given to it amongst them? Because says he, that the Latins took
this answer for an acknowledgment of Transubstantiation: But who told him, that
the Latins did not do ill in taking it after this manner; Who told him the
Greeks intended the Latins should take it in this sense? The Greeks have kept
to their general expressions, and the Latins have drawn them as far as they
could to their advantage. If there has been any equivocation in them, the
Latins have voluntarily made it, and it is very likely, could they have made the
Greeks say (...), instead of (...), they would gladly have done it, but not
being able to effect it, they have made what advantage they could of (...), in
interpreting it by the word Transubstantiation. And this is the whole Secret,
which is neither ridiculous nor affrightful in any other, than Mr. Arnaud's
imagination.

And as to what he says concerning Syropulus, and Mark of Ephesus, namely,
that they would have observed the Latins were deluded by an Equivocation, and
accuse them who thus answered in behalf of the Greeks of prevarication and
deceit; I see no reason they had to do this, for when the Greeks, said (...),
they spoke their usual Language and derided no body. If the Latins understood
it otherwise than the force of the Term and common use permitted them; it is
they that derided the Greeks rather than the Greeks them, wherefore there is no
reason in this respect to accuse them who made this answer of prevarication and
deceit. Andrew de S. Cruce his relating the words of Bessarion according to the
intention of the Latins, does but confirm what I say, which is that the Roman
Church has ever endeavored to expound to its advantage the general expressions
of the Greeks, and I know not wherefore Mr. Arnaud tells us, that he deserves
no less credit than the other Historians, who wrote of this Council. Would he
have it, that Bessarion who speaks for all the rest of the Greeks, did not use
the Term (...); This is the very word in the Greek Text concerning that
Council, and Andrew de S. Cruce's Authority is not sufficient to correct a
Public Act, neither can his Latin alter the Greek. Would he have it that the
Latins explained the (...) of Bessarion by Transubstantiatur? I grant it, and
the Decree of the Council shows it, so that he needs not call Andrew de St.
Cruce to his assistance. Yet may we observe that Mr. Arnaud himself is not
fully satisfied that the Greek and Latin expressions on this Subject, do mean
but one and the same thing, although he tells us he is; for he calls that which
Andrew de S. Cruce, relates from Bessarion, a more precise manner, more
distinct and circumstantial, which is as much as to say after all, that the
Transubstantiari of the Latins is more precise, distinct and plain than the
(...) of the Greeks.

AND this the force of Truth has extorted from him; and it were well if it
could likewise so far prevail with him as to make him acknowledge, that this
proceeding of the Greeks is an evident mark they believed not
Transubstantiation. For had they believed it, what likelihood is there they
should thus carefully keep themselves from using the expressions of the Latins,
which are proper, distinct and clear, and change them into others, which are
general and equivocal, and that in the same Acts wherein those aforementioned
exactly describe the conversion of the Substances, the others should be so
obstinate, as not to take notice of it. Had they been persuaded the Latins did
not innovate, would they not have yielded to a thousand Reasons which seemed to
constrain them to manifest their through Conformity with them? Their Affairs were
in very bad circumstances, they left their Country to implore the assistance of
the Western Princes; they were in the Pope's hands, and maintained at his
charge; they consented to the reunion of the two Churches; their Emperors did
not only solicit but constrain them thereunto; and they had already offered
great violences to their own consciences, for they consented to the addition of
the Filioque in the Creed; what reason then could hinder them from
acknowledging the Conversion of the Substances, had their belief been the same
with that of the Church of Rome; Wherefore should they still affect their
general Terms, of (...); Wherefore even in the very act of the reunion made at
Florence, the Term of Transubstantiation was never inserted, but only that of
confici, in the Latin, and that of (...) in the Greek? For thus was it set
down, (...). Item in azymo sive fermentato Pane triticeo Corpus Christi
veraciter confici, Sacerdotesque in altero ipsum Domini Corpus conficere
debere, unumquemque scilicet juxta suae Ecclesiae sive Occidentalis sive
Orientalis consuetudinem. That the Body of Jesus Christ is really consecrated,
or made into Wheaten Bread, either with or without Leven, and that the Priests
ought to make or consecrate the Body of our Lord with either of these, every
one according to the Custom of his Church, whether Eastern or Western. Here is
no mention of the conversion of the Substances, for the general Terms carried
it away from the determinations of the Latins. Neither need Mr. Arnaud tell us
as he does, that the Greeks took Lib. 4. cap 2. page 346.
these words in a sense of Transubstantiation, because the Latins did so; For
if the Greeks believed a true and real conversion of Substance, wherefore then
was not that Article expressed in clear and proper Terms. The Latins were not
ignorant of them, the Greeks knew them well enough, there being no word more
common among them than that of (...). That of Substantia had been already
affected by the Latins in the Mystery of the Eucharist, and the Popes that
preceded Eugenus the IV. were not wanting to bring it into that famous
Confession of Faith which we have so often mentioned. In short Mr. Arnaud need
not tell us so often of these Equivocations, for we know very well, that in
these kind of Accommodations, wherein interest holds the chiefest rank, the two
Parties agree commonly in certain generalities, which each of 'em endeavor to
explain to their own advantage. There is nothing more common than these kind of
Treaties, in which when there is foreseen any insuperable difficulties, they are
usually left untoucht, both Parties contenting themselves with general Terms,
by which each of 'em think to compass their designs. Mr. Arnaud is a Person of
too much reading and experience to question a Truth so well known, and I
believe we need not go far for instances of this kind. But, howsoever, this is
certain and undeniable, that in all the Decrees of the Florentine Council,
there appears nothing on the part of the Greeks, that establishes the
conversion of Substances, but on the contrary, it seems as if they had
prevailed on the Latins, to abate their expressions in the solemn act of their
reunion.

BUT before we leave this Proof, it is to be observed that Bessarion Archbishop
of Nice, who was one of the Principal Agents in this Accommodation, in behalf
of the Greeks, was a Person already brought over to the Interests of the
Latins, and for his good Services was soon after made a Cardinal in the Roman
Church. It cannot then but be supposed he favored the Latins, and used all
possible means to prevail on his own Countrymen. In effect Syropulus complains
of this; in such a manner, as sufficiently shows, what judgment we ought to
make of this particular. In the mean time, compare I pray, the Terms Bessarion
uses when he speaks in behalf of the Greeks in the Conferences of the Council,
with those he uses in his Treatise of the Eucharist, wherein he speaks from his
own head, since he was made a Cardinal, in Specie, says he, in this Treatise,
Panis and Vini, veritas Corporis and Sanguinis continetur, cum in illa,
Substantia Panis Vinique mutetur. The Body of Jesus Christ is really contained
under the Species of Bread and Wine, the Substance being changed into this Body
and Blood; and a little farther, verba dicuntur quibus dictis mox Consecratio
fit, Transubstantialitas perficitur; The words are no sooner said but the
Consecration is made, and the Transubstantiation finished. It Is no longer (...)
and (...), Consecration and Sanctification, but Substantia mutatur,
Transubstantialitas perficitur, the change of Substance, Transubstantion.
Whence comes this difference, but from that the Greeks do not use the same
expressions as the Latins, and that there is not any Conformity between these
two Churches in this Point of the Conversion of Substances? Bessarion
counterfiting the Greek, makes use only of general expressions. But when he
discovers himself to be a Latin, he speaks plainly and distinctly.

BUT besides Bessarion, this same difference is observable in other Latinised
Greeks, engaged to propogate the Roman Doctrines, if we compare their Style
with that of the true Greeks. Compare for example what Mr. Arnaud tells us out
of Emanuel Calecas, and John Plusiadene, with what he himself alleges out of
Cabisilas, Mark of Ephesus, Simon of Thessalonica, and others, and you will
find these last mention not the change of Substance, whereas the former do
expressly assert it. Emanuel tells us concerning the Eucharist, that God is
able to change the inward Substance, and yet conserve the same Accidents
entire. Plusiadene after the same manner, That the Substance of Bread is
changed into the Body of Christ. Whereas there is no such expressions in the
true Greeks: for we meet only with such expressions as these, that the Bread is
really the Body of Jesus Christ, and that it is changed into the Body of Jesus
Christ: but as to the Substance they make no mention of it, and there is
nothing but Mr. Arnaud's Consequence or Synonimy, which can make them do it.

CHAP. IV.
The Sixth Proof taken from the Greeks, employing on other Subjects, the same
Expressions as on the Eucharist. Mr. Arnaud's Tenth Delusion manifested.

THE only way to judge of the meaning of Authors, when it is matter of Debate,
is to examine their Style in other like Matters, it being impossible, but in
comparing their expressions some of 'em will give light to others. Had Mr
Arnaud followed this method, he would never have valued so highly several
expressions in Greek Authors; for he would have seen at the same time, that
they deliver themselves almost after the same manner on other Subjects, where
there is no Transubstantiation to be suspected. I know it is a hard matter for a
Person that is prejudiced, to consider the question he handles, in those
respects which are disagreeable to him; but besides that this prejudice is a
fault, and therefore to be avoided, especially when men write on a Public
Account, or take upon them to instruct People; besides this, I say, there are
several considerable matters which so offer themselves to be seen, that we
cannot abstain from beholding them; and it is more especially in respect of
these, that men's neglect is blameworthy, because it is affected, and is
inconsistant with the Rules of Sincerity. As for instance, how can we approve
of Mr. Arnaud's proceeding, who has scarcely mentioned a word in his Book
touching that prodigious ignorance which has overspread the East, in matters of
Religion? How can we approve his taking no notice of that multitude of
Emissaries, wherewith all that Country has been filled, for I know not how many
Ages together, nor of the means used for the propogation of the Romish
Doctrines, nor the progresses they made. These are things he could not be
ignorant of, and are not matters of small importance; seeing the Judgment to be
made of this whole Controversy, does in some measure depend thereon. But not
to rehearse what we already mentioned, how can we bear with him, when he passes
over in silence several Greek expressions, like unto those from which he would
draw advantage, and yet are applied to Subjects which have not the least
relation to Transubstantiation. These expressions offered themselves to him,
and there needed little deliberation to determine what use was to be made of
them, and what rank they hold in the decision of this Controversy. Yet has he
taken no notice of them, for his desire of vanquishing has far exceeded his
love to Truth.

BUT howsoever it is certain the Greeks speak almost after the same manner
concerning the Church (it being likewise the Body of Christ) as they do
concerning the Eucharist. Cabisilas is one of the Authors Mr. Arnaud has quoted
with most complacency, having filled a long Chapter with Passages taken out of
him, he alleges amongst others, these words of his 38 Chapter, The Church is
represented in the Mysteries of Religion, not as in the Signs, but as the
Members are marked by the Heart, the Tree by the Root, and the Vinebranches by
the Vine, forasmuch as the Mysteries are the Body and Blood of Christ, and that
this Body and Blood are the Nourishment of the Church. So far is his
Allegation; but it is requisite to hear Cabisilas himself in the full extent of
his Discourse, to judge of the Style of this Author, and Mr. Arnaud's Delusion.
The Church, says he, is represented in the Mysteries of Religion, not as in
the Signs, but as the Members are in the Heart, the Branches of the Tree in the
Root, and the Vine-leaves in the Vine, as speaks our Lord. For here is not only
a Communion of Names, or a reference of likeness, but it is the Identity of the
thing it self; For the Mysteries are the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ. Now
they are the real nourishment of the Church, and when she partaketh of them she
does not change them into a humane Body, like unto other Food, but she her self
is changed into them, (...), forasmuch as the most excellent part has the
predominancy. Behold the iron, when it is joined with the fire, it becomes fire,
and it does not make the fire become iron, for the fire effaces all the
properties of the iron; so in like manner if any one could see the Church of
Christ in that respect, whereby it is united to him, and partakes of his Flesh,
he would behold nothing but the Body of Christ, and therefore St. Paul says,
you are the Body of Jesus Christ, and each of you are his Members; For when he
calls him the Head and us the Members, he does not represent to us thereby the
cares of his Providence, nor our subjection to him in the same sense as we call
our selves the Members of our Parents, or Friends, by an hyperbolical way of
speaking; But he means what he says; That the faithful by the efficacy of this
Blood, live the Life which is in Jesus Christ, and have their real dependence
on him as their Head, and are clothed with this Body.

It needs not now be demanded of Mr. Arnaud, why he cut short this passage of
Cabisilas, seeing the reason manifestly appears; for if we take but the pains
to compare what he alleges from this Author touching the Eucharist with what I
now related touching the Church, we shall soon find that these last expressions
are far stronger and significant than what he says concerning the Sacrament.
He excludes the bare communion of name and resemblance between Christ and the
Church, and establishes a perfect Identity. He says the Church is changed into
the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ. He uses the comparison of iron inflamed,
which others apply to the Eucharist, and as if he designed to make us
understand that the Church is Christ's Body in a litteral and complete sense,
he assures us this is no Hyperbole, and that St. Paul speaks the same thing. I
am greatly deceived, if there can be any thing found so pressing and
comprehensive in relation to the Eucharist, either in this Author, or any other
of the true Greeks; and this shows on one hand, how vain and groundless Mr.
Arnaud's Triumphs are, and on the other, how requisite and necessary a thing it
is, for men to show the Substantial Conversion, clearly, and expressly in the
Doctrines of a Church before it be concluded she believes it.

CABISILAS is not the only man who speaks after this manner touching the
Church, for others borrow his proper Terms to explain themselves fully like
him; for we may find the same passage at large, in the first Answer of Jeremias
the Patriarch of Constantinople to the Divines of Wittemberg.

PHOTIUS spoke likewise to the same purpose, and Oecumenius after him, as
appears by the Commentaries of the latter of these, on the Tenth Chapter of the
first Epistle to the Corinthians; The Apostle, say they, tells us, that the
Bread is the Communion of the Body of Jesus Christ; but forasmuch as it seems
that that which is communicated is of a different nature from him to whom it is
communicated, he would now show us that we do not communicate, but that we are
all of us (...), the same Body of Jesus Christ: For as one piece of Bread is
made of several Grains, so we likewise although several, are made one and the same
Body with Jesus Christ: I believe there is few expressions to be found amongst
the Greeks in the Subject of the Eucharist, which exceed these.

BUT besides what I now mentioned touching the Church, we must likewise
consider the manner after which the Greeks do express themselves concerning the
Book of the New Testament, or Volumn of the Gospels, when the Deacon who
carries it in his hand lifted up enters into the Church., This entrance is
called (...), the small entrance, designing to represent by this Ceremony the
coming of the Son of God into the World. They bow before this Book, and speak
of it as if it were our Savior himself, crying out altogether at the same
time, (...). Come let us worship Christ, and fall down before him, Save us O
Son of God. As Soon as they begin to read, the Bishop throws off his Mantle, and
Simon of Thessalonica giving an account of this action, tells us, it is to give
a public testimony of his Servitude; For, says he, when our Lord himself
appears speaking in his Gospel, and is as it were present, the Bishop dares not
cover himself with his Mantle. Isidorus de Peluse used almost the same
expressions before him, when the true Shepherd himself appears, says he, in
the reading of the Holy Gospel, the Bishop throws off his Mantle, to signify
that the Lord himself the Prince of Pastors, our God and Master is present. I
do not believe the Book is transubstantiated, and yet they speak and behave
themselves, as if it was our Savior himself; which already shows us that the
Style of the Greeks is always very mysterious, and that we have no reason to
impute Substantial Conversions to them, every time they make use of excessive
Terms.

We may likewise see here another Example of what I say, even in the very Bread
of the Eucharist before its Consecration. The Greeks have two Tables, one which
they call the Prothesis, and the other the great Altar. They place on the former
of these, the Symbols, and express by diverse mystical actions part of the
Economy of the Son of God, that is to say, his Birth, Life, and Sufferings.
They solemnly carry them afterward to the great Altar, where they consecrate
'em, so that before this it is but simple Bread and Wine, yet on which, they
represent the principal passages of the life of Christ, and they say themselves
that then the Bread and Wine are but a Type or Figure; Yet do they speak
concerning them almost after the same Germa^ ^n Theor.
manner before they are consecrated as after. Germain the Patriarch of
Constantinople, calls them, the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, he says, that
the Saints and all the Just enter with him, and that the Cherubins, Angels, and
all the Host of immaterial Spirits march before him, singing Hymns, and
accompanying the great King our Savior Christ, who comes to his Mystical
Sacrifice, and is carried by mortal hands. Behold, says he, the Angels that
come with the Holy Gifts, that is to say, with the Body and Blood of Jesus
Christ, from Mount Calvary to the Sepulcher. And in another place, the
Translation of Holy Things, to wit, of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ,
which come from the Prothesis, and are carried to the great Altar, with the
Cherubick Hymn signifies the entrance of our Savior Christ from Bethany into
Jerusalem. He says moreover, that our Savior is carried in the Dish, and
shows himself in the Bread, (...). And as yet it is no more than Bread and Wine
un-consecrated.

ARCUDIUS observes, some call this Bread the dead Body of Jesus Arcud. lib de
Euch. c. 20 and 21.
Christ. He says farther, that Gabriel de Philadelphia, calls it, the
imperfect Body of Christ, and proves the Symbols are called in this respect,
(...), the holy, divine, and unutterable Mysteries, which are the same names
they give them after their Consecration.

WHEN they carry them from the Prothesis to the great Altar, the Quire loudly
sing that which they call the Cherubick Hymn, in which are these words, Let the
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Jesus Christ our God draw near to be
sacrificed, and given to the Faithful for Food. At which time their Devotion is
so excessive, that Arcudius did not scruple to accuse the Arcud. lib. 3. de
Euch.
Greeks in this respect of Idolatry. Goar clears them of this crime, yet says
himself, that some bow, others kneel, and cast themselves prostrate on the
ground, Goar in Euch. notis in Miss. Chrysostom.
as being to receive the King of the World invisibly accompanied with his Holy
Angels, that all of 'em say their Prayers, or recommend themselves to the
Prayers of the Priests, and that they usually speak to our Savior Christ, as
if he was personally present, praying to him in the words of the good Thief,
Lord Remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom. The Priests answer, the
Lord God be mindful of us all, now and for ever.

THEY repeat these words without ceasing, till he that carries the Symbols is
ent'red the Sanctuary, and then they cry out, Blessed is he, that comes in the
name of the Lord. And yet so far there is not any Consecration, and much less a
Conversion of Substance.

WHILST the Symbols are still on the Table, they separate a Particle from the
rest of the Bread in remembrance of our Savior, and call the remainder the
Body of the Virgin Mary. They afterward lay another small piece on the right
side of the first, in honor of the Holy Virgin, to the end they may say, in
effect says Goar, (...), The Queen is at thy right hand, in a Vestment of Gold
wrought with diverse colors. They set by another small piece in honor of St.
John Baptist, another in honor of the Apostles, and several others for a
remembrance of other Saints. Goar tells us, they separate Goar ibid.
nine pieces after this manner, besides those of our Savior, and the Blessed
Virgin his Mother, and that this is done to represent the whole Celestial
Court. They afterward carry all these to the great Altar, where the
Consecration is performed; but when they speak of these Particles, they call
one of 'em the Body of the Virgin Mary, the other the Body of St. John, the other
the Body of St. Nicholas, and after the same manner all the rest. I know Goar
denies they are thus called, affirming the Greeks say only (...), the Particle
of the Virgin, and not the Body of the Virgin, I know likewise that Arcudius
seems not to be agreed in this Point, and perhaps the Latins have at length
caused the Latinis'd Greeks to leave this way of speaking. But Goar himself
says, that some amongst the Latins have been so simple to imagine, that the
Greeks believe the real Presence of the Body of the Blessed Virgin in her
Particle of Bread; and what likelihood is there, Persons endued with the least
sense, should fall into this Opinion, if the expressions of the Greeks gave
them not some reason for it? Arcudius assures us, that in Arcud. lib. 3. de
Euch. C 9.
his time, there was a certain Person in Poland, otherwise both Pious and
Learned, who persuaded a Lady of Russia to receive no more the Sacrament from
the hands of the Priests of her Religion, because they administered not the Body
of Jesus Christ, but that of the Virgin Mary, and St. Nicholas, etc. This man's
mistake, to whom Arcudius gives another kind of Character than that of a
Calumniator, was no otherwise occasioned, but by the manner of speaking usual
amongst the Greeks, who called these Particles the Body of this or the other
Saint. For it is not likely he invented this Fable himself, which Histor. Eccl.
part. 4. p. 20.
is so impertinent and ridiculous. Hottinger affirms, there is to be seen in the
Library of Zurich a Manuseript, which bears the name of one Peter Numagen, in
which is expressly mentioned, that the Greeks affirm, the remainders of the
Consecrated Bread, (which is to say, of that Bread from whence the great
Particle has been taken in remembrance of our Savior, and which they
distribute to the People at the end of the Action, calling it (...),) to be the
remainders of the Body of the Virgin Mary. Guy Carmus relates the same thing,
the thirteenth Error of the Greeks, says he, is, that they affirm the
remainders of the Consecrated Bread, are the remains of the Body of the Blessed
Virgin.

GERMAIN the Patriarch of Constantinople, speaks after this manner, Theoria
rer. Eccles.
we [need not doubt, says he, but there are great spiritual blessings and
advantages which do follow from the communication of this Bread, which is the
Body of the Blessed Virgin. And the same kind of expressions are to be seen in
Sacred Nosegay. lib. 4. c. 3.
Boucher's relation touching the Greeks: They all of 'em, hold, says he, a
most ridiculous and extravagant opinion; for they believe that under these
Particles of the Consecrated Host, is really contained the Body of the Virgin,
after the same manner as the Body of her Son under the principal parts of the
said Host, so that they receive these Fragments with new Prayers and
Preparatives in honor of the Mother of our Savior. I do not doubt but that
Boucher is mistaken as well as those mentioned by Goar, and this good man of
Poland mentioned by Arcudius, in imputing to them such a ridiculous
Superstition; but it is certain the occasion of this charge was the manner of
the Greeks expressing themselves, who attribute to these Fragments and
Particles of Bread, the name of the Body of the Virgin and Saints in the same
manner as they call the great Particle our Savior's Body.

NOW this manifestly shows we ought not to abuse (as Mr. Arnaud does) their
Mystical expressions; for seeing they apply them to the Bread, when as yet
unconsecrated, and speak of it as if it was our Savior himself, behaving
themselves as if he was present in his Humane Nature; who then can find it
strange if they express themselves above the ordinary rate, concerning the
Consecrated Bread, which is the consummation of the whole Mystery? And seeing
they are not sparing of their Mystical expressions touching the Particles of
Bread: divided and set apart in honor of the Virgin Mary and Saints, what
likelihood is there they should be more reserved in respect of that, which they
consecrate in remembrance of the Son of God, and on which they express with so
great Ceremony and Pomp, the whole Economy of our Salvation? It is evident,
that to attribute to them the belief of a real and substantial Conversion,
according to the sense of the Roman Church they must have explained themselves
in clear and proper Terms; for should we be guided by Mr. Arnaud, who makes the
most trivial matters serve for Proofs, and draws Consequences from all Sides,
either right or wrong, we should run the hazard of being deceived, as well as
those that imagined the Greeks believed the real presence of the Virgin Mary's
Body, and that of St. Nicholas.

CHAP. V.
The Seventh Proof taken from that the Greeks do not believe the Particles of
the Virgin Mary and the Saints ought to be consecrated on the great Altar, as
is that of our Savior, and yet they distribute them to the People in the same
manner as they do the Body of Jesus Christ. Mr. Arnaud's Tenth Fallacy laid
open. The Eighth Proof taken from their believing that the Eucharist
consecrated on Holy Thursday, has a greater virtue than that which is
consecrated at other times. The Ninth Proof taken out of several Passages of
their Liturgies.

WE have seen in the preceding Chapter, that the Greeks when as yet at the
Prothesis, (that is to say, at the little Altar) do separate eleven Particles
of Bread, the first and principal Particle in honor of our Savior, the second
in honor of his Holy Mother, and the rest in honor of the Saints, and that
they carry all these and place them on the high Altar, where the Consecration
is performed.

WE must here observe they believe not that all these Particles are
consecrated, for they restrain this effect to that which bears the name of our
Savior, the others remaining unconsecrated. Arcudius affirms Simeon of Arcud.
de Sacr. Euch. lib. 3. c. 10.
Thessalonica (who lived in the beginning of the Fifteenth Century) to be the
Author of this Opinion, against which he with much passion inveighs. Mr. Arnaud
tells us we must not attribute this Error to all the Greeks; because, says he,
that Simeon protests before he proposed it, that he did not offer it
dogmatically, but only as a probable Opinion; But Arcudius does not fully say
this, he only tells us that Simeon, at the end of his whole Discourse adds,
that he mentions not these things as Points of Doctrine, because he always
follows the Sentiments of the Church. This is a Clause of Submission, but this
is not to protest before the proposal of the Opinion, that he offers it but
only as a mere Opinion. Mr. Arnaud adds, That it is likely the Greeks in the
Council of Florence did answer the Latins according to the sense of Simeon, for
the Acts mention that the Bishop of Mytilene fully satisfied them touching the
Questions proposed, amongst which this was one. But he is mistaken, for the
Question of the Latins was not concerning the Consecration of the small
Particles, but touching the Making of these Particles, and uniting them with
the great one, (...). They demanded of us wherefore we divided the Particles in
the Oblation, that is to say, on the Prothesis, and afterward joined them to
the Divine Bread, or great Consecrated Particle. Now this Question does not
respect the Consecration of these Particles, but supposes on the contrary they
are not consecrated; for if the Greeks believed they were consecrated, it would
be in vain for the Latins to demand wherefore they join them with that which is
consecrated. It appears likewise by Arcudius, that Gabriel of Philadelphia
maintains this Opinion of the non-Consecration of these Particles, not only as
the bare Opinion of Simeon of Thessalonica, but as that of the whole Greek
Church, for he recites these words of Gabriel, What is it which persuades me
Arcud. lib. 5. cap. 11.
of this? It Is first the Faith, and in the next place the Authority of the Holy
Fathers, but in fine, I am persuaded of this, because it is the Doctrine which
the Catholic Church dispersed over the Face of the whole Earth teaches and
confirms. By this Catholic Church he means that of the Greeks. In like
manner the Jesuit Francis Richard an Emissary, speaking of this Belief touching
the non-consecration of the Particles, tells us, that he has had several
Relation of the Isle of St. Erini.
Disputes with the Papa's that embraced this False Opinion, and that the People
for want of Instruction know not what to believe. Had Mr. Arnaud carefully
perused Leo Allatius, his chief Author, who has furnished him with the greatest
part of his Materials touching this Dispute about the Greeks, he might have
found this Sentiment to be the same with that of the Monks of Mount Athos. All
the Monks, says he, that inhabit Mount Athos, are of this Epist 2. ad Nihus.
Opinion, as testifies Athanasius Venoire, the Archbishop of Imbre, who dwelt a
long time with them, and I my self have seen several who were Priests that
zealously maintained the same thing.

BUT be it as it will, Mr. Arnaud and I would draw from one and the same
Principle very different Conclusions, the Principle is that the Greeks do not
believe that the Particles are consecrated, his Conclusion is, that they then
hold Transubstantiation, and mine on the contrary, that they then do not
believe it. Let us now see which of these Conclusions is the truest.

HE tells us, that when any Object against the Greeks, that if their Opinion be
true, it would follow, that they which communicated of these Partcles Lib. 4.
cap. 1. page 330.
would not receive the Body of Jesus Christ; they answer, there is put into the
cup part of the Host truly consecrated, which is mixed with its Particles not
consecrated, out of which afterward they distribute in a spoon the Communion
to the Laity, so that it commonly happens that all in general receive some part
of the Body of Jesus Christ, and when it should fall out otherwise, it would
only follow they communicated but of one kind.

BUT this pretended Answer of the Greeks has no other Foundation than Mr.
Arnaud's Authority, who alleges no Author to confirm it, and Arcudius who
manages this Dispute against Simeon and Gabriel, and whence Mr. Arnaud has
taken all he knows, makes no mention of it.

HE adds, That this Error invincibly proves the Greeks hold
Transubstantiation, and that we need but consider after what manner they
express it. And he afterward produces the Passages of Simeon and Gabriel. The
Church upon just Grounds, says Simeon, offers these Particles, to show, that
this lively Sacrifice, sanctifies both the quick and dead, but she makes them
not Gods by nature. He means, that as the Saints are united to God by Grace,
but become not Gods in their nature, so these Particles are united to the Body
of Jesus Christ, although they do not therefore become his Body. And this he
clearly expresses in these words. The Saints being united to Jesus Christ, are
deifi'd by Grace, but become not Gods by nature; so likewise the Particles
which are offered upon their account, obtain holiness by the participation of
the Body and Blood, and become one with this Body and Blood by this mixture,
but if you consider them separately, they are not the very Body and Blood of
Christ, but are only joined to them. The Archbishop of Philadelphia says the
same thing in using the same comparison, as the Souls of the Saints, says he,
being brought to the light of the Divinity which enlightens them, become Gods
only by participation, and not by nature, so these Particles, although united to
the Flesh and Blood of Jesus Christ, are not changed, but receive holiness by
participation. After this Mr. Arnaud concludes in these words, it is as clear
as the day, that all this has no sense, but only as it relates to the Doctrine
of Transubstantiation, and that as these Authors suppose these Particles are
not transubstantiated, so they suppose the greatest portion which is offered in
the name of Jesus Christ, and from which alone is taken what is reserved for
the sick, is effectually transubstantiated, and becomes the very Body of Jesus
Christ.

BUT I shall not stick to tell him, his Philosophy deceives him, for these
Authors do not dispute on this Point, that is to say whether these Particles
are transubstantiated or not. But whether they are made the Body of Jesus
Christ in the same manner as the great Portion. And this does in truth suppose
that the great Portion becomes this Body, but not that it is transubstantiated.
The comparison they use does not favor this pretended supposition, for they
mean no more by it than this, that as the Saints are indeed united unto God,
and partake of his holiness, but become not Gods by nature, so the Particles
which represent the Saints, are really united with the great one which
represents our Savior Christ, and partake of its Sanctification, but they
become not effectually what the great one is made, to wit, the Body of Jesus
Christ. And this is their reasoning which does not satisfy us how the great
Particle is made this Body, whether by a Substantial Conversion, or otherwise.
And thus does Mr. Arnaud's Logic conclude nothing.

LET us see now the Conclusion I pretend to draw hence. First, we are agreed
that in Simeon's sense these little Particles are bread in Substance, and
represent the Saints. Now if we suppose the biggest ceases to be Bread, and is
made the proper Substance of Jesus Christ, there can be nothing more
impertinent than the Ceremony of the Greeks, to place in the same Mystery round
about our Savior, who is in his own proper Substance, not real Saints, but
little morsels of Bread which represent them. Now methinks there is a great
deal more reason in saying that the great Particle is the Mystical Body of
Jesus Christ, and the small ones according to their way, mystical Saints, than
to say that the great one is substantially Jesus Christ, and the small ones,
are only Bread in Substance, and Saints in the Mystery.

MOREOVER, what means Simeon, when he tells us, that the small Apud Arcud. lib.
3. cap. 11.
Particles become one with the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ by mixture? which
is to say, that when they join them with the great Particle in the Cup, and mix
them therein together, it is no more then but one and the same thing. For if we
suppose, that as well the great one, as the lesser, are the Body of Jesus
Christ, and mystical Saints, I find no difficulty therein, for he means that
all these Particles put together make no more than one Mystery, which expresses
that perfect Unity, which is between Christ and his Saints, which together with
him make but one Body. But if on the contrary we suppose that the first
Particle is Jesus Christ in Substance, there will be found nothing more absurd
than the expression of this Person, when he tells us that little Saints made of
Bread are converted into the very Substance of Jesus Christ. He is one and the
same with his true Saints, whether they are in Heaven or on Earth, but to say
he becomes one and the same with their Figures and Representations, or with
Crumbs of Bread, which represent them on an Altar, is in my opinion such an
extravagant fancy, that we ought not to charge the Greeks with it.

IN fine Arcudius assures us, that it is customary to administer these Particles
to the People, after the same manner as we do the Sacrament. He says indeed
that Simeon and Gabriel warned the Curats not to distribute them in this manner
to the People, but to administer them with the great Particle mixed and pressed
together in the Cup. Yet, adds he, Simeon ambiguously Arcud. lib. 3. cap. 10.
expresses himself, for he says that the Particles are the Body of our Lord,
when they are mixed with the Body and Blood, and are not so being separate, and
therefore the Faithful may partake of them in the Sacrament, which is to say,
they may receive them as the real Sacrament. Now tell me I beseech you, whether
it is likely a man that believes the Eucharist to be the Body of Jesus Christ,
in its proper Substance, would speak after this manner. These Particles, says
he, become the Body of our Lord when mixed, but separate they are not so. Is it
that the conjunction and mixture transubstantiates them, and the separation
untransubstantiates them? If this be his meaning, why does he so earnestly
assert, that they are not consecrated? Why does Gabriel his Disciple, say, that
they are not changed, although united? He must certainly mean Ibid.
they are the Body of Christ, otherwise than in propriety of Substance, and he
sufficiently explains himself, when he says in the second passage which Mr.
Arnaud has alleged, (...), they participate Apud Arc. lib. 3. cap. 11. page 331.
of the Body and Blood of our Lord, which Mr. Arnaud understood not amiss when
he translated it, they receive holiness by the participation of the Body and
Blood. Which is to say, they are made the Body and Blood by a Communication of
Sanctity, which comes to them from the great Particle by means of the mixture,
even to the making them capable of being given in the Communion to the
Faithful. Now there are several things which do hence necessarily follow. For
first, it follows that the Bread which is the Body of Jesus Christ, not in
Substance, but in Sanctification, is sufficient for the Communion of the
Faithful. Secondly, that the great Particle is the Body of Jesus Christ in such
a manner that it may be communicated to another piece of Bread without the
change of its Substance, and by consequence that it is not it self this Body
substantially, for besides that this manner of being the Body of Jesus Christ
is incommunicable, it is evident that if it could be communicated to another
Subject, even to the making of it the Body of Jesus Christ, it then follows
that this other Subject must be transubstantiated. In a word, Simeon's meaning
is, that the great Particle is in such a manner the Body of Jesus Christ, that
it may communicate this honor to the rest, and make them become the Body of
Jesus Christ in such a sort as renders them proper for the Communion. And to
the same effect are these words of Arcudius. He says, says he, that the
Particles are the Body of our Lord, when mixed with the Body and Blood, and
therefore the Faithful may receive them in the Sacrament, and these other
words, (...), they communicate, or participate of the Body and Blood of our
Lord. It is then evident he means not that the great Particle is the Body of
Christ in propriety of Substance, for this propriety cannot be communicated to
another Subject, if we suppose at the same time as Simeon does, that this other
Subject remains really Bread.

AND this is my Argument. Mr. Arnaud who saw the force of it, has endeavored
to escape it by his usual Artifices, for on one hand he has concealed from us
what Arcudius has expressly declared, to wit, that these Particles are the Body
of Christ being mixed, and that the faithful may partake of them as of the
Sacrament, and on the other, he has misrepresented Simeon's sense, and
pretended it to be to his advantage. But all his Artifices cannot hinder us
from perceiving that the real Sentiment of the Greek Church is; 1. That the
Substance of Bread remains in all the Particles, that is to say, as well in
that which is consecrated as in all the rest. 2. That the consecrated Particle
becomes the Body of Jesus Christ in full virtue of Sanctification, and is as it
were a Fountain of Grace and Divine Efficacy. 3. That the other Particles by
mixture and union with the great Particle do partake of this Sanctification,
and become by this means the Body and Blood of our Lord, not after a complete
and perfect manner like unto the great Particle, but in a far lower degree,
which is yet sufficient to make them proper to be distributed to the People in
the Communion, as being the Body and Blood of our Lord.

WE shall be confirmed in this opinion, if we consider the eighth Proof which I
shall here offer. It consists in that the Greeks believe the Eucharist
consecrated on Holy Thursday, to have a greater efficacy than that which is
consecrated at other times, which may be verified if 'twere needful by the
testimony of several Authors. See here what Prareolus says; They assure us,
says he, that this excellent mystery consecrated on the day in which our
Savior celebrated his Supper, that is to say, on Thursday in the Holy Week,
has a more excellent virtue, and is more efficatious than when it is
consecrated on other days, Prercol. Elem. Here Is. lib. 7. page 201.
and it is for this reason, according to Guy Le Carmes Relation, that they
consecrate the Eucharist (for the sick) on no other day of the year than in
that wherein our Savior made his last Supper, which they keep all the year
only for this purpose. John de Lasko Archbishop of Gnesne, and Ambassador from
the King of Poland to Leo X. in the year 1514, relates the same thing of the
Moscovites, whose Religion as every one knows, is in a manner the same with
that of the Greeks. As to the Sacrament of the Eucharist, says he, which they
consecrate Raynald ad ann. 1514.
on the day in which our Lord made his last Supper, they say that this only is
proper for the sick, and not that which is consecrated at other times, so that
they consecrate Bread on that day for the whole year, in a Chalice prepared for
that purpose, and put it dry and full of maggots (as it is) into the mouth of
the sick with a spoon. Possevin the Jesuit in the writing he presented to the
great Duke of Muscovia in the year 158^. In which he reckons up the Errors of
the Greeks, especially remarks this as one of the chief; They err, says he,
Possevin in Mosc page 43.
in saying the most excellent Sacrament of the Eucharist, which is consecrated
on the day in which our Lord made his last Supper, is more efficacious and of
greater virtue than that which is consecrated on other days. Anthony Caucus
Archbishop of Corcyra in his Relation of the Errors of the Greeks to Pope
Gregory the XIII. observes likewise in the 14th. Article; That they hold the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, which is consecrated on the day in which our Lord
made his last Supper, has a greater virtue than that consecrated on other
times. Allatius mentions this Article of Caucus, amongst others, which he
censures as calumnies; but although he is very earnest to refute this Archbishop,
and treats him as unworthily as may be, without any respect to his Dignity,
even to the calling of him, os durum and Stygium, non nisi mentiri gnarum, yet
has not he Allat. de perpet. cons. lib. 3. cap. 17.
dared to touch on this Article in particular, and his outrages only confirm in
this regard the Authority of Caucus, and the truth of his Relation.

ALPHONSUS de Castro attributes this same opinion to the Greeks. Alphonsus de
Castro. adv. baeres. lib. 6. tit. de Euchar. haeres. 9.
He alleges for this effect, the Testimony of Guy Carmus; and although he has
been accustomed not to spare him in his censures whenever he can find the
least occasion, yet does he agree with him in this particular, saying, we must
not wonder if the Greeks be in this Error, seeing the Genius of that People
lies, in expressing themselves after a vain manner, and in inventing of Fables.

ARCUDIUS confirms the same thing, There are, says he, People so Areud. lib.
3. cap. 55.
impertinent, as to believe, the Holy Eucharist which is prepared on that day
(Holy Thursday) has a greater virtue to sanctify them who receive it, than
that which is consecrated on another day. As if it were not still the same
Jesus Christ, or as if our Lord was at sometimes more powerful than at others.

IF it be demanded what consequence we can hence draw against
Transubstantiation; I answer it appears plain enough in it self. For if we
suppose the Greeks hold the Eucharist to be made the Body of Jesus Christ, in
virtue and efficacy, by means of this abundant sanctification which the Bread
receives, we shall not find any absurdity in this other Opinion, which they
hold, concerning the Eucharist consecrated on Holy Thursday, namely, that it is
more efficacious than that consecrated on other days, for this sanctification
of the Bread, and quickening Grace which accompanies it may have its degrees; it
receives more and less, as the Schoolmen speak; but if you suppose the
Eucharist to be made the Body of Jesus Christ by conversion of Substance, this
more and this less, which they imagine, cannot be admitted; it is true indeed
that the Sacrament will produce various effects, according to the various
dispositions of the Persons who receive it, and according as there shall be
more or less devotion in a man's Soul, it will feel more or less the strength
of Grace, but the cause will be in them who shall receive the Sacrament, and
not in the Sacrament it self, nor in the day of its Consecration. If the Bread
becomes the proper Substance of the Son of God, it is always of equal virtue in
it self; and the time of Consecration, can neither increase nor diminish it. It
is then scarcely to be imagined, that Persons who believe Transubstantiation,
can fall into this other Opinion; for is it not the same Substance, the same
Jesus Christ personally, is it not one and the same Conversion, which
terminates it self in the same Subject? Whence then can proceed this more and
less? Would they say that the Transubstantiation is made more on one day than
another? This thought cannot happen in the mind of those that know what
Transubstantiation means. Do they mean that the Body of Jesus Christ has
greater virtue in it one day than another? This thought likewise cannot happen
in the mind of those that know what our Savior is. Do they hereby only mean
that he displays a greater efficacy one day than another, although he has ever the
same measure of it in himself? It is certain that this more and this less of
Grace, which the Faithful receive in the Communion (supposing we take the
proper Substance of Jesus Christ with the mouths of our Bodies) cannot proceed
from any other cause, but that of more or less devotion, which we bring with us
to the Lord's Table. So that this Opinion of the Greeks being found
inconsistant with that of Transubstantiation, and moreover it not appearing
clearly to us that they have this latter, whereas it is plainly manifest they
have the other, we are obliged to conclude they hold not the substantial
Conversion. I know we must not imagine that men do always so exactly adjust
their Sentiments, that they never contradict themselves; and I acknowledge the
Greeks are ignorant enough to have on the same Subject contradictory Opinions,
but besides that there are certain palpable contradictions, of which few men
how brutish soever they be are capable, as this would be to believe that the
Eucharist is the proper Substance of the Son of God, and yet to be of a more
excellent virtue being consecrated on Holy Thursday than on other days; besides
this I say, seeing it does not expressly and clearly appear to us from any thing
else that they believe Transubstantiation, it is far more just to give to their
Terms, on the subject of the Change which happens to the Bread, a sense which
agrees with this aforementioned belief, than to give them another which wholly
contradicts it, and makes them ridiculous. If they must be led to the
Substantial Conversion, or carried off from it by way of explication of their
general expressions, there is more reason to expound them in a sense
conformable to their other Opinions, than to make them guilty of manifest
absurdities.

WOULD Mr. Arnaud lay aside for a while this Personal Interest wherewith he
seems to be transported in this Dispute, and consider things without passion; I
am persuaded he would soon acknowledge that the sense he imputes to the Greeks
has no resemblance with the Terms of their Liturgies, nor other usual
expressions. As for example, we would know how we must understand this Clause
of their Liturgies, Make this Bread the precious Body of thy Christ, and that
which is in this Cup the precious Blood of thy Christ, changing them by the
virtue of thy Holy Spirit. Mr. Arnaud understands them as mentioning a change
of Substance; I say on the contrary, these are general Terms, to which we
cannot give at farthest any more than a general sense, and that if they must
have a particular and determinate one, we must understand them in the sense of
a Mystical change, and a change of Sanctification, which consists in that the
Bread is to us in the stead of the Natural Body of Jesus Christ, that it makes
deep impressions of him in our Souls, that it spiritually communicates him to
us, and that it is accompanied with a quickening grace which sanctifies it, and
makes it to be in some sense one and the same thing with the Body of Jesus
Christ, and yet does not this hinder but that the Natural Substance of Bread
remains. Let us examine the Liturgies themselves, to see which of these two
senses are most agreeable thereunto.

WE shall find in that which goes under the name of St. Chrysostom, and which
is the most in use amongst the Greeks, that immediately after the Priest has
said, Make this Bread to become the precious Body of thy Christ, and that
Euchar. Graecorum Jacobi Goar and Bibl. patr. Graecor. Lat. Tom. 2.
which is in the Chalice the precious Blood of thy Christ, changing them by thy
Holy Spirit, he adds, to the end they may purify the Souls of those that
receive them, that is to say, be made a proper means to purify the Soul, by
the remission of its sins and communication of the Holy Spirit, etc. These
words do sufficiently explain what kind of change we must understand by them,
namely, a change of Sanctification and virtue, for did they mean a change of
Substance, it should have been said, changing them by thy Holy Spirit, to the
end they may be made the proper Substance of this Body and Blood, or some such
like expressions.

In the Liturgy, which goes under the name of St. James, we find almost the
same thing; Send, says it, thy Holy Spirit upon us and these Holy Gifts lying
Bibliot. Patr. Graeco. Lat. Tom. 2.
here before thee, to the end that he coming may sanctify them by his holy,
good and glorious presence; and make this Bread to become the Holy Body of thy
Christ, and this Chalice the precious Blood of thy Christ, to the end it may
have this effect to all them which shall receive it, namely, purify their
Souls from all manner of sin, and make them abound in good works, and obtain
everlasting life. And this methinks does sufficiently determine, how the Bread
is made the Body of Jesus Christ; to wit, in being sanctified by the presence
of his Spirit, and procuring the remission of our sins and our Sanctification.

The Liturgy which bears the name of St. Marc, has almost the same expressions,
Send on us and on these Loaves and Chalices thy Holy Spirit, that he Ibid.
may sanctify and consecrate them, even as God Almighty; and make the Bread,
the Body, and the Cup the Blood of the New Testament of our Lord God and
Savior Jesus Christ, our Sovereign King; to the end they may become to all
those who shall participate of them, a means of obtaining Faith, Sobriety,
Health, Temperance, a regeneration of Soul and Body, the participation of
Felicity, Eternal Life, to the glory of thy great name. A Person whose mind is
not wholly prepossessed with prejudice, cannot but perceive that this Clause,
to the end they may become, etc. is the explication of the foregoing words,
change them into the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, and that it determines
them, to a change, not of Substance, but of Sanctification and Virtue. This
Truth is so evident, that Arcudius has not scrupled to acknowledge, that if
this Clause be taken (make this Bread the Body of thy Christ) in an absolute
sense, Arcud. lib. 3. cap. 33.
that is to say, that it be made the Body of Christ, not in respect of us, but
simply in it self) it will have no agreement nor coherence with these other
words that follow, to the end they may be made, etc. And he makes of this a
Principle, for the concluding, that the Consecration is not performed by this
Prayer, but that it is already perfected by the words, this is my Body, directly
contrary to the Sentiment of the Greeks, who affirm it is made by the Prayer. So
that if we apply Arcudius's Observation to the true Opinion of the Greek
Church, to wit, that the Consecration is performed by this Prayer, we shall
plainly perceive that their sense is, That the Bread is made the Body of Jesus
Christ in respect of us, inasmuch as it sanctifies us and effects the remission
of our sins.

AND with this agrees the Term of (...) to Sanctify, which the Greeks commonly
make use of to express the Act of Consecration, and that of (...), the
Sanctifications, by which they express their Mysteries, as appears by the
Liturgies, and those of (...), the holy Gifts, the sanctified Gifts, the holy
Mysteries, the quickening Mysteries, the holy Bread, which are common
expressions amongst them. All which favors the change of Sanctification.

ON the other hand we shall find in the Liturgy of St. Chrysostom, that the
name of Bread is given three times to the Sacrament after Consecration, in the
Pontificia four times, and in the declaration of the presanctifi'd Bread, it is
so called seven times. In the Liturgy of St. Basil the Priest makes this Prayer
immediately after the Consecration, Lord, remember me Archi. Habert Apud. Goar.
in Euchol.
a sinner, and as to us who participate all of us of the same Bread, and Cup,
grant we may live in Union, and in the Communion of the same Holy Spirit.
Likewise what the Latins call Ciborium, the Greeks call (...), which is as much
as to say, a Bread Saver, and it is in it wherein they put that which they call
the presanctifi'd Bread, being the Communion for the sick. I know what is wont
to be said in reference to this, namely, that the Eucharist is called Bread
upon the account of its Species, that is to say, of its Accidents, which remain
sustained by the Almighty Power of God without a Subject; but the Greeks
themselves should give us this explication; for till then we may presume upon
the favor of the natural signification of the Term, which we not finding
attended with the Gloss of the Latins, it must therefore be granted not to
favor the Conversion of the Substances.

IT is no more favored by several other Clauses in the same Liturgy. For in
that of St. James there is a Prayer, which the Priest directs to our Savior in
Heaven; although he has the Consecrated Bread before him, (...), says he, (...),
Bibl. Patr. Graeco Lat. Tom. 2.
(...). O thou Holy One, that dwell in the Holy Places, sanctify us by the
Word of thy Grace, and coming of thy Holy Spirit. We find this same Prayer in
St. Mark's Liturgy. In those of St. Basile, and Chrysostom, there is another
directed after the same manner to our Savior in Heaven. Look down we beseech
thee, says it, O Lord Jesus Christ our God, from the Holy Place of thy
Habitation, and Throne of thy Glory, which is in thy Kingdom, and come to
sanctify us, thou that sit at the right hand of the Father, and art here
with us invisibly. Mr. Arnaud perverts these last words, and who art here
invisibly with us, not considering they relate to that part of the Petition,
wherein, they beseech him, to come and sanctify them, and that they only
signify this invisible presence of his Grace and Divinity, which he promised
his Disciples when he left the World, and ascended up into Heaven. It plainly
appears that the intention of the Greek Church is to send up their Devotions to
the Place where our Savior inhabits. How comes it to pass, we find not at
least one Prayer wherein is expressed, that he has clothed the proper Substance
of his Humanity, with the Veil of the Accidents, or some such like words? But
on the contrary, when the Priest reads with a loud voice, (...), Holy Things
are for Holy Persons, the Quire answers, there is only one that is Holy, only
one Lord, who is Jesus Christ, at the Glory of God the Father. For it is clear,
that these words, at the Glory of God the Father, mean that he is above in
Heaven. In the Liturgy of the presanctifi'd (Bread,) the Priest thus addresses
himself to God, beseeching him, that his only Son may rest on this Altar, by
virtue of these dreadful Mysteries thereon Eurho. Goar.
exposed; thus manifestly distinguishing the Mysteries from Jesus Christ, and
immediately prays, That he would sanctify our Souls and Bodies, by a perpetual
Sanctification, to the end that partaking of these Holy Things with a pure
Conscience, a holy assurance, and enlightened mind, and being quickened by them,
we may be united to Jesus Christ himself, our true God, who has said, he that
eats my Flesh and drinks my Blood, dwells in me, and I in him. By which words
it is evident, that the Mysteries are plainly distinguished from our Savior
himself, and that those who receive them unworthily, are not united with him.
In the Liturgy of St. Basil the Priest prays, That receiving with the Testimony
Vbi supra.
of a pure Conscience the Particle of the Sanctifications of God, we may be
united to the Body and Blood of his Christ, and that receiving these things
worthily, we may have Jesus Christ dwelling in our hearts. These words do
moreover distinguish Jesus Christ from the Sacrament he has ordained, and it is
certain these Terms, of Jesus Christ dwelling in our hearts, do more plainly
intimate a Spiritual Communion, than a corporeal one. In fine in this same
Liturgy the Priest having performed his Office in this particular, makes a
Prayer unto God, in which he recapitulates whatsoever has passed in this
Mystical Celebration; but mentions not the least tittle concerning
Transubstantiation. We have, says he, finished and consummated the Mystery of
thy Economy, O Jesus Christ our God, as far as we have been able. For we have
celebrated the memory of thy Death, we have beheld the Figure of thy
Resurrection, we have been filled with thy never fading Life, and been made
partakers of thy immortal Pleasures, grant we may be found worthy to enjoy the
same in the World to come. Is it not a wonderful thing there should not in all
this be the least mention of the conversion of the Substances, which is yet in
the sense of the Roman Church the most essential part of that Mystery, that
whereunto all the rest does tend, and whereon depends so much, that the rest
without this would signify nothing. Let Mr. Arnaud allege what he pleases,
it is not to be imagined the Greek Church would forget this part of the Mystery
in such a solemn recapitulation which it makes to God at the end of its Office,
did she in effect believe any other Change in the Bread, than that of its
Virtue and Holiness.

CHAP. VI.
The Tenth Proof taken from that the Greeks do often use an extenuating Term,
when they call the Eucharist the Body of Jesus Christ. The Eleventh from their
not believing the wicked who partake of the Eucharist, do receive the Body of
Jesus Christ. The Twelfth from their believing the dead, and those in Deserts
remote from all Commerce, do receive the same as we do in the Communion.

ALTHOUGH the Greeks do frequently call the Eucharist the Body of Jesus Christ,
yet must we not thereupon immediately conclude that they are in this respect of
the same opinion with the Church of Rome; and adopted Transubstantiation or the
substantial presence amongst the Articles of their Faith. One Proof of the
contrary of this, is, that sometimes, when they mention the consecrated Bread,
and give it the name of the Body of Jesus Christ, they add a Term of
Diminution, which shows they do not mean that it is his Body in propriety of
Substance. Which appears by a passage taken out of Balsamon on the Seventieth
Canon of the Apostles. This Canon ordains a punishment to those that shall fast
with the Jews, and celebrate their Feasts; and Balsamon takes hence an occasion
to inveigh against the Feasts of unleavened Bread, in these words. If a Balsam.
in Canon. 55. Apost. Can 70.
man deserves to be deposed only for eating unleavened Bread with the Jews, and
expelled the Christian Communion; what punishment do they not then deserve that
partake of it, as of the Body of our Lord, and celebrate the Passover after the
same manner as they do?

MATTHEW Blastarius, speaks almost to the same purpose, in Arcudius. They,
says he, that celebrate the mystical Sacrifice with unleavened Bread, Areud
lib. 3. cap. 6.
do greatly offend against the Christian Customs; for if they who only eat the
unleavened Bread of the Feast of the Jews, ought to be deposed and
excommunicated, what excuse can they make for themselves, who receive it as if
it were the Body of our Lord.

SIMEON of Thessalonica expounding that passage of the Liturgy, where the
Priest perfumes the Gifts, in saying these words, Be thou exalted, O God, above
the Heavens, and be thou glorified through out all the Earth; the Priest, says
he, speaks of the Ascension of our Lord, and the Glory he received when he was
preached to every Creature; as if, he spoke to our Savior himself, and said to
him, Thou art descended to us, thou have ascended into Heaven, and fillest the
whole Earth with thy Glory. And therefore do we celebrate these Holy Mysteries,
and partake of and possess thee eternally. Wherefore have we this (as if) he
spoke to him, (...), which Goar has well translated, Quasi cum salvatore
dissereret. How comes it to pass, I Goar in Euchol. p. 153.
say, we have this, quasi, if in effect our Savior was present, and the Priest
spoke to him? It may be alleged the passages I come from producing have some
ambiguity, for it may be doubted whether by the aforementioned (...), is meant,
as being the Body of our Lord, or as if it were the Body of our Lord, that is
to say, as if it were in the stead of our Lord's Body. But first of all this
ambiguity is void in respect of the passage of Simeon, who tells us, that the
Priest does, as it were speak to our Savior; for it cannot be alleged, that
this is either a quasi of quality or of Identity, if I may so speak, nor give
it another sense than this, to wit, that the Priest speaks no otherwise, than
if he had our Savior himself in Person before him, and directed his Discourse
to him, in the same sense, as he says, Let us see our Savior speaking in the
Apud. Allat. de perp. cons. lib. 3. cap. 13.
Gospel, and that he is, as it were, present, (...), and elsewhere, That the
Priest holding the Gospel in his hand, gives it to be kissed by him that takes
upon him the Christian Profession, as if it were our Savior himself, (...),
and says to him, behold Jesus Christ is invisibly present in the midst of us.
Now this contributes to the resolving of whatsoever may seem doubtful in the
other passages.

MOREOVER the reasoning of Balsamon and Blastarius clears the difficulty: for
if we suppose they believed Transubstantiation, we cannot give any tolerable
sense to their Discourses. In effect, either they acknowledged that the Azyme
was changed into the Body of Jesus Christ, as well as the leavened Bread, or
denied it; if they acknowledged it, their sense is, that it is a great crime to
eat the proper Body of Jesus Christ, under the Accidents of an Azyme. Now this
is absurd: for if the Body of Christ be really under the Accidents of the
Azyme, what crime is there in thus eating of it? For that which is eaten is no
longer a real Azyme, but the Substance of the Body it self. Wherefore moreover
should they be judged more worthy of condemnation than those who mix themselves
with the Jews when they celebrate their Feast, and eat unleavened Bread with
them? For the latter of these do really eat an Azyme, whereas the others
receive only the Accidents of it, which serve as a vayl to the proper flesh of
our Lord. If it be said they do not acknowledge the Azyme to be changed into
the Body of Jesus Christ, as the leavened Bread is, their sense will be that
it is a greater Crime to eat an Azyme, in supposing it to be the Body of Jesus
Christ, than to eat the same Azyme, wittingly and willingly, in the Communion
of the Jews. Now this is no less absurd, for the intention, and belief, which
the first have, lessens their fault, whereas the knowledge and intention of the
other aggravates it. They that eat the Azyme with the Jews, mean only to eat an
Azyme; whereas those that eat it in imagining they eat the Body of our Lord,
pretend nothing less than to eat an Azyme; so that it cannot be said in this
respect, but that the crime of these last is greater than that of the others.
It must then be granted that to give a likely sense to Balsamon and Blastarius,
their quasi must be a quasi of comparison and not of Identity, and that they
mean, that for a man to eat unleavened Bread in stead of the Body of Jesus
Christ, is a greater crime than to eat it simply with the Jews, because this is
an introducing of Judaism in the Christian Religion, and to make of that which
is accursed, the Mystery of our Lord's Body. Mr. Arnaud will without doubt
reply, that they dispute against the Latins, and so by consequence this quasi
ought to be taken in the sense of the Latins. Now the Greeks know very well
that the Latins do not receive the Bread of the Eucharist instead of the Body
of Jesus Christ, but as being really and in effect this Body it self. I answer
that Balsamon and Blastarius do not dispute in particular against the Latins,
whom they do not so much as mention in the Commentary they wrote on the
Seventieth Canon of the Apostles; but establish in general this Rule, that we
ought not to eat unleavened Bread in this Mystery. So that this subterfuge will
not serve Mr. Arnaud's turn, for their quasi must be taken in the sense of the
Greeks, and not in the sense of the Latins. But supposing there be still a
great deal of ambiguity in this Term; yet is it fully cleared by the expression
of John Citrius in a passage cited by Allatius; We offer, says he, leavened
Bread in the Sacrifice instead of Apud Allat. lib 3 ^e perp. C^ns cap 12.
the Body of our Lord. And this is the meaning of this (...), of the Greeks, as
the Body, that is to say, instead of the Body.

IT is in the same sense that Germain the Patriarch of Constantinople, says,
That as often as we eat this Bread, and drink of this Cup, we confess the Death
and Resurrection of Jesus Christ, and that in this Belief we eat the Bread, and
drink of the Cup, AS of the Flesh of the Son of God, confessing his Death and
Resurrection. We find the same Particle used by Nicetas Choniatus; Our Savior,
says he, is AS it were eaten after his Resurrection.

ST. Athanasius used this Particle, AS a great while before him, Our Savior,
says he, after his Passion and Resurrection sent his Apostles, to gather
Athan. disp. hab. in Council. Nic. V^l alius sub nomine Athanas^.
together the Nations, having spread his Table, which is the Holy Altar from
which he gives the heavenly and incorruptible Bread, to wit, his Body, and Wine
that makes glad the heart of man, (...), mingling, AS it were his Blood in the
Chalice. These quasi's have such a bad relish with them, that Father Nouet,
alleging this passage of St. Athanasius, has thought good to leave it out, and
it is the same antipathy to quasi's that obliged the Translators of Mons to
leave out one, which they found on another Subject in the Text of St. Paul in
his Third Chapter of the First Epistle to the Corinthians Verse 15. For whereas
the Greek reads, (...), ipse autem salvus erit, sic tamen quasi per ignem,
which they have translated, he shall be saved, but must pass through the fire. The
respect due to St. Paul could not save his quasi from the fury of these
Gentlemen. And thus do they deal with the Holy Scripture, when it speaks not
according to their mind.

I know not whether the quasi's of Balsamon, Blastarius, Simeon of
Thessalonica, Germane, Nicetas, and those of Athanasius are less distastful to
'em, than that of St. Paul: But howsoever these diminutive Terms do
sufficiently evidence the Greeks do not believe Transubstantiation, for th^se
that do believe it study rather to strengthen by clear and precise expressions
the name of the Body of Jesus Christ, which is given to the Eucharist, than to
weaken it by restrictions and diminutions.

BUT to go on with our Proofs, It is an opinion generally received amongst the
Greeks, That the wicked who participate of the Eucharist, do not receive the
Body of Jesus Christ. And that they do hold this opinion may be proved by the
Testimony of several good Authors.

PRATEOLUS expressly mentions this amongst their Errors. They affirm, says he,
that those who live in the practice of any known sin do not receive Prateol.
Elen. Heresic. lib. 7. cap. de Graecis.
the Body of Jesus Christ, although they draw near to the Table of our Lord, and
receive the consecrated Bread from the hands of the Priest.

POSSEVIN the Jesuit confirms the same thing, They err, says he, Possevin in
Mosc. p. 43.
in affirming those that are defiled with sin do not receive the Lord's Body
when they come to the Altar.

NICHOLAS Cabasilas does fully set forth the Belief of the Greek Church
touching this Point. The causes, says he, of our sanctification, or if
Gabisil. in explicat. Litur. cap. 22.
you will the dispositions which our Savior requires of us, are purity of
Soul, and love of God, an earnest desire to partake of the Sacrament, and such
a thirst after it as shall make us run to it. These are the things which
procure our Sanctification, and with which it is impossible but those that come
to the Communion must partake of Jesus Christ, and without which it is
impossible they should. And a little further endeavoring to prove that the
Souls separate from their Bodies, do receive the same as the Faithful which are
living in this World of the Sacrament. If the Soul, says he, has no need of
the Body whereby to receive Sanctification, but on the contrary the Body has
need of the Soul, what more of the Mystery do the Souls receive which are
clothed with their Bodies, than those which are stripped of them? Is it that they
behold the Priest and receive the Gifts from him? But the Souls that are out of
the Body have the Eternal Priest, who is to them more than all these things,
being the same likewise that administreth it to them alive, who receive it as
they ought to do. For all those to whom the Priest administers it, cannot be
said truly to receive it. The Priest administers it to all that come to him,
but our Savior gives it only to those that are worthy to partake of it: Whence
it clearly appears that it is our Savior alone, who by means of this Sacrament
consecrates and sanctifies the Souls as well of the living as the dead.

LEO Allatius has made a Catalogue of Simeon the Abbot of St. Mamant's Works,
who lived about the end of the Eleventh Century, and whom the Greeks call
Simeon the Divine. Now in one of his Treatises there is a Hymn expressly
relating to this Subject before us, to wit, that the wicked do not partake of
the Body of Jesus Christ when they receive the Sacrament. Allatius tells us
that he has seen this particular piece, (being a Manuscript) in a certain
Library in Italy, and that the Title of it is, That they which receive
unworthily the Sacraments do not receive the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ.
And it is unto this whereunto relates what Nilus says in his Sentences, Keep
your selves from all corruption, and partake every day of the Mystical Supper,
Apud Allat. de Simeon Nil. in Par. Bibl. Patr. Graeco-lat. Tom. 2.
for it is after this sort, that the Body of Jesus Christ becomes ours. And what
we find in the Verse of Psellus on the Canticle of Canticles, Jesus Christ
gives his Body to the Children of the Virgin, that is to say, to the Church,
for thus does he speak to them, (but it is Only to those that are worthy) whom
he calls his near Kindred, come my Friends eat and drink, and be merry my
brethren, you Comm. trium. Patr. in Cant. Cant.
that are my brethren in good Works, eat my Body and drink my Blood. And these
words of Joanicius Cartanus, the Saints are made partakers of holy things, not
they that are unworthy, and sinners who having not cleansed themselves from
Apud Allat. de perpet. Cons. lib. 3.
their sins remain still polluted, and elsewhere, when we shall draw near unto
God with Love, Fear, Reverence and Repentance, and be in charity with all men,
then shall we be meet partakers of the Body and Blood of Christ.

NOW if you would know of what importance the Argument is, which we draw from
this Doctrine of the Greeks, you need but read what Chifflet the Jesuit and
others have written touching a passage of the Confession attributed Chifflet.
praefat. ad Lector. in Confess. Alcu.
to Alcuinus which bears, That the virtue of this Sacrifice is so great, that
it is the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ only to the just sinners, tanta est
virtus hujus Sacrificii ut solis justis peccatoribus Corpus sit and Sanguis
Christi. If the Sacrifice, or Sacrament, says this Jesuit, be the Body and
Blood of Jesus Christ to some only, and not to all, what remains then but to
confess, that Alcuinus has been the Forerunner of Berengarius and Calvin: and
that he has denied the Real Presence of Jesus Christ in the Eucharist? He tells
us this passage has given him no small trouble, and endeavors to expound it,
saying, that Alcuinus speaks of the Body and Blood of Christ in respect of
their salutiferous effect which appertains only to the Just. But the Authors of
the Office of the B. Sacrament; having told us, that it seems we must read,
tanta In their Historical and Chronological Table under the title of B. Alcuin.
est virtus Sacrificii ut solis justis, non peccatoribus Sanguis sit and Corpus
Christi, they have added, that this expression has not been used since the
Heresy of Berengarius, and that the Schoolmen who have been more scrupulous as
to Terms, have (after the rise of the Heresies touching this Mystery) avoided
it. Which is as much as to say, in my opinion, that if we believe
Transubstantiation, as the Church of Rome has believed it since the time of
Berengarius's condemnation, we cannot be of this Belief, that the Eucharist is
only the Body of Jesus Christ to the faithful and not to the wicked. And in
effect if the Substance of Bread be really changed into that of Christ's Body,
it hence evidently follows that all those that communicate thereof (be they
either righteous or wicked) do receive this Body as it is, that is to say, in
its proper Substance, covered with the vail of Accidents. So that the Greeks
asserting the Eucharist not to be the Body of Christ to Sinners; (as I have
already showed) makes the Proof I draw hence concerning their not believing of
Transubstantiation to be solid and convincing.

YET may there be two Objections made against my Argument; the First, That what
the Greeks say concerning Christ's Body, is to be understood only in respect of
its salutiferous effect, as has been declared by the Jesuit Chifflet, and not
in respect of its Substance, which is to say, their meaning is, that the wicked
do indeed receive the real Substance of this Body and Blood, but receive
thereby no advantage: The Second, that the Bread reassumes its former
Substance, when a wicked man approaches to receive the Communion, and that that
of the Body of Jesus Christ withdraws it self. But first, I say to make people
of good sense contented with this explication, they must be showed these kind
of meanings in the Writings of the Greeks themselves, which without question
would be met withal, did they hold Transubstantiation. It cannot be denied but
this Doctrine they teach concerning the wicked does manifestly oppose that of
the Substantial conversion, and furnishes us with this conception, that if the
Eucharist be not the Body of Jesus Christ to the wicked, how can it then be
said, that the Substance of the Bread has been changed into that of this Body?
This scruple does naturally arise in the mind of those that believe
Transubstantiation, as appears by the example of the Jesuit Chifflet, by that
of the Authors of the Office of the blessed Sacrament, and by the pre-caution
of the Schoolmen and Lattin Writers who carefully shun these kind of
expressions. We need not doubt but if the Greeks believed the conversion of the
Substances they would do one of these two things, either they would renounce
this other Opinion, and deliver themselves after another manner, or at least
they would so expound and mollify it as to shelter thereby Transubstantiation.
But besides this, I say, if we examine these pretended illustrations in
particular one after another, we shall find they are vain and ill applied to
the Greeks. In effect the first cannot be of any use, because the Latins impute
to them the Doctrine here in question, as an Error. Now this would not be an
Error in respect of the Latins, if the Greeks understood it only in this sense,
that the wicked do not receive the salutiferous effect of the Body of Jesus
Christ in the Communion, although they received the Substance of it, for even this
is believed in the Church of Rome. Yet Possevin does not only affirm they err,
but he opposes moreover against their Error a contrary Proposition to be held,
and on which he grounds his censure. They err, says he, Possevin ubi Supra.
for the wicked do really receive the Body of Jesus Christ, although they
receive it unworthily, and to their condemnation.

AS to the other Objection, it is certainly groundless, for not to take notice
of the extravagancy of this Opinion, that the Substance of the Bread is changed
into that of Christ's Body, and again that of the Body into that of the Bread,
the Terms of Cabasilas are so clear that they admit not any evasion, for he
distinguishes two Persons that give the Communion, one the Priest, and the other
our Savior Christ, and he attributes to our Savior alone the glory of giving
his Body and Blood, it is likewise he himself, says he, that administers to
Gabasilas ubi Supra.
them amongst the living who truly receive. For all them to whom the Priest
gives it, do not truly receive it. He himself; that is to say, immediately and
without the Priests sharing in the honor thereof. The Priest has the honor to
distribute the Bread, but not of giving the Body and Blood. Now this does
wholly overthrow Transubstantiation, and refutes the second Objection which I
examine, for if the Bread were transubstantiated, there would be no need of
having recourse to our Savior himself, in order to his giving the Faithful
his Body and Blood, the Priest would give it them, for that which he holds in
his hands and communicates to the Faithful, would be this Body and Blood in
propriety of Substance, and Cabasilas would have no reason to oppose our
Savior to the Priest.

BUT before we leave this passage of Cabasilas, it is necessary to observe two
things, one of which respects the Proposition he would establish, and the other
the means he makes use of for this. The Proposition he would establish is, That
the dead receive the same as the living when they partake of the Eucharist. The
purity of the Soul, says he, the Love of God, Faith, an earnest desire to
partake of this Holy Mystery, a secret joy which accompanies this desire, a
fervant appetite and thirst which makes us run to it, these are the things
which procure our Sanctification, with which qualifications it is not possible
but those that approach the Communion do partake of Jesus Christ, and without
which it is impossible Cap. 42.
they should. Now all these things depend only on the Soul, and are not
corporeal. There is nothing then which hinders the Souls of the dead from
having these things as well as the living. If then these Souls are in the state
and disposition requisite for the receiving of the Mystery, if he to whom it
belongs to bestow Sanctification and Consecration is always willing to
sanctify, and ever desires to communicate himself in all places, what can then
hinder this participation? And a little further, It is evident, says he, by
the things I now mentioned, that whatsoever belongs to this Mystery is common
as well to the dead as living, and a little lower, the participation of the
Holy Gifts is a thing which necessarily attends Cap. 43.
the Souls after death. If their joy and repose sprang from any other
Principle; it might be said that even this would be the reward of that purity
wherein they are, and this Table would be no longer needful to them. But it is
certain that whatsoever makes up their delights and felicity, whether you call
it Paradise, or Abraham' s bosom, or those happy seats free from sorrow and
cares, or that you call it the Kingdom of Heaven it self, all this I say is no
more than this Bread and Wine. For these things are our Mediator, who is
entered as our Forerunner into the Holy Places, who alone conducts us to the
Father, who is the only Sun of our Souls, which at this time appears and
communicates himself to all them that are in the Bands of the Flesh in the
manner he himself pleases, but he shall then visibly manifest himself without a
Vail, when we shall see him as he is, and shall gather together the Eagles
about the dead Body. He afterward proves that the Souls separate from the
Bodies, are far more fit to partake of the Mysteries, than when clothed with
their Flesh, that whatsoever rest or recompense they enjoy, is nothing else but
this Bread and this Cup, of which the dead have as much right to participate as
the living, and for this reason, our Savior calls the Saints felicity a
Supper, to show us thereby, that it is nothing else but this Table. And this
already gives us great cause to suspect that Cabasilas did not believe that
which we eat in the Sacrament to be the proper Substance of the Body and Blood
of Christ; for we must not imagine he thought the Souls of the dead did really
partake thereof. They do indeed participate of the Body and Blood of Christ,
but after a spiritual manner, which is accomplished without our Savior's
Substance entering into them. Yet Cabasilas says the dead receive the Holy
Gifts, that they receive the Mystery, and that which makes up their felicity,
is this Bread and Cup, that they partake of it, and that whatsoever appertains
to this Mystery is common to them with the Living. All which is well enough
understood provided it be supposed we have no other Communion with our Savior
Christ in the Eucharist than what is Spiritual, for the Souls separate from the
Body have this as well as we, and partake of our Bread and Cup, not in respect
of their Substance and Matter, but in respect of the Mystery they contain and
Grace they communicate, and thus it is certain that whatsoever belongs to this
Mystery is common to them with the living. But if we supposed the Substantial
Conversion, how could it be said, They partake of the Holy Gifts, that they
receive what we receive, that we have nothing more in the Mystery than they,
and that whatsoever appertains to the Mystery is common to them with us? For in
fine we should really receive the proper Substance of the Body and Blood of
Christ which they do not.

BUT to manifest more clearly this Doctrine of Cabasilas and put it out of
doubt, we should consider the course he takes for the strengthening of his
Proposition. For it will appear that this participation of the Body and Blood
of Christ, which he makes common both to the dead and living, respects not only
the thing of which we partake, but likewise the manner of partaking of it; and
in a word, he means we communicate thereof no otherwise than Spiritually.
First, then he always speaks of the Sanctification which is made by way of
participation and reception of the Body of Jesus Christ, as of one and the same
thing, without the least difference, which is justified by the bare reading of
his whole Discourse. Now this shows us, he means not that we receive in the
Sacrament the proper Substance of the Body of our Lord, for if it were so, the
wicked would receive it without receiving Sanctification, as the Church of Rome
it self does acknowledge, and the reception of this Substance, and the
Sanctification, could not be considered but as two distinct things. Yet
Cabasilas confounds them, and thereupon immediately considers this difficulty;
how the dead which neither eat nor drink can be sanctified by this
participation. Are they, says he, in a worse condition in this respect than
the living? No sure, says he, for our Savior communicates himself to them in
Cap. 42.
such a manner as is best known to himself. He afterward inquires into the
causes of the sanctification of the living, and their participation of Jesus
Christ, and says, it is not to have a Body, nor to come with feet to the Holy
Table, nor to receive the Communion with our hand and mouth, nor to eat or
drink, but that it is the purity of the Soul, Faith, Love of God, and other
motives of Piety, these are the things, says he, which make us necessarily
partakers of Jesus Christ, and without which it is not possible to be so.
Whence he concludes that the Souls separate from the Body are capable of this
participation, and that in effect they have it seeing they have all these good
affections. Now it hence plainly appears that he grants the living but one kind
of participation of Jesus Christ which is Spiritual; and which they have in
common with the dead, and which immediately respects the Soul. For if they be
only the good dispositions of the Soul which make us partakers of Jesus Christ,
and that without them it is not possible for us to be so, and that the dead
have the same advantage we have, it cannot then be said, we receive the proper
Substance of the Body, seeing on one hand according to the Hypothesis of the
Church of Rome, the want of these dispositions hinders not men from receiving
it, and on the other that the dead with all these their qualifications cannot
receive it.

THIS appears by the Sequel of his reasoning, for what he says concerning the
dead, the same he says concerning the living which dwell in Deserts, and that
cannot personally come to the Lord's Table. Jesus Christ, Ibid.
says he, sanctifies them invisibly with this Sanctification. How can we know
this? I answer, because they have the life in themselves, and they would not
have it, were they not partakers of this Mystery. For our Savior himself has
said, unless you eat the Flesh of the Son of man, and drink his Blood, you have
no life in you. And for a further confirmation of this, he has caused to be
brought to several of these Saints, the Gifts, by the Ministry of Angels. It is
evident, he attributes to these Inhabitants of Deserts, the same participation
of Jesus Christ, the same manducation of his Flesh and Blood which we receive
in the Sacrament without the least difference, whence it follows, that our
Communion with Jesus Christ by means of the Sacrament is purely Spiritual, and
that our eating of his Flesh is Spiritual likewise, there being no need of
adding the reception of his Substance into our Stomachs.

BUT yet this does more plainly appear by what follows. The Gift, says he, is
indeed communicated to the living by means of the Body, but it first passes to
the Substance of the Soul, and afterward communicates it self to the Body, by
the Ministry of the Soul. Which St. Paul meant when he said, that he that is
joined to the Lord, is one and the same Spirit with him, because this Union and
Conjunction is made first of all in the Soul. This being the Seat of this
Sanctification which we obtain by the exercise of our virtues. This is likewise
the Seat of Sin. It Is here wherein is the Band of Servitude, by which the
Sacrament links us to God. The Body has nothing but what it derives from the
Soul, and as its pollutions proceed from the evil thoughts of the heart, from
the heart likewise comes its Sanctification; as well that of the Virtues, as
that of the Mysteries. If then the Soul has no need of the Body, to receive
Sanctification, but the Body on the contrary of the Soul, why then must the
Souls which are yet clothed with their Bodies be greater partakers of the
Mystery, than those stripped of them? We must be strangely prepossessed with
prejudice, if we do not acknowledge that this Author only establishes the
sanctifying and spiritual Communion, and not that of the proper Substance of
the Body and Blood of our Savior, for if we suppose the Bread to be the Body
of Jesus Christ in Sanctification and Virtue, it is easy to comprehend what he
means, but if we suppose Transubstantiation, how shall we then understand what
he says, viz. that the Gift is indeed received by the Body, but it immediately
passes to the Soul and afterward communicates it self from the Soul to the
Body? Does not the Substance of the Body of Jesus Christ descend immediately
from the Mouth into the Stomach, and does it not remain there till the change
of the Species? How then shall we understand him when he says, that our
Communion with Jesus Christ is first established in the Soul? For it is certain,
that to judge of it, in the sense of Transubstantiation, it would be
established on the contrary first of all in the Body, which would be the first
Subject that would receive the Substance of the Flesh and Blood of our Lord.
How shall we understand the Conclusion he draws from all this Discourse, to
wit, that the Souls of the dead are no less partakers of this Mystery than
those of the living, for the living do communicate after two manners,
Spiritually and Substantially, whereas the dead only in one? How in fine, shall
we understand what he means in saying that the Body has no other Sanctification
by means of the Mystery, than that which comes to it from the Soul? Is it no
wise sanctified by touching the proper Substance of the Son of God.

CABASILAS stay's not here, for concluding by way of Interrogation, that the
Souls clothed with their Bodies do not more partake of the Mystery than those
which are stripped of them, he continues to demand what they have more. Is it,
says he, that they see the Priest, and receive from him Cap. 43.
the Gifts? But they that are out of the Body have the great Eternal High
Priest, who is to them all these things; It being he indeed that administers to
them that truly receive. Was there ever any man that betrayed such a want of
memory as this man does, should it be supposed he believed Transubstantiation?
Could he not remember that the living have not only this advantage above the
dead to behold the Priest, and receive from him the Gifts, but likewise to
receive the proper Substance of their Savior? Could not he call to mind, that
the Spiritual Communion, remaining common both to the one and the others, the
Substantial was particularly to the living? Moreover, what does he mean in
saying, that as it is Jesus Christ that administers it to the dead, so it is he
likewise that gives it to the living that effectually receive it? Is it that
the Priest who gives the proper Substance of Jesus Christ does not truly and
effectually administer it? Is it that this Substance which is called with so
great an Emphasis, the Truth and Reality, and which Mr. Arnaud always
understands, when he finds these kind of expressions, the real Body, and Blood
of Jesus Christ? Is it, I say, that this is not a Truth?

MR. Arnaud can without doubt remove all these difficulties when he pleases,
and it is likely he will find a way to reconcile them with the belief of
Transubstantiation, seeing he himself has heretofore written, that God admits
Of frequent Com. part. 3. P. 725.
us to the participation of the same Food which the Elect feed on to all
Eternity, there being no other difference betwixt them and us, but only that
here he takes from us the sensible taste and sight of it, reserving both one
and the other of these for us when we come to Heaven. He will tell us there is
no body doubts, but that he is of the number of Transubstantiators, seeing he
has with so much honor vanquished the Minister Claude, and yet that what he
has maintained is not contradictory to the discourse of Cabasilas. I do verily
believe his single Proposition has almost as much force as whatsoever I have
mentioned from Cabasilas, for if there be no other difference between the
participation of the Faithful on Earth, and that of the Elect in Heaven, than
that of the sight and sensible taste, which we have not here, nor shall have
but in Heaven, I do not see any reason wherefore Mr. Arnaud should so bestir
himself to show us that what we take by the Mouths of our Bodies, and which
enters into our Stomachs, is the proper Substance of the Body and Blood of
Christ, seeing it is certain the Elect in Heaven do not receive Jesus Christ in
such a manner. But it being no ways reasonable that what Mr Arnaud has said at
one time contradictorily to what he has said at another, should serve me as a
Rule for the understanding of Authors, all that I can do in his favor is this,
freely to offer him to lay aside the Proof taken from Cabasilas, when he shall
have made his Proposition to be approved of in the Court of Rome.

CHAP. VII.
That the Greeks adore not the Sacrament with an Adoration of Latria, as the
Latins do, and consequently believe not Transubstantiation. The Thirteenth
Proof. Mr. Arnaud's Eleventh Illusion.

WE may I think already begin to doubt, whether the Greeks have in effect the
same Sentiments with the Latins touching Transubstantiation, and whether the
assurances Mr. Arnaud has given us thereof be well grounded. He appears very
brisk and confident in asserting this Point, and behaves himself as a Person
that has already conquered, but it is more than probable that these flourishes
are the effects of that kind of Rhetoric which teaches men to put forth their
voices in the weakest part of their cause, to the end they may obtain that by
noise, which they could not by reason. But howsoever, it may now be demanded
what will become of all those Historical Collections, Arguments, Attestations,
Consequences, Keys, Systems, those confident Defies, and Challenges to produce
any thing which had the least appearance of Truth or Reason against his Proofs,
and in a word of all this great torrent of Eloquence and mundane Philosophy. --
Aurae
Omnia discerpunt and nubibus irrita donant.


THE Proofs I have already produced do sufficiently confirm this, but that
which I shall farther offer will yet more evidence it, and at the same time
discover another of Mr. Arnaud's Illusions. My Proof shall be taken from the
Greeks not adoring the Eucharist with that Sovereign Adoration the Latins do.
Now if this be made apparent, what likelihood is there, that a Church which
otherwise is not at all scrupulous in matters of Ceremony, and which has such a
great devotion for Pictures, for the Writings of the Evangelists consecrated
Bread which they call (...), and even the Bread of the Eucharist before it is
consecrated, should believe the Substance of the Symbols to be really changed
into the Substance of the Body and Blood of Christ, and yet not render it that
Sovereign Honor which belongs to it. It concerns us then to know what the
Custom of the Greeks is touching this Adoration, and so much the more, because
this Question being one of the chief of our Dispute, it is therefore absolutely
necessary to be thoroughly informed in it.

BUT before we proceed any farther, we must distinguish (according to the sense
of the Greeks and Latins) two sorts of Adoration, the one inferior and
subalternate which is rendered to Subjects, in which we do not acknowledge an
infinite Majesty, and the other a Sovereign and Highest Worship, called that of
Latria, which is only due to God.

WE must likewise distinguish according to the sense of the same Greeks and
Latins, an Adoration called relative, which terminates not it self in any one
Subject, but passes (as it were) from one Subject to another, as through a
Channel; and an absolute Adoration, which terminates it self in that Subject
which is worshipped, without a reference to any thing else.

IN fine there ought to be a distinction made betwixt an internal Adoration
which consists in the motions of the Soul toward the Subject adored, and the
external Adoration which consists in outward expressions.

WHICH Distinctions being premised, we are now to enquire whether the Greeks
adore the Eucharist with a Sovereign Adoration, and that of Latria, not
relatively, (as we speak) but absolutely, and in the same manner we ought to
worship the proper Substance and Person of Jesus Christ. And because the
internal affections of the Soul, cannot be immediately known, it therefore
concerns us to enquire whether the Greeks do outwardly express any Sign of such
an Adoration, either by their words or actions. Mr. Arnaud holds the
affirmative and I the negative, and this being here only a question of Fact,
it is likewise by Proofs of fact wherewith it must be decided.

FOR this effect I shall first here offer the testimony of a Cannon of Cracovia
called Sacranus, who in reckoning up the Errors of the Moscovits, (whom we all
know do follow the Greek Religion) does expressly mention this. Before the Cup
is prepared, says he, they light Torches and expose to the Religio. Ruthenor.
art. 20.
Peoples sight with exceeding great devotion the Bread, which is to be
consecrated, with the Wine and hot Water, which they pour into the Chalice.
They carry these about, and the People bow down before them with the greatest
testimonies of respect and veneration. But afterward when the Bread is placed
on the Altar and consecrated, there is no veneration showed it, nor do they
make any elevation of it.

JOHN de Lasko Archbishop of Gnesne, and Ambassador from Poland Raynald ad
ann. 1514.
to Rome in the beginning of the last Century, makes the same relation of the
Errors of the Russians, as Sarcanus had done before him. It is likely by what
Mr Arnaud tells us, that he has only copied out what Sacranus wrote and
appropriated it to himself, for we find their expressions to be both the same.
But be it as it will, he has not forgotten this Article I now mentioned.

PETER Scarga a Jesuit of Vilna in Lituania has written a Book against the
Greeks and Russians, which he entitled, de uno pastore, in which, Par. 3. cap.
2. art. 8.
making a Catalogue of their Errors, he particularly mentions this. At Mass
they worship on their knees the Bread before it is consecrated, but after its
Consecration they give no honor to the most Holy Body of Jesus Christ.

SO that we have here already three Witnesses whose Testimonies are not to be
rejected, seeing they are of far greater weight than the forced consequences of
Mr. Arnaud, for they lived in those Parts, and were eyewitnesses, of what they
tell us, and moreover considerable Persons in the Romish Church, the first of
them being a Cannon, the other an Archbishop, and the third a Jesuit, who do all
three of them positively affirm the Greeks do not adore the Eucharist after
Consecration. Behold here a fourth of the same Order, which is Anthony Caucus a
Venetian, and Archbishop of Corfou. He had an order from Pope Gregory XIII. to
inform himself exactly of the belief of the Greeks, and to make him a Relation
thereof which he did. Allatius speaks of this Relation as if it were published.
I confess I never saw it in print, but I have seen a Manuscript of it in the
King's Library, wherein I found these words in the thirteenth Article of their
Errors. They yield no Reverence, Honor, Veneration, nor Worship to the most
Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist consecrated with leavened Bread according to
their Custom, they carry it to the sick without Lights and Torches. They keep
it in their Churches in a bag hanging against a wall in a little wooden box,
and yet burn Tapers before the Images of all the Saints. He informs us
elsewhere that the Greek Priests when they carry the Sacrament to the Sick, are
wont to wrap it up in a linen cloth, or Handkercher, and so put it into their
bosoms without any other Ceremony. But when he sets himself to the opposing of
this Error, he thus speaks. There Is no People (that I know of) who profess the
Christian Religion that show less respect and veneration to the Holy Sacrament,
than the Greek Nation. They adore and reverence their leavened Bread before
it is consecrated, even to the very idolizing of it, but after scarcely rise up
to respect it. Their Priest carry the Eucharist in their bosoms to the sick,
without any Lights, and that which is most absurd is, they keep it in their
Churches in a little wooden box, tied up in a bag and hanged against a wall
without any Lights before it, as if 'twere a profane thing to the scandalizing
of all pious People. I believe they have this Custom from the Heretical
Sacramentaries, who deny the virtue of this most Holy Sacrament. They are
moreover so super stitious and covetous, that when deceased Persons have
bequeathed them any Legacy, they light Candles before the Images of all the
Saints, drawing near to them with the greatest testimonies of reverence when
they enter the Churches, but they turn their backs to the Holy Sacrament of the
Eucharist. I wondered to see them do thus, and being desirous to inform my self
of the reason of this irreverence, showing them how grievously they erred, in
that they testified a greater respect to the Saints who are the servants and
friends of our Savior than to himself, who is their Lord and Master. These
Papa's gave me no other answer but that there was no command which enjoined
this respect and adoration. This answer is Heretical as I shall hereafter
manifest, for John Oecolampadus (that arch Heretic of our time the ringleader
of the Sacrament aries, asserted that our Savior was not contained in the
Sacrament of the Eucharist) has likewise written and publicly taught that we
ought in no wise to adore the Eucharist with an Adoration of Latria, terming
all them Idolaters that did so. Wherefore let Catholics judge whether this
does not well agree with the Opinion of the Greeks.

IT will be thought perhaps, this Author speaks only of some particular Persons
and not of the Greek Church in general, but such Persons may be soon satisfied
when they read what follows toward the end of his Relation, Behold most Holy
Father, says he, all the Heresies of the Modern Greeks which I have laid open
and confuted as well as I could. I say the Heresies of the Greeks, not only of
the Inhabitants of Corfou, but of all the Eastern Greeks, to the end the others
may not magnify themselves, for they have all the same belief, the same will,
and obstinacy, to maintain every where the same things, And here I think is
another good Witness, being likewise an Archbishop, and a Person that wanted
neither Wit nor Learning, who dwelt among the Greeks. He affirms precisely as
well as the rest, that the Greeks do not adore the Sacrament. He proceeds
farther and lays this to their charge as a crime, and aggravates it by
comparing it with the respect they show the Images; he relates their Reasons,
there being no command enjoining this Adoration. He condemns this Opinion as
Heretical, and likens it unto that of the chief of Heretics; he farther tells
us, that this is not only the opinion of some particular Persons, but of all
the Eastern Greeks, and in short he remarks the irreverences which are directly
opposite to all kinds of Adoration. What can be more expressive, and what can
Mr. Arnaud reply to this? Will he call again here to his assistance Allatius
who disputes against Caucus, and would have it believed that this Archbishop
has falsely charged the Greeks. But besides that it cannot be showed by what
interest Caucus should be moved to form such an accusation contrary to the
respect he owed the Pope, and that his testimony is found conformable to that
of several others, it is certain that Allatius himself is of all men the most
passionate and least sincere, frequently denying and affirming things according
to his own Capricio, or rather Interest, and that which likewise is most
considerable, is, that Allatius who meddles with other Articles dared not touch
in particular on this, so that his silence is a confirmation of what I say.

THE Jesuit that wrote the Relation touching St. Erinis, affirms almost
Relation of the I sle of St. Frinis cap. 12. page 142.
the same thing as Caucus. A great abuse, says he, has crept in amongst the
Greeks. For when the Priest comes from the lesser Altar to the Offertory, to
pass on to the great one, all the People there present adore the Bread which is
not yet consecrated, and show a greater devotion during this action, than in or
after the time of Consecration; for in the time of the Consecration they put
out the Torches which they lighted for the Offertory. And in another place, We
see Cap. 20.
by what has been said in the foregoing Chapters how greatly the Greeks are to
blame for the little respect they yield to this adorable Sacrament, seeing that
having consecrated on Holy Thursday a great quantity of Particles, they keep
them all the year in a little wooden box enclosed in a bag, and hanged on a
nail over the Altar, or behind an Image, without a light or any other mark of
veneration. When they enter into the Church to say their Prayers, you may see
'em make a profound bow, before the Images of our Lord, or Virgin Mary, or some
other Saint, but you will never see them prostrate themselves before this
adorable Sacrament. We have often reprehended them for this fault, and some
have promised to amend it, others are really sensible of the unseemliness of
this their carriage; but being loath to appear singular in their Devotions,
they choose rather to follow the Customs of an ignorant People than to render
themselves up to reason. So great force has ill examples over weak minds. Some
time since the Lady Margareta D'argenta, a Person both devout and eloquent,
told me, that being in company with some Greeks, she sharply rebuked them upon
this occasion; you Greeks really show your selves, said she, in matters of
Religion, to be void of sense, not knowing to whom you owe your respects, nor
to whom to direct your Prayers. On one hand you acknowledge that Jesus Christ
who is God and Man, our Creator and Redeemer, is really in the Sacrament, with
all the Treasures of his Graces, and on the other, we can see you show him not
any reverence answerable to the respect of his Majesty. I have been several
times in your Churches, and having sought the only object of my affection, and
the God of my heart, I found, you keep him close shut in a wooden box, hanging
up in a little bag on a nail covered with dust and cobwebs. A Savior in a
pitiful box, an Infinite Majesty in the dust, an Almighty God in a bag, hanged
on a nail! He is not thus treated amongst us, you may see him receive an other
kind of usage, showing him far greater respect than this. Our Priests keep him
in a silver Pyx, he rests in a Tabernacle gilded without, and within covered
with Satin, and to show that we believe he is the Light which light'neth our
Understandings, and enflameth our Affections, we have Lamps always burning day
and night before him. When we come into our Churches we set not our selves upon
considering the several Pictures and other Ornaments, for our affections do
immediately lead us to the place where we believe our Treasure is. Whereas you
keep your selves standing like the Pharisees, and we fall on our knees with the
Publican.

THAT which the Jesuit makes this woman speak concerning the Greeks believing
the real Presence, is forged by him without any grounds in the sense wherein he
takes it, that is to say, as a Substantial Presence, for it is certain the
Greeks do not thus understand it. But whatsoever he otherwise tells us is
matter of fact which he has seen himself, and concerning the truth of which we
have no reason to doubt. Now these Facts are such, that we cannot but judge
them inconsistent with the belief of adoring the Sacrament of the Eucharist
with such a Supreme Adoration as is due to the Son of God alone.

THE Author that wrote Mr. De la Haye's Voyages the French Ambassador, Mr.
Haye's Voyages, part. 49.
observes the same thing as the others concerning the linen bag, and that they
hang it on a nail behind the Altar, wherein they put the consecrated Particles.
He says he thus saw it at Selivree, and several other places. But because this
remark might offend his Readers, he has therefore attributed the cause thereof
to the great poverty of the Greeks; but this is but a false color, for the
Greeks are not so poor, but that they may keep the Eucharist in a more decent
manner, did they believe it to be the proper Substance of Jesus Christ. The
true reason of this Custom, is, that they do not believe what the Latins do,
(or as speaks Caucus) they do not believe there is any command which enjoins
them to reverence the Sacrament according to the made of the Latins.

MR. Thevenot an exact and inquisitive Traveller, gives us an account of
Thevenot's Voyages, part. 2 chapter 77.
the manner, which the Patriarch of Alexandria uses in celebrating the
Sacrament; but in all his Relation there is not a word of Adoration, and he is
even forced to say, that they do in truth behave themselves with less respect
at the Communion than the Latins.

MR. de Montconis describes likewise very exactly the Divine Service,
Montconis's Voyages, p. 228. etc.
which he saw performed by a Greek Archbishop at Mount Sinai; and observes not
any thing which shows they adored the Sacrament.

MR. Arnaud who has seen the use which might be made of the express Testimonies
by which it appears the Greeks adore not the Sacrament, and several other
Proofs which might be added, and which conclude the same thing, has betook
himself to his usual Artifices. First of all he has avoided the handling of the
question touching the Adoration, as a means whereby to clear up that of
Transubstantiation, or the real Presence. He on the contrary handles it only as
a necessary consequence of it, I would say, that instead of arguing thus, the
Greeks give to the Sacrament the Supreme Honor which is due to Jesus Christ;
they believe therefore that the Sacrament is Jesus Christ in propriety of
Substance, he reasons on the contrary after this manner, the Greeks believe
Transubstantiation and the real Presence, therefore they adore the Sacrament.
Now I say there is a great deal of deceit in this method, for although
Transubstantiation may be used, when it is agreed it is believed, as a means
whereby to conclude, that those who believe it adore it, yet who sees not, that
in this debate wherein I deny both one and the other of these to Mr Arnaud, it
had been a more just and natural course to begin with the Adoration as a means
whereby to conclude Transubstantiation? For Adoration is a thing which
discovers it self by outward acts, a public Rite wherein a whole Church
agrees, and consequently is more sensible and apparent, and more easily known
than an Article of Faith, concerning which we must consult the Writings of the
Learned, judge of Persons, and weigh their expressions. It is certainly a great
deal easier for us to know whether the Greeks give the same honor to the
Sacrament which the Church of Rome does, or one equivalent thereunto, than to
know what their belief is touching the Substantial Conversion. We may be
imposed on by this last, for there may be forged attestations produced, and
hunger starved Greeks brought in as witnesses, whom a small pension will bias
either way; or the Decrees of Latinis'd Synods offered us for those of the
Greeks. A Consul zealous for his Religion may easily give or admit a change.
The testimony of a false Greek may be alleged, as of that of a true one, and
moreover it is no hard matter to dazzle peoples eyes by a long train of
Narrations and Arguments. But it is not so easy a matter to make use of all
these false colors in the point of the Adoration. In a word, it plainly
appears that Mr. Arnaud's design was to send back this Article to his Treatise
of Consequences, to hinder us from treating of it according to our method of
Proofs.

THE second thing he does, seems to correct the first; for he pretends to
establish this Adoration by particular Proofs, which he calls gross Proofs, to
distinguish them from that other more fine and slender Proof, which he draws
from the real Presence. He immediately produces a passage of Cabasilas in Lib.
10. cap. 9.
these Terms, The faithful, desirous to show their Faith, in receiving the
Communion do adore, bless, and praise Jesus Christ as God, who is manifested in
the Gifts. I answer, he ought faithfully to translate this passage. Cabasilas
speaks of the Gifts, and says, That the Faithful adore, bless, and praise
Jesus Christ, who is understood in them, (...). Now a man must be very Cap. 37.
little conversant amongst Greek Authors not to know, that when the question is
concerning the Symbols, (...), or the (...), signifies the Spiritual and
Mystical Object, represented by the outward Sign. Jesus Christ then being
represented by the Gifts, is adored according to Cabasilas, and not the Gifts
themselves. Which is what I observed in my Answer to the Perpetuity. Mr. Arnaud
would have me before I make use of this passage to consider all that he has
taken out of this Author to show he believed the real Presence. For, says he,
Cabasilas asserts in his Book that our Savior Christ is really present in the
Sacrament, and shows us in this passage we ought to adore him Lib. 3. cap. 8.
p. 317.
in the Gifts. Therefore does he teach the. Adoration of the Eucharist. I
answer, that Cabasilas neither teaches Transubstantiation nor the real
Presence, as I shall make appear in its place, and had the Author of the
Perpetuity alleged the passages cited by Mr. Arnaud, we should not have been
wanting to examine them, but the question then in hand only concerning the
Adoration. I could not without great injustice tire the Reader with a long
Dispute about the real Presence, before I could allege one formal passage
touching the Subject I handled.

MR. Arnaud tells us afterward, that Cabasilas blames those that adore before
Lib. 10. cap. 9.
the Consecration the Gifts which are carried about, and that speak to them as
to our Savior himself, and approves they should give the same respect to the
Eucharist after its Consecration. I answer, that the Greeks prostrate
themselves before the Book of the Gospels and speak to it, as to our Savior
himself, and yet it cannot hence be concluded, they adore the Book it self with
an absolute Adoration, as if the Book were in effect our Savior himself.
Cabasilas likes they should do the same thing in respect of the consecrated
Gifts, but does not approve they should do it before their Consecration, although
he already acknowledges them to be Types and Figures, because he would have a
difference made, they being not as yet the Body and Blood of Christ. But this
is not to say they ought to give to the Gifts, either before or after their
Consecration, an honor which terminates it self in them alone.

AS to what he alleges out of Simeon de Thessalonica, we have no other Ibid.
assurance of the truth of these passages than the bare word of Allatius, that
is to say, of a passionate man, ready to assert and maintain any thing right or
wrong, for the interest of the Court of Rome. We shall have occasion to speak
more of him hereafter, but in the mean time shall only say, that the words of
Simeon be they what they will, do not conclude, we ought to yield the Gifts an
absolute honor, which terminates it self in that Substance which the Priest
carries on his head when he enters into the Church.

THE passage the Author of the Perpetuity quoted, as of Gabriel de Philadelphia
Second part, page 257.
was more specious, but because Cardinal Perron (from whom 'twas borrowed) does
not recite the Greek Text, and Arcudius who relates some clauses thereof,
describes him as a Person void of all kinds of Learning, either in Divinity,
Philosophy, or Grammar, and that moreover the same Arcudius assures us, the
Greeks do give very little honor if any at all to the Sacrament after its
Consecration, I therefore said I would suspend my Judgment till I could
ascertain my self by reading the Book it self.

MR. Arnaud who is ever upon his Criticisms, and willingly passes over the
Answer to the 2. Treat. of Perp 2. part. cap. 8.
matter, that he might fasten on the Person, imagines he has found here a lucky
occasion to triumph over me. But I am sorry to find my self obliged to disturb
his Enjoyments, which I would not do, could I well avoid it. I affirm then
first, I had reason to suspend my Judgment, because that to judge aright of the
sense of an Author, it is not sufficient that we see a passage translated into
French by Cardinal Perron. For besides that, his Translations are not always
very exact, as several have observed no more than those of the Office of the
Blessed Sacrament (according to their Relations that have examined them,) it is
probable this passage of Gabriel has been already made to his hand, by Persons
unknown to us, and for whose Fidelity he was not willing to answer. In effect
forasmuch as he has not inserted the Greek in the Margent, as he has done in
the most part of his other Quotations, may justly give us a shrewd suspicion of
this. Moreover we meet therein with the Term of Transubstantiation which Mr.
Arnaud himself confesses is not an usual expression with the Greeks. There is
likewise mention therein of the Accidents of Bread which remain, which is not
the usual Style of the Greeks. I have then wronged no body when I suspended my
Judgment, but have rather done what I and every man else ought to do in the
like occasion. I was not obliged to ask Mr. Arnaud's leave for this, although he
pretends I was; for he is not the Sovereign Arbitratour of Affairs which are
treated of in the Empire of Reason, there being several things which pass
there, in which he takes no part.

BUT, says he, Arcudius Mr. Claude' s great Author relates several passages
Ibid.
out of Gabriel which are as expressive as that now in question. I answer, that
what Arcudius relates obliges me yet more to suspend my Judgment, because that
in it there are several Contradictions and manifest Absurdities, as I showed in
my Answer to Father Nouet, which the Reader may consult, if he desires
information touching this particular.

I confess, adds Mr. Arnaud, that having not the least reason to doubt of the
Ibid.
Sentiment of this Author touching the passages produced by Arcudius, I have
therefore avoided giving my self the trouble to inquire after his Book. And I
for my part profess I am not so easily satisfied, for I cannot thus take things
upon trust. What shall we say, every one has his way, Mr. Arnaud's humor is
immediately to catch hold of any thing, but mine is not so hasty, and indeed I
never had cause to repent of my slowness in this particular, reckoning it to be
the best way to prevent mistakes. Not that I would have him put himself to the
trouble of seeking after this Book of Gabriel's, as he has proffered me to do,
for our Dispute may be as well carried on without this Archbishop, whofe Book,
(if we will believe Arcudius) is a very extravagant one, and the Civilities of
such a Person as Mr. Arnaud is, may be expected in a weightier occasion.

BUT as we must not suffer our selves to be prevailed on by his kindness, so
neither must we suffer our selves to be run down by his Injuries. For he
charges me with disingenuously suppressing Arcudius his words, which would have
discovered the true sense of what I cited. He chages me with likewise
impertinently designing to invalidate the Testimony of Gabriel by that of
Arcudius. I must then justify my self concerning these two particulars. The
first of which will be soon dispatched by considering, that having in the first
Edition of my Books only set down in the Margent the particular places of those
Authors where are to be found the passages I made use of, I have in the last
Edition inserted these passages themselves in full length, according as they
are in the Original. Now that very place of Arcudius in question, may be seen
there set down at large, together, with the Clause which Mr. Arnaud says I
have suppressed. Let but any man take the pains to read the 296 page, and he
shall find these very words therein, Nam etiam postea in elevatione
Sacratissimae Hostiae quamtumvis eam non aspiciant, quamprimum tamen Sacerdos
ea verba protulerit, (...), sancta sanctis, statim procumbunt and cultu Latriae
adorant, which are the same words Mr. Arnaud makes his efforts upon. This is
then a groundless Accusation, for he cannot allege he knew not of this
Edition, seeing he has mentioned it himself in the Eighth Chapter of his
Seventh Book, upon occasion of the Council at Nice.

BUT, it will be demanded, perhaps why I did not insert into the Body of my
Discourse these words of Arcudius which do so plainly manifest his meaning. I
answer, that if I had argued on the sense of Arcudius, I should have been to
blame in not alleging whatsoever might give light to this sense. For when we
would draw a true consequence, we ought to establish the Principle in a clear
and perfect manner, to take away all occasion of mistakes. But Mr. Arnaud needs
not be told what kind of Person this Arcudius is, being a Greek latiniz'd
Priest, brought up at Rome in the Seminary of the Greeks, extremely passionate
for the Interests of the Roman Church, having wrote a Book particularly against
the Protestants, to persuade us that the Greeks are at agreement with the
Latins, as to what concerns the Sacraments in all essential Points. I cannot
then otherwise allege Arcudius than to confront him with himself concerning
some Truths and Matters of Fact, which do now and then escape him, after the
same manner as I would quote Cardinal Perron, and Bellarmin, and Mr. Arnaud
himself, not as witnesses that believe what I would conclude, but as Persons
who affirm things, from whence I conclude what they themselves do not believe.
And thus does Mr. Arnaud quote Mestrezat and Daille, and sundry others of our
Authors. Now it is evident that when the Testimony of an Adversary is alleged
in this respect, a man is not obliged to set down what has been his Sentiment
at the bottom, nor to relate all the words which may make it known, for this
piece of impertinence would be good for nothing, but to tire the Reader's
patience and trifle away the time. It is sufficient if what is alleged from
them be true. Mr. Arnaud therefore has very unjustly accused me, seeing I
published this illustration in my Answer to Father Nouel, which although well
known to him; yet has it not stopped him in his carreer, concealing my
Justification, neither more nor less than if I had said nothing.

IT only then remains to know whether what I alleged from Arcudius be
sufficient to conclude, that the Greeks adore not the Eucharist,
notwithstanding whatsoever the same Arcudius has elsewhere asserted. Which is
what I take upon me to maintain. He says, that when the Priest consecrates the
Gifts, Arcud. lib. 3. cap. 21.
in saying, this is my Body, this is my Blood, he then shows them little or no
respect at all, he bows not his head, neither does he adore them, nor prostrate
himself before them, nor lights Candles, nor makes any Reverence. Mr. Arnaud
answers, the question concerns not the Adoration in it self, but the time of
the Adoration, Book 10. chap. 9.
that we must distinguish betwixt a voluntary Adoration and an Adoration of
Rite or Ceremony, that the first is one and the same both with the Greeks and
Latins, because it chiefly consists in acknowledging the Eucharist to be the
Body of Christ with an inward Submission, which both one and the other do, as
soon as the Consecration is performed, that as to what concerns the second, the
Latins immediately perform it after the Consecration, and the Greeks later, to
wit, at the Elevation of the Host, which is done a little before the Priest
disposes himself to communicate.

THAT we may examine this Answer, we must lay aside this voluntary Adoration of
which he speaks, for it has no other foundation in relation to the Greeks, than
his bare word, or at most the Proofs he supposes he has given of their Belief
touching the real Presence; but this is what is in question, and we cannot yet
suppose the solidity of his Proofs. To color over this pretended distinction
of a voluntary Adoration, and an Adoration of Rite, he should show us that the
Greeks do give at least at some time to the Eucharist immediately after
Consecration this honor he calls voluntary, and that in their intention, this
is a sovereign honor. But to tell us as he does that this honor chiefly
consists in acknowledging the Eucharist to be the Body of Christ with an inward
reverence, and to persuade us the Greeks do this, is a plain abuse, for what is
this but a setting us upon penetrating into men's hearts, and guessing at their
thoughts? Those that have this inward reverence to the Eucharist, do certainly
show it by some outward Sign, and the Greeks showing none, Mr. Arnaud cannot
ground what he says on any thing, unless it be upon some particular revelation
he has had of this matter.

SACRANUS, Scarga, and Caucus, who lived amongst the Greeks, were ignorant of
this pretended inward reverence, for had they known any thing of it, they would
not have been so positive in asserting the Greeks do show no Reverence,
Respect, or Adoration to the Eucharist after its Consecration; nor would they
call them, as they have done, Heretical, and Profane People. Even the Greeks
themselves who answered Caucus there was no command which enjoined this
Adoration, knew nothing of this. This inward Reverence had its residence and
operations in their Souls, and yet they knew nothing of it; for had they known
it, they would never return such an Answer. None but Mr. Arnaud knew this
secret; but if he gives us not other Proofs, it is to be feared, his voluntary
Adoration will be taken for one of his own private conceits.

WE must come then to this Adoration of Rite, or Ceremony, which is used, as he
says, at the Elevation of the Host, and see whether it is an Adoration of
Latria which terminates in the Sacrament it self. Now I cannot but admire these
Gentlemen's Ingenuity with whom I am concerned. The Greek Liturgy has these
words, That the Priest and Deacon adore three times, in saying thrice with a
low voice, O God be propitious unto me a sinner. The Author of the Perpetuity
would have these three Adorations refer to the Sacrament, Second Part. chap. 5.
page 254.
wherefore he says, that the Priest adores, and the Deacon likewise three
times in the place where they are, in saying thrice softly, Lord be propitious
to me a sinner. My Answer was, that I found in Goar' s Book of Rites and Answer
to the second Treatise part 2 c. 8.
Ceremonies, not this Term of Lord, but that of God, which shows that this
Adoration terminated it self in God, and not in the Sacrament. Mr. Arnaud who
cannot deny this Truth, leaves out the Priest's Prayer which discovers his
deceit, and contents himself with alleging these words of the Liturgy, then
the Priest bows and the Deacon likewise, and a little while after the People in
Book 10 ch 9. p. 7.
general do reverently bow. Leaving it to be believed that these Adorations do
certainly terminate themselves in the Eucharist. But he ought to proceed
sincerely; it is true that then the Priest and Deacon do adore, but it is
likewise as true that their Adoration addresses it self to God in these express
Terms, (...), O God be propitious to me a sinner, from whence it is plainly
apparent there can be no such thing concludedas the Adoration of the Eucharist.

AS to Arcudius's Testimony (who tells us, that the People prostrate themselves
on the ground, as soon as they hear the Priest say, Sancta Sanctis, Holy Things
are for Holy Persons, and that they adore the Sacrament with an Adoration of
Latria) we need not be much concerned thereat, being a Person prepossessed, and
one who testifies of a thing whereof he is altogether ignorant, Goar in not. in
S. Joan, Chrysostom. Miss. page 153.
Arcudius, says Goar, although a Greek knew very little of the Rites of the
Greeks, being brought into Italy when he was but ten years of age. In effect
what he says concerning the Peoples prostrating themselves on the ground, as
soon as they hear the Priest say, Sancta Sanctis is not true, for the Liturgy
denotes this Adoration of the People before the Sancta Sanctis, at the same
time as the Priest and Deacon adore, immediately after this Prayer, Look upon
us O Lord Jesus Christ our God, etc. But granting it were so that the People
prostrated themselves in the time the Sancta Sanctis was said, it would not
thence follow that their Adoration terminated it self in the Sacrament. They
would worship God, as does the Deacon in the words I now mentioned, O God be
propitious, etc. Or our Savior in Heaven as they do in the Prayer, which I
likewise now mentioned which precedes the Sancta Sanctis, Look down O Lord our
God from the Holy Place of thy Dwelling. They prostrate themselves before the
Images of the Saints, before the Book of the Gospels, before the Bread when as
yet unconsecrated, and yet no Body concludes hence, they adore these things
with an absolute Adoration. Why then will Arcudius have them to adore the
Eucharist with an Adoration terminating it self in it?

BUT if Arcudius's Testimony be of no validity in reference to this last
Article, wherefore must it be otherwise in respect of this other Article on
which I ground my Conclusion? I answer, for two Reasons, the one, for that
being interressed as he is against us, it is not to be imagined he would speak
any thing in our favor, unless the thing were so well known and undeniably
true, that he could not disguise it; or pass it over in silence; and the other
because that in effect his Testimony in this respect, agrees with the Liturgy
of the Greeks, which expresses no kind of Adoration directed to the Eucharist
immediately after its Consecration. And there being no mention likewise of any
such thing afterward to the end of the Office, the Conclusion I draw hence is
undeniable. Had the Greeks the same Sentiments as the Latins, and made
profession of rendering the same Divine honors to the Substance of the
Sacrament which are due only to the proper Person of the Son of God, what time
could they choose better for the acquitting themselves of this Duty than that
in which he begins to be present on the Altar? When a Prince comes into a
place, People are not wont to delay the showing him the respect due to him,
every one stands immediately uncovered in his Presence, and those Persons that
did otherwise would be esteemed foolish and stupid. What likelihood is there
then, did the Greek Church believe, that immediately after the Consecration,
the Bread becomes the very Substance of the Body of our Lord, she would defer
any longer to acknowledge it to be so, by a Solemn Adoration? Mr. Arnaud must
not tell us, that the Priest's mind is so taken up with the Idea of the
Sacrifice, that it is all this while fixed in Heaven. These are Reasonings
invented, expressly to excuse a thing which cannot be altered, but in truth, it
is so natural, to Persons that believe Transubstantiation to show immediately
the Signs of Adoration to that Object they have before their eyes, that
notwithstanding all these fine Reasons, those who compiled the Liturgy of the
Greeks would never have been wanting in this particular had they believed the
aforementioned Doctrine. So that this very consideration of the Greeks not
having ordained any solemn kind of Reverence or Worship to the Sacrament after
its Consecration is alone sufficient to make us conclude what we contend for.

MR. Arnaud who indeed has no reason to rest satisfied with his first Proofs,
has recourse to his Baron of Spartaris and Paysius Ligaridius, that is to say,
to two false Greeks, brought up in the Faith of the Roman Church; and won to
its interest, as will appear hereafter. I only wonder he is not ashamed to
bring for witnesses such kind of People as these are.

AS to Oderborne the Lutheran (who discoursing of the Russians, tells us, That
the Priest leaving the Altar to show the People the Eucharist, the People kneel
down, and the Priest says in the Moscovit' s Language, Lo here the Body and
Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ whom the Jews put to death although innocent,) it
is easy to perceive he is deceived in taking for an Adoration of the
Eucharist, a Devotion which they practice before its Consecration, when the
Bread is carried, from the Prothesis to the great Altar. There can be raised no
scruple concerning the truth of this, seeing we have the Testimony of all
Authors who by unanimous consent observe, that this Ceremony is performed
before the Consecration of the Symbols.

ALEXANDER. Gagnin, says, That one of them carries the Bread Moscovit.
descript. cap. 2.
which is prepared for the Sacrifice, and another the Cup full of Wine, that
they issue out of the Sanctuary through a little door with other Priests that
carry the Images of St. Peter, St. Nicholas, and Michael the Archangel, whilst
in the mean time the ^^ople express their Devotion by Acclamations and Acts of
Worship, that some of 'em cry out, Lord have pity on us, others knock their
foreheads against the Ground, and that others make often the Sign of the Cross,
and bow their heads, in fine that they render to the Symbols which are carried
about sundry marks of veneration and honor. That having went round the Church,
they enter again through the Gate which is in the middle of the Quire into the
Sanctuary, and there make the Sacrifice. Sigismond Baron of Herberstain, says
likewise, Comment. Vir Mosco.
That before they consecrate the Bread according to our manner, they walk with
it about the Church, worship it, and adore it with a certain form of words they
utter.

ARCUDIUS, who inveighs so earnestly against this Custom as an Idolatrous
Arcud. lib. 3. cap. 19.
practice, attributes it not only to the Greeks, but likewise to the Russians,
and says, That they prostrate themselves and knock their heads against the
Ground. M. Habert Bishop of Vabres, says, That in the Greek Churches Pontif.
Eccl. Gr. obscrvat. XI. ad partein. 7. litt.
the People make a low bow, but in other Churches, as in those at Russia, they
prostrate themselves on the ground after the same manner, as if our Savior's
real Body passed along. We have already observed that Sacranus and Scarga do
expressly refer this Devotion to the Bread when as yet unconsecrated as well as
others, and moreover add, that the Russians show no reverence to the Sacrament
after its Consecration. And in effect we do not find they go twice round the
Church, whence it follows that Oderborne was mistaken, and supposed this
respect was given the Bread after its Consecration, for there being but one
turn made round the Church, it cannot be denied but it is done before the
Consecration. What I say is so well known, that Allatius himself censures a
Protestant named Jerome Viscer, for saying, the Greeks carry the Body of our
Savior in Procession twice about the Church; So far are Allatide Perp. Cons.
lib. 3. cap. 15.
they, says he, from carrying the Eucharist twice about the Church, that on
the contrary they carry it not at all, for that which they carry from the
Prothesis, to the great Altar which they call the great Entry, is no more than
Bread and Wine unconsecrated.

AND these are Mr. Arnaud's gross Proofs, as he calls 'em, for I meddle not
here with what he tells us concerning a Letter from Mr. Pompone. We shall
examine that in the following Book. His fine Proofs (as he tetms them) are
those he draws from the real Presence in supposing the Greeks hold it. For,
says he, whosoever believes Jesus Christ to be present in the Eucharist, Book
10 chap. 9 page 76.
speaks to him as God, implores his assistance, beggs his pardon, excites
himself by expressions of confidence in him, acknowledges his own unworthiness,
and all these actions being external are outward expressions of Adoration. So
that to bring Proofs of the Adoration of the Eucharist, there needs no more to
be done, but only to produce all the Prayers contained in the Liturgies which
are offered to our Savior after the Consecration. But it has been already
observed that this is one of Mr. Arnaud's Illusions, who is not willing to
handle the Question of the Adoration, as a means whereby to decide that of the
substantial Conversion, but rather as a Consequence thereof; so that all the
force of his pretended Proofs consisting in supposing the Greeks believe
Transubstantiation and the real Presence, there needs no more to be done, for
the overthrowing them, than to send him to the refutation of these Arguments,
by which he pretends he has established his Principle; and even this very
consideration that he could not form his Proof without making this supposition,
will only confirm what we maintain, viz. that the Greeks adore not the
Sacrament, whence it follows they do not believe it is the proper Substance of
the Son of God, for it is not likely a Church that holds this Opinion, would be
wanting to give to the Sacrament those outward expressions of reverence which
would distinguish themselves easily, from all other kinds of honor. The Church
of Rome furnishes us with an example of this, on which we need only cast our
eyes, for it clearly appears by her words and actions, that the honor she
gives the Eucharist is a sovereign and divine honor, such as is due to God
alone. Had the Greek Church designed to show it the same respect, what should
hinder it from doing as the Roman Church does? Would she not at least endeavor
to imitate its example in several particulars? Why do they not carry it to the
sick with the same solemnity as those of the Church of Rome? Wherefore, I say,
does not the Greek Church enjoin her Children to kneel as often as they shall
meet the Sacrament? Why does she not openly expose it in public rejoycings or
afflictions? Wherefore does she not carry it about in Procession? Why not
dedicate a particular Festival to it? Mr. Arnaud may tell us as long as he
pleases, That there is no natural Book 10. chap. 9. page 78.
coherence between these things and the Adoration, that the Institution of
these Ceremonies is pious and commendable, but no wise necessary, and that the
Adoration may subsist without them, as it does in effect in all the East. When
there were not a natural coherence between Adoration and each of these
particular Customs, yet would it be (me thinks) contrary to nature that the
Adoration should subsist separated from all these things in general; seeing
these are in a manner almost the same external marks of Divine Worship, which
People have ever rendered to some visible Object. What likelihood is there if
the Greeks had the same Sentiments as the Latins touching this Sacrament, but
they would adopt some one of these Devotions which are so familiar to the
Latins, especially those that approach the nearest their usual Customs, and
which are moreover very proper to express this sovereign honor now in
question, as is that solemn Feast called God's Festival, with all its Pomp. But
so far have they been from imitating the Church of Rome in this particular,
that they have on the contrary showed the greatest aversion to it, as appears
by the Confession of Metrophanus Citropulus made at Helmstad in the year 1625.
We carry not about the Streets, says he, this Holy Mystery, unless Consess.
Eccles. Orient. cap. 9. de coena Dom.
it be to the sick, it being not given us to make a show of it, but to be
religiously received for the remission of sins according to the words of our
Savior. All Historians are agreed that the Russians do not observe this
Festival. Sigismond in his Commentaries touching Moscovia and Gagnin, in his
Description of this same Country do expressly take notice of it. But that which
most considerable is, That when those amongst them, who were subject to the
King of Poland were forced to reunite themselves to the Roman Church, which
happened in the year 1595. under Pope Clement the Eighth they made this
Contract. That they should not be compelled to make any Procession on the
H^mber. sum conir. t. 11. Tho. a Jesu lib 6. p. 3. c. 1. Thom. ^ Jesu. ibid.
Festival of the Body of Jesus Christ, because they had other Customs amongst
them in reference to the Sacrament.

WHEREUPON a Learned man of the Roman Church being consulted, gave this Answer,
That as to the carrying or not carrying of the Sacrament about in Procession,
that was not to be much regarded, but there were several other things of
greater importance touching the Sacrament to be considered.

THIS Person, although he spoke not fully his mind, yet said enough to make us
understand him. For he means, (if I mistake not) that did the matter concern
only the Festival of the Sacrament it signified little, but that the
unwillingness these People showed to observe this Feast, did sufficiently
evidence they had not the same Sentiment in the main with the Latins touching
the Eucharist. And in effect wherefore should they refuse to observe this
Feast, did they believe the Sacrament to be the proper Substance of the Son of
God, and adored it with an Adoration of Latria? Were they afraid of giving it
too much honor? Why not conform in this particular with the Roman Church,
seeing they were reunited to her, and had left the Greeks? Is not this an
evident token, that the Greeks cannot accommodate themselves to the Adoration
practiced by the Latins, nor consequently to the Doctrine they teach, and on
which this Adoration is established.

BUT when what I said should have no ground, and the Adoration might subsist
without these Ceremonies, Mr. Arnaud ought at least to show us they substituted
some others equivalent to them, which were to the Greeks the same as those we
speak of are to the Latins. But Mr. Arnaud takes no notice of this. He thinks
it sufficient, to tell me, I am fallen into a condition void of reason and
common sense, that I make extravagant and ridiculous Conclusions, and that he
is both ashamed and sorry for me, that he laughs at my Arguments, being such
little Sophistries as are not fit to be offered by a judicious Person, and that
my audaciousness is beyond example in denying the Greeks adore the Eucharist.
These are his usual Civilities, which yet shall not make me change my humor. I
hope he will be one day of a better mind, and to that end I shall deal with
him, not only in a calm and gentle manner, as it becomes a man of my
Profession, but offer up my Prayers unto Almighty God for him.

BUT before I finish this Chapter, I am obliged to tell him, he could not do
his Cause a greater Injury than to cite as he has done on this Subject of the
Adoration of the Eucharist, a passage taken from Stephen Stylite, who told the
Emperor Copronymus, That the Christians adore, and kiss, the Anti-Types of the
Body and Blood of Jesus Christ. Either he has not examined this Passage, or his
prejudice has hind'red him from observing what is as clear as the day, to wit,
that Stephen attributes no more to the Eucharist than an inferior and relative
Adoration, such as is given to Images, the Cross and consecrated Vessels, whose
matter is not adored. And this appears throughout the whole sequel of his
Discourse. The Emperor accused him for being an Idolater in that he adored
Images. He answers that his Adoration related not to the matter of the Image,
but to the Original which the Image represented. And to show that this kind of
Adoration is not Idolatry (although addressed to a thing made with hands and
senseless) he alleges the example of the Cross, holy Garments and Vessels
which are likewise adored, and in fine that of the Eucharist. Lo here his
words which justify what I say. What crime do we commit when we represent by
an Image the humane Vita S Stephani junioris apud Damascen. Biblii.
shape of Jesus Christ who has been seen, and whom we worship? Is this to adore
a Creature, or do you think it may be truly said that we adore the Matter, when
we adore a Cross be it made of what stuff it will? We adore the Holy Vestments
and Sacred Vessels, without incurring any censure, for we are persuaded that by
Prayer they are changed into Holy Things. Will you banish likewise from the
Church the Anti-Types of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, because they are
the Image and true Figure of this Body and Blood? We worship, and kiss, them
and by partaking of them obtain Sanctification. Either Mr. Arnaud's Friends
have deceived him (if he has quoted this Author only from their Relation) or he
has deceived himself, or which is worse he has designed to deceive others, when
he produced this passage; for it is certain, that hence arises a clear
Demonstration that the Greeks do not adore the Eucharist with that supreme and
absolute Adoration now in question, and which terminates it self in that
Substance we receive. There needs little strength of reasoning to make this
Conclusion, and as little Meditation to comprehend it. We need only observe
that this man endeavors to defend from the imputation of Idolatry the
Adoration given to Images, by the example of the Adoration of the Eucharist,
and ranks in the same order, the Adoration given to the Cross, to the sacred
Vestments, to the Vessels of the Church, to Images, with that given to the
Eucharist. We need only take notice that he calls for this effect the
Eucharist, the Antitype, Image, and true Figure of the Body and Blood of
Christ, whence it follows he places the Adoration of the Eucharist in the rank
of those which terminate not themselves in the Object which we have before us,
but which refer to the Original they represent, wherein the Matter or that
which is visible is not adored; but where by means of a material Symbol, a man
raises up his mind to the Object whose Symbol he beholds. In fine it needs only
be observed, that if the Greeks adored the Sacrament with an Adoration of
Latria terminating it self in the Sacrament, never man was more impertinent
than he, in endeavoring to excuse a relative Adoration by an absolute one,
never man betrayed more his Cause, for besides the Extravagancy of his
reasonings, for which he may be justly reproached, he may be likewise told, he
falls into a new Heresy, and horrible Impiety, making the Adoration of the
Eucharist to be like that of the Cross and consecrated Vessels, or that of
Images, whose visible Subject or Matter men do not adore. Neither must Mr.
Arnaud tell us he speaks only of the Adoration of the Accidents, for Stephen
expressly ranks this Adoration in the number of those amongst which the visible
Matter is not worshipped, and consequently, means there is in the Eucharist a
Substance which is not adored. He says, they worship these Anti-Types and kiss
them. Now in the intention of the Communicants these acts of Adoration and
kissing are not barely directed to the Accidents, but to the whole Subject
called the Eucharist. He says, in short, that in partaking of these
Anti-Types, we obtain Sanctification, which appertains to the whole Eucharist,
and not the bare Accidents.

DAMASCENE who lived much about the same time as Stephen, and stiffly maintained
the same Cause, thus argues. I worship not, says he, the Orat. 1. d. Imag.
Matter, but the Author of the Matter, who has himself become Matter for my
sake, and exists in it, to the end he may give me Salvation by it, and as to
the Matter by which Salvation is procured me, I will ever worship it, not as
the Divinity, God forbid, for how can that be God which has been taken out of
nothing, although it be true that the Body of God is God by means of the Union of
the two Natures in Unity of Person, for the Body is made without Conversion
that which it has been anointed, and remains what it was by Nature, to wit,
Living Flesh, endued with a reasonable Soul and Understanding, which has had a
beginning, and bin created: AS TO THE OTHER MATTER, by which Salvation has been
obtained for us, I honor and worship it, as being full of the Divine Grace.
The blessed wood of the Cross, is it not Matter? The Holy and Venerable Mount
Calvary, is it not Matter? The Rock of Life wherein was the Sepulcher of Jesus
Christ, and which was the Spring of our Resurrection, was it not Matter? Those
black letters wherewith the Holy Gospels were written, are they not Matter?
This Holy Table from whence we receive the Bread of Life, is it not Matter? In
fine the Body and Blood of our Lord, are they not Matter? You must either then
overthrow the Veneration and Worship of all these things, or grant the
Adoration of the Images of God and his Friends the Saints. It is evident that
by this Body and Blood of Christ, he means the Eucharist, and distinguishes it
from the Natural Body, for speaking of the Natural Body as of a Matter, he
adds, As to the other Matter, etc. which shows he passes over to another kind
of material things distinct from the Body hypostatically united to the
Divinity. It is likewise apparent he ranks this Body and Blood in the same
order and degree with the wood of the Cross, Mount Calvary, the Holy Sepulcher,
the Letters of the Gospel, and the Communion Table, and attributes no more to
all these things than one and the same Adoration, an Adoration proportionable
to that of Images.

WHEN he has occasion to discourse on the Adoration which ought to be given to
the Natural Body, he expresses himself after a different manner. I adore, says
he, one God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, I give to him alone the Ibid.
worship of Latria, I worship one God, one Divinity, but I adore likewise the
Trinity of Persons, God the Father, God the Son clothed with Humane Flesh, and
God the Holy Ghost, which yet are no more than one God. I worship not the
Creature besides the Creator, but I adore the Creator who has made me, and who
without the loss of his Dignity or suffering any Division has descended to me
to honor my Nature and make me partaker of the Divine Nature. I do also
together with my God and King adore th'enclosure of his Body, if a man may so
express himself, tho not as a Vestment, or fourth Person, God forbid, but as
having been declared God and made without Conversion, that which it has been
anointed. Here the Humanity is adored in Person, with an Adoration of Latria,
whereas the Mystical Body and Blood are only adored with a relative Adoration
after the same manner as the Cross, the Holy Sepulcher and Images. If you say,
says he, in another place a little farther, that we ought only to be joined
with God in Spirit and Understanding, abolish then all corporeal things,
Tapers, Incense, Prayers uttered with an articulate voice; nay, even the Divine
Mysteries which consist of Matter, to wit, the Bread and Wine, the Oil of
Unction, the Sign of the Cross, the Reed, and Lance which pierced his Side to
make Life issue out from thence. Either the veneration of all these things must
be abolished, which cannot be done, or not reject the Worship of Images; What
he called a little above, the Body and Blood, he here calls Bread and Wine, but
whether he designs them under the name of Body and Blood, or whether he calls
them Bread and Wine, he attributes no more to them than a proportionable
Adoration unto that which he pretends ought to be given, Images and other
material things he mentions, that is to say a relative Adoration.

WE find in Photius a Passage like unto those of Stephen, and Damascene, in
which he justifies after the same manner, the relative Adoration given to
Images, by the example of that which is given to the Mysteries. He compares
these two Worships together, and makes them of the same order and quality. When
we adore, says he, the Image of Jesus Christ, the Cross, and the Pho. de Synod.
Sign of the Cross, we do not pretend to terminate our Worship or Adoration in
these things, but direct it to him, who by the unspeakable Riches of his Love
became man and suffered a shameful death for us. And thus do we adore the
Temples, Sepulchers, and Relics of Saints, from whence do proceed those
miraculous cures, praising and glorifying God who has given them this Power,
and if there be any such like thing in our mystical and holy Sacraments, we
acknowledge and glorify the Author and first Cause of it, for the Gift and
Grace which he has bestowed on us by their means.

AND this is what I had to say on this Point; I leave now the Reader to judge,
whether my denial that the Greeks do adore this Sacrament according to the
manner of the Latins, be the effect of an unparalled rashness, as speaks Mr.
Arnaud, or whether it be not rather the effect of a Knowledge and Consideration
more just and disinteressed than that of his. I ground my negative on the
express Testimonies of Sacranus, John de Lasko, Peter Scarga, Anthony Caucus,
Francis Richard, all Roman Catholics and Ecclesiastics, who lived in those
Places and are consequently unreproachable Witnesses in this particular, who
all of 'em expressly affirm the Greeks do not adore the Sacrament after
Consecration, and reproach them with it as a capital crime and brand them in
this respect with the name of Heretics. I confirm this not only by the Silence
of Travelers who exactly relate the Ceremonies of their Office, without
observing this essential particular, but likewise from the proper Rituals of
the Greeks and their refusal to practice the chief Ceremonies the Latins use to
express their Adoration, without substituting others equivalent to them. I
farther confirm it by express Passages taken out of other Greek Fathers, who
only attribute to the Eucharist a relative Adoration, like unto that given to
Images, Temples, Crosses, and Relics of Saints. And yet Mr. Arnaud, tells me,
that he is both ashamed and sorry for me, and that my negative is the effect of
a rashness beyond example, and he grounds this fierce charge on voluntary
Adorations and internal Venerations, which no body ever saw but himself, that
is to say, on Chimera's with which the necessity of maintaining his Th^sis,
right or wrong, has furnished him. Yet how greatly soever men's minds may be
prejudiced, I doubt not but good men of his own Communion will be of another
mind.

I hope at least they will not say I have been rash in affirming the Greeks
adore not the Sacrament as do the Latins. For were there any rashness in this
assertion they must blame these Canons, Archbishops and Jesuits and not me, who
only denied it after them. I hope likewise the Proof I have made touching these
same Greeks not believing Transubstantiation will not be esteemed
inconsiderable, my Consequence being grounded on Mr. Arnaud's own Principle.
Not only, says he, the Doctrine of the real Presence is necessarily Book 10.
chap. 9.
annexed to the internal Adoration, but also to some act of external respect.
For although they may be separated by metaphysical Suppositions or extravagant
Errors, such as those of some Heretics in these latter days, yet is it
impossible to separate them by the real Suppositions of Persons endued with
common sense.

CHAP. VIII.
The Fourteenth Proof taken from that the Greeks when ever they argue touching
the Azyme, do carry on their Disputes upon this Principle, That the Sacrament
is still real Bread after its Consecration. The Fifteenth, from the little care
they take to preserve the Substance of the Sacrament. The Sixteenth, from a
Passage of Oecumenius.

WE know very well that the Greeks consecrate the Eucharist with leavened
Bread, and that there is touching this Point, between them and the Latins, so
stiff a Controversy, that the Greeks believe their Altars are polluted when
the Latins have performed their Service thereon, and therefore when ever this
happens, they wash them with exceeding great care before they use them. I shall
not trouble my self, or Reader, with mentioning here any thing touching the
beginning or progress of this Dispute, all that I aim at here, being only to
give farther light to the question I handle. It seems to me then no hard matter
in reading their Books concerning this Point, to know what their real belief is
touching Transubstantiation, for we find them continually arguing from this
Principle, that the Eucharist is still Bread after Consecration.

AND this appears by the Letters of Michael Cerularius, and Leo Bishop of
Acrida, to John Bishop of Tranis in the Kingdom of Naples; for giving an
account of the Institution of the Holy Sacrament, they add, observe how our
Savior has called under the New Testament the Bread his Body. This expression
Bibliot. Pa^^. Tom. 4. ^d^t. 4.
let Mr. Arnaud say what he will, does not well agree with the belief of
Transubstantiation; for according to this Doctrine it may be affirmed, that our
Savior has made Bread his Body and changed it into his Body; but it cannot be
said with good sense, that he calls the Bread his Body, seeing this latter
expression signifies, he attributes to the Bread the name of his Body, which
supposes the Bread remains, and receives the name of the Body of Jesus Christ.
Yet do we meet with these kind of expressions not only in Michael Cerularius,
but in the Triode of the Greeks which is one of their Ecclesiastical Books,
(...), say they, having likewise related the words of the Institution (...)
Allat de lib. Eccles. Graec. diss. 2.
(...), Observe that he calls the Bread his Body and not an Azyme, let them
then be ashamed that offer in the Sacrifice unleavened Bread. It appears by the
Dispute which bears the name of Gennadius, that this Passage Gennad p^o Council.
Flor. cap. 2 sect. 7. Book 10.
is frequently used by the Greeks. And Mr Arnaud has observed that Jeremias and
Photius Patriarchs of Constantinople express themselves in this same manner,
Jesus Christ called the Bread his Body, the Wine his Blood; He assures us that
Jeremias believed Transubstantiation, but whether he did or not we shall see
hereafter; He likewise tell us that Photius joins this expression with that
which naturally denotes Transubstantiation, to wit, that the common Bread is
changed into the Body of Jesus Christ, (...), but this is mere mockery to
desire us to believe that a Term so general as is that of (...), does naturally
signify a Conversion of Substance.

IN the second place the Greeks are wont in this Controversy to reproach Bibl.
Patr. Tom. 4. Edit. 4.
the Latins with their eating the Jewish Azyme, and that they eat it as a
Figure of the Flesh of Christ, You offer to God in Sacrifice, says Nicetas
Pectoratus, the Azyme and dead Bread of the Jews, and eat it as a Figure of the
true and living Flesh of Jesus Christ; and a little further, he that makes the
Azyme, and eats it, although he has not taken this Custom from the Jews, yet does
he in this imitate them, and his Knowledge is no greater than that of a Jew.
They apply to this occasion the Eleventh Canon of the Sixth Council in Trullo,
which forbids the eating of the Azyme of the Jews, and this is near upon the
same Language of all the rest of the Greeks. But these expressions would be
extravagant did they not suppose that which we eat in the Eucharist to be real
Bread; for to eat the Body of Jesus Christ under the Accidents of an Azyme, is
not to eat the Azyme of the Jews, and in effect those amongst the Latins that
have refuted them touching this Article have not failed to tell them, that
after the Conversion it is no longer Bread, neither leavened nor unleavened, but
the Body of Jesus Christ, and that in supposing this Conversion, the Question
concerning the Azyme's is superfluous, as appears in an Anonymous Treatise in
the Bibliotheca Patrum, and in a Letter of Pope Gregory the 9th. which Mr.
Arnaud mentions in the Tenth Chapter of his Third Book.

IT appears likewise by a Treatise attributed to Gennadius, the Patriarch of
Constantinople, that at the Council of Florence, wherein 'twas ordained the
Priests shall consecrate the Body of Jesus Christ with leavened Bread, and with
the Azyme, every one according to the Custom of his own Church, the Greeks that
rejected the Union thus loudly expressed themselves, saying, Gennad. pro
Council. Flor. cap. 2 sect. 1.
That the Council had divided the Mystery of the New Testament into two Parts,
and made two Bodies of Jesus Christ, the one of unleavened, and the other of
leavened Bread. Which Language would be very improper in the mouths of Persons
who believe Transubstantiation; for besides that this would not be two Bodies,
but one alone under the different Species, it should at least have been said
they had set up two Bodies, one made of leavened the other of unleavened Bread.

WE find that the Greeks in this same Controversy, to show unleavened Bread
ought not to be used in this Mystery, affirm that Leaven is the same thing to
Bread, as the Soul is to the Body, because Bread receives elevation by means of
the Leaven, so that they call leavened Bread, living Bread, as being that which
has Spirits, and on the contrary the Azyme dead Bread, a dead Lump, unfit to
represent the living Body of Jesus Christ; and thereupon they ground this
Accusation, that the Latins eat a dead Lump, inanimate Bread, and not the Body
of Jesus Christ which is of the same Substance as ours, and is not void of
Soul, as taught the Heretic Apollinarius. We may find this kind of arguing in
Cerularius his Letter, in that of Nicetas Pectoratus, and in the Answers of
Cardinal Humbert, and likewise described at large in the Anonymous Author I
mentioned, The Christians Easter, says he, Bibl Patr. Tom 4, Edit. 4.
was celebrated, not with unleavened Bread, but on the contrary with that which
is leavened; to set forth the Perfection of Jesus Christ. For our Lord has
united to himself two Natures in one Person; and as the Divine Nature is most
simple, so the humane Nature is composed of Soul and Body, or Flesh. There
being then in Jesus Christ the Divinity, the Soul and the Body, so likewise in
the Mystery of the Sacrament which we celebrate with complete Bread, that is to
say with leavened Bread, there are three things, namely, Flower, Leaven, and
Water. But yours, far from being a true Sacrament, is no Sacrament at all,
being so different from the Truth. But we find this arguing more clearly
expressed in a Letter of the Patriarch of Antioch to the Bishop of Aquila:
Those, says he, that Auctar Combesis, Tom 2. in not. ad Isaaci arm. Cath.
ambas inv.
partake of the Azyme are in danger of falling into the Heresy of
Apollinarius, who did not stick to affirm that the Son of God took of the
Virgin Mary a Body destitute of Soul and Reason, affirming the Divinity was to
him in stead of the rational Soul. The Azyme then which has neither Salt nor
Leaven, is it not dead and inanimate, and worthy in effect of Death? Our Lord
Jesus Christ who is perfect God and Man has two Natures, and one only
Hypostasis, having taken of the Holy Virgin a living Body endued with
Understanding, and given us the Mystery of the New Testament by means of
perfect Bread. Supposing the Bread of the Eucharist to be a Mystery that
represents Jesus Christ, its Substance still existing, it will then be no hard
matter to comprehend this reasoning of the Greeks; for they mean, that the lump
of Bread represents the Body of Christ, the Leaven his Soul, or Life, and the
Salt his Understanding, or Reason, wherefore they say, that the Leaven stands
for the Soul, and the Salt for the Understanding: So that partaking of this
Bread, we mystically eat the animate and living Body of Jesus Christ, such as
it is in effect, and not such a one as Apollinarius dreamt of. Whereas those
that partake of an Azyme, do only mystically eat inanimate Flesh. But suppose,
these People be lieved Transubstantiation, and judge then of their meaning.
They that celebrate the Eucharist, say they, with unleavened Bread eat a dead
Lump, how so? They eat not the Substance of the Azyme, but that of the living
Flesh of Jesus Christ. They offer, say they, Flesh that is dead. How so again,
if they offered it in its proper Substance such as it now is, that is to say
living? They eat not the Body of Jesus Christ which is consubstantial with us,
because they eat an inanimate Azyme. But it is false that they eat the Azyme,
they receive only the colors and appearances of it, in the same manner as
others take the colors and appearances of leavened Bread. Their Sacrament is
not indeed a Sacrament, differing so greatly from the Truth. Their Sacrament
being the Truth it self, it can admit of neither difference nor resemblance.
Who sees not these People are unintelligible if we imagine they argue from the
Principle of Transubstantiation? For if they only mean, that the matter of the
Sacrament must be leavened Bread to become proper to be changed into the real
Body of Jesus Christ, they must consider it in the time preceding the
Consecration; as for instance, were I to show that these Stones are not proper
to build a Palace, I must consider them in the time preceding the Building.
Common sense leads us to this. But these People on the contrary are wont almost
always to consider it in the time which follows the Consecration. You partake,
says Nicetas, of an inanimate Azyme, you offer to God an Azyme, being the dead
Bread of the Jews; You are fed from the Hebrews Table, and not from the living
and rational Table of the Lord. You communicate with the Jews, says
Cerularius, you eat a dead Lump, says the Author of the Treatise of the
Auctar. Com. bef. Tom. 2 in not ad Is. Armen. in.
Azymes against the Armenians, you receive an Azyme, you offer an Azyme, being
dead Flesh, whereas Jesus Christ has given his Mystery, (...), with perfect
Bread. All this does very ill accord with the Belief of Transubstantiation.

NEITHER will it be less difficult to reconcile it with some other expressions
used by the Greeks in this same Controversy, as with that of Nicetas, which I
already mentioned; You offer in Sacrifice to God the Azyme, the Nicet. pect. in
Lat. Bib. Patr. ^4.
dead or unleavened Bread of the Jews, which you eat as a Figure of the true
and living Flesh of our Lord; and that which he adds soon after. You say that
the Apostles received the Azymes of Jesus Christ, and that they left 'em to
you* for the celebrating of the Mystery as a representation of the Body of
Jesus Christ, And that of John Citrius which I already likewise mentioned, We
offer in Sacrifice leavened Bread for the Body of our Lord, (...). And that of
the Patriarch of Antioch, the Leaven stands for the Soul, and the Apud. Allat.
Perpet Cons. lib. 3. cap. 12. Sigism. Reg. Mosc. Com.
Salt for the Understanding. And that of John the Metropolitan of Russia in his
Letter to the Pope, or rather to the Archbishop of Rome, as he calls him, Jesus
Christ gave not to his Disciples an Azyme, but Bread when he said, Behold the
Bread which I give you. Let Mr. Arnaud pretend what he will, yet I really
believe these expressions do not well please him. He may tell us the Eucharist
may be considered in two different respects; and that when it is looked upon in
reference to its external Vail, it is called a Figure and Bread, and yet the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation receive no prejudice thereby. But this will not
satisfy the World, for it is plainly apparent, the sense of Nicetas and other
Authors reaches farther than this; for to say, we offer dead Bread, unleavened
Bread, and figuratively eat it as the Flesh of Jesus Christ, that our Savior
gave Bread to his Disciples, that he told them 'twas Bread he gave them, that
this Bread, should signify his Body, the Leaven his Soul, and the Salt his
Understanding, this is not a bare consideration of simple Accidents. But it is
on the contrary to suppose, that the Bread remains, for we can neither offer,
nor eat, dead Bread, a dead Lump, unleavened Bread, the figurative Bread of the
Flesh of Jesus Christ, if it does not remain Bread in its real Substance. The
Bread can neither stand for the Body, nor the Leaven for the Soul, nor the Salt
for the Understanding, if in effect this Bread, this Leaven and Salt do not any
longer subsist, but give place to the Body, Soul, and Understanding of Jesus
Christ. Mr. Arnaud, may tell us, if he pleases, that Agapius his Monk of Mount
Athos, who taught Transubstantiation makes use of this way of speaking, that
the Eucharist is to us in the stead of Jesus Christ, we shall find he is a
Person that would not wholly estrange himself from the expressions of the
Greeks, if it be true that he received the Doctrine of the Latins. But we must
go on with our proofs.

OUR Fifteenth Proof, shall be drawn from the little care the Greeks take to
preserve the Substance of the Sacrament after its Consecration. For it is not
to be imagined supposing their Belief to be the same with that of the Church of
Rome, they would be so neglectful of it, and disrespectful to it as they are. I
have already related in my Answer to the Perpetuity what Cardinal Humbert wrote
from Constantinople, touching their Custom of burying under Ground the remains
of the Communion, and letting fall the Crumbs thereof, without troubling
themselves about them. When you break, says Humbert. contr. Nic. Bib. Patr.
Tom. 4. Edit. 4.
he, the Holy Bread, or receive it, you are not concerned at the Crumbs falling
down on the Ground. Neither are you more careful when you wipe the Dishes after
an undecent manner, with the Leaves of Palm Trees, or Brushes made with
Hogsbristles. Some among you gather up the Body of Christ with so great
irreverence that you fill boxes with it, and to prevent the scattering of the
Crumbs, press them down with your hands. They eat likewise what is left of the
Oblation after the same manner as common Bread, and sometimes so much of it,
till they glut themselves with it, and what they cannot eat they bury under
Ground, or throw it into Wells. He in another place severely censures the
Custom of the Greeks; To bury, says he, the Eucharist, as some are said to do,
or put it in Bottles, or scatter it about, is certainly a great neglect, and
sign, that such have Humbert contr. G^^^. Calumn.
not the fear of God before their eyes. For the Holy and Divine Mysteries are
the Faith of Christians. And in another place, in answer to Cerularius, who
boasted that he would teach great and excellent things, are these, says he,
those great and excellent things you speak of, to place the Oblation on the
Altar Ibid.
in so great a quantity, that neither the Ministers nor People, can devour it,
but you must bury it, or throw it into Wells made for that purpose?

THE Anonymous Author of the Treatise against the Greeks observes the same
thing with Humbert, At Easter, says he, when the People receive the Bibl.
Patr. Tom. 4 Edit. 4.
Communion, they provide abundance of Bread, and consecrate it all; and because
the heaps which are left, cannot be kept, they bury them.

THIS Custom of burying the Eucharist remains still amongst the Greeks; for the
Jesuit Richard relates, that a poor Woman of the Isle of Saint Erinis, had no
sooner received the Holy Communion, but she brought it up again by reason
Relation of the Isle of St. Erin. chap. 17. p. 2^0.
of the weakness of her stomach, and that the Greek Priest, who gave it her
before he confessed her, did not scruple to take up what she had vomited and
bury it, together with the Sacred Particles at the foot of his Altar, for which
fact he was blamed by the other Papa's, who would have him bury it on the
Seashore, judge then, adds he, how great is the ignorance of these Greek
Priests, and how great our Savior's patience to bear this? He undoubtedly saw
all these disorders and indignities he was to suffer, when he instituted this
Divine Sacrament.

THE same Author, says likewise, That their Priests following the Custom of
the Jews, let their Beards grow, which are all over wet with the Lord's Blood
Tract. contr. Bibl. Patr. Tom. 4. Arcud. lib. 3. cap. 60.
when they drink. Arcudius reproaches them in the same manner. The Greek
Priests, says he, receive the Eucharist very undecently, for taking the
consecrated Bead they grasp it close in their hands, and so lift it up on their
heads, (I suppose they do this as a sign of Honor and Veneration) and having
eaten the Eucharist, and recited some Praises, they lift up their hands to
their heads and stroke them, for it commonly happens that some Crumbs stick
thereon. As soon as they have drank the Blood, they do not scruple to wipe
their Beards with their hands, or handkerchiefs, as if they had drank common
Wine; and forasmuch as they let their Beards grow, and never cut their
Moustaches, it frequently happens that drops of Blood fall from them on the
Holy Vestments, or Altar, and not seldom on the Ground. He farther adds, That
the Rubric of their Liturgy deceives them, and that these words should be
corrected, after the Priest has wiped his lips and the brims of the Sacred
Chalices, with the Veyl he has in his hands, he calls the Deacon. Sacranus
speaking of the Russians, says likewise, That they give the Communion to the
People in nasty wooden Spoons, and wipe off the Crumbs which stick thereon with
a cloth, letting them fall on the Ground.

THEY are far from being scrupulous, and taking that care the Roman Church
does, to prevent the Eucharists being eaten by Vermin, for the Rats may run
away with great pieces of it, and yet they not concerned thereat. Manuel the
Patriarch of Constantinople (whom Binius ranks in the Seventh Century) being
asked by one of his Bishops what punishment he thought a Priest deserved, who
let a Mouse run away with the consecrated Bread, coldly answered, That those to
whom these mischances happen are not to be blamed, because these things are
usual; Multa enim ejusmodi saepe accidunt. If the like Questions were offered
to a Latin Bishop, it is not to be doubted but he would insist on the care that
ought to be taken for the prevention of these inconveniences, and instead of
slighting the matter and excusing the Priest, as this Patriarch does, by saying
this often happens, he would on the contrary invent all ways imaginable to
prevent this from ever hap'ning.

LET Mr. Arnaud if he pleases reflect a little on all these things. How is it
possible these People would show so little reverence and so great neglect to
the Substance of the Sacrament, did they believe it to be the proper Substance
of their Savior? They eat thereof as common Bread till they have glutted
themselves, they bury it, and cast it into Wells, and when any Crumbs thereof
fall to the Ground, or stick on their hair, they are not all concerned thereat.
They spill the consecrated Wine on their Beards, on the Altar, yea on the
Ground, and matter it not, and their Liturgy enjoins them to wipe their lips
with their handkerchers when they have received the Communion, to which we may
add what I related in the foregoing Chapter, that they let the Sacrament hang a
whole year in a linen bag on a nayl, exposed to the mercy of worms, according
to the express testimony of Sacranus, and the Archbishop of Gnesne. Now what
congruity has all this with the belief of Transubstantiation? Mr. Arnaud may
distinguish, if he pleases, between the necessary Consequences, and those of
congruity, yet all his Philosophy falls short of persuading us that these
practices are consistent with the belief, that it is no longer the Substance of
Bread, but the proper Substance of the Body and Blood of Christ.

I shall finish this Chapter with a passage taken out of Oecumenius, which
shall be my Seventeenth Proof. This Author (who is famous amongst the Greeks
and lived in the Eleventh Century) expounding these words of Saint Peter, Let
your Conversation be honest among the Gentiles, that whereas they speak ill of
you as of evil doers, they may glorify God; Saint Peter, says he, speaks here
of the false Accusations of the Heathens, and if you would know the particulars
thereof, read what Ireneus Bishop of Lions has written touching the Martyrs
Sanctus, and Blandina, and you will be perfectly informed. This in few words is
an account thereof. The Greeks having taken some Slaves belonging to the
Christian Catecumenists, used great violence toward them to make them confess
the Christians Mysteries, and the Slaves not knowing what to say to please
those that so rudely handled them, remembered they heard their Masters relate
that the Holy Communion was the Body and Blood of Christ, imagining that 'twas,
In effect Flesh and Blood. Whereupon they taking this as if the Christians were
wont REALLY to eat and drink human Flesh and Blood made report hereof to all
the other Greeks, and by torments forced the Martyrs, Sanctus, and Blandina to
confess it. But Blandina afterward very pertinently demanded of them, how they
could imagine People who out of Devotion did abstain from eating Flesh (whose
use was permitted them,) should do any such thing.

THIS passage may be considered in two respects, either as being of St. Ireneus
or Oecumenius. I know very well there are several Learned men that believe
Oecumenius was mistaken in relating this Story as if it came from Saint
Ireneus, and in effect, we do not thus find it in the Letter of the Churches of
Vienna and Lions produced by Eusebius. But in the second respect, under which I
now offer it, we may certainly conclude that 'twas the Sentiment of Oecumenius
himself. For how can we suppose he would call the belief of the Slaves and
Heathenish Inquisitors a mistake, That the Holy Communion did in effect consist
of Flesh and Blood, and that the Christians did really do this. Wherefore would
he reckon this Error amongst the Slanders of the Heathens? Wherefore should he
introduce Blandina refuting this Imagination had he himself believed the
Communion to be in effect and reality the Flesh and Blood of Christ in its
proper Substance, and had this been the real Sentiment of his Church? How came
it to pass, he did not endeavor to mollify and explain these Terms, and show
that Blandina was mistaken in denying the Eucharist to be in effect and
reallity Flesh and Blood, or that what she did in this case was only to conceal
from the Heathens, the Churches Belief in this particular, or in fine that she
only denied it in one sense, to wit, that it was visibly and sensibly Flesh and
Blood? How happened it, he feared not lest the Greeks amongst whom he lived
when he gave this account would not be scandalized at it, or the weak take
hence occasion to call in question the truth of the Doctrines of
Transubstantiation and the real Presence? Yet does he not trouble himself in
searching after mollifying Terms or Explanations, and the manner in which he
has laid this down does clearly show us that he did not in any sort believe the
Holy Communion to be really and in effect the Body and Blood of Christ, nor
imagined, he affirmed any thing contrary to the Doctrine of his Church, or
which might be taken in an ill sense.

CHAP. IX.
The Seventeenth Proof taken from the Dispute agitated amongst the Greeks in
the Twelfth Century touching the Eucharist, some of 'em affirming the Body of
Jesus Christ to be incorruptible, and others corruptible. The Eighteenth, from
a Passage out of Zonarus a Greek Monk that lived in the Twelfth Century.

I Mentioned in my Answer to the Perpetuity a Dispute which arose amongst the
Greeks in the Twelfth Century, touching the Body of Jesus Christ which we
receive in the Eucharist, from whence I took occasion to prove the Greeks do
not believe the Transubstantiation of the Latins. Mr. Arnaud contents not
himself with pretending my Proof is not good, but will needs draw a contrary
Conclusion from the same Principle I made use of. It then lies upon me to
examine in this Chapter two Passages, the one of Nicetas Choniatus, and
the other of Zonarus who both take notice of this Controversy; and to know
whether this difference does suppose Transubstantiation or not.

I will begin with Nicetas, who lays down the Question in these Terms. The
Question, says he, was whether the Sacred Body of Jesus Christ which we Nicet
Chon. Annal. lib. 3.
receive, be incorruptible, such as it has been since his Passion and
Resurrection, or corruptible as it was before his Passion. Before we go any
further, we should consider whether it is likely such a Question should be
stated in a Church that believes Transubstantiation. This is a Point easily
decided if we consider, that those that hold this Doctrine do not reckon the
Body of Jesus Christ in the Eucharist to be either in a corruptible state; such
as it was before his Passion, or an incorruptible one, wherein it has been
since his Resurrection. They have invented a Third, which holds the middle
between the two others, and which equally agrees with the two times, before and
after his Resurrection, which is that they call the Sacramental State, in which
they will needs have this Body to lie hid under the Accidents of Bread, being
invisible and insensible in it self, without Extension, Action, or Motion,
having all its Parts in one Point, and existing after the manner of Spirits. In
this State according to them he has neither the incorruption he obtained by his
Resurrection, nor the Corruption he put on in coming into the World, but is
corruptible in respect of the Species which enclose him, and incorruptible by
reason of that Spirituality which Transubstantiation gives him. How can Mr.
Arnaud imagine that in this Principle of the Sacramental State, there may be
formed the Question, whether he is incorruptible, such as he has been since his
Resurrection, or corruptible as before his Passion? How can he conceive that
Persons who have his third State in view, and are agreed amongst themselves,
can fall into a debate touching the two others? For it cannot be supposed the
ignorance of the Greeks has bin so great as not to let them see the
inconsistency there is between their Question and the Doctrine of the
Substantial Conversion, as it is taught by the Latins. No People can be so
ignorant as not to know that a humane Body, such as is that of our Savior;
being under the Accidents of the Eucharistical Bread, is neither the same that
was on the Cross, nor that which Thomas touched when it was risen and we must
necessarily suppose that he has neither the corruptibility under which he was
before his death, nor the incorruptibility he received when he arose from the
Sepulcher, but another incorruptibility, which comes to him from his existence
after the manner of a Spirit. They could not be so ignorant as not to know that
our Savior celebrated his Sacrament before his death, and that we celebrate it
likewise since his Ascension into Heaven, and that consequently according to
the Hypothesis of Transubstantiation we cannot regulate the State of his Body
in the Mystery, neither by one nor the other of these two times, that is to say,
neither by the time which preceded his death nor that which followed his
Resurrection, but we must take a middle time which may agree both with the one
and the other, whence it plainly appears these People believed not
Transubstantiation, for had they believed it, this difference had never arose
among them; and so much concerning the Question in general. Let us see now in
what manner the two Parties maintained their Opinions.

SOME, says Nicetas, asserted that it was incorruptible, because that the
Participation of the Divine Mysteries is an acknowledgment, and commemoration
that our Lord died and rose again for us, (as teaches the great Divine
Cyrillus) so that whatsoever part we receive, we receive entirely that which
Thomas handled, and that he is as it were eaten after his Resurrection,
according to these following words of Saint Chrysostom. O wonderful! he that
sits at the right hand of the Father, is found in the hands of sinners; and in
another place, Jesus Christ is a fruit which budded in the Law, ripened in the
Prophets, and was eaten after its Resurrection, and he tells us afterward,
this is no other Body than that which was too strong for death, and which began
our Life. For as a little Leaven leavens the whole Lump according to the saying
of the Apostle, so likewise this Body which God has made immortal, being in our
Body changes and converts it wholly into it self; some likewise alleged these
words of Eutychius that great light of the Church, we receive the Sacred Body
of the Lord entirely and his precious Blood after the same manner, although we
receive but one part of it, for it is divided indivisibly into all by reason of
the mixture.

MR. Arnaud pretends this Party supposed Transubstantiation, because, says he,
they asserted after St. Chrysostom, that our Savior was in Heaven Lib. 2. cap.
14. page 242.
and on Earth, and after Eutychus that he was distributed wholly and entirely
to all, that is to say, they taught the real Presence. But I hope he will
correct his, that is to say, when he has considered that the Design of these
Disputants was only to show in what respect Jesus Christ communicates himself
to us in the Eucharist, to wit, not as being mortal and corruptible, such as he
was before his Passion, but as being risen. So that when they say we receive
him whom Thomas handled, him who sits at the right hand of the Father, the
same that vanquished death, the Body which God made immortal, they do not
design thereby to signify his Substance, but only the State which followed his
Resurrection, as if they had said, we do not so much receive that Body, which
the Soldiers misused, as that which Thomas handled, not so much in respect
that it was on Earth, but at the right hand of the Father, not so much for that
it has suffered death, but vanquished it, and that God has made it immortal,
which is to say, in a word, that we receive him as risen, because that in this
Quality he is the Principle of our Life. It is clear that this was their drift,
whence there can be nothing concluded in reference to the Substance, for when
we receive the Body of Jesus Christ, not in Substance, but in Mystery, yet do
we receive it in respect of its being risen; and receive him also entire, and
so that passage of Eutychus will not decide our difference.

THERE need other considerations for this.

AND first it must be remembered that those that will argue from the Hypothesis
of Transubstantiation, that the Body of Jesus Christ is incorruptible in the
Eucharist, must not attribute to it the incorruptibleness which comes to it
from the State of his Glory, for besides that it could not have it, as I
already said, at the time of the first Supper, seeing that our Savior was not
then glorified, it is moreover apparent that even at this day, it is not in
this State of Glory and Majesty which it has in Heaven. They must then
attribute to it this other incorruption, which is the effect of its Sacramental
State. And it is unto this that the Doctrine of the substantial Presence does
naturally and necessarily drive them. It is therein incorruptible, because it is
indivisible and insensible after the manner of Spirits.

YET do not the Greeks mention one word tending to this sacramental
incorruption, they speak absolutely only concerning the incorruption which
follows his Resurrection and Glorification, which is an evident token they
argued not from the Principle of Transubstantiation. Secondly, had these Greeks
intended to propose our Savior's Resurrection; wherefore say they, that the
Mysteries are a commemoration of it as well as of his death? for they might
with greater strength and clearness of reason affirm, that seeing it is the
proper Substance of the Body that is risen, it can be no more either passible
or corruptible, as it was before the Resurrection. How comes it then to pass
they mention not a word of that which reason would suggest to them, supposing
they believed the Conversion of Substances?

YET Mr. Arnaud tells us their reasoning was good, and that it overthrew the
whole Foundation of those Heretics, which was, that the Eucharist only
represented Lib. 3. cap. 14. page 241.
our Savior Christ in a State of Death, whence they concluded he was in it
only in a State of Death, in taking for their Principle that he was therein
such, as he is represented. But Mr. Arnaud does not consider, that besides it
is not true that the Adversaries of these Greeks did take for their Principle
that the Body was in it, such as it is therein represented, in supposing it was
really in it; I say this would be moreover to impute to these Greeks, not a
reason, but an overthrowing of all reason and common sense. If we believe Mr.
Arnaud their Adversaries must have reasoned in this manner. Jesus Christ is in
the Eucharist, such as he is therein represented; now he is therein
represented, in a State of Death, he is then therein effectually dead.
Supposing they believed Transubstantiation, were they not very imprudent to let
slip this first Proposition, which is altogether contrary to Transubstantiation
in the sense Mr. Arnaud would have them hold it, to apply themselves to the
second, which is undeniably evident. For no body ever denied, that our Savior
is represented in the Eucharist in a State of Death, seeing this Sacrament is a
commemoration of his Death. But those that hold the Transubstantiation of the
Bread into the living and glorified Body of Jesus Christ, may not grant that he
is really in it such as he is represented, because he must be effectually dead,
being represented therein as dead, which is punctually what the Adversaries of
these Greeks would conclude. They had been then very imprudent to pass by the
first Proposition of their Adversaries Argument, on which they might defend
themselves and apply themselves to the second, against which there could be
nothing said. For as I already observed, it cannot be denied but that our
Savior is represented in the Eucharist in a State of Death. But would they not
likewise have been very impertinent to apply themselves to the second
Proposition (in asserting as they have done) that our Savior is represented in
the Eucharist in a State of Death and Resurrection both together? What is this
but to conclude, that he is then in it at the same time actually dead, and
actually risen by this Principle acknowledged by both Parties, that he is
really in it such as he is therein represented. The Catholics, says Mr.
Arnaud, overthrew the Foundation of the Heretics, by a Passage of Saint Cyril'
s, in which this holy man affirms that the Eucharist is the Confession of Jesus
Christ dead and risen for us. Whence they rightly concluded that he was then in
it in a State of Resurrection, and consequently in an incorruptible State. If
this Conclusion be good, as Mr. Arnaud says it is, this is so too; he is then
in it in a State of Death, and consequently in a State of Corruption, for
Cyrillus does as well assert that it is the Confession of Jesus Christ dead, as
risen; whence it follows that according to these People our Savior dies and
rises again effectually in the Eucharist. And thus do they argue according to
Mr. Arnaud, Our Savio^^ is in the Eucharist, such as he is therein represented,
now he is represented therein, not only in a State of Death but Resurrection.
He is then really in it not only dead, but likewise risen again, and
consequently corruptible and incorruptible both together. This would be the
most sottish reasoning imaginable, for after this manner they would as well
argue for their Adversaries as themselves. And yet this is the arguing which
Mr. Arnaud so commends. And into these absurdities and extravagancies does he
lead those Persons he would have favorable to him.

YET he adds, That it is an easy matter to conclude that according to these
Catholics, Jesus Christ was really present in the Eucharist, but it is a hard
matter to divine by what means Mr. Claude has concluded he was not in it. It is
no such difficult matter to know this. For if these People said not what common
sense immediately dictated to them, supposing they believed Transubstantiation,
but on the contrary that which even common sense would hinder them from saying,
it follows they had not this Hypothesis in their Minds. Now this is what my
Proof contains, for it shows that what they said would be an extravagancy, and
likewise what they ought to say, and have not said. For they ought to say that
our Savior since his Resurrection can be no longer in a State of Death, or
passibility, and consequently that being really in the Eucharist, he cannot be
therein corruptible, and this they have not said.

BUT how, (says Mr. Arnaud,) can Mr. Claude know what they have said, or not
said? Will he pretend that all the reasonings of these Persons are contained in
the short account this Historian gives us of this Debate. But I do not pretend
to this, for I only say, that if the Greeks whose Dispute is set down by
Nicetas, believed Transubstantiation, he would have made them reason after
another manner than they do, he would have made them say what sense and reason
do readily suggest to People that hold this Doctrine, and not Impertinencies,
which could never enter into the mind of a man prepossessed with
Transubstantiation.

BUT, adds he, these Greeks have expressly said, what Mr. Claude blames them for
not saying. For have they not expressed this clearly in these Words, Ibid.
that whatsoever part we receive of the Eucharist, we receive entirely Jesus
Christ himself whom Thomas handled, because we eat him after his Resurrection,
which they confirmed by diverse Passages of the Fathers, and amongst the rest by
that of St. Chrysostom; O wonderful! He that sits at the right hand of the
Father is found in the hands of sinners. I answer that Mr. Arnaud comprehends
not the force of an Objection but only when he pleases. I do not deny but that
these Greeks said, That Jesus Christ is in the Eucharist as risen, and that we
receive him wholly and entire. This is the State of their Question, and they
prove it by Passages taken out of the Fathers. But I say that had they reasoned
on the Hypothesis of the substantial Conversion, they would have said that
Jesus Christ since his Resurrection can be no longer either mortal or passible
in himself, that he exists on the Altar after the manner of a Spirit, and is
consequently incorruptible; that the substantial Conversion cannot be made in
the dead and inanimate Body of Jesus Christ, forasmuch as this is a State which
has ceased since so many Ages, and that it would be blasphemy and horrid
cruelty against the Majesty of the Son of God to make him die every day really
and personally. And this is what I said in plain Terms, but Mr. Arnaud would
not understand me. I tell him therefore again, that common sense led the Greeks
to this, had their belief been the same as the Latins. Yet you cannot find this
in what Nicetas makes them speak. You read indeed that whatsoever part we
receive, we partake of him whom Thomas handled, that is to say, of Jesus
Christ; the word Same which Mr. Arnaud has added, is of his own invention. You
find there that he is eaten after his Resurrection, and instead of Mr. Arnaud's
Because, there is in the Greek a Diminutive Particle (...), he is as it were
eaten, but you find not that Jesus Christ can be any more passible, nor that he
is in the Eucharist after the manner of a Spirit, nor what a great outrage it
would be to the Son of God to make him die and suffer personally again. And yet
this is what ought to be said according to sense and reason, supposing they
believed the real Presence, and designed to refute their Adversaries.

NICETAS continuing to relate as from the part of these Greeks the Passage of
Euthychius, adds these words, It is as a Seal which imprints its form on the
matters which receive it, and which yet remain one, after this Communication,
without being diminished or changed into those things which receive the
Impression, although several in number. Even as one voice alone uttered by a
Person, and cast forth into the Air, remains wholly entire in him that utters
it, and yet is carried wholly entire in the Air to the ears of them which hear
it, without any of the hearers receiving more or less, but it remains
indivisible and wholly entire in all, when they should be several thousands in
number, although it be but one Body, for a voice is nothing else but verberated
Air. Let no one then doubt but that after the Holy Sacrifice and Resurrection
of the incorruptible and immortal Body of our Lord, and his holy and living
Blood are applied to the Anti-Types by their Consecration, but that they do I
say as much imprint his proper virtue, as the things I offered by way of
example do, and that he fully and entirely exists in them. I know not what Mr.
Arnaud thinks of these words, but certainly he ought not to suppress them as he
has done. He mentions what precedes, and follows them, but leaves out those
that are in the middle. It Is probable he could not well brook this comparison
of the Seal that imprints its Image on several things, nor that of the voice
which multiplies it self in the Air, without losing its Unity, for in effect
there happens no change of Substance neither in the Matter that receives
impression, nor in the Air which receives the voice, and these several Matters
to which the Seal communicates its Image, or those several parts of the Air
into which the voice is carried are one and the same thing amongst themselves,
and with the Seal, or the first Air, in respect of the Characters, or
Articulation, but not at all in respect of the Substance; whence we may
conclude the same thing concerning the parts of the Sacrament, which is to say,
that the Bread although it receives the impression of the virtue of Christ's Body,
yet does it keep its Substance, after the same manner as the Body of Jesus
Christ retains his, the virtue remaining the same in all the parts of the
Bread. It Is probable he did not like, that in proposing the comparison of the
Seal, Eutychius has observed, that it is not changed into the things to which it
communicates its Characters, whence it follows, that they are not likewise
changed substantially into him. It Is likely he could not well relish this
expression, that the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ are applied to the
Anti-Types, and that they imprint no less in them their proper virtues (...),
than the Seal does in things, and the voice which a man utters in the Air. In
effect I am much mistaken if this does not represent the Idea of a Body of
Jesus Christ, in virtue and efficacy against which Mr. Arnaud has so great an
aversion. I am greatly deceived if these expressions be not inconsistent with
the Doctrine of Transubstantiation or the real Presence. For what mean this
Body and Blood applied to the Anti-Types by Consecration, and which as a Seal
imprint on them their proper virtues, if we suppose these Anti-Types to be
really changed into this Body and Blood, and become the same numerical
Substance? But be it as it will, Mr. Arnaud ought not to retrench all this
Discourse from the midst of the rest, or if he designed to do it, not to
reproach me, for that in my Answer to the Perpetuity, I did not mention at
large the Passages of Nicetas and Zonarus. I can easilier justify my self
concerning this particular than he can himself, for it will appear at the end
of this Chapter, that 'twould have been very advantageous to me to represent
them at their full length, and the reason why I did it not, was because I was
unwilling to tire the Reader with Passages which are very long, and the sum of
which may be represented in few words; besides I have caused them to be printed
at large in the Margent of the last Edition of my Book. We must then attribute
this reproach Mr. Arnaud makes me, to his humor and not to his Judgment, for
had he taken time to consider, he would have spared us the reading of so
frivolous a matter. But when we call to mind that he himself has suppressed one
part of Eutychus his Discourse, this must be said to be an effect of his
Judgment and not of his humor, for he seems to be naturally an Enemy to Com pe
diums.

IN fine Nicetas, having made the Greeks of the first party speak their sense,
he introduces the other, and adds these following words; Which things being
alleged by these, and they producing several other Testimonies of the Church,
the others replied on the contrary, That the Mystery is not an acknowledgment
of the Resurrection, but only a Sacrifice, and consequently is corruptible,
being without Soul or Understanding, and that the Communicant does not receive
Jesus Christ entire, but in part. For were it, say they, incorruptible, it
would be endued with Spirit, it would be alive, it could neither be touched,
seen, nor chewed with the Teeth, and in its cutting it would be insensible of
pain.

TO know whether these People believed Transubstantiation, or the real
Presence, we need only inquire whether they had common sense, for unless they
were deprived of it, they could never believe that the Substance of the Bread
is changed into the dead and inanimate Body of our Lord, which is seen,
handled, cut, and chewed with the teeth, and which although inanimate, yet is
grieved and pained to see it self thus used. If Mr. Arnaud can make us believe
this he may make us believe any thing. How apparently impious and contradictory
would this their Opinion be to expose our Savior again to grief and pain; to
imagine they see him and chew him with their teeth, and cut his flesh in
pieces, that every one may partake thereof; to believe he is without Life and
Soul (...), and yet that he is pained and grieved, (...).

BUT It will be perhaps then demanded what is their sense, seeing Mr. Arnaud
assures us, That all this would be ridiculous, if we understand it as meant of
Bread, which is only the Figure of our Savior, and which contains only his
virtue. I answer, it is no hard matter to give their words a national sense in
supposing they only believe a change of Mystery and Virtue, for they mean that
we receive Jesus Christ in the Eucharist, as dead and sacrificed for us, and
that for to thus represent him the Symbols are taken from the number of those
things which have neither Life nor Understanding, from amongst those things (I
say) which we see, handle and chew with our teeth, and which relate to the
first visible State of Jesus Christ, when he lived on Earth, and was subject to
pain and misery; whereas were he represented in it in his incorruptible State,
wherein he is no more visible to our eyes, nor liable to the ill usages of his
Enemies, our Lord would without doubt employed other Symbols, wherein these
dolours are not so lively represented. And as to what they say concerning our
not receiving Jesus Christ wholly entire, but in part, this supposes nothing
else but that they believe the whole Body of the Bread receiving the impression
of our Savior's virtue becomes his whole Body, and that each Particle is in
effect but one part of it. It Is probable likewise they had regard to the moral
Body of our Savior which is the Church, and is represented by Bread, of which
every one takes a part, to signify that every particular Believer is not the
whole Body, but one part thereof in communion with the rest, according to that
of Saint Paul, For we being many are one Bread and one Body; for we are all
partakers of 1 Cor. 10:
that one Bread.

SO that here is the Passage of Nicetas examined, and to the end it may not be
thought the sense I give it is only grounded on mere conjectures, we shall see
immediately that Zonarus expresses himself to the same effect, and that these
two Authors explain one another. And this is the reason Why I differed in this
particular from Mr. Aubertin, when he thought Nicetas did not faithfully relate
the Question, and that in effect the Dispute was grounded on
Transubstantiation, and the real Presence. This was his conjecture, and we all
know that the mere conjectures of Authors, although otherwise never so judicious,
lay not any necessity upon us of following them. Every man is at liberty in
these kinds of matters, and Mr. Arnaud who scruples not to deviate sometimes
from the Opinions of his own Doctors in Points of greater importance, had
little reason to say, That here I am at variance with my Master Page 237.
Aubertin. I do in truth profess my self a Disciple to those that preceded me,
for I am not of an aspiring humor, neither have I as yet been accused of
affecting Singularity, but when Masters offer their conjectures under the title
of videtur, touching an Historical Passage, as Mr. Aubertin has done, the
Disciples have right to judge of it and reject it, if their conjectures be not
well grounded. Which is what I have done in this particular, and Mr. Arnaud
must not pretend to refute me by opposing Mr. Aubertin against me, much less in
quoting some pretended Marginal Notes of Wolphius, which appear not in his
Nicetas, Printed at Basil, 1557.

I come now to the other Passage which I said belonged to Zonarus, and which
Allatius attributes to Glycas, We know, says he, dear Brother, that some Tom.
6. Cyrill. Alex. in notis Valcan ad lib. advers. antrop. Allat. advers. Chr^ict.
suffering themselves to be too much led away by their own reasonings, do raise
doubts concerning the nature of the immaculate Mysteries, sometimes maintaining
the Eucharist to be incorruptible, seeing it communicates to us the life
immortal, and othertimes affirming it is corruptible, because we chew it with
the teeth and eat it. They assert likewise several other things according to
their own fancy, and as it were, making a sport and jest of these serious
things. But as for your part, dear Brother, follow not their example, trouble
not your self with examining the Mysteries, lest that curiously enquiring
whether the Holy Communion be above corruption, or whether it lasts but for a
time, in trusting too much to your self you exceed the bounds of Truth. For
these kind of things are to be believed, not questioned. And let not your
reason make you so much a Sceptick as not to reject one of these Opinions as
impious, and hold the other. For in examining them you will find they may be
both maintained in a Catholic sense. The Bread of the Prothesis, is that very
Flesh of our Savior that was crucified at the time of his Passion, and laid in
the Sepulcher. Which manifestly appears by what our Lord said to his Apostles
when he instituted the Mysteries of the New Testament; for in giving 'em to
them, he said, take eat, this is my Body which is broken for you for the
remission of sins. Consider, that if the Flesh of our Lord had not been
corruptible it would not have been subject to the corruption of Death. For that
which is incorruptible, is above all corruption. The Bread then of the
Prothesis is subject to corruption, as being the real Flesh of Jesus Christ,
which is cut, and chewed with the teeth, for were it incorruptible it could be
neither cut nor eaten; moreover be not troubled at this saying, nor think it
hard and insupportable, for although we speak to you of corruption in this
divine and dreadful Cummunion, yet is it in fine attended with incorruption.
For the Flesh of our Lord after it had yielded to death, and was laid in the
Sepulcher, was not corrupted according to the saying of the Prophet, Thou will
not suffer thy Holy One to see corruption, for being preserved by the Divinity
it remained incorruptible. So likewise the Bread of the Prothesis after it has
been chewed with the teeth, and descended into the Stomach as in a Sepulcher,
returns to the state of incorruption according to John Damascene, being united
to the Substance of the Soul. And therefore those that depart this life, if
they have participated of the Holy Mysteries of our Lord with a pure
conscience, are taken up by Angels by means of what they have received, as
says Saint Chrysostom.

MR. Arnaud that always offers his Arguments as Decrees, says, That a man need
but only read these words, that the Bread which is offered on the Altar is that
very Flesh of Christ which was crucified and buried, to explode the vain
Arguments of Mr. Claude, and that a man who undertakes to argue against such an
Evidence deserves not to be heard. And I passing by the vanity of his
Discourse, which shows how greatly it is his interest that I be not heard, do
demand Public Audience to discover the Nullity of his Proof. There is nothing
more usual in Eccelsiastical Writers then to say of a Subject to which the
Scripture gives the name of Jesus Christ, that it is Jesus Christ himself. Saint
Chrysostom speaking of a poor man, says, That he is Jesus Christ himself,
Chrysostom. Hom. 15. in Romans lib. 4. de Sace^dot.
who suffered death for us. Discoursing in another place of the Church, he
says, That it is the Body it self of Jesus Christ. Saint Austin expresses
himself after the same manner in several places, and were it requisite, we
could easily August. in Psalm. 87 and Scrm 49. and 53. de verb. Dom.
show that this same, or he himself, is applied sometimes to the Poor, and
sometimes to the Church, and sometimes again to every particular Believer in
Sedulius, Cesarius, Fulgentius, Ephraim, Valerian, in Alcuinus amongst the
Ancients, and Cabasilas and Jeremias amongst the Modern. Moreover how can Mr.
Arnaud (who so triumphantly charges me with differing from Mr. Aubertin in an
Historical Passage) maintain that the Evidence of these words of Zonarus, (the
Bread is the very Flesh it self of Jesus Christ which has been sacrificed for
us) leaves no place for my arguings, he I say, who knows very well that the
most famous Doctors of the Roman Church do teach that this Proposition, the
Bread is the Body of Jesus Christ, cannot be admitted but in a Figurative
Sense? Every Proposition, says Occam, in which the Body of Jesus Occham quod
4. quaest. 35. Bell. lib. 1. d. Euchu. cap 1.
Christ is said to be Bread, is impossible. This Proposition, says Bellarmin,
that the Bread is the Body of Jesus Christ, if it be not taken Figuratively and
in this sense, that the Bread signifies the Body of Jesus Christ, is wholly
absurd and impossible, for the Bread cannot be the Body of Jesus Christ.

SUAREZ and Vasquez affirm the same thing, and were not these three last
Jesuits, I might likewise say in my turn, that here the Disciple is at variance
with his Masters. In the third place I affirm that in the Discourse of Zonarus
the Term of, the same, relates not so much to that of Flesh, as that of
sacrificed, as Mr. Arnaud renders it, and of buried, to signify not the Bread
is this Flesh in propriety of Substance, but that it is this dead and buried
Flesh; which shows how frivolous Mr. Arnaud's Proof is, for this can neither be
the same death nor burial, it must then of necessity be another. In fine, it is
but observing never so little Zonarus Discourse, and we shall find he
distinguishes the Bread from the Body of Jesus Christ, for he compares the one
with the other, saying, that as the Flesh of Jesus Christ suffered death and
was buried, so the Bread is subject to corruption; being chewed with the teeth,
eaten, and sent down into the Stomach, as in a Sepulcher; and that as the Flesh
of Christ overcame corruption, so in like manner the Bread becomes
incorruptible, and passes into the Substance of the Soul; which shows that his
sense is, that the Bread is the Flesh it self of Jesus Christ, not
Substantially, but Mystically, and consequently this pretended Evidence of Mr.
Arnaud is no more than one of his Whimsies.

IN effect, suppose that Zonarus believed Transubstantiation, and that what he
calls Bread is the proper Substance of Jesus Christ, is it possible his
extravagancy has lead him so far as to believe that this Flesh is at first
corruptible, and afterward becomes incorruptible; that it is cut and chewed
with the Teeth, and in fine reduced into the Substance of the Soul? Mr. Arnaud
says, it is probable that Zonarus abuses the word corruption and extends this
Ibid. page ^44.
Term to all the changes that happen to the Body of Jesus Christ, not in it
self but in respect of the Vayl which covers it. But this evasion will not
serve his turn, for Zonarus says, that the Bread is subject to corruption, as
being the true Flesh of Jesus Christ. Now it is not in respect of its Accidents,
or Vayl, that it is the true Flesh of Jesus Christ according to the Hypothesis
of Transubstantiation. It is so by the change of Substance. Not to take notice
that to eat and chew Accidents with the teeth (that is to say, Figures and
Colors stripped from their Substance) is a singular Fancy.

THIS Passage of Zonarus which I now examined puts me in mind of another of the
same Authors, who was a Grecian, and famous amongst his own People and lived
about the Twelfth Century, which shall be my Eighteenth Proof. The Passage is
taken out of his Commentaries on the Cannons of the Apostles and Councils. See
here what he writes on the 32. Canon of the Sixth Council in Trullo; The Divine
Mysteries, I mean the Bread and Wine, do represent to us the Body and Blood of
our Lord, for in giving the Bread to his Disciples, he said to them, take eat
this is my Body, and in delivering the Cup, he said, drink ye all of it, this
is my Blood. Seeing then the Lord in his Divine Passion, after he had poured
out his Blood, caused to flow from his Side pierced with a Spear, not only
Blood, but likewise Water, the Church has therefore thought it necessary to
mingle Water with the Wine in the Holy Mysteries.

THERE may be made two important Reflections on this Passage; First, he says,
the Bread and Wine do represent to us the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, which
cannot agree with the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, unless forced by several
Interpretations unknown to the Greeks, as that by the Bread we must understand
the Accidents or Appearances of Bread; and by the word represent an inclusive
Representation of the thing it self. Secondly, that grounding as he does this
Representation of the words of Christ, This is my Body, this is my Blood, it is
clear that he has taken them himself in a sense of Representation, and believed
that 'twas as much as if our Savior had said, This Bread represents my Body,
this Cup my Blood; for otherwise he could not ground as he has done his
Proposition, that the Bread and Cup represent the Body and Blood of our Lord,
on this reason, that our Savior said, This is my Body, this is my Blood.

THIS Passage seeming to determine the Question in our favor, it will not be
amiss therefore to consider, what may be opposed against it; to avoid its
force, Zonarus makes use of the Term of (...), which may be said to be better
rend'red, not represent, but present, give, communicate; and that the sense of
this Author is not, that the Bread and Wine do represent to us the Body and
Blood of Jesus Christ, as Signs and Pictures represent their Original, but that
they present and communicate them to us in effect, inasmuch as they contain the
Substance of them, and that it is to confirm this Proposition he alleges the
words of our Savior, This is my Body, this is my Blood. But this evasion will
not serve turn, if the sense and sequel of Zonarus his Discourse be never so
little considered. His Design was to confute the Armenians, in showing that
there ought to be Water mingled with the Wine in the Chalice. To prove this, he
asserts, we must represent in the Mystery the Water and Blood which ran down
the pierced Side of our Savior when on the Cross, and to confirm this
Proposition, he has recourse to this general Maxim, that the Mysteries, which
is to say, the Bread and Wine, do represent the Body and Blood of our Lord.
Which plainly shows then we must not translate the Verb (...), present, or
give, for why, says he, the Bread and Chalice give us the Body and Blood of
Christ; but because Jesus Christ has said, This is my Body, this is my Blood.
We must then put Water into the Cup, because Blood and Water issued out from
our Savior's Side. The Armenians have said on the contrary there must be none
put in, because the Lord only made mention of his Blood; that it is very
uncertain, whether the Mysteries give us this Water which ran down from our
Lord's Side; and that supposing they do give it us, yet does it not hence
follow we must mingle Water with the Wine in the Cup, the Wine alone being
sufficient to be transubstantiated into the Blood and Water which accompanies
the Blood. We must then necessarily (if we suppose Zonarus speaks sense)
understand the Term of (...), in the sense of Representation, and then his
Discourse will appear rational; The Mysteries represent the Body and Blood of
Jesus Christ, as they were upon the Cross. Now in this State there issued from
the pierced Side of Jesus Christ Blood and Water, we must then express in the
Mystery this Circumstance, and to express it we must mingle Water with the Wine
in the Sacred Chalice, to the end that as the Wine represents the Blood, so the
Water may represent this Divine Water which gushed out together with ^e Blood
from our Savior's Side. And this being thus cleared up, it is hence evident
that Zonarus understood these words of our Lord, This is my Body, this is my
Blood, in a sense of a Mystical Representation.

CHAP. X.
The Nineteenth Proof, that, we do not find the Greeks do teach the Doctrines
which necessarily follow that of Transubstantiation. The Twentieth, is, the
Testimony of sundry Modern Greeks that have written several Treatises touching
their Religion. The One and Twentieth, from the Form of Abjuration which the
Greeks are forced to make when they embrace the Religion of the Latins.

I Did affirm in my Answer to the Perpetuity, that we donot find the Greeks do
teach any of those Doctrines which necessarily follow the Belief of the change
of Substances, whence I concluded, there was no likelihood they were in this
Point agreed with the Latins. This Consequence has disturbed Mr. Arnaud, and as
he makes his own Dictates and those of Reason to be one and the same thing, so
he has not scrupled to affirm, That Reason rejects this as a silly
extravagancy. But forasmuch as we have often experienced Lib. 10. cap. 8. page
59
that in matters of Reason, Folly and Extravagancy, it is no sure course
absolutely to rely upon Mr. Arnaud's words, therefore will we again lay aside
the Authority of his Oracles, and examine the thing as it is in it self.

FIRST, The Greeks do not teach the Existence of the Accidents of Bread and
Wine in the Eucharist without any Subject, or Substance which sustains them.
Now this is so necessary a Consequence of Transubstantiation, that those which
believe this last, cannot avoid the teaching and acknowledging of the other,
supposing they are endued with common sense. In effect it would be to charge
the Greeks with the greatest folly, to suppose they imagined that the proper
Substance of the Body of Jesus Christ, even the very same Body which was born
of the Virgin, and is now in Heaven, does really exist on the Altar being the
same in all respects, as the Bread of the Eucharist does appear to us to be,
that is to say, white, round, divisible into little pieces, etc. and that the
same things which, (as they speak) did qualify and affect the Bread before, do
qualify and affect the same Body of Jesus Christ. We must not charge the whole
Greek Church with such an absurdity. Whence it follows we must not attribute to
her the belief of Transubstantiation; for did she make profession of believing
and teaching it, she would teach likewise the existence of Accidents without a
Subject; these two Doctrines being so closely linked together, that it is
impossible to separate them unless they fall upon this fancy, that the
Accidents of Bread do exist in the Body it self of Jesus Christ, or this other,
namely, that which appears in the Eucharist is not really the Accidents of
Bread, but false appearances, and pure Phantasms which deceive our senses,
which is no less absurd, nor less contrary to the Doctrine of the Greeks.

SECONDLY, Neither do we find that they teach what the Latins call the
Concomitancy, which is to say, that the Body and Blood are equally contained
under each Species; but we find on the contrary, that they establish the
necessity of communicating of both kinds, and ground it on the necessity there
is of receiving the Body and Blood of Christ, as will appear in the Sequel of
this Chapter; which is directly opposite to this Concomitancy. Yet is it not to
be imagined but that those People who believe the Conversion of Substances, do
at the same time establish this other Doctrine. For if we suppose as the Church
of Rome does, that we receive with the mouths of our Bodies, this same
Substance of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, which he had when on Earth,
and has still in Heaven, it is not possible to separate in such a manner his
Blood from his Body, and his Body from his Blood, as to reckon the Body to be
contained in the only Species of Bread, and the Blood in the only Species of
the Wine, seeing it is true that this Separation cannot be conceived without
breaking the Unity of the Life which is in Jesus Christ.

THIRDLY, Neither do we find the Greeks have ever applied themselves to show,
how it is possible for our Lord's Body to exist in the Eucharist, stripped of its
proper and natural Figure, deprived of its dimensions, impalpable, indivisible,
without motion and action, which is moreover another Consequence of
Transubstantiation.

FOURTHLY, We do not find the Greeks do in any sort trouble themselves,
touching the nourishment, our Bodies receive when they partake of the
Eucharist, and yet is it certain that if we suppose they believed
Transubstantiation it is impossible for them to obtain any satisfaction touching
this matter. For should they deny this nourishment, they may be convinced of it
by experience, and if it be referred to the proper Substance of Jesus Christ,
they plunge themselves into an Abyss of Absurdities and Impieties. If it be
said the Accidents nourish, besides that common sense will not suffer us to say
that Colors and Figures nourish, they that affirm this do expose themselves to
the derision of all the World, who know our nourishment is made by the Addition
of a new Substance to ours. To affirm that God causes the Bread to reassume its
first Substance, or that he immediately creates another, this is to make him
work Miracles when we please, and to be too free in our disposals of the
Almighty Power of God. And therefore the Latins have found themselves so
perplexed, that some of 'em have taken one side, and some another. Some have
boldly denied this nourishment, whatsoever experience there is of the contrary,
as Guitmond, and Algerus, others, chosen rather to affirm the Accidents do
nourish, as Thomas Aquinas and Bellarmin. Others have invented the return of
the first Substance of Bread, as Vasquez; and others the Creation of a new
Substance, as Suarez and others. Mr. Arnaud has chosen rather to affirm, That
we are nourished, not with the Body of Lib. 2. cap 6. page 155.
Jesus Christ, but after another manner known only to God, which shows his
perplexity to be so great in this particular, that he knew not on which side to
turn himself. Whilst the Greeks possess so great Tranquillity in this Point,
that it does not appear they ever found the least difficulty in it. They assure
us the Eucharist does nourish our Bodies; but they see none of those
inconveniences which disturb the Latins; which clearly shows they do not
believe the Conversion of Substances. For did they believe it, they would not
fail to see what common sense discovers to others; and seeing it, how is it
possible they should express no astonishment, nor any difficulty therein, or at
least not take that side which Mr. Arnaud has taken, which is to leave these
difficulties to Almighty God?

NEITHER do we find that the Greeks do trouble themselves about the alteration,
or corruption which frequently happens in the Substance of the Eucharist, as
the Latins do, although the former of these have more reason for it, than the
latter. For the Latins take all possible care to keep their Hosts from
corrupting; but the Greeks on the contrary take none at all. And keeping as
they do the Sacramental Bread sprinkled with consecrated Wine, the space of a
whole year, for the use of the sick, it often happens that it is corrupted and
full of Maggots, as it is observed by Sacranus, and the Archbishop of Gnesne,
and consequently are more exposed to these inconveniences than the Latins. Yet
do they not seem to be concerned, nor inform themselves whence come these
Worms, which being as they are Substances, it cannot be said they generate from
bare Accidents. Neither can it be said without blasphemy, that they are made of
the proper Substance of Jesus Christ.

THIS Proof may be extended farther; for it is certain we do not find amongst
the Greeks any of these kind of things which depend on Transubstantiation. I
mean which necessarily and wholly depend thereon. They are in this respect in a
most profound silence. But it is worth our while to hear Mr. Arnaud. It is
indeed, says he, a real truth, that the Greeks take little Lib. 10 cap 8. p.
59.
notice of these Philosophical Consequences. Samonas speaks occasionally of a
Body in two places, and of Accidents without a Subject, the Archbishop of Gaza
does the same, but both one and the other of these do this by constraint. What
signifies this tergiversating, for he ought not to say the Greeks speak but
little hereof, seeing they speak not at all of it. This Samonas and this
Archbishop of Gaza are not Authors to be quoted, seeing we shall make it appear
in its place, that the Book which bears the name of the first of these is
deservedly suspected to be counterfeit, and that the other is a Roman Proselyte
wedded to the Interests of the Court of Rome. It is evident that to establish a
restriction of this Consequence, Mr. Arnaud should have better Proofs. But that
we may do him right, we will not conceal what he adds afterward. I drew from
the silence of the Fathers touching the Miracles of Transubstantiation, and its
Consequences, an Argument to conclude they believed it not. He answers, that
instead of Fathers, I should substitute the Greeks, Armenians, Ibid. page 63.
and Copticks of those times, for, says he, it is certain that all these
Christians believed Transubstantiation, as we do, and yet take no notice of all
these difficulties which Mr. Claude' s head is full of. This acknowledgment is
sincere, and we need desire no more. The Greeks take no more notice of the
difficulties arising from Transubstantiation than the Armenians and Copticks,
and Mr. Arnaud grants this to be so undeniable a Truth, that he makes it the
ground of an Answer.

OUR present business then is to know whether the Consequence I hence draw be
just and good. Which he contests me, and first he says, that all these Eastern
Churches profess to believe original sin, and yet their Divines trouble not
themselves about explaining this Doctrine. He adds, that they observe Ibid. page
58, 59.
the same silence in all the Questions and difficulties which the Socinians
propose against the Trinity, the Person of the Holy Spirit, and the
satisfaction of Christ, although these difficulties are as obvious and sensible as
those alleged against the real Presence.

BUT it is his prejudice, and not his reason that has dictated to him this
Answer. For first, there is a vast difference betwixt the incomprehensible
Mysteries respecting the Divinity, which being above the natural light of
reason require a profound submission, and the Doctrine of
Transubstantiatiation. The nature of the Sacraments is well known, and the
matter and signs thereof are better known, which are Bread and Wine. Even the
thing signified, to wit, the natural Body and Blood of Jesus Christ are not
only the natural Object of Reason, but likewise of Sense, and both one and the
other of these Faculties can judge of it, nay, they do judge of it by a
spontaneous motion, even when we would not our selves. Secondly, besides this
infinite difference, which yields no room for Mr. Arnaud's comparison, the
Point in hand concerns not the difficulties touching Transubstantiation, or the
real Presence, but the Doctrines which necessarily attend them, and Questions
which immediately arise thence of themselves. There is a great deal of
difference between these two Particulars. The difficulties which are raised
against a Truth, are commonly false Consequences which the Adversaries draw
thence; and I confess it would not be to reason aright, absolutely to conclude
that a Church holds not a Doctrine, because she troubles not her self in
answering all the Objections which may be made against it. To allow these kinds
of Arguments, there are distinctions to be made, and particular circumstances
to be observed, without which there can be nothing concluded. But we speak here
of real Consequences of a Doctrine, of Consequences, I say, which immediately
show themselves to the ordinariest capacity, without any great Meditation and
Study. Now although the Greeks do not apply themselves to answer the Objections of
the Socinians, against Original Sin, against the Mystery of the Trinity, the
Person of the Holy Spirit, and Satisfaction of Christ, being perhaps not
acquainted with them, yet do we plainly see amongst them the Consequences of
these Doctrines. They baptize little Children, and baptize them in the Name of
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, they believe the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit
are consubstantial; they adore the Person of the Holy Spirit, they put their
trust in the death of Jesus Christ, and such like things. Wherefore should it
not be the same in respect of the Consequences of Transubstantiation? Is it
possible to hold this Doctrine, without thinking at the same time at least on
some one of these Consequences, on the actual existence of a humane Body in
several places, the existence of this Body without its usual Dimensions, the
concomitancy of the Body and Blood, and on the Accidents of Bread which remain
after Consecration.

THE difficulties which the Socinians object against the Trinity and other
Doctrines mentioned by Mr. Arnaud, are for the most part false Consequences
which these Heretics draw from these Doctrines. It is no wonder if almost all
Christians be ignorant of these Consequences. They do not spring up naturally:
For it is passion and blindness that produces them. For I call blindness those
false Lights which cause these Heretics to behold that which is not. But that
which Mr. Arnaud calls the difficulties of Transubstantiation are real
Consequences of this Doctrine, and acknowledged to be such by them of the
Church of Rome. Let him say as long as he will these are Philosophical
Consequences, I affirm they are not so Philosophical as to hinder them from
being very natural, appearing to be so, even to the light of common sense. It
is most natural for a man that believes the Substance of Bread ceases to be, to
think on the Accidents which remain. It is very natural for him that believes
the Body of Jesus Christ, and his Blood to be substantially therein, to imagine
that where the Body or Flesh is, there must the Blood be also, which is called
in one word the concomitancy. It is most natural, for him that believes that
it is not the Substance of Bread that nourishes, to consider what should cause
this nourishment. It is very natural for a man that believes the Body of our
Lord to be a real humane Body, to inquire how this Body can be stripped of the
proprieties of its Nature. It is natural, when we see Worms which engender in
the Eucharist, to inquire whence they take their matter. It is likewise certain
that Philosophy is not properly any more concerned in these Consequences than
barely to defend them, and not to illustrate them. And yet when they should not
appear in themselves to the eyes of the Greeks, and we suppose the whole Body
of this Church to be in such a prodigious stupidity, that for so many Ages
since they have discovered nothing of themselves touching these things, which
would be in my mind one of the boldest suppositions imaginable, yet it must be
acknowledged they have seen them in the Doctrine and common belief of the
Latins, who have filled their Religion with them since Beringarius his time.

NEITHER is it true, that 'twas men's Disputations which occasioned all these
Questions on the Subject of the Eucharist, or discovered these Consequences we
speak of. Mr. Arnaud would fain persuade us to it, but we know the contrary,
and that it is the very Doctrine it self of Transubstantiation which has
produced them. For they take their birth from what our eyes see, and hands
touch, and experiences, which cannot but be acknowledged. In effect, they are
to be found more amongst the Schoolmen than Controvertists, more amongst
Authors of the Church of Rome than Protestants.

THERE is so great absurdity in saying the Greeks are ignorant of the
Consequences of the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, supposing they believed it,
that Mr. Arnaud seems to be ashamed to maintain it to the end. Ibid. page 62.
He turns himself on another side, and tells us that it is the docility of the
Faith of the Greeks which will not permit them to behold these difficulties.
But this is very absurdly answered again. For were it thus, the Greeks
themselves would at least tell us something of it. I mean they would tell us
themselves in some sort, that they know well all these Consequences, and are
not so stupid, but that they see such and such Questions which arise from the
Conversion of the Substances, but that they behold them as an Abyss which
cannot be fathomed, or to use Mr. Arnaud's Eloquent Expression, That they
stifle and Ibid.
drown all humane thoughts in the absolute certainty of the Word of God, and
infallible Authority of his Church. They would give some reason for their
silence, and endeavor to hinder its being interpreted in an ill sense. They
would instruct their People in the same Modesty and Docility, and observe, that
their Conduct in this particular was more discreet than that of the Latins. And
this is what the Greeks would do, did they believe Transubstantiation after
this gentle and quiet manner Mr. Arnaud attributes to them. Yet do they not so
much as mention these Consequences or difficulties, they take no notice of
their own silence in this respect. But Mr. Arnaud speaks for them without any
call or order from them. He tells us his Conceptions, and those of Ernulphus an
English Bishop of the Twelfth Century, but not a word of the Greeks. The Greeks
are in such an absolute silence on this Subject, that this silence cannot come
from any other cause than the nature of their Doctrines, which not having the
Consequences of Transubstantiation, do no ways oblige them to take notice of
these same Consequences.

AND thus far I think my Argument may pass for good in the Opinion of those
People that understand reason. Yet Mr. Arnaud will have this to be Ibid. page
59.
mere Folly and Extravagancy. And to show it to be so, he tells us, That reason
it self shows us we must not disown certain and undoubted Truths under
pretense, they appear contrary amongst themselves on weak conjectures; but the
certainty of these Truths should make us conclude touching the falsity of these
Reasonings and pretended Contrarieties. It is, adds he, as certain a Truth as
any thing of this kind can be, that the Greeks and other Eastern Churches do
believe the real Presence and Transubstantiation, and there is nothing but may
be called in question upon the same grounds, if we may doubt of the consent of
all the Churches with the Church of Rome in this Doctrine. This is another
Truth, that the Greeks take little notice of the Philosophicl Consequences.
Whence he concludes, that these two Truths being equally certain, they cannot
be contrary, and that they show us the falsity of Mr. Claude's Consequence.

IT must be acknowledged that never man had less trouble to answer an Adversary
than Mr. Arnaud. I prove to him the Greeks do not believe Transubstantiation,
because they make no mention of its Consequences nor difficulties. He denies my
Consequence because the Greeks do believe. Transubstantiation and that two
Truths cannot be contradictory. It costs little to make such kind of Answers,
and it costs no more to tell him that if it were a certain Truth (as he affirms
it is) that the Greeks believed the conversion of Substances, he would have no
need to trouble himself to answer my Arguments. For the Question being decided,
there would be nothing remaining upon this account betwixt us. I believe I
established the Negative, which I defend a thousand times more solidly, than he
has proved his Affirmative; but if I pretended to elude his Arguments by
saying, I deny the Consequence, because the Greeks do not believe
Transubstantiation, I should be an impertinent Disputer. It seems to me I
should make it appear, either that the Matters of Fact which Mr. Arnaud
proposes are not true, or that he takes them in a contrary sense, and draws
from them false Conclusions; but barely to say I deny the Consequence, because
it opposes my Thesis, which I hold for a certain Truth, this would be to make
my self ridiculous. I know that a man that answers, supposes always his Thesis
to be true, and that he has liberty to draw thence, if he can, where withal to
solve the Arguments of his Adversary, but he must do it in another manner, than
by saying, I deny the Consequence, because my Thesis is true. For otherwise his
Adversary will tell him, and I prove that your Thesis is false by the very
Argument I offer; so that this would be always to begin again. Mr. Arnaud will
reply, he does not barely propose his Thesis for an Answer, but proposes it, as
having already solidly established it by a great number of Proofs, and pretends
that his Proofs surmount mine. I confess, that if this be his sense, he has
right to oppose Proof against Proof, and require a comparison to be made of
them, before the Reader passes his final Sentence. But I demand likewise for my
part that there be comprehended in this comparison, not only one o^ my Proofs,
but all of them together, with the Answers which I shall return his to show
their weakness and insufficiency. Which is what a judicious Reader ought to do
at the end of the Dispute, in the mean time each Proof in particular should
have his force, neither must he imagine to elude them, one after another, by
barely opposing against them those which seem to establish the contrary. If I
pretended by the only force of my Argument drawn from the silence of the Greeks
on the Consequences of Transubstantiation to acquit my self of the examination
of Mr. Arnaud's Proofs, and end the Dispute by this means alone, he might
reasonably bring me back to this Discussion. For this would be to err in the
same manner as the Author of the Perpetuity has done, who would decide the
whole Controversy of the Eucharist, by an Argument drawn from the pretended
Consequences of a change, without any regard to our Proofs of Fact, which
conclude directly the contrary. It would signify nothing for me to allege
that my method is a method of Prescription, and not of Discussion; for this
would be mere wrangling. But this is not my design. I proposed to my self,
(having first established by diverse most solid Reason, that the Greeks do not
believe Transubstantiation,) to answer in its due order whatsoever Mr. Arnaud
has offered to show that the Greeks do believe it. And yet this Proof, which I
here treat of, comes with the rest into the order of the Dispute. It has then,
as I said, its particular force and weight, and Mr. Arnaud must not imagine to
overthrow it by barely opposing his Proofs against it, for before the Dispute
be ended, I hope to show, that what he terms Proofs, are but mere Paralogisms
and Delusions.

TO the end the Reader may better judge of the solidity of my Proof, Answer to
the Sccond Treatise of Perp. cap. 8. page 442. Edit. 7.
he must observe, that I offered it in my Answer to the Perpetuity only on this
Ground, that there is no Law amongst the Greeks, or general determination, that
establishes Transubstantiation, that none of their Councils have decided it,
none of their Confessions of Faith comprehended it, nor any of their public
Catechisms asserted it. Now when men differ touching a matter of Fact, they
usually have recourse to the place where they may most reasonably expect
satisfaction, and if it does not appear there in it self, sense obliges 'em to
address themselves to its Consequences, and if the Consequences do not manifest
themselves any more than the Fact it self, they draw thence a negative
Argument, which in its place, has all the force that can be desired. This
method have I followed in this Answer to Mr. Arnaud, for I produce not this
Argument drawn from Consequences, till I manifested that the Fact it self here
in question, that is to say, Transubstantiation, does not appear any where
amongst the Greeks, neither in respect of the Terms, nor thing which the Terms
signify, and to justify it I have produced what Mr. Arnaud has alleged to
the contrary.

IN effect, if you set aside the Latiniz'd Greeks, such as Bessarion, Emanuel
Calecas, Plusiadenus, the counterfeit Greeks, such as the Baron of Spartaris,
and the Archbishop of Gaza, whom I can prove to be a Pensioner of the Court of
Rome, and others that are notoriously suspected, such as the pretended Samonas,
the Monk Agapius, the six Priests of the Patriarchate of Antioch, and the Synod
of Cyprus in the Year 1668. with some Acts that have been altered by the Latins
already mentioned by us, all the rest consists only in Arguings and
Consequences, which have even in this quality neither Evidence nor certainty,
as will appear hereafter. For as to Mr. Arnaud's vaunting, that he has showed
Transubstantiation, has been defined by Councils, that it is expressly
contained in the profession of Faith signed by the Sarrasins, and in the
Ecclesiastical Writings of the Greeks, is what he ought not to affirm on such
slight Grounds, seeing People may be convinced of the contrary by the bare
reading of these pretended Councils of Cyrillus, Berrhea, and Partenius, and
Passages he produces as well of the profession of Faith of these Sarrasin
Proselytes, as Ecclesiastical Writings; for it is certain we find
Transubstantiation neither defined, nor expressly taught therein.

THIS Belief then appearing not of it self in the Greek Church, and the
expressions she makes use of being liable to sundry Interpretations, a prudent
man will consider the Doctrines which depend thereon, and which are the
inseparable Consequences of it; for if these Doctrines do no more appear than
the Substantial Conversion, this must be granted a new Proof which confirms the
first, and very much helps us to make our final Judgment. For as I said, it is
not possible that the Greeks can be in this Point agreed with the Latins,
without believing at the same time with them, that the Accidents of Bread which
remain, subsist without being upheld by the Substance of Bread, that the Body
of Jesus Christ is substantially present in several places at one time, that it
exists in the Eucharist void of these natural dimensions, and that the Body and
Blood are equally found under both Species by virtue of the concomitancy, etc.
These are the necessary dependances on Transubstantiation, and the Greeks are
so much the more obliged to explain themselves, in as much as the Terms by
which they are said to express their Belief touching this last particular are
equivocal, and capable of several senses, for they ought at least to show
hereupon what is their meaning. So that having not done it, it is a Proof they
are not agreed with the Church of Rome on the principal Point of the
Conversion. And yet notwithstanding all this, if we will believe Mr. Arnaud, my
Proof is but a foolish and extravagant one. He may say what he pleases, but it
seems to me by this, that for the most part there is no agreeing with him under
any other Terms than the renouncing of our Reason. But to proceed.

I shall add to what I have already represented, the Testimonies of some Modern
Greeks, who have given us exact descriptions of their Religion, and yet not a
tittle of Transubstantiation, although their design and occasions which set them
on writing, obliged them not to be silent on so important an Article. I might
begin with Jeremias the Patriarch of Constantinople; for let a man read over
never so many times his Answers to the Divines of Wittemberg, yet cannot he
find the least intimation of a substantial Conversion, unless he suffers his
mind to be corrupted by Mr. Arnaud's Declamations, but it will be more proper
to refer this examination to the following Book, wherein, the order and sequel
of this Dispute will oblige us to mention it.

WE have Christopher Angelus his Letter, given us by George Felavius a Lutheran
Divine of Dantzic; which Angelus was a Greek, a man both pious and learned. He
greatly suffered amongst the Turks for his Religion, and at length came into
England to end there his Days in peace and quietness. His Letter contains a
large Account of the Customs of the Greeks touching the Eucharist, wherein he
is so far from asserting the substantial Conversion of the Latins, that he
expounds on the contrary these words of Body and Blood by them of Bread and
Wine. The Priest, says he, carrying in his hands Status and ritus Ecclesiae
Graecae a Christoph Angel^. cap. 23.
the Holy Things, draws near to the People and stops at the door of the
Sanctuary, where at once he distributes to every one the Body and Blood of our
Lord, that is to say, Bread and Wine mixed, saying, this Servant of God
receives, in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, for the Remission of
his Sins, Amen.

WE have a Confession of Faith Compiled by Metrophanus Critopulus at Confession
Cath. and Apost. in Orient. Ecclesiae per Metrophanem Critopulum.
Helmstat in the Year 1625. He was not long after made Patriarch of Alexandria.
There is a whole Chapter in this Confession, the Title whereof is, (...), of
the Lord's Supper. In which having established the use of leavened Bread, the
Unity of this Bread to represent our Unity with Jesus Christ, and one another,
he adds. That the consecrated Bread is truly the Body of Christ, and the Wine
undoubtedly his Blood, but the manner, says he, of this change is unknown and
unintelligible to us. For the Understanding of these things is reserved for the
Elect in Heaven, to the end we may obtain the more favor from God by a Faith
void of curiosity. Those that seek after the reason of all things overthrow
Reason and corrupt Knowledge, according to the Observation of Theophrastus,
seeing then this Mystery is really the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, it is
therefore very pertinently called by Saint Ignatius, a remedy against
Mortality, a Medicine that purifies us, and an Antidote which preserves us from
Death, and makes us live in God by Jesus Christ.

HERE we find the Bread to be really the Body of Jesus Christ, and that it
suffers a change, but we find not that the Substance of the one is really
changed into that of another, which is precisely the Transubstantiation of the
Latins. But on the contrary that the manner of this change is unknown to us
whilst on Earth, which is to say, in a word he would have us indeed to believe
a change, (for the Bread is not naturally the Body of Christ) but will not
suffer us to determine the manner of it, which what is it, but a plain
rejecting of Transubstantiation, seeing that it is it self the Determination of
this manner. It will be replied that they of the Church of Rome, do likewise
acknowledge Transubstantiation to be an unaccountable change, that we must
believe it without troubling our selves how it is possible, and Mr. Arnaud has
not failed to produce in this sense, the Passage of Metrophanus, which I now
mentioned according to his usual Custom, which is to turn to his advantage,
even those things that are most against him. But there is a great deal of
difference between saying, there is a change which makes the Bread become the
Body of Christ, although we know not the manner thereof, and affirming there is a
substantial change which converts the Substance of Bread into that of the Body
of Jesus Christ, although we know not how this comes to pass. By the first we keep
our selves in the general Idea of a change without descending to a particular
determination. By the second we determine what this change is, to wit, a change
of one Substance into another. In the first, the expression is still retained
which supposes the Bread remains, to wit, That the Bread is the Body of Christ;
but in the second, this expression is willingly laid aside, because it cannot
be admitted but under the benefit of Figures and Distinctions. The first is the
Language of the Greeks, the second that of the Latins.

BUT before we leave this Confession of Metrophanus, it will not be amiss to
make two reflections thereon, the one, that when he establishes the necessity of
the Communion, in both kinds, he grounds it on the necessity of partaking as
well of the Body as Blood of Christ, and alleges for this effect that saying
in the sixth Chapter of Saint John, If you eat not the Flesh of the Son Ibid.
cap. 91.
of Man, and drink his Blood, you will have no life in you. Now this reason
manifestly opposes the pretended concomitancy of the Latins, and
Transubstantiation it self; for if there be made a conversion of the Bread into
the proper Substance of the Body of Christ, such as it is at present, that is
to say, living and animate, those that receive the Species of Bread do partake
as well of the Blood as Body, and it cannot be said, there is any necessity of
receiving the Cup, by this reason that we must partake of the Blood, without
falling into a manifest contradiction, which is likewise the reason wherefore
in the Church of Rome it is believed to be sufficient to communicate of one
kind.

THE second Consideration concerning Metrophanus, is, that this Author
discoursing, toward the end of his Chapter, of the Sacrament which the Greeks
reserve for the sick, says, That they believe, according to the Doctrine of
the first Ibid.
Ecumenical Council, that the Mystery being reserved, remains still a Holy
Mystery, and never loses the virtue it once received. For as Wool, says he,
being once dyed, keeps its color; so the Sanctification remains in these
Mysteries ever indelible, and as the remains which are taken off the King's
Table are always the remains of the King's Table while they last, although kept
several years, so it cannot be but that the remains of this Holy Mystery, are
the remains of the Body and Blood of Christ. Let Mr. Arnaud tell us sincerely
whether this be the Style of a man that believes Transubstantiation, and
whether he himself would call that which is reserved of the Sacrament, the
remains of the Body and Blood of Christ, and compare the Sanctification which
the Bread receives to the color wherewith Wool is dyed. Whether he would say,
that this Sanctification remains in the Mysteries, and is indelible. For it is
certain this gives us the Idea of Bread, which, so remaining, yet receives an
Impression of Grace and Holiness, which resides in it as in its Subject, and
makes it to be the Body of Christ, but no wise transubstantiated Bread. If we
were to understand by the virtue, not an Impression of the Holy Spirit in the
Bread, but an Action that changed the Substance of the Bread into the Substance
of the Body of Christ, it might then be said the effect which is produced by
this Action, or Conversion, remains, that is to say, that it is ever the
Substance of the Body of Christ. But it could not be said, as Metrophanus does,
that the Action it self, that is to say, the Sanctification, always remained,
because it would be conceived in this case as a momentary Action, which ceases
to be, as soon as the Conversion is made. Neither could it be moreover compared
to the dye which Wool receives, seeing Wool remains still Wool in respect of
its Substance. In fine, if Metrophanus means no more but that the Mystery
remains still what it has been made, to wit, the Body of Christ, in Substance,
there can be no reason given, why, being able without doubt to explain himself
easily, and clearly, he chose rather to use obscure and perplexed Terms, which
have an Air wholly contrary to his Mind, and need a Commentary and
Distinctions, than to use clear and natural expressions; for how many
Commentaries need we to render intelligible, that this indelible Sanctification
which the Bread receives, and is like to the dye which Wool takes, signifies
the proper Substance of the Body and Blood of our Savior?

I will finish this Chapter with another Proof, taken from the Form of
Abjuration which the Greeks make when they leave their Religion to embrace the
Roman. One of the Articles they are made to confess is this, That the Body and
Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ with his Soul and Divinity, are really, truly,
Apud Possevin Bibl. select. lib. 6.
and substantially, in the Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, and that there is
made a Conversion of the whole Substance of Bread into the Body, and of the
whole Substance of Wine into the Blood, which Conversion the Catholic Church
calls Transubstantiation. The Greek runs thus, (...).

Here Is clearly expressed the substantial Conversion, (...), and
Transubstantiation (...), for thus do the Greeks speak when they become Latins,
and it is thus they ought to speak that believe this Doctrine. But why must the
Greeks profess this when they change their Religion, if they held the same
Language before? Is it usual, when Proselytes are received to make them profess
Doctrines common both to the Religion they forsake, and that which they
embrace? Do the Greeks do so by the Latins that pass over to them, and is not
this a plain sign that their former Belief touching this Point was not that of
the Church of Rome? For it is to be observed that this Formulary contains first
the Symbol with the addition of the filioque, which the Greeks do not receive.
Then it contains the Decrees of the Florentine Council, which the Greeks
reject, and in fine the Articles determined in the Council of Trent, and in
respect of this last part, it is the same profession of Faith which them of our
Communion make when they embrace that of Rome.

IT will be perhaps replied, that amongst these Articles there are two, to wit,
that of the Invocation of Saints, and worshipping of Images, which there is no
necessity of making the Greeks confess, seeing they practiced them already in
their Religion, whence it does not follow that they believed not
Transubstantiation, although found expressed in this Form of Confession, for there
ought to be the same Judgment made of this, as of the other two Articles. But
if this Answer happens to be approved by Mr. Arnaud, I will tell him it is of no
weight. For as to the Invocation, the Greeks will not practice it to the Saints
of the Church of Rome, which they do not acknowledge. When I enter into a
Church of the Latins, says Gregory the Confessor Hist. Conc. Fl^^. sect. 4.
cap. 31, Relig. Ruthen, art. 6.
in the History of Syropulus, I adore not the Image of any Saint, because I
know not any one of them that I see. They blaspheme, says Sacranus (speaking
of the Russians) against the Churches Saints, who lived in the Communion, and
Obedience of the Roman Church. In the Invocation of Saints, says the Error
Mos. ex Scarga art. ^
Jesuit Scarga, they are guilty of several absurdities. This Article then was
not needless, but on the contrary there was some kind of necessity to insert it
in the formulary. And as to that of Images, we all know that the Greeks do
abhor the Images of the Latins, and therefore call their Worship in this
respect Idolatry.

THE Greeks, says William Postel, call the Western People that are subject De
Repub. Turcor. page 46. Voyages of the Sieur Benard. lib. cap. 24.
to the Church of Rome, grand Idolaters, because we have Statues erected. They
have no other Images in their Churches, says the Sieur Benard, than the
Crucifix, the Virgin Mary, Saint John the Evangelist, and Saint George which
are Painted in Tables. They teach, says the Jesuit Richard; that carved Images
are Idols, and that it is unlawful to worship any others than those which are
painted.

POSSEVIN the Jesuit reckons likewise this amongst the rest of their Errors.
That they will not suffer a carved Image of our Savior to be set up in their
Churches. And the Sieur de la Boulay le Goux asserts the same thing, viz. that
they suffer no other Images but those that are painted against the Walls, their
reason being, that carved Images are forbid in Moses his Law; which Nicholas de
Nicolai confirms, telling us, They suffer no carved Images in their Churches,
only Table-Pieces.

IT was then moreover needful to insert in the profession of Faith this Article
of Images. But there can be nothing alleged like this touching that of
Transubstantiation. There could be no reason obliging the Popes to require an
express Declaration from the Greek Proselytes, unless that of this Doctrines
being not taught in the Church they left, and therefore they must change their
Faith as well as their Communion. In effect the Terms of the Greeks, are for
the most part of 'em general, and although the Latins do abuse them in their
Disputes, to make us thereby believe they hold the substantial Conversion, yet
when the matter in the main relates to their own interest out of the Dispute,
they do not then find them sufficient for the forming a true Idea of Possevin
Bibliot. select. lib. 1.
this Conversion, seeing there has been made an express Article touching this
Point conceived in the Terms of the Council of Trent. This is so true, that
when they send into the East, those that have been educated in their
Seminaries, they make 'em sign this same Formulary, to the end they may not
fail to labor at the propagation of this Doctrine. It is no longer (...), nor
(...), nor (...), Change, Mutation, Conversion, there is not enough in this to
make a good Catholic, it is (...), a Change of Substance, Transubstantiation.
Mr. Arnaud torments himself to make us acknowledge the Doctrine of the Church
of Rome in the common expressions of the Greeks. But that he may avoid this
trouble hence forward, let me only advise him to consult Pope Gregory the
Thirteenth, for it was by his Order this Formulary we mentioned has been
compiled.

CHAP. XI.
The Two and Twentieth Proof, taken from an Answer in Manuscript of Metrophanus
Critopulus, to some Questions offered him by Mr. Oosterwieck. The Three and
Twentieth, is, another Answer in Manuscript of Meletius Archbishop of Ephesus,
and Hieroteus, Abbot of the Monastery of Cephalenia. The Four and Twentieth,
is, the Testimony of Jeremias a Doctor of the Greek Church. The Five and
Twentieth, is the Testimony of Zacharias Gerganus.

WHILST I am endeavoring to defend the Truth against the vain Subtilities of
Mr. Arnaud, I hear, that several pious, and learned men, who cannot endure the
World should be thus imposed on, do interess themselves in this Dispute, and
having read this Famous Book I examine, they have wondered its Author should
with such confidence affirm, that the Greeks believe the Transubstantiation of
the Latins. Some of 'em have sent me some Manuscripts, which they judged proper
for the clearing up of this Question. I will produce them then here, naming the
Persons from whom I received them, to the end if any doubt arise, they may
address themselves to them, from whom I had them for their satisfaction.

MONSIEUR Spanheim, a Reverend Minister, and Divinity Professor, in the
University of Heydelberg, sent me an extract of a Manuscript he has by him,
containing Seven and Twenty Answers, made by the same Metrophanus Critopulus,
whom I mentioned in the foregoing Chapter, to so many Questions that were put
to him by Monsieur Oosterwieck, who was then in the East, and was so curious as
to inform himself, not concerning the particular sense of Metrophanus touching
these Articles, but of the whole Greek Church, in which he then held a very
considerable rank, being Patriarch of Alexandria. One of these Questions was
thus expressed in Greek, (...), I desire to know the Opinion of the Greek
Church touching these Articles of the Christian Faith. The Three and Twentieth
Article has for its Title, (...). Of the Sacrifice of the Mass, to wit, whether
Christ be corporally present in the Sacrament. The Answer is this; We call the
Lord's Supper a Sacrifice, but a Sacrifice that is spiritual and commemorative;
spiritual as having nothing of carnal in it, according to that of our Savior,
the words which I speak to you are Spirit and Life. Commemorative, as being
performed in remembrance of the Sacrifice once offered on the Cross, according
to that other expression of our Savior, do this in remembrance of me. Which is
what is taught by Saint Chrysostom, and the whole Church, saying, this is done
in remembrance of what was done then, do this says our Savior in remembrance
of me. We offer not any other Sacrifice, as did heretofore the High Priest,
under the Old Testament; but we offer every day the same, or to speak better we
commemorate this Sacrifice. But we never believed Christ was bodily present in
the Mystery. Had the Greek Church believed Transubstantiation, it was here a
fit place to declare it, and to reply yes, we do believe that Jesus Christ is
corporally present in the Sacrament, inasmuch as that the proper Substance of
his Body lies covered under the Accidents of Bread, or some such like
equivalent thing. It will be to no purpose to allege that Metrophanus means
Christ is not corporally in it, that is to say, after the manner of visible and
sensible Bodies with all their Dimensions; for this would be to make him return
a captious Answer, and such a one as is unbecoming an honest man, seeing he
well saw this was not the Question asked him, and that the Term of corporally in
the Question propounded, respected the proper Substance of his Body. So that
the force of this Testimony cannot be evaded. This Metrophanus was Patriarch of
Alexandria in the Year 1642.

THE said Mr. Spanheim imparted to me the Answer of Meletius Metropolitan of
Ephesus made some twenty years since to the Divines at Leyden; touching some
Questions they proposed to him. They asked him amongst other things, (...).
Whether we may pray to Angels, or the Virgin Mary, and religiously worship
them; and whether we must believe the Bread to be transubstantiated in the
Sacrament. Observe here what he answers, (...). I declare, says he, there are
none of these things to be believed, for I may not believe the Doctrines of
men, before those of Christ and his Apostles. The Superscr^^tion is, (...).
Adjoining unto which is the consent of Hierotheus, in these words, (...). And I
Hierotheus an Archimandrite Abbot of Cephalania, am of the same mind in all
things here above contained with the most holy and prudent Metropolitain of
Ephesus, and all Asia, according to what he has declared.

DR. Benjamin Woodroff, an Eminent Divine in the Church of England, and
Chaplain to the Duke of York, has favored me with an Extract, whose Original
he has by him, and which was given him by its Author, being then at Oxford. It
is a Declaration of the sense of the Greek Church, drawn up by a Greek Doctor,
named Jeremias. Observe here its Contents. The different use of the Mystery of
the Eucharist having produced different Sentiments, some celebrating it with
unleavened Bread, others with that which is leavened and kneaded, some
believing it to be only a Sign, others that the Bread is changed and altered by
the Word. Those that believe the change are the Western People, which
administer this Sacrament according to the Doctrine of the Roman Church, and
all the rest hold the Sign except the Eastern People; For the Eastern Church
differs from both these, and yet teaches a Doctrine that is easy, full of
piety, and free from contradiction. She affirms then that the Bishop, or
Priest, in the Divine Service holds the place of Christ, making the
Propitiation for the sins of the People, and that by the Holy Invocation of
God's Name, and mention of the Divine Words of our Savior, the spiritual Grace
descends that sanctifies the Bread and Wine, and changes them, not into the
sensible, but spiritual Body of Jesus Christ. And as to those that assert the
Substance of Bread and Wine is changed into the natural Flesh of Jesus Christ,
if they understand hereby a supernatural change after a spiritual manner, those
that do thus speak, concur in their Opinion with the Eastern Church. But seeing
they will have this to be sensibly effected, our Church does therein disagree
with them, although they have recourse to another way of speaking, in telling us
of Accidents and Species, and such like things, which none of the Ancients ever
thought of, much less mentioned. For the Fathers of the Eastern Church have
been ever averse to Novelties and Contentions, which tend to the ruin of
Souls, not only detesting those Doctrines which are heretical, and divide the
Church, but which, in disturbing its Peace, eclipse its Glory. The
Superscription is, (...), Jeremias Doctor of Divinity in the Eastern Church.

ALTHOUGH we learn no new thing from the Testimony of this Author, yet does it
confirm, and illustrate several matters. First, that the Sentiment of the
Greeks touching the Eucharist, is not in any thing the same with that of the
Church of Rome, but a middle way betwixt the Doctrine of the Latins and
Protestants. Secondly, That although the Greeks do use the Term (...), change,
yet do they not understand thereby a real change of one Substance into another,
which the Latins have invented, but a spiritual change wrought by the Grace of
the Holy Spirit which sanctifies the Bread and Wine. Thirdly, That when it is
said the Substance of Bread and Wine is changed into the natural Flesh of
Christ, this must be understood in a sp^ritual manner to be conformable to the
Sentiment of the Eastern Church. Fourthly, That those of the Church of Rome
understanding it (as they do) in a sensible manner, the Greeks reject them and
their Communion. Fifthly, To the end there may be no pretense left for
cavilling on the Term of sensibly, in saying the Roman Church understands not
that the Body of Christ is visible and palpable in its natural form, in the
Sacrament, he declares that he well knows she makes use of other expressions,
namely, of Accidents and Species; meaning that this is still to understand it
sensibly to assert our Savior's proper Substance is in this Mystery, although
covered with the Species and Accidents of Bread. And that this is a Novelty the
Greeks have ever rejected, and of which the Ancients have not made the least
mention. If Mr. Arnaud likes this let him make the best use he can of it, in
the mean time we will pass on to another Proof.

MATTHEW Caryophilus, titular Archbishop of Iconia, a Latinised Greek, and
almost of the same stamp and temper, as Arcudius and Leo Allatius, has
published a refutation of some Propositions taken out of a Catechism made by a
Greek Gentleman whom he calls Zacharias Gerganus; Allatius says he was a
Bishop. But be he what he will, Caryophilus uses him after a dreadful manner,
terming his Propositions Blasphemies, and calling him Serpent, Basilisk, Wolf,
the Devil's Instrument, worse than the Devil himself, a Lutheran. But it is a
usual thing with these Gentlemen to load men's Persons with Injuries, when their
Doctrines agree not with theirs. They thus begin, continue, and end their
Refutations. It cannot then be taken ill, if laying aside their Injuries, I
only affirm, that Caryophilus very impertinently charges this Greek with his
being a Lutheran; for it is apparent from the Propositions he recites, and what
he says in his Preface, that he was a true Greek, and maintained the Maxims of
his Religion and Church; and moreover a real lover of his Country. He opposes
(amongst other things) the addition of the filioque, in the Symbol, and attacks
the Azuma of the Latins. He affirms there is but one Holy Church, which is the
Catholic, Apostolical, and Eastern; which does not well agree with the Title
he has given him of a Lutheran; and it is plainly seen he has given it him only
to make him suspected by his own Countrymen, and hinder us from any advantage
by his Testimony.

SO that the single Authority of Caryophilus, being not sufficient to hinder us
from considering this Author's Testimony, notwithstanding his pretended
Lutheranism. I shall therefore produce here some of his Propositions, which he
himself has taken out of his Catechism. The LXI is this. R^futatio
pfeud^-Christianae Catechesis editae a Zacharia Gergano Graeco Auctore Matthae^
Caryophil. Romae 1631. Blasph. 61.
The Holy Communion consists of two Substances, the one visible, and the other
invisible, the visible Substance is the Bread and Wine, the invisible Substance
is the Word of Christ, This is my Body, this is my Blood. The Question in this
Dispute being only, Whether the Greeks believe Transubstantiation, it will be
therefore sufficient for me to show by this Testimony, that the visible
Substance of Bread and Wine remain, so that I am not concerned to know in what
sense this Author calls the Words of Christ the invisible Substance of the
Sacrament. Yet will I affirm his sense is clear enough; for in respect of the
Bread and Wine which are in effect Substances, it is plain we must take the
Term of Substance in its natural signification; but in respect of the Words of
Christ, which in effect are not Substances, it is likewise apparent we must
understand this expression in a metaphorical sense, seeing by it is meant no
more, but that the internal and mystical virtue of this Sacrament is contained
in these words, This is my Body, because these words show us we must not take
these things as mere Bread and Wine, but as the Body and Blood of Christ, of
which they are the Mystery. Which is what he understands by this invisible
Substance, that is to say, the force and efficacy of the Sacrament; for had not
our Savior said of the Bread, This is my Body, it would be no more than Bread,
proper to nourish our Bodies, whereas the Faith we have in these words shows us
in it another spiritual Substance, which nourishes our Souls.

THE LXV. Proposition does no less oppose the substantial Conversion; Ibid.
Blas. phem. 65.
for it contains these words, That the Laity which communicate but of one only
kind, receive an imperfect Communion, which is directly opposite to one of the
necessary Consequences of Transubstantiation; which is the Concomitancy. And to
prevent any cavilling touching the sense of this Proposition, as if he would
say only, that this Communion is imperfect in respect of the Institution of
Christ, who has ordained we should partake of both kinds, and not in respect of
the Body and Blood it self; which we fully receive under one, he thereupon
explains himself clearly in the 68 Proposition. This is an Ibid. Blasphem. 6.
impious Doctrine of the Papist, says he, and of which Pope Eugenus has been
the first Author, that where the Body of Christ is, there is likewise his
Blood, and for this reason it is not necessary that the Laity receive the
Communion under both kinds. So that here the pretended concomitancy is
overthrown, and consequently Transubstantiation, inasmuch as one cannot subsist
without the other. This Author lived about the Year 1630.

CHAP. XII.
The Twenty Sixth Proof, taken from the Confession of Faith of Cyrillus Lucar,
Patriarch of Constantinople, and what followed thereupon.

HAD Mr. Arnaud contented himself, (to the end he might get clear from the
Confession of Faith of Cyrillus) in saying this Patriarch studied John Calvin,
and was a great admirer of his Doctrine. That his Confession of Faith
contradicted several Articles of the Belief of the Greeks; that 'twas condemned
by two Councils held since his death, and that there is no reason the Doctrine
of the whole Greek Church (touching the Eucharist) should be determined by his
opinion; had he I say only thus expressed himself, we should not have
complained against him, but endeavored to satisfy him in every one of these
particulars. But instead of containing himself within these bounds, he has fallen
foul on the Person Lib. 4. cap. 6. page 382,, 83.
of Cyrillus himself, whom he treats as a hireling, charging him with receiving
five hundred Crowns in Germany, for subscribing to Articles against the
Catholics, as a sacrilegious Person and Usurper, who diverted the money he
gathered in Candia under the name of his Patriarch Meletius, to the purchasing
the Patriarchate of Alexandria to the prejudice of another, that was elected by
common consent, as an insatiable ambitious. Wretch, who not content with the
Patriarchate of Alexandria, would have that of Constantinople; and which is yet
worse, as a Villain and Murderer, who having caused his Predecessor Timotheus
to be poisoned, got afterward Janisaries to strangle him, who assisted him in
this detestable Action. Tho I resolved not to be concerned at Mr. Arnaud's
Passion, which cannot but be displeasing to good People of either Communion,
yet I may tell him, that seeing he publishes these Accusations against a Person
that is dead, he must be able to prove by good Testimony his charge to be true,
but having no better an Author than Allatius for this, he cannot take it ill,
if I affirm, his account of this Person to be mere Calumny and Forgery.

HE confesses, he relates this whole Story chiefly upon the credit of Allatius,
who Ibid. page 383.
made it his business to inform himself, and being a Greek, ought sooner to be
believed than Dutch or Switzers Ministers, and especially than Hottinger, who
is one of the most passionate Ministers, and least sincere Writers he ever
read. Let the Dutch or Switzers Ministers, and especially Hottinger be what he
pleases, what signifies this to the Confirmation of the Truth of these
Accusations, and the sincerity of Allatius? When the Ministers shall positively
affirm any thing in favor of Cyrillus, which they cannot prove; then Mr.
Arnaud may question their Testimony, and term them passionate Persons not
worthy of credit. If Allatius relates the same thing otherwise than the
Ministers, he may say he is sooner to be believed than they, and see what
answer we will make him; but for Allatius to charge Cyrillus with such heinous
Crimes, and to authorize his Impostures, we must be told that Hottinger is no
good Author, and that Allatius is more worthy of credit, this is mere mockery;
For to decide the Question, whether what Allatius affirms be true or fabulous,
Hottinger and other Ministers are not concerned, we are only to inquire whether
Allatius cites any Witnesses, or whether he himself is an Author worthy of
credit. Allatius, says Mr. Arnaud, has taken special care to inform himself.
He must tell us then what his Informations contain, and not affirm such
important matters, without good Grounds. He was a Greek by Nation, very true,
but a Greek that forsook his Religion to embrace the Roman Faith; a Greek whom
the Pope preferred to be his Library Keeper, a Person the most wedded of all
men to the Interests of the Court of Rome, a Person than whom none could be
more malicious against those he took to be his Adversaries, and especially
against Cyrillus, and those called Schismatical Greeks, a man full of words but
little sense. His Religion and Office of Library Keeper will not be called in
question by those that ever heard of him. His Zeal for the Interest of the
Court of Rome appears in the very beginning of his Book, De perpetua
consensione, for observe here how he expresses himself, in the Pope's Favor:
The Roman Prelate, says he, is independent, he judges all the World, and
Allat. de Perpet. Cons. lib. 1. cap. 2.
is judged of none, we must obey him although he governs unjustly, he gives Laws,
but receives none, and changes them when he pleases, he makes Magistrates,
determins Points of Faith, and orders as seems good to him the greatest Affairs
in the Church. If he would err, he cannot; for he cannot be deceived himself,
neither can he deceive others, and when an Angel should affirm the contrary,
being guarded, as he is with the Authority of Christ, he cannot change. The
sharpness, wherewith he treats those against whom he writes, such as Chytreus,
Creygton, the Archbishop of Corfou, and some others, appears by the bare
reading of his Writings; every period honoring them with these kind of Titles,
Sots, Vide Allat. de Perpet. Cons. lib. 3. cap. 15, 16, 17, 18. etc. advers.
Ch^eygt. passim.
Liars, Blockheads, Hellish, and impudent Persons, and other such like Terms
which are no Signs of a moderate Spirit. To prove the Conformity of the Greek
Church with the Roman in Essentials, he takes for his Principle to acknowledge
none for the true Church, but that Party which has submitted to the Roman See,
and in respect of the other Greeks, whom he calls Heretics, and Schismatics,
he fiercely maintains that a good course is taken with 'em, when they can be
reduced by Fire and Sword; That Heretics must be exterminated Allat. de
Perpet. Cons. lib. 2. cap. 13. Ibid. lib. 3. cap. 11.
and punished, and if obstinate, put to death and burnt, these are his
Expressions; and as to what concerns Cyrillus, we need but read what he has
written of him to be persuaded of his partiality and injustice. Does Mr. Arnaud
think he has done fairly to borrow the Weapons of such a man to defend himself
against the aforementioned Confession of Faith.

CYRILLUS had Adversaries whilst living, and after his death; but, he has had
likewise Defenders of his Innocence, and Admirers of his Virtues. It is the
Fate of great men to be persecuted, and those that are acquainted with the
Eastern Affairs, must acknowledge there is no place more dangerous and exposed
to more Revolutions and Tempests, than the Patriarchate of Constantinople.
Besides the Traverses, which Envy, and particular Interests stirred up against
Cyrillus, he had the whole Party of the Latins and false Greeks against him,
who looked upon him as an Obstacle that withstood their old Design, to bring
over that Church to Roman See. He Ibid.
was assayed both by Promises and Threatenings, as Allatius himself
acknowledges, but they found him unmovable; and this is the real cause of their
after hatred.

IT is certain Cyrillus had a great aversion to the Romish Religion, and his
Inclination led him rather to the Protestants side. Neither do I doubt but he
disapproved several Superstitions in vogue amongst the Greeks, and labored
with all his power to reform them, according to the directions of his
Conscience and Authority of his Charge. But to make him pass under pretense of
this, for a half Calvinist, that was false to his own Principles, this is very
disingenuously done. It is true he relates himself, that in a conference he
held with Fuxius, a Transylvanian Doctor, touching the Invocation of Hottinger
in Appendic^ dissert. 8.
Saints, He acknowledged the difference betwixt having the Word of God for ones
Rule, and following the Fancies and Opinions of men, the difference between
building a man's Faith on the Foundation of Christ, and on Hay or Stubble.

BUT besides that, Hottinger from whom Mr. Arnaud has borrowed this particular;
sets not down the time in which Cyrillus had this Conference with Fuxius, and
that we must not suppose without good Proof, this happened before his promotion
to the Patriarchate of Alexandria; besides this, I say, it cannot be hence
concluded, he wholly renounced in his heart the Invocation of Saints, nor that
he respected it as an Impiety. Hottinger indeed calls this Worship
Superstition, but from himself, and not from Cyrillus; so that it is not fairly
done, to confound one man's Opinion with another. Cyrillus perhaps may have
acknowledged in this Conference, that this Invocation, aster the manner some
teach and practice it, is a mere Fancy and humane Invention; that it is this
Word, Hay, and Stubble, Saint Paul speaks of, and yet not absolutely rejected
this Doctrine in the main. Metrophanus Critopulus Confess. Ec^ Orient. cap. 17.
whom I already mentioned expressly distinguishes between an Invocation directed
to Saints, as Mediators, and that which respects them as Ambassadors, whom
the Church has near Almighty God to beseech him in behalf of their Brethren. He
rejects the first, upon this Reason, that there is but one only Mediator, who
is Christ Jesus; but he receives the second; and Cyrillus himself, in the
eighth Article of his Confession, insinuates this distinction, saying that our
Savior alone performs the Office of Chief Priest and Mediator. It concerns me
not now to examine, whether the distinction be good, or not, it is sufficient
to say, that a man which holds it, may condemn the Invocation of Saints in one
respect, and retain it in another, and remain in the Greek Church which
practices it, without acting against his Conscience, and being a damnable
Hypocrite, as Mr. Arnaud calls Cyrillus.

WE may judge of the Sincerity of this Patriarch by his Confession, in which,
and some Answers which accompany it, he clearly declared his Belief. It
contains things which does not well agree with Calvin's Doctrine; as for Cyril
Conf. fi^ dei, art. 1. and art. 16.
instance, That the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father by the Son, and that
Baptism is absolutely necessary for our Communion with Christ, which plainly
shows Mr. Arnaud has been mistaken in affirming he was a Calvinist. We do not
find he opposes any where Christ's Descent into Hell, nor the Hierarchical
Order, nor regulated Fasts, Lents, Arbitrary use of Confession, Religious
Orders, Monastic Vows, Celebration of Feasts, nor the use of the Greek
Liturgy, nor any of those things commonly believed and practiced in that
Church, although Calvin has for the most part disapproved of them. He admits the
use of the Images of Jesus Christ, and the Saints, it is true he detests the
giving them the Adoration of Latria, or any Religious Worship, (...) Resp. ad
In^ terr. 4.
(...), and insinuates he was willing to correct the Superstition of the Greeks
in this particular; he teaches likewise the Doctrine of Predestination, and
Justification, according to the Word of God, more clearly than the Eastern
People knew it. But it must not therefore be concluded, he was a Person that
betrayed his Trust, in performing the Functions of the Patriarchate; nor that
he was obliged to leave the external Communion of his Church, nor as speaks Mr.
Arnaud, That Piety could not subsist with so damnable Hypocrisy.

OUR Savior and his Apostle taught us not to judge so rashly of the
Consciences of men. Judge not, says our Lord, that ye be not judged, for Matt.
7.
with what Judgment you judge ye shall be judged, and with what measure you
meet, it shall be measured to you again; And the Apostle cries out to us, Who
Romans 14.
art thou that judge another man's servant? Certainly a man cannot be guilty
of greater rashness than to condemn People from the Dictates of their own
Conscience, when having never seen nor heard them, it is impossible to have any
other than a confused and general knowledge of them, such as is Mr. Arnaud's
touching Cyrillus. For besides that, a man may be easily mistaken, in imagining
that such and such a sentiment obliges a man in conscience to the doing of this
or the other thing, if a man proceeds not to a particular consideration of
Circumstances, besides this I say, it may be that this Obligation which appears
to us so cogent and inviolable, has not so appeared to the Person concerned,
which suffices to acquit him of the Crime of acting against his Conscience. Mr.
Arnaud's censure cannot be justifiable, unless he could prove Cyrillus has
really practiced or approved the practice of things which he believed in his
heart to be not only indifferent, or unprofitable, but absolutely evil, and
that he has practiced them in the same time when he judged them to be so. Now
this Mr. Arnaud has not proved nor never will, he may make it appear that
Cyrillus believed, we must not ground the hopes of our Salvation on humane
Traditions, but the word of God, that we must invoke only Jesus Christ in the
quality of Mediator, and render no kind of Religious Worship to Images. He may
prove that Cyrillus has found out the Errors in the Religion of the Latins,
and Superstitions amongst the Greeks, and detested both. He may show that
Cyrillus has approved, conformably to his Confession, diverse Points of the
Doctrine of Calvin, but he cannot prove Cyrillus ever contradicted by his
Actions any of these Sentiments, nor believed these Opinions obliged him to
separate himself from the Communion of the Greeks, and forsake the Patriarchal
Functions. His whole Conduct showed on the contrary he believed 'twas his duty
to labor at the establishment of perfect Piety in his Church, in opposing to
the utmost of his power the progress of Error and Superstitions he condemned,
and not leave a Flock which God had committed to his charge, and of which he
was to render an Account. All which he did to the last breath. He held not the
truth in unrighteousness, nor was he false to the Dictates of his Conscience.
He published his Confession, and put it in the hands of all the Greeks, and
maintained it before Kings and Princes in the presence of Ambassadors from
Christian Monarchs, so that 'twas only passion that extorted this saying from
Mr. Arnaud, That he was a damnable Hypocrite, and one that made his Faith
buckle to his Interest.

IT IS the same Passion caused him to say, That the advantageous Judgment Lib. 4
cap. 11. page 417.
we make of this Person shows, that our Sect has no true Principle of Religion.
That the Spirit which animates us, is rather a Spirit of Faction, and a Cabal
against the Catholic Church, than a Spirit of Zeal for the establishment of
true Piety. God who is the Witness of our Innocence can be when he pleases the
Protector of it. Our Interests are in his hands, and as we pray him to defend
them, so likewise we beseech him to forgive Mr. Arnaud the Injury he does us.
We appear extreme odious in his sight, but when pleases God to inspire him with
more equitable Sentiments, he will judge wholly otherwise. In this hope we will
comfort our selves by the example of the Holy Apostles, and of our Savior
himself, who were accused, says Saint Chrysostom, to be seditious Persons and
Innovators, that made it their business to disturb the Chrysostom. Hem. 23. in
Romans
Public Peace. We will endeavor to refute these kind of Accusations by a
Christian Deportment, without forgetting our Duty, is, to bless them that curse
us, and pray for them that despitefully use us.

ENGLAND and Holland are able to justify (were there occasion) the Actions of
their Ambassadors in relation to the business of Cyrillus, without my
interposing. And as they were not the Masters nor Directours of his Conscience,
so they were never able to prescribe him what he had to do; so that it is very
unreasonable to make them responsable for his Conduct in those particulars.
They have been no farther concerned in the Actions of this Patriarch, than this
that having known him in their Countries when he was there, their acquaintance
was turned into mutual familiarity, when they found him at Constantinople. But
this familiarity reached no farther than the usual Services, Persons of merit
are wont mutually to render to one another, notwithstanding the difference of
their Opinions in Religion. They helped him to Books, and to the keeping a
correspondence with Learned men. If Mr. Arnaud condemns this Commerce, and
makes it a Mystery of Iniquity, Page 422.
as he is pleased to call it, who need be troubled thereat? Strangers at
Constantinople are not bound to give him an Account of their Friendships and
Civilities. I do not doubt but these Ambassadors were glad to find this
Patriarch's Confession to be so agreeable with several Doctrines which the
Protestants believe to be of great Importance, and that he had no Inclination
to a Union with the Church of Rome. Neither do I doubt but they condoled the
Afflictions to which his Dignity and Virtues rendered him obnoxious, and would
gladly have done him all the good offices in their power, and what is there
unlawful in all this? Must Cyrillus therefore be one of their Creatures, or
govern himself according to their Directions? Had they said, Page 420.
says Mr. Arnaud, that they had obliged him to make a Declaration of his Faith
agreeable to their Doctrine. Why would he have them acknowledge an untruth? Did
ever any body see any thing more captious than to establish in the form of an
Answer from our part a false Foundation to build thereon an Invective? Had they
said, they had in fine obliged him. But should they say they obliged him not to
this Confession, but that he made it according to the Dictates of his own
Conscience and Knowledge? Now this is what they are without doubt ready to
affirm, seeing it is the real truth. As to his being canonized amongst us for a
Saint and Martyr (as Mr. Arnaud is pleased to affirm) he knows we have no such
power. It Is certain (as I already mentioned) his memory is still precious
amongst the Greeks, as that of a Saint and Martyr of Christ, as I shall make
appear hereafter, but this is not to make him one of our Saints or Martyrs.

SHOULD we press those that judge thus of the Consciences of other men, perhaps
they would be straightened to give us a reason for theirs, on the same Maxims, on
which they would have that of this Patriarchs judged, and the Ambassadors of
England and Holland. For not to go farther, how can they in conscience approve
that their Scholars brought up in the Seminary at Rome (which were wholly their
Creatures, sent into Greece to promote the Interest of the Roman See) should
take Orders from Schismatical Bishops, and afterward be raised to Bishoprics
by Schismatical Patriarchs; that they should live in their communion and
dependence in the midst of a Church in which the Pope and all the Latins are
continually excommunicated on Holy Thursday by the Patriarch of Jerusalem;
where their Sacrifice is abhorred, and this Sentence read every Year in their
Churches, confounded be all they that In Triod.
offer unleavened Bread in the Sacrifice, wherein Purgatory is rejected, and
it is held a crime to say the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father and the Son,
wherein the necessity of communicating under both kinds is held, carved Images
condemned, and several other such like things which are not over favorable to
the Latins. How in Conscience can these said Scholars be advanced to
Patriarchates, elected, and consecrated by Schismatical Metropolitains, and
placed at the Head of a Church which professes an open Separation from the
Church of Rome, and live in Communion with that of Jerusalem, in which all the
Latins in general are excommunicated? What I say, is grounded on matter of
Fact, which Mr. Arnaud dares not deny, for should he do it, he would be
convinced by the Testimony of Thomas a Jesu; who expressly tells us, That it has
been ever thought fitting, to permit the Scholars Thom. a Jesu de procuran.
Salute omn. Gent. lib. 1. cap. 4.
of the Seminary at Rome to take Orders, when in Greece, from the hands of
Schismatical Bishops, it being necessary to use this Indulgence or
Dispensation; to the end the Patriarchs may not scruple to promote them to
Bishoprics; and likewise, that, they being Bishops, may provide the Churches
in their Diocesses with Catholic Curats. Let Mr. Arnaud tell us if he pleases,
how they could in conscience advance Cyrillus of Beroe, to the Patriarchate of
Constantinople, being a Disciple of the Jesuits, whom Allatius calls, vir
probus and Catholicus, Allat. de Perp. Cons. lib. 3. cap. 11.
and who after his death was like to be canonized, says Allatius. The same
Question may be put to him touching others, namely, Timotheus, Anthimus,
Gregory, Athenasius, Patelar, who being all of 'em Latins in their hearts, yet
for all that exercised the Patriarchal Functions in a Schismatical Church,
wherein, as I said, the Pope and all the Latins are every year excommunicated.
Moreover this Excommunication is not to be called in Question, forasmuch as Mr.
Arnaud himself acknowledges it. The Greek Patriarch of Jerusalem, says he,
excommunicates once a year on Holy Thursday, all other Lib. 2. cap. 3.
Sects, not excepting the Roman Church.

HAVING satisfied the unjust Accusations of Mr. Arnaud against Cyrillus it now
remains to see what advantage may accrue to us by this Patriarch's Confession,
and whether the rejection he makes in express Terms of Transubstantiation, may
be esteemed as that of the Body of the whole Greek Church. Mr. Arnaud tells us
three things, on the discussion of which depends Lib. 3. cap. 6, and 7.
the Solution of this Question. The first, is, that, the Greeks continually
endeavored to deliver themselves from the Tyranny of Cyrillus, and that in
effect he was four or five times expelled the Church. The second, that this
Confession is wholly contrary in its principal Articles to the Doctrine of the
Greeks. And the third, that it has been condemned by two Councils held by
Cyrillus his Successors. Which is what we are now to examine.

AS to the first of these particulars, I confess this Patriarch has endured
several cruel Traverses during his life, which never ended till they had
procured his death, but I deny 'twas his Church occasioned him all these evils;
It was the Latin Party and false Greeks which followed him with incessant
Persecutions. How dexterous soever Allatius has been in disguising the Allat.
de Perp. Cons. lib. 3. cap. 11.
Truth, yet could he not refrain here from discovering it: He tells us then,
that the Greeks whom he calls pii homines, zealous and pious People, not being
able to defend their Faith themselves, nor carry on the necessary expenses for
this, addressed themselves to other Christians, and especially to the Roman
Prelate, by whose means they avoid the like Tempests, and secure their Church.
He adds, there were Persons deputed toward Cyrillus, with an express charge,
to oblige Ibid.
him either by Promises, or Threatenings, to send to Rome his Confession of
Faith, in which he was to admit the Council of Florence, and condemn the Errors
of the Calvinists, and in so doing he might assure himself of the assistance
and favor of the Apostolical See. That Cyrillus answered, he liked well their
offers, and was ready to accept their conditions, provided he might have money
and be upheld in his Patriarchate. But that at length finding he kept a
correspondence both with Calvinists and Catholics too, these last, being
troubled thereat, proceeded to threatenings, saying, they would never suffer
that Chair to be defiled with the Blasphemies of the Calvinists. What he says
touching this Deputation is true, for the Congregation, de fide propoganda,
sent two Jesuits to Constantinople with one, named Canachio Rossi, charged with
Instructions to gain Cyrillus by Promises or Threatenings, being required only
to receive the Decrees of the Florentine Council. But what he adds concerning
Cyrillus his Answer, is a mere Calumny, for Cyrillus remained immovable,
notwithstanding all these Solicitations. Neither, have we any reason to
believe any thing upon Allatius's bare word. Mr. Arnaud may judge as he
pleases, yet cannot he deny but Cyrillus his Enemies, were the Latins and
Latinised Greeks, and that the Tempests and Storms he suffered, and which at
length overwhelmed him, came from that side, seeing, that Allatius himself (his
own Witness and great Author) affirms it. Cyrillus was ever beloved and
honored by his own true Church, as appears from the care and charge she was at
to support him, and to say as Mr. Arnaud does, that the Dutch lent him money
upon use, and that he extorted it afterward from the Churches, which were made
to obey him by the Turks, is a Story for which he brings no proof. Neither is
there any likelihood particular Persons, who put their money out to use, should
choose a man in his Circumstances, that is to say, one that was bereaved of his
Dignities, and stripped of all he had, were he (as it is supposed) the Object of
his Peoples hatred. The Dutch Merc^^nts at Constantinople are not wont to part
with their money upon such Security. Hottinger, Hottinger. in Append Dissert. 8.
tells us, (from the Testimony of the deceased Mr. Ledger, Minister of Geneva,
who was at Constantinople, and had a particular Knowledge of this History) That
one Isaac, Metropolitain of Chalcedon, a Disciple of the Jesuits, having bought
of the Turks Cyrillus his Seat, and the report of it being spread throughout
Constantinople, there was such an Universal Lamentation amongst all the Greeks,
that it came to the Grand Senior's Ears, who broke off this Intrigue, and would
not suffer 'em to obey any longer this Usurper. He likewise Which Letter may be
seen in its Original.
produces a Letter from Cyrillus his Proto-Syncellus, that is to say, from one
of the Chief Officers in his Chamber, named, Nathanael Conopius, dated from
Constantinople the Fourth of July, 1638, Immediately after the death of
Cyrillus. Wherein he takes particular notice that the Executioners which
strangled him, having parted his Garments among them, and afterward carried
them into one of the Markets of Constantinople to sell them, as being the
Clothes of the late Patriarch, the People were universally seized with Grief,
and uttered a thousand imprecations against Cyrillus of Berea, calling him
Villain, and Murderer, who had dishonored God's Church, and not only usurped
the Throne of the Holy and Lawful Patriarch, but likewise put him to death. He
adds that some of 'em, entered the House of the Usurper, calling him Pilate, and
bidding him give them the Body that they might bury it; and how they afterward
went to the Caimacans, and offered him a great deal of money to obtain of him
the Body of their true Patriarch, but the wicked Usurper who caused him to be
put to death, understanding it, sent to the Caimaican to tell him, that, if he
gave these People Cyrillus his Body, the City would certainly be in an uproar,
which hindered him from granting them their request. In fine, he says, this
Usurper sent Slaves to take his Body, and cast it into the Sea, but that some
Christians having taken it thence, carried it into a Monastery (called St.
Andrews) where they privately buried it.

MR. Arnaud, will not fail to fay, that Hottinger is a Minister, and one of the
most passionate, and least sincere Writers, he ever read. But why must we
rather believe Allatius, than Hottinger? The former of these has all the marks
of a passionate man, who is ever upon disguishing things, whereas this last on
the contrary (let Mr. Arnaud say what he pleases) has all the Characters of a
faithful Writer, relating things according to the best of his Knowledge. The
former of these is I confess more polite, but the other has more simplicity.
Allatius relates from his own head, what he pleases, Hottinger alleges his
Witnesses, and what likelihood is there Mr. Ledger and Conopius whose Letter in
its Original I have by me, invented these Stories thus circumstanced as we find
them, if it were moreover true, that the Greek Church respected Cyrillus as a
Heretic, and did her utmost endeavors to deliver her self from him. It was on
the contrary the Latins and their Disciples who so strenuously endeavored, to
get rid of a Person whom they could neither gain by Promises, nor Threatenings,
and that hindered them in their great Design of a Reunion. It was in reference
to them, that Cyrillus added at the end of his Confession, We plainly foresee,
this short Confession, will be as a mark of contradiction to them, who are
pleased to calumniate and persecute us. His Presentiment was not vain.

AND thus much touching Mr. Arnaud's first Objection. As to the second, which
asserts the principal Articles of his Confession, are contrary to the Sentiment
of the Greeks. I confess, there are some of 'em wherein the Doctrine of the
Gospel is more plainly asserted than in other Greek Books, as the Thirteenth
and Fourteenth Articles, for instance, which treat of our Justification by
Faith in Christ, of Free Will and Divine Grace, but it is certain they do not in
the main contradict the Doctrine of the Greek Church, and may be easily
reconciled with the Answers of Jeremias to the Divines of Wittemberg. The
Fifteenth Article, acknowledges but two Sacraments, and Jeremias, says Mr.
Arnaud, openly professes to hold seven. But I say the Lib. 4. cap. 5. page 387
Confess. cap. 9.
Greeks have no rule in this matter, Metrophanus acknowledges three of Divine
Institution, to wit, Baptism, the Eucharist, and Penance, and as to the other
four he affirms, They are called Mysteries improperly (...). Jeremias
acknowledges seven, it is true, but he reckons properly but two to be of Divine
Institution, namely, Baptism, and the Lord's Supper; and as to the five others,
he seems to acknowledge the Church has added them to the number of Sacraments.
Wherefore will Mr. Arnaud needs have Cyrillus (who only speaks of the true
Sacraments instituted by our Savior, and not of humane Ceremonies, which are
improperly called Mysteries, because they have something that is mysterious in
them, as speaks Metrophanus) to have contradicted the Doctrine of the Greeks?
Why (seeing he opposes Jeremias to Cyrillus) does he not sincerely relate the
Sentiment of Jeremias? Arcudius has dealt better in this respect than he, for
he acknowledges, That Jeremias does Arcud. lib. 2. cap. 2.
not only teach that the Cream is a Sacrament of Tradition; but that he passes
the same Judgment on all the rest, Baptism and the Lord's Supper excepted,
contrary to what he had asserted in the Seventh Chapter of his first Answer.

AS to the Eighteenth Article, in which Cyrillus asserts, That the Souls of the
deceased, are carried immediately into a State of Bliss or Misery. Mr. Arnaud
Ibid. lib. 3. cap. 6 page 388.
says, he therein contradicts the general Opinion of the Greeks, touching the
State of Souls after death. Hornbeck, and Chytreus, says he, And all that ever
treated on the Opinions of the Greeks, affirm, they admit besides Paradise, and
Hell, a certain dark, and doleful place, in which the Souls are purged after
this life. I answer, the Greeks are not determinately positive, touching the
State of the Soul after death. As to the Souls of the Faithful, there are some,
who hold they will not enjoy the Beatifick Vision, till after the last
Judgment, and in the mean time, are in pleasant and delightful places, places,
exempt from all kind of sorrows, or else in dark and dismal shades, where they
continually ruminate, on the sins they have committed, and these hold there are
three different ranks of deceased Persons, namely, the Unfaithful or Wicked,
the Faithful, that dye in a State of Repentance, and perfect Holiness, and
others, who notwithstanding their Faith and true Piety, yet have committed
several sins, for which they have not so truly repented, as they ought. Hell
is designed for the first of these. The second, say they, go into places of
rest and refreshment, and the last, into those doleful places, where they feel
the want of God's favor and illumination.

BUT we must not imagine this to be the sense of the whole Greek Church, for
there are not a few, that hold there are only two conditions of men after
death, namely, that of the virtuous, and wicked, and two places, to wit, Heaven
and Hell. Syropulus, relates in his History of the Council of Florence, that,
the Greeks being urged by the Latins, to express themselves Hist. Council. Flor.
Sect. 5. cap. 16.
plainly touching the State of departed Souls; Bessarion declared, That the
Souls of the Saints, receive the Bliss prepared for them, and those of sinners,
their punishments, and that it only remains, that each of these reassume their
Bodies, after which, the Souls of the Just shall enter into a full enjoyment of
Happiness with their Bodies, and that sinners likewise with their Bodies, etc.
shall suffer everlasting punishments. We see here but two States after death.
We find in Allatius a passage of the Greeks, which likewise asserts but two
places. We must know, says it, that the Souls of the Just remain in certain
places, and Allat. de lib. Eccl. disp. 2.
those of sinners in like manner separate from them. Those rejoice upon the
account of the hope of Bliss, These lament in expectation of their torments.
There is moreover a passage of Joseph Briennius, which asserts, That, there are
two Ibid.
places, designed for the entertainment of deceased Souls, Heaven for the
Saints, and the Center of the Earth or Hell for sinners. That the Saints are at
liberty, that they have all the World, and especially the Garden of Eden for
their abode. That those who are condemned to Hell, will not come out from their
abode, till the day of Judgment, and that they cannot receive the least beam of
light or relaxation. For, adds he, the Saints will not enjoy eternal happiness,
nor sinners suffer their everlasting torments, before the last Judgment. But
these last shall be shut up in the mean time in dark Prisons, under the custody
of cruel Devils. Sigismond, speaking of the Moscovits says, They believe not
there is any Purgatory, but Sigism. Com. ver. Moscov.
hold, that every one after death goes to the place he deserves, good People
into a place of Serenity amongst Angels, and the wicked into dismal and dark
shades, amongst terrible Devils, where they expect the last Judgment; that the
Souls of the faithful know they are in God's favor by the nature of the place
they are in, and by the presence of Angels which accompany them, and so the
others on the contrary. Goar testifies that Ligaridius (a Greek Author of the
Isle of Chios) expounding Jacob. Goar in notis in offic. Exeq.
the meaning of those frequent Allelujas, sung at the Funeral of the deceased,
says, They are sung as sign of joy, that those who remain alive, may rejoice,
in that the defunct, has happily left this miserable life, and is now in
possession of Everlasting Bliss.

IT appears then by this diversity, that there is nothing so regulated, on this
Subject, amongst the Greeks, but that Cyrillus may assert the Doctrine
contained in the Article before us, without contradicting the general Belief of
his Church. Besides, his Terms are not so strict, but that they may be well
accommodated, with the Sentiment of those who affirm the Souls Enjoy not the
Beatifical Vision, or a perfect Felicity, till the last Judgment, and that
hold, there are three States of deceased Persons, for he says only, That the
Souls of the deceased are in bliss or misery, and as soon as ever they leave
their Bodies, are either in Heaven, or Hell, which will bear this sense, that
Judgment is already passed upon them, and that God has already shown them their
condition, which hinders not, but it may be said that the damnation of the one
is not yet perfect, and the felicity of the others not yet completed. And this
sense seems to be favored by what Cyrillus adds immediately afterward, That
every one is judged, according to the condition he is in at the hour of death,
which seems to intimate, that he would be understood to speak only of the
Judgment, and not of the full and perfect execution of this Judgment. There are
two things, most certain in reference to the Greeks, the one, that they pray
for the dead, and the other that they reject the Purgatory of the Roman Church.
Now Cyrillus, touches not on the first of these, and as to the second, he
agrees very well therein with his own People, for he calls Purgatory, an
imagination not to be admitted. So that Mr. Arnaud impertinently accuses him of
contradicting the Greeks, in the chief Articles of his Confession.

WE come now to Mr. Arnaud's third Objection, which consists, of two pretended
condemnations of Cyrillus his Confession, the one under Cyrillus of Berrhaea,
and the other under Parthenius. I have already discoursed of those two Pieces in
my Answer to Father Nuet, wherein I have shown they are suspected to be
fictious. But if the Reader will not trouble himself, with consulting what I
have elsewhere written, touching the matter, he may here behold a Compendium of
my Reasons.

I. ALTHOUGH these Narratives have been often printed, there has been no body yet,
that has taken upon 'em to own and warrant the Truth of them to the Public.
There is one of them printed from a Manuscript, sent from Rome, and the other
from an Edition printed at Jasi in Moldavia published by a certain Monk named
Arsenius. It seems to me there ought to be greater assurance given than what we
have already, seeing it is not sufficient to authorize so important a matter as
the Determinations of two late Councils, the one in the year 1639. and the other
in 1642.

II. THESE two Narratives contradict one another, the first of them which is
published under the name of Cyrillus of Berrhaea, is subscribed by several of
those whose hands are to the second, and by the same Parthenius, to whom this
last is attributed, and yet in the second there is no mention of the first. The
first expressly anathematizes Cyrillus, and calls him an impious and wicked
Person; The second, says only, There are certain Articles produced under the
name of the Patriarch Cyrillus. The first condemns with an Anathema these
Articles. The second says, It was proposed in the Synod, whether they should
be received and held for pious and orthodox Points, or rejected as being
contrary to the Doctrine of the Eastern Church, which plainly shows that they
that made the second, knew nothing of the first, and yet they are both found
subscribed by the same Persons.

III. THERE is no likelihood that Metrophanus the Patriarch of Alexandria, who
is said to have been an Assessor at the first Synod under Cyrillus of Berrhaea,
nor that Parthenius who is said to have held the second, would have so lightly
and fraudulently condemned Cyrillus Lucaris, seeing one of 'em had been the
Chief Officer of his Chamber, and the other his Protector, and intimate Friend.

IV. ARSENIUS the Monk, from whom it is said we have the pretended account of
the Synod under Parthenius, and who sent it from Constantinople to a nameless
Friend at Venice, having stuffed his Letter with Railings against Cyrillus and
his Confession, yet mentions not a word touching its first condemnation under
Cyrillus of Berrhaea. Which shows us that these are counterfeit Pieces composed
at several times, and by different Persons, who not consulting one another, nor
furnished with sufficient Instructions, have been guilty of several
Contradictions.

I will now add to what has been already said, some other Remarks, which are no
less considerable, the first is that when Cyrillus his Confession of Faith
appeared in our Western Parts; the first Game that was played, was to deny it,
and affirm 'twas a feigned Story; but when this Shift would no longer serve
turn, and that the thing was made evident, then an account of these pretended
Councils appeared, which shows that they were substituted as a new remedy,
instead of the other, which could be of no longer use. Secondly, what
Parthenius is made to say, That there have been some Articles produced under
Cyrillus his name, is as every man may discover the Style of the Western
People, and not that of Parthenius himself, who could not speak after this
manner, nor his Synod neither, because 'twas notorious in Constantinople, that
this Confession was in effect Cyrillus his own, seeing he offered it in a
Council, and openly justified it before the Ministers of the Grand Senior, in
the presence of several Ambassadors; and because Parthenius and his Bishops in
the preceding Synod had already considered it, as unquestionably his. Moreover
what likelihood is there, that Parthenius and his Council would thus grossly and
slanderously imputed to Cyrillus a thing that was false as they do? For
Cyrillus having said in the first Article of his Confession, That the Holy
Spirit proceeds from the Father by the Son, which is an expression from which
the Greeks never vary; The first Article of the Censure bears, That he asserted
contrary to the sense of the Catholic Church the Substantial and Eternal
Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Father and the Son, which is exactly the
expression the Greeks abhor.

WE may add to this, that Mr. Arnaud tells us of a Treatise of Paysius
Ligaridius Archbishop of Gaza, in which, Ligaridius discourses of Cyrillus and
his Confession, and raises an Objection about it, which he himself answers,
saying, That, several boubted of the truth of this Piece, and that should it be
true, yet one Swallow does not make a Summer; but he makes no mention of these
two pretended Censures, which without doubt he would never have forgotten,
being (as he is) a man full of Zeal for the interests of the Roman Religion,
were they acknowledged to be good and Authentic Acts in the Greek Church. I
might say the same thing of the Barons of Spartaris, did it not elsewhere
appear, that he was a Person of small Knowledge in the Affairs of the Greeks.

HEYDANUS (a Dutch Professor of Divinity) relates, that in the year 1643. The
News being come to Constantinople, that, this pretended Heydanus praefat. ad
lib cui titulus est, causa Dei.
Council was confidently reported to be true in the West, Parthenius himself
was so surprised and offended thereat, that assembling his Clergy and People in
the Patriarchal Church, he openly professed 'twas false, and that he never
intended such an injury to the memory of Cyrillus.

IN fine, Mr. Rivet, Doctor of Divinity, in Holland, writing to Mr. Sarrau, a
Counselor in the Parliament of Paris, the 21 of March, 1644. tells him
touching this Business, That he saw (at Mr. Hagha' s a Letter written in Vulgar
Greek, from Pachomius, the Metropolitain of Chalcedon, which disowned the
pretended Council under the Patriarch Parthenius. Farther affirming, that the
Subscriptions were counterfeit, and particularly his. That this Piece was
contrived by a Rascal, etc. That the Patriarch was a double minded man, yet
denied what was printed in Moldavia to be the Act he signed; and that the
Prince of Moldavia banished the Author of this Impression from his Territories.

BUT, supposing what I now alleged, to be wholly untrue, and that these two
pretended Councils, were as really true as I believe 'em to be false, yet is it
certain, they will but confirm the Proof we draw from Cyrillus his Confession
against Transubstantiation, and change it into Demonstration. Which will
clearly appear, if we consider, that whosoever composed them, did all they
could to turn Cyrillus his words into a sense odious to the Greeks, even to the
imputing to him several Falsities; that Cyrillus of Berrhaea who presided in
the first Council was a false Greek, and one of the Jesuits Scholars, engaged
long since in the Party of the Latins, and that Parthenius seemed likewise
fastened to the Roman Interest, if we take that for one of his Letters, which
one Athanasius a Latinising Greek published, in which he makes him thus write
to the late King, That he heartily desired the Peace of the two Churches,
Athan. Rhetor. Presbyt. Bisant. anti patellar. Paris 1655.
as much as any of his Predecessors, but if the Turk, under whose Empire they
lived, knew of this Affair, he would kill 'em all. Yet could the King find out
a way whereby to secure them from this danger, he solemnly protests that for
his part he would not be wanting. So that we see here what kind of men the
Authors of these two Censures have been, supposing 'em true, and yet they have
not expressly censured what Cyrillus Lucaris asserted touching
Transubstantiation; the first of these, to wit, Cyrillus of Berrhaea says,
Anathematised be Cyrillus who teaches and believes that neither the Bread of
the Altar, nor the Wine are changed, (...), by the Priests Consecration, and
coming down of the Holy Spirit, into the real Body and Blood of Jesus Christ,
seeing it is written in the seventeenth Article of his Heretical Doctrine, that
what we see and take is not the Body of Jesus Christ. The second, namely,
Parthenius, says, His Doctrine is so destructive to the Eucharist, that, he
attributes only the bare Figure to it, as if we were still under the Old Law of
Types and Shadows. For he denies the Bread which is seen and eaten, becomes
after Consecration the real Body of Jesus Christ, in any other than a spiritual
manner, or rather by imagination, which is the highest pitch of Impiety. For
Jesus Christ did not say, This is the Figure of my Body, but this is my Body,
this is my Blood, this, to wit, that which was seen, received, eaten, and
broken after it was blessed and sanctified. Not to take here notice, how
captiously these People turn the Words of Cyrillus, to make them contradictory
to the Belief, and common Expressions of the Greeks, it will be sufficient to
observe, that howsoever prejudiced these Persons have been, they durst not
re-establish the Transubstantiation he expressly condemned, nor take any notice
of that part of the Article which rejects it in express Terms. But to the end
we may better judge of this, it will not be amiss, to recite Cyrillus his own
Words. We believe, says he, that the second Sacrament, which the Lord has
instituted, is, that, which we call the Eucharist, for in the Night in which he
was betrayed, taking Bread and blessing it, he said to his Apostles, take eat
this is my Body; and taking the Cup, he gave thanks and said, drink ye all of
this, this is my Blood which is shed for you; do this in remembrance of me. And
Saint Paul adds, as often as ye shall eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup,
ye show the Lord's death. This is the plain, true, and lawful Tradition, of
this admirable Mystery, in the administration and understanding of which, we
confess and believe a real, and certain Presence, of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
wit, that which Faith offers and gives us, and not that which
Transubstantiation has rashly invented and teaches. For we believe the faithful
eat the Body of Jesus Christ in the Sacrament, not in a sensible chewing of him
with the teeth, in the Communion, but in communicating by the sense of the
Soul. For our Lord's Body is not in the Mystery, what our eyes behold, and what
we take, but that which Faith (which receives after a spiritual manner)
presents and gives us. Wherefore, it is certain if we believe, we eat, and
participate; but if we believe not, we are deprived of this benefit. If you
compare this Article with Cyrillus of Berrhaea and Parthenius's Censures, you
will find they apply themselves to that which is said concerning Our Savior's
Body being not what we see and eat, but that which our Faith does spiritually
receive, and that they endeavor to give these Words a construction abominated
by the Greeks, and different from their usual expressions. But as to what he
says, touching Transubstantiation, (which he calls a rash invention, (...)) we
see they meddle not with that. They say that the Bread ((...)) is changed into
the real Body of Jesus Christ, that it is not a Figure, but the real Body, but
that it is so, by a real Conversion of Substance, they do not mention. I
dispute not here concerning those Persons sense that drew up these Censures;
for I do not question but they were Latins in their hearts, and I further
believe had they dared they would have proceeded farther; but any man may
perceive they designed to accommodate themselves to the Style of the Greeks,
the better to color over their Forgeries. You see on one hand Cyrillus, who
opposes Transubstantiation in plain Terms, boldly naming it, and giving it a
Title sufficient to startle a Church that believed it, and on the other, we
behold Persons interessed to run down Cyrillus, and that leave no means
unattempted whereby to render him odious to the Greeks, that poison all he
says, and yet dare not defend this Transubstantiation, neither directly nor
indirectly, neither in express Terms, nor equivalent ones. What means this
Mystery, if the Greek Church does in effect believe the conversion of
Substances? Could they light of a better occasion wherein to show their Zeal
for Orthodoxy, and to confound at the same time Cyrillus his Accomplices.

MR. Arnaud tells us, That the Word (...), is not the expression the Lib. 4.
cap. 6. page 387.
Greeks commonly use for the explaining of Transubstantiation. But what does he
mean by this? (...) signifies properly Syllable, after Syllable,
Transubstantiation, the Latins use it when they express themselves in Greek,
the Latinizing Greeks use it, and all the rest know what it signifies;
supposing then it were not in common use amongst them, would they suffer a
Person who pretends not to be a Grammarian, but a Divine, who speaks not of the
Term, but of the thing meant by it, to reject it as stiffly as Cyrillus has
done, without so much as saying, that although we use not the Term of (...), yet
we believe the thing meant by it, to wit, the Conversion of Substances? Yet do
they take no notice thereof, they forsake the Term and the thing represented by
it, and contain themselves in their general expressions. Is not this then an
evident token Cyrillus said nothing in this respect which opposed the Doctrine
of his Church?

AND this is what we had to say touching this Patriarch. I am very much
mistaken if any comparing this Chapter with the Third, which Mr. Arnaud has
made on this Subject, will accuse me of rashness, for saying the real Doctrine
of the Greeks appears in Cyrillus his Confession. For it is certain, that man
who barely considers what I now mentioned touching Cyrillus his Confession,
cannot but conclude the Greek Church believed not Transubstantiation. It only
remains, for the finishing of this Chapter, that I speak something touching the
State of this Church since the year 1642. the fixed time of the last of these
pretented Censures. Parthenius having caused Cyrillus of Berrhaea to be
banished, and afterward strangled after the same manner as he served his
Predecessor, he himself remained not long on the Throne. His bad Conduct,
brought him down thence, and the Church of Constantinople substituted one, (who
had been Cyrillus Lucaris his Disciple,) and named likewise Parthenius in his
place. Which Allatius acknowledges in a Letter he Allat. de per. Cons. lib. 3.
wrote to Nilhusius dated in the year 1645. from whence we may judge, that this
great aversion the Greeks showed Cyrillus and those Synodical Censures are mere
Forgeries: for what likelihood is there a Church, that used so many endeavors
to deliver it self from such a man as Cyrillus, and which had anathematized his
Memory and Doctrine, should four or five years after, put her self into the
hands of one of his Disciples, and so run her self again into the same disorder
and Heresy. Neither must Mr. Arnaud tell us that the Turks promote to this
See, those that give them most money, and that a Lib. 4. cap. 7. page 39, 392.
Socinian may as well arrive thereunto, as another; for this is not so
absolutely true, but that the People have the liberty of hindering the Elections
of Persons disagreeable to them, as appears by what Allatius relates concerning
one Meletius Bishop of Sophia, who coming to Rome, in order to the reconciling
Allat. de Perpet. Cons. lib 3. cap. 11.
himself with that Church, at his return into his own Country, was designed for
the Patriarchate of Constantinople: But, says he, he was put by, being hindered
by the People. We see then this People, have still the liberty to reject the
Latinising Greeks, and that they do in effect put them by; but we find not they
made the least attempt to hinder the Election of Cyrillus his Disciple, Allat.
ubi supra.
whom the Latins term a Heretic and Calvinist, as well as his Master.

THIS condition wherein we now beheld the Greek Church lasted from the year
1645. till 1653. Observe here what Doctor Basire a Reverend Divine of the
Church of England, whom I have already mentioned wrote to me about it. When I
was at Constantinople, which was in the year 1653. Paysius was then Patriarch
of it, who in token of Communion with the Church of England, laid his hands on
me in an Assembly of Bishops, according to custom, as being a Priest of the
Church of England, and with this imposition of hands gave me power to preach in
Greek in all the Greek Churches within his Jurisdiction. Which I afterward did
very often, according as occasion offered, as well at Constantinople as
elsewhere, although the Jesuits seemed to be very much displeased thereat. I
preached one Sunday to the English, another in French for the Genevoises, the
next Sunday to the Italians, the following Sunday in Latin to the Hungarian and
Transylvanian Ambassadors, and the fifth Sunday in Greek in the Greek Churches.
Now what likelihood is there, if Cyrillus his Doctrine were so odious, and his
Memory so execrable to the Greeks, (as Mr. Arnaud would persuade us) and their
Opinion touching the Eucharist the same with theirs in the Church of Rome; and
if they detested our Doctrine as impious and Heretical, they would admit a
Minister of the Church of England, to be a preacher amongst them, and not be
afraid that in preaching to 'em the Gospel, he should instill amongst them the
pretended Errors of his Nation, especially in that important Subject of the
Eucharist?

CHAP. XIII.
The Real Belief of the Greeks, touching the Eucharist.

BUT what do the Greeks then believe, if they believe not Transubstantiation?
The Bounds of this Controversy oblige me not to answer this Question. For it
concerning us here only to inquire, whether the Greeks do, or do not believe
the Conversion of Substances, it is sufficient that we show they do not believe
it, seeing as I have already said, we pretend not, that their Faith must be the
rule of ours; yet will I endeavor to satisfy the Reader in this particular. I
do also hope, that this inquiry will not be useless toward the clearing up of
the principal Question, between Mr. Arnaud and my self, because that in showing
what the Greeks do believe, I do at the same time show what they do not
believe. I shall do then three things in this Chapter, the first of which shall
be to show the real Belief of the Greeks touching the Eucharist; Secondly,
describe in what they agree, and differ from the Church of Rome. And thirdly,
likewise, wherein we of the Reformed Church do agree with them, and in what
particulars we do not.

AS to the first of these Points, to the end we may have a fuller and clearer
understanding of the real Opinion of the Greeks, it will be necessary we make
several Articles of it, and reduce them into these following Propositions.

FIRST, in general, the Eucharist is, according to them, a mystical
representation of the whole Economy of Jesus Christ. They express by it his
coming into the World, his being born of a Virgin, his Sufferings, Death,
Resurrection, Ascension into Heaven, and the Glory he displayed on the Earth in
making himself known and adored by every Creature. Were it necessary to prove
this Proposition, we could easily do it, by the Greek Lyturgies, and
Testimonies of Cabasilas, Germain, Simeon Thessaloniensis, Jeremias, and
several others; but this not being a matter of contest, I shall not insist upon
it.

SECONDLY, They consider the Bread in two distinct respects, either whilst it
is as yet on the Table of the Prothesis, or on the great Altar. Whilst it is on
the Prothesis, they hold it is a Type or Figure. Yet do they sometimes call it
the Body of Jesus Christ, sometimes, the imperfect Body of Christ, sometimes
the dead Body of Jesus Christ, although they do not believe the Consecration is
then completed. This is confirmed by what I related in the Fourth Chapter of
this Third Book, and it is not likewise necessary to insist any longer thereon,
because this particular concerns not the matter in hand.

THIRDLY, When the Symbols are carried and placed on the great Altar, they say
that by the Prayers of the Priest, and Descent of the Holy Spirit, the Bread
and Wine, are perfectly consecrated and changed into the Body and Blood of
Christ. To express this change, they use these general Terms I already noted,
to wit, (...), etc. which signify a change. They say the Bread is the Body of
Christ, and that it is made the very Body it self, or the proper Body of
Christ, and hereunto refer all those Citations Mr. Arnaud has alleged out of
Theophylact, Euthymius, Nicholas Methoniensis, Cabasilas, Simeon
Thessaloniensis and Jeremias. We do not deny that the Greeks use these
Expressions, it concerns us here only to know in what sense the Greek Church
uses them, and what kind of change they mean thereby.

I say then, that when we come to examine this change, and determine in what
manner the Bread and Wine, are made the Body and Blood of Christ, they curb our
curiosity, and remit this knowledge and determination to God, and for their own
parts keep within their general Terms. Which appears by the profession of Faith
which the Sarrazins made in the Twelfth Century, when they embraced the Greek
Religion; I believe, Bibl. Patr. Tom. 2. Graeco-Lat.
says the Proselyte, and confess the Bread and Wine which are mystically
sacrificed by the Christians, and of which they partake in their Divine
Sacraments. I believe likewise that this Bread and Wine, are in truth the Body
and Blood of Christ, being changed intellectually and invisibly by his Divine
Power above all natural conception, he alone knowing the manner of it. And upon
this account it was, that Nicetas Choniatus complains, that in the Twelfth
Century the Doctrine Nicetas Choniat. Annal. lib. 3.
of the Divine Mysteries was divulged, and therefore censures the Patriarch
Camaterus for his not having immediately silenced a Monk, who proposed this
Question (to wit) whether we receive in the Eucharist the corruptible or
incorruptible Body of Jesus Christ. He should have been condemned, says he,
for an Heretic that introduced Novelties, all the rest silenced by his
example, to the end the Mystery may ever remain a Mystery. John Sylvius in his
Cathe'merinon Joan Sylv. a^rebat. Cathem.
of the Greeks recites a Prayer, wherein it is said, That the Body and Blood of
Jesus Christ are touched, and changed on the Altar, after a supernatural
manner, which must not be inquired into. We have likewise already seen in the
Tenth Chapter of this Book the Testimony of Metrophanus, the Patriarch of
Alexandria, who having told us the consecrated Bread is really the Body of
Jesus Confess. Eccles. Or. cap. 9.
Christ, and that which is in the Cup undoubtedly his Blood, he adds, That the
manner of this change is unknown to us, and the knowledge thereof reserved for
the Elect in Heaven, to the end we may obtain more favor from God by a simple
Faith void of curiosity. And thus acquits himself.

ANOTHER Greek Author, cited by Allatius, under the name of John Allat.
adversus Chreygton exercit. 22.
the Patriarch of Jerusalem. You see, says he, that Saint Paul scruples not to
call this Body Bread. But be it so if you will, that it be no longer called
Bread, and being no longer Bread is neither leavened nor unleavened, you see
that it is not bereaved of these Appellations till after Sanctification. But
before this dreadful Sacrifice, when you offer it to sanctify it, shall this
be neither Bread nor an Azyme? Now that which is done in this Oblation is by
our selves; but that which happens in this admirable change, is not from us but
God. It appears by this passage recited by Allatius, and taken if I be not
deceived out of a Manuscript, wherein this Author disputes touching the Azymes
against a Latin who told him, that this Controversy was vain, seeing that
after the Consecration, it is no longer Bread, but the Body of Jesus Christ,
and it seems this Patriarch maintains against him, that 'twas still Bread, and
proves it by the Authority of Saint Paul, who so calls it. It seems likewise by
what he adds, that he would say, that supposing it was no longer called Bread,
and lost this name, yet we must not speak of what it becomes by Consecration,
because God only knows that, and not men.

ALTHOUGH the Greeks are sometimes thus reserved, restraining themselves within
their general Terms, yet for the most part they show more particularly their
thoughts, touching the nature, and kind of the change which happens to the
Bread and Wine, and which makes them to be the Body and Blood of Christ: And
they do it likewise in such a manner, that it is no hard matter to find out
their meaning: Which is what we have now to demonstrate. But before we enter
into this Deduction, it will not be amiss to observe, that the Bread and wine
may be conceived to be changed into the Body and Blood of Christ two ways.
First, by a real conversion of the whole Substance of Bread and Wine, into the
Substance of the Body and Blood, I mean into the same numerical Substance (as
the Schools speak) so that the Substance of Bread subsists no longer after the
change, which is what is held in the Roman Church. Secondly, by the addition of
a new quality, or form in the Bread and Wine, so that their first Substance
remaining, they receive that which they had not before, and by this reception
become that which they were not. In this first manner of conceiving the change,
the Substance of Bread, and that of the Body are considered as two Terms, or
two different Subjects, the first of which does not subsist, but passes over
into the other. In the second, the Bread is considered as a Subject that always
subsists, but which receiving into it that which it had not, by this means
becomes the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, after the same manner as the paper
which receives the Characters and Seal of a Prince, becomes the Princes Letter,
or Wax receiving the Impression of a Seal, is made the Seal it self, or Wool
dyed in Scarlet, becomes a scarlet color, or Wood receiving the impression of
fire, becomes fire it self, or in fine, as the nourishment we take, receiving
the form of our Flesh, and being joined thereunto, becomes our Body. By which
it appears that to proceed faithfully, and ingenuously, in our Inquiries after
the real Belief of the Greeks it must first be acknowledged, that these
expressions; The Bread is changed into the Body of Jesus Christ, the Bread is
made the Body of Christ, the Bread is the Body it self, or the proper Body of
Jesus Christ, are in themselves general expressions, and that they may be
simply taken in this their generality, or applied to several particular,
senses. Now if Mr. Arnaud would have us take these expressions in the sense of
Transubstantiation, he must produce some solid and real passages out of Greek
Authors, by which it may appear that it is in this sense they understood them,
and that they cannot admit of any other. Which is no more than what he ought to
have done, but he has been far from undertaking it, knowing it to be a thing
absolutely impossible.

AS to my own part, had I only intended to show the insufficiency of Mr.
Arnaud's Proofs, I might content my self with alleging this generality, for it
alone is sufficient to hinder him from drawing any Conclusion. But seeing I
have taken upon me, to show in this Chapter, what the real Sentiment of the
Greek Church is, I find my self obliged to bring, not Arguments, or
Distinctions from my own Head, but good and solid passages of the Greeks
themselves; which plainly demonstrate what kind of change they mean.

FOR this effect I shall reduce what they say concerning it, to this
Proposition; They believe that by the Consecration there is made a kind of
composition or mixture of Bread and Wine, and Holy Spirit; that these Symbols
keeping their own proper nature, are joined to the Divinity, and by the
impression they receive from the Holy Ghost, are changed (for the Faithful
only) into the virtue of the Body and Blood of Christ, being made by this means
not a Figure, but the proper, and real Body of Jesus Christ, and this by way of
Augmentation of the same natural Body of Jesus Christ. To which they apply the
Comparisons I already mentioned, concerning the nourishment which becomes our
proper Body by Assimilation and Augmentation, of the Wood which is put to the
Fire, of the Wool which receives the dye, of Paper that is made the Princes
Letter, and Wax, or other Matter which receives the Impression of the Seal.

This Proposition having several parts, and each of them of great importance in
this Question, it is therefore necessary to establish them one after another
distinctly and solidly.

FIRST, They believe there is a composition or mixture made of the Bread with
the Holy Spirit. Metrophanus the Patriarch of Alexandria, shows us, that this
is their Doctrine. For observe here what he says in his Confession of Faith of
the Eastern Church in his Chapter of the Sacraments, God, says he, has
communicated his Grace to the Elect, not only after a spiritual manner, Confess.
Eccles. Or. cap. 5.
but likewise by some sensible signs, as most certain pledges of his promise.
For as we are composed of two parts, so likewise the manner of communicating
his Grace must be double, to wit, by a sensible matter, and by the Holy Spirit,
seeing the Persons that receive these things are made up of a sensible Body and
intelligent Soul; Now these Pledges are that which we call the Mysteries, to
wit, Baptism and the Holy Communion, which consist of visible Matter, and of
the Holy Spirit. These Words are so plain, that they need no Comment. He
affirms there are two things in the Sacraments, and particularly in the
Eucharist, to wit, the sensible Matter, and the Holy Spirit. Now the sensible
Matter in the Eucharist can be nothing else but the Bread and the Wine.

METROPHANUS, affirms moreover the same thing in his Chapter, touching the
Lord's Supper, wherein he says, that the Mystery never loses Ibid cap. 9.
the Sanctification it has once received, and that it is indelible. It is here
where he compares the Sanctification the Bread receives, to Wool when it is dyed
in any color, which includes apparently this Idea of the Composition of Bread,
and the Holy Spirit almost after the same manner as Wool that is dyed is a
composition or mixture of Wool and dye.

THIS Greek Patriarch has only followed in this, the Doctrine of Jeremias the
Patriarch of Constantinople in his Answer to the Divines of Wittemberg,
Consisting, says he, as we do of two Parts, that is to say, of a Body and a
Jerem. Rep. 1. ad Theologos Wittemb.
Soul, our Savior Christ has therefore given us these things doubly, (he means
the Sacraments) he himself consisting of two Natures, being both God and Man.
He spiritually sanctifies our Souls by the Grace of his Spirit, and sanctifies
likewise our Bodies by sensible Matters, namely, with Oil, Water, Bread and
Wine, and other things sanctified by the Holy Spirit, and thus gives us a
complete Salvation. He not only says, that the Sacraments in general are
things that are double (as he terms them) consisting of things sensible, and
the Holy Spirit, but says, this particularly of the Bread and Wine in the
Eucharist.

WITH this agrees the expressions of the Greek Liturgies, and those of the most
famous Authors of this Church, who call the Sacrament the Holy Bread, the
Consecrated Bread, the Divine Bread, the Gifts sanctified by the Holy Spirit,
for these Expressions do naturally denote that composition or duplicity
aforementioned.

NOW if we would know how it has come to pass, the Greeks of latter Ages have
thus expressed themselves in relation to this part of their Belief, we need
only look back to the foregoing Ages, for we shall there find Sentiments and
Expressions on the same Subject, if not wholly conformable to the Expressions
of the Modern Greeks, yet which come very near them, and which have served for
a Foundation to 'em, as will appear by the following Passages.

WE may then here mark what the Fathers of the Council of Constantinople in the
Eighth Century asserted. As the Body of Jesus Christ is Holy, In actis Council.
Nic. 2 act. 6.
because it is deified, so likewise, that which is his Body by Institution, to
wit, his Holy Image is made Divine, by a Sanctification of Grace. For as by
virtue of the Hypostatical Union, our Savior deified the Flesh he took on him,
by a Sanctification naturally proper to him, so in like manner he will have the
Bread in the Eucharist (which is the real Image of his Flesh) to become a
Divine Body by the Descent of the Holy Spirit into it, the Oblation being, by
means of the Priest, transferred from a common State, to a State of Holiness.
And therefore the natural Flesh of Jesus Christ endued with Soul and
Understanding, has been anointed by the Holy Spirit, being united to the
Divinity, and so likewise his Image, to wit, the Divine Bread, is filled with
the Holy Spirit. Who sees not in these words the Union, and Composition of
Bread with the Holy Spirit? The Bread, say they, is made Divine by a
Sanctification of Grace, it becomes a Divine Body by the Descent of the Holy
Spirit into it; the Bread is filled with the Holy Spirit, in like manner as the
natural Flesh of our Lord has been sanctified, deified, and anointed with the
Holy Spirit, by virtue of the Hypostatical Union. All this plainly favors the
Composition of the Modern Greeks. Now this Testimony is the more considerable,
in that the second Nicene Council having been held on purpose to overthrow
whatsoever had been determined in that of Constantinople, touching the Point of
Images, they censured the name of Image, which their Adversaries had given the
Eucharist, but left untouched the other Clauses, I now mentioned. Which shows
that these kind of Expressions, were received by both Parties, and that this
was the common Doctrine of the whole Greek Church.

IN effect if we ascend higher, we shall find, that Saint Ephraim Bishop Apud.
Phol. Bib. Cod. 229.
of Antioch, who lived about the Sixth Century, thus expressed himself, That
the Body of Jesus Christ, which the faithful receive, does not leave its
sensible Substance, nor is separated from the spiritual Grace. Which does
moreover favor the Duplicity, or Composition of Bread with the Holy Spirit.

THEODORET, who lived about the Fifth Century, expresses himself Diog. al. 1.
after the same manner. Jesus Christ, says he, has honored the visible
Symbols with the name of his Body and Blood, not in changing their naturee, but
in joining his Grace thereunto. Chrysostom said the same thing in the Fourth
Chrysostom. Hom. 44. in Joan.
Century, That the Bread becomes Heavenly Bread, by means of the Holy Spirit's
coming down upon it.

THEOPHILUS of Alexandria in the same Century wrote, That the Theophil. Alex.
Ep. Pasch. 1. Bibl. Patr. Tom. 3. Edit. 4.
Bread and Wine placed on the Lord's Table are inanimate things, which are
sanctified by Prayer, and Descension of the Holy Ghost.

SAINT Irenaeus who lived in the Second Century, spoke to the same Irenae,
advers. Hares. lib. 4. cap. 34.
purpose, That the Eucharist consists of two things; the one Earthly, the other
Heavenly. It is plain by the sequel of his Discourse, that he means by these
two things the Bread, and sanctifying Grace of the Holy Spirit. But it is also
manifest, that all these Passages have occasioned the Belief of the Composition.

THOMAS a Jesu tells us of an Error wherewith almost all the Eastern Thom. a
Jesu. lib. de procur. salute omn. gent. part. 2. lib. 7. cap 7.
Christians are infected: which is; That Jesus Christ soaked the Bread he was
to give to Judas, that he might thereby take away its Consecration. I confess
it is a great absurdity to imagine the Consecration can be taken away by this
means; but it is easy to perceive, these ignorant People have fallen into this
Error, by conceiving the Consecration under the Idea of a real impression made
on the Substance of Bread, for thereupon they have imagined this impression
might be effaced in washing the Bread, or soaking it.

AND thus far concerning the first part of my Proposition. The second, is, That
they believe the Bread and Wine keeping their proper nature are joined to the
Divinity. Which is the same thing as the first, only, otherwise expressed. They
will then mutually assist and strengthen each other. For this effect I shall
produce the Testimony of Nicholas Methoniensis, who lived in the Twelfth
Century. This Author in answering those that doubted whether the Eucharist was
the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, because they saw neither Flesh nor Blood,
but Bread and Wine, resolves the difficulty in this manner. God, says he, who
knows all things, and is perfectly good, has wisely ordered this in respect of
our weakness, lest we should have in horror the Pledges of Eternal Life, being
not able to behold Flesh and Blood, he has therefore appointed this to be done
by things, to which our nature is accustomed, and has joined to them his
Divinity, saying, this is my Body, this is my Blood.

MR. Arnaud pretends to make advantage of these Doubts, which Nicholas Nicolaus
Methon. advers. dubitantes, etc. Bibl. Patr. Craeco-Lat. Tom. 2.
Methoniensis treats of, but we shall answer this Point in its due place. It
suffices at present that we behold this Author laying down on one hand, the
things to which our natures are accustomed, that is to say, Bread and Wine, and
on the other, he assures us, that the Divinity is joined to them. Which is
exactly what I was to prove, whence it follows, that according to the Greeks,
the Bread and Wine remain in Union with the Divinity. Mr. Arnaud who saw the
force of this Passage, has endeavored to avoid it by a frivolous evasion. God
joins, says he, his Divinity to the Bread and Wine. It Is true, but Lib 2 cap.
13. page 231.
he has joined it as the efficacious cause of the change of the Bread and Wine
into the Body and Blood of Christ, so often repeated, by Nicholas Methoniensis,
but not as a means of Union between the Bread and Wine, and Body of Jesus
Christ. He has joined it to the Bread, not to conserve it in the Substance of
Bread, but to transform it internally into his Body.

I say this is a frivolous evasion. For according to this reckoning we must
understand by the things familiar to our natures, the Bread and Wine, as the
matter to which the Divinity is joined to change it. But were this the sense of
Nicholas Methoniensis, what would this contribute to the clearing up the doubt
proposed to him? The Question is, whether the Flesh and Blood would not appear,
if they were in the Sacrament, and Nicholas Methoniensis answers, that the
Bread and Wine are the matter changed by the Divinity, which effects this
change. This is certainly a very strange way of speaking, to say, he joins his
Divinity to them, to signify that he transubstantiates them. We see few People
thus express themselves. But supposing this, what relation has this to the
Doubt he pretends to resolve? If the Flesh of Christ were in the Sacrament, say
these Dubitants, it would appear, we should see it. I answer, say, Nicholas
Methoniensis, (according to Mr. Arnaud's Comment) that the Bread and Wine are
the matter which is changed, and that the Almighty power of God changes them.
Can any Answer be more ridiculous? This Author must certainly lost his Wits to
make such a Reply. They do not ask him, what the matter is that is changed, nor
what the efficient cause of this change, but, why, if it be use Body of Christ,
it does not appear to be Flesh, but Bread; Matter, Cause, efficacy contribute
nothing to the solving of this Doubt. This Gloss then of Mr. Arnaud's is
absurd, and if we suppose Nicholas Methoniensis spoke sense, it must be
granted, that his meaning is, that the Bread and Wine, remaining Bread and
Wine, are yet notwithstanding made the Body and Blood of Christ, by reason of
their Union to the Divinity, and not otherwise. Whence it follows, that it must
not be expected they should appear to be Flesh and Blood, because they are not
so in respect of their Matter, or Substance, but only by their Union to the
Divinity, which makes them in some sort to be the same thing, with the Body and
Blood.

THIS Opinion seems to be derived from Damascen, whose expressions I desire I
may have leave to mention, although we must use them also in another place. For
it is certain, that to judge aright of the Opinion of the Modern Greeks, we must
ascend so far. Mr. Arnaud has himself observed, that, John Damascen is another
Saint Thomas amongst the Greeks, and has been ever the rule of their Doctrine
touching the Eucharist. Elsewhere he assures us, That we need only read the
Treatises of the Modern Greeks, to find that they Lib. 2. cap. 6. page 155.
Lib. 2. cap. 12.
wholly conform themselves to the Sentiment and Expressions of this Father.
This then is a Principle with Mr. Arnaud, so that to convince him touching the
Belief of the Greeks, there is a kind of necessity lying upon us to consult
this Father.

OBSERVE here then what he says in his Fourth Book of the Orthodox Faith, The
Bread and Wine are not the Figure of the Body and Blood of Damascen de Orthod.
fid. lib. 4 cap. 14.
Christ; God forbid; but they are the deified Body it self of Jesus Christ, the
Lord himself saying unto us, this is, not the Figure of my Body, but my Body,
not the Figure of my Blood, but my Blood: He had said before to the Jews, if ye
eat not the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, you will have no life
in you, for my Flesh is Meat indeed, and my Blood is Drink indeed. And then
again, He that eats me shall live. Draw we near then with trembling, with a
pure Conscience, a firm Faith, and it will be unto us according to the
constancy and firmness of our Faith. Honor we it with a perfect purity of Body
and Soul. For it is double. Approach we toward it with a fervent desire, and
placing our hands in manner of a Cross, receive we the Body of him that was
crucified for us. Let us put it on our Eyes, Lips, and Forehead; and take we
thus the Divine Coal, to the end our Devotion being inflamed thereby, our sins
may be consumed, and our hearts enlightened, and that by the participation of
this Divine Fire, we may our selves become inflamed and deified. Esaias saw a
Coal. Now a Coal is not mere Wood, but Wood in conjunction with Fire. So the
Bread of the Communion is not mere Bread, being it is united to the Divinity.
Now a Body united to the Divinity is not one single nature, but two, one being
that of the Body, and the other that of the Divinity annexed thereunto. So that
to take them together, it is not one only nature, but two.

THESE Words clearly show, that Damascen means, that the Bread in the
Eucharist, which is the Body of Jesus Christ, is double, because it is joined to
the Divinity, that it is not mere Bread, but Bread united to the Divinity,
consisting of two natures, one of Bread, and the other of the Divinity which is
joined to it; in like manner as Esaias his live Coal was not mere Wood, but
Wood in conjunction with Fire. Now this is what is exactly contained in my
Proposition, that the Bread, and Wine keeping their proper nature are joined to
the Divinity, according to the Greeks.

MR. Arnaud, who saw the force of this Passage, that he might get clear off it,
has bethought himself, to say, that the Duplicity which Damascen mentions must
be understood as meant of Jesus Christ himself, who consists of two Natures. He
rehearses the Passage in hand to these Words, Duplex Lib. 7. cap. 4. page 654.
est enim, and then adds, it is plain that hitherto these Words relate to Jesus
Christ, and his true and real Flesh, and that it is of him it is said, Duplex
est enim, which is to say, that he is composed of two Natures, and a little
farther, It plainly appears that Saint John Damascen' s Design is to exhort us
to a double Ibid.
purity of Soul and Body, to honor the double Nature of Jesus Christ, and to
show that we receive in the Communion this double Nature. So that these Words,
non est panis simplex sed unitus divinitati, corpus autem unitum divinitati non
est una natura sed duae, una quidem corporis alter a conjunctae Divinitatis,
are the Exposition of what he said before, that Jesus Christ was double. And
that which he shows us, is, that this double nature of Jesus Christ has been
signified by the Coal which Esaias saw, and that we receive this Divine Coal.

BUT all this is but an Error, and cunning Evasion of Mr. Arnaud, who was not
willing to consult the Greek Copy of Damascen, for it is true indeed these Latin
Words, Duplex est enim, may refer to Jesus Christ, or his Flesh, because the
Latin word, Duplex, is of all Genders, so that being taken in the Masculine it
relates to Christ himself, and in the Feminine to his Flesh. But had Mr. Arnaud
been willing to consult the Greek Text, he would have found no pretense for
this evasion. For there is (...). Now who knows not, that (...), is of the
Neuter Gender, which by consequence can neither agree with Jesus Christ, nor
his Flesh, but with (...), the Body which the Vide Damascen de Orthodoxa Fide,
of Veronnes Impression, 1531. and that of Basil.
Bread is, and which we receive in the Communion, of which he spoke in the
beginning of his Discourse? He might have found also that these words, Honor
we him, are in the Greek in the Neuter Gender, (...), which can only refer to
the Body, and not to Jesus Christ, nor his Flesh.

MR. Arnaud methinks should take more care another time of what he writes, and
not give us so many of his; It is clear, it manifestly appears, for there is
nothing so clear as the contrary of what he says. Damascen speaking of the
Bread of the Communion, says, that it is not a Figure, but the deified Body of
Jesus Christ, he would have us honor this Body, that is to say, that Body
which we receive in the Communion, with a double purity of Body and Soul,
externally and internally, because it is double. He shows what ought to be our
inward disposition, to wit, a fervent desire, he passes to our external
Actions, which are, to hold our arms cross-wise, and to hold the Communion we
receive on our Eyes, Lips, and Forehead. Afterward, to explain how this Body
is double; he compares it to the Coal Esaias saw, which was not bare wood, but
wood and fire together. Then applying immediately his comparison, he adds, Thus
the Bread of the Communion is not mere Bread, being it is united to the
Divinity. Now a Body united to the Divinity, is not one single nature, but two,
one of the Body, and the other of the Divinity, which is joined thereunto. Who
sees not then, that this double Body, of which he speaks, and which he compared
to Esaias Coal, is the Bread of the Communion, that it is double, being Bread
united to the Divinity, and that the effect of this Union is, not to change the
nature of the Bread, but to make a composition of two Natures. Whence it
manifestly follows, that one of these Natures being the Divinity, the other is
the nature of Bread. It is then true, as Mr. Arnaud has observed, that these
last words, Sit panis communionis non est panis simplex sed unitus divinitati,
are the exposition of what he said before, Duplex est enim, for it is double.
But because duplex refers not to Jesus Christ, but to the Body we receive in
the Communion; it is therefore likewise true, that they expound what we must
understand by this Body, to wit, the Bread united to the Divinity.

BUT I must puruse the other parts of my Proposition. The Greeks believe, That
by the impression which the Bread and Wine receive from the Holy Spirit, they
are changed into the virtue of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, and made by
this means this Body and Blood. Which is apparent, first, from all those
Passages of the Liturgies I mentioned in the Fifth Chapter of this Book; the
result whereof, is, that the Bread becomes the Body of Jesus Christ, in as much
as it is made capable of sanctifying us, and that this is exactly what the
Priest prays for in the words of Consecration. Now what is this, but the
Bread's being made the Body of Jesus Christ in virtue?

SECONDLY, This appears likewise by what we have seen from Simeon
Thessaloniensis, who tells us, that the unconsecrated Particles being mixed
with those that are consecrated, and partaking of their Sanctification, become
in some sort, the Body of Christ, and are proper for the Communion of the
Faithful. For this necessarily supposes, as I showed in the Fifth Chapter, of
this Third Book, that the consecrated Particle it self is the Body of Jesus
Christ, in as much as it receives this Sanctification.

THIRDLY, This moreover appears by the Passages of Cabasilas, which I alleged
in the Sixth Chapter, by which we see that he takes for the same thing, to
receive Sanctification, and to receive the Body of Jesus Christ. Which likewise
necessarily supposes that the Bread becomes the Body of Christ, only in
Sanctification and virtue.

FOURTHLY, Euthymius Zigabenius, a Greek Monk, that lived in the Euthym.
Comment. in Matthe. cap. 64.
Twelfth Century, confirms the same thing. We must not, says he, consider the
nature of things which are offered, but their virtue: For as the word deifies
(if it be lawful to use such an expression) the Flesh to which it is united
after a supernatural manner, so it changes by an ineffable operation the Bread
and Wine into his Body, which is a Spiring of Life, and into his precious
Blood, and into the virtue of both one and the other.

MR. Arnaud nibbles at this Passage, Euthymius, says he, says that Jesus Lib.
24. cap. 12. page 216.
Christ changes after an ineffable manner, the Bread into his own Body. This
signifies, says Mr. Claude, that he changes it, not into his Body, but into
the virtue of his Body. Euthymius says, that he changes the Wine into his
Blood. This signifies, says Mr Claude, that he changes it, not into his Blood,
but into the virtue of his Blood. Euthymius adds, that he changes them into the
virtue of both one and the other, in gratiam ipsorum. This Addition has
perplexed Mr. Claude, and therefore he has thought good not to mention it. But
in adding it, because it is there in effect, the whole expression of Euthymius
expounded in the Calvinists sense will be, that Jesus Christ changes the Bread
into the virtue of his Body, and the Wine into the virtue of his Blood, and
into the virtue of both one and the other. Who ever heard of such a folly to
join together the Metaphorical Term, and the exposition of the Metaphorical
Term, as two distinct and separate things? Do we say, for example, that the
Stone is Jesus Christ, and the Sign of Jesus Christ; that the Ark was the
Church, and the Figure of the Church; that the Paschal Lamb was Christ, and the
representation of Christ; that Anger changes men into Beasts, and into the fury
of Beasts.

ALL this is but vain Rhetoric. Euthymius says, We must not consider the
nature of the things offered us, but their virtue. This is not the Language of
a man, that would say, that the nature of Bread and Wine ceases to be, and that
we must consider the proper Substance of Jesus Christ under the Vail of
Accidents. This Expression on the contrary supposes that the nature of these
things subsists, although we must not consider it, but raise up our minds to the
Consideration of the supernatural virtue they receive. When then he adds, that
Jesus Christ changes the Bread, and Wine into his own Body and Blood, it is
true that this signifies, according to my Interpretation, that he changes them
into the virtue of his Body and Blood, and not into their Substance. But what
he says afterward, and into the virtue of both ^^e and the other, is not
another distinct thing, or different from what he had said, being only the
explication of it. This Et is an explicative Particle, which has the force of
an as much as to say, as if he said, They are changed into the Body and Blood,
that is to say, into the virtue of both one and the other. Mr. Arnaud must not
think to blind us, by his, who ever heard? For there is nothing more common in
Authors than the use of this Particle Et, in a sense of explication, which
joins not two several things, but two several expressions, which signify one
and the same thing, and one of which is the explication of the other. Thus
Saint Paul says, That God created Meats to be received with Thankfulness by
the 1 Timothy 4. 3.
Faithful. AND by those that know the Truth. Again, Peace be unto those that
walk according to this Rule, AND on the Israel of God. All these Ets Gal. 6. 16.
are put for, that is to says. Thus. Cyrillus of Alexandria speaking of the
effect of the Communion, the least Eulogium, says he, mixes or confounds in it
Cyrill. Alex. in Joan. 6. 57. Chrysostom. Him. ^. in Romans
self our whole Body, AND fills it with its efficacy. Saint Chrysostom, and
whereas we were men, he has made us Angels and Children of God. Saint Augustine,
he that could change Water into Wine, is able to change Grass into Gold; Aug.
S^rm. 12. ex 40 Sermon.
AND make of Flesh an Angel. All these ETS, are explicatives, and are put for
that is to says. Mr. Arnaud need not contend about a thing so well known as
this is; I say then Euthymius having first said, That we must not consider the
nature of things which are placed on the Altar, but their virtue, and
afterward adding, that Jesus Christ changes the Bread and Wine into his own
Body and Blood, AND into the virtue of both one and the other, the first
Proposition which respects only the virtue, in supposing that the nature of
Bread and Wine subsists, leads us to the understanding of the second, and makes
us easily comprehend, that it is as much as if he had said, that he changes them
into his Body and Blood, which is to say, into the virtue both of the one and
the other. For it is of the virtue not the substance, which his Discourse treats
of. Had Euthymius meant by his change into the Body and Blood, a change of
Substance, what could move him to add, that they are likewise changed into the
virtue of both one and the other? Besides that to speak properly, it would not
be true, that the change was made into the virtue, seeing it would terminate it
self only in the Substance, and that the virtue would be only as a sequel of
the Substance, and not as a Term of the change; besides this, I say, wherefore
should he speak of this change of virtue? To inform us that the Substance is
not alone; but who doubts that the sanctifying virtue of the Body and Blood is
every where, where their Substance is, and what need is there of informing the
Readers of this?

FIFTHLY, When Euthymius his expression were ambiguous, yet would they be
cleared up by those of other Greek Authors, that better explain themselves, and
show that the common Doctrine of this Church is, that the Bread and Wine are
the Body and Blood of Christ, inasmuch as they are changed into their virtue.

THEOPHYLACT, who lived in the Eleventh Century, thus expresses Theophyl. in
Marc 14.
himself, Because the Bread and Wine are Food familiar to us, and we are not
able to endure Flesh and Blood to be set before us, God therefore who is full
of pity, accommodating himself to our weakness, conserves the Species of Bread
and Wine; but changes them into the VIRTUE of his Flesh and Blood.

WE must observe, he makes this answer, to People, that doubted, whether the
Bread was the Flesh of Jesus Christ, because they saw no such thing as the
latter of these. When then he tells them, that the Bread and Wine are changed
into the virtue of the Flesh and Blood; it is clear he means, that the Bread
and Wine are changed only in virtue, whence it follows, it is not to be expected
they should appear to be Flesh and Blood, for otherwise he would not satisfy
the difficulty he had proposed. Were they changed into the real Substance of
Flesh and Blood, as well as into their virtue, the doubt would still remain, to
wit, that they must still appear Flesh and Blood. The change of Virtue would
not decide the Question. We shall examine in their due order, all the frivolous
exceptions, which Mr. Arnaud opposes against the evidence of this Passage, and
likewise hope to give a satisfactory account to whatsoever he alleges from
this Author. I must not now interrupt my Proof by a Digression which would
carry me too far. It is sufficient to show, that Theophylact expressly affirms,
that if the Bread and Wine appear not to be Flesh and Blood, it is because God
changes them into the virtue of this Flesh and Blood.

VI. IF we ascend higher than the Eleventh Century, we shall find the same
belief and expressions amongst the Greeks of those times, which will give us
greater light into the belief of the Moderns. Observe here how Ely Archbishop
of Candia, the Commentator on Gregory Nazianzen expresses himself. Saint
Gregory having called the Eucharist an external Sacrifice and an Antitype. By
this external Sacrifice, says Ely, he means that which is celebrated Elias
Cret. Comment. in Oration. Apol. Greg. Naz.
with Bread and Wine, which being placed on the Holy Table, are really changed
by the power of Almighty God into the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ. Were
there no more said but this, Mr. Arnaud would be sure to triumph; but hear what
follows, For, adds he, to the end we might not be struck with horror in seeing
Flesh and Blood upon the Holy Table, God condescending to our weakness indues
the Elements, set before us, with an enlivening quality, and changes them into
the efficacy (or operation) of his Flesh. This Author lived about the Eighth
Century, and was present at the Council of Nice.

VII. WE have already seen in the Quotations of Nicetas Choniatus, a Passage of
Eutychus, which asserts the same Doctrine as the rest. This Author lived (if I
be not mistaken) toward the end of the Sixth Century, for I believe he is the
same Eutychus against whom Gregory the Great, being at Constantinople, disputed
touching the Resurrection. But howsoever, he says, Nicet. Annal. lib. 3.
according to the Relation we have from Nicetas, That the Body and Blood of
Jesus Christ being applied to the Antitypes, by Consecration, imprint on them,
Their proper Powers (or proper virtues) (...). It was he from whom we had the
comparison of the Seal, which applied to Wax, imprints its Character thereon,
which does moreover represent this impression of virtue, we now speak of.

VIII. IN the Fifth Century, lived Cyrillus Alexandriensis, and Victor of
Antioch; which latter relates these Words of Cyrillus, not to contradict, but
to approve them. Lest we should conceive horror at the sight of Flesh Victor
Antioch. Com. MS. in Marc.
and Blood on the Holy Table, God in regard to our weakness, indues the things
thereon offered with a VIRTUE of life, and changes them into the efficacy of
his Flesh, to the end they may be to us a vivifying Communion, and that the
Body of life may be found in us as a living Seed.

IX. IN the Fourth Century Saint Epiphanius held the same Language. Epiph.
Sermon. de Fide Eccles. and in Anacephal.
They that come, says he, to the Baptism, receive the virtue which Jesus
Christ brought to it when he descended into it, and are illuminated by the
communication of his light. Thus, is the Oracle of the Prophet, accomplished,
which says, that there shall happen in Jerusalem a change in the virtue of
Bread and Water, and there shall be given to them a saving virtue. For here, to
wit, in Jesus Christ, the virtue of Bread and force of Water are made strong,
not that the Bread is thus powerful to us, but the virtue of the Bread: For as
to the Bread, it is indeed an Aliment, but there is in him a VIRTUE to inliven
us.

X. GREGORY of Nisse, in this same Century, spoke to the very same Greg. Niss
in Bapt. Chr.
effect. You see, says he, that Water is made use of in the Holy Baptism, but
you must not therefore despise it, for it is of great virtue and mavelous
efficacy. Do you see this Holy Altar where we attend? As to its nature, it is a
common stone, which differs in nothing from others with which we build our
Houses. But when it has been sanctified by the Divine Service performed
thereon, and received the blessing, it becomes a Holy Table, an impolluted
Altar, which all the World cannot touch, the Sacred Ministers alone touch it,
but yet with respect. So the Bread is at first common Bread, but after the
Mystical Consecration, it is called, and is the Body of Jesus Christ. I affirm
the same concerning the Mystical Oil and Wine, these are things of small value
before their Consecration; but when blessed by the Holy Spirit, both the one,
and the other operate after an excellent manner. His Design, is to show, how
mere Water, such as is used in Baptism, comes to have such great virtue, and
produces such admirable effects. For this purpose he alleges diverse Examples
of mean and despicable things in themselves, which by their Consecration,
acquire an excellent virtue and efficacy. Amongst which, he especially reckons
the Bread, and Wine, in the Eucharist. As to the Wine, he makes use of the Term
of, operate, but as to the Bread, he says, it is the Body of Jesus Christ;
which plainly shows, that in his sense, to be the Body of Jesus Christ, and to
have an excellent operation, is but one and the same thing.

XI. WE find at the end of Clement Alexandrinus his Works, a Treatise Epitome.
Theodot. in calce, oper. Clem. Alex.
of a Greek Author, named Theodotus; who lived in the Third Century, wherein he
asserts this same change of virtue, The Bread and Oil, says he, are sanctified
by virtue of the Holy Spirit. They are no longer then, what they were before,
notwithstanding their outward appearance, but are changed, INTO A SPIRITUAL
EFFICACY.

WE have here then, the Doctrine of the Greeks, cleared up, by express
Testimonies, both from Modern, and Ancient Authors. So that methinks Mr. Arnaud
has no reason to turn into sport, and raillery, as he has done, this change of
virtue, in calling it our Key of Virtue. Every man sees it is no invention of
ours, and that we allege nothing concerning it, but what is authorized, by
good and real Passages, and by the Sentiments and proper expressions of the
Greeks of greatest account in all Ages. When Mr. Arnaud shall produce as many
and solid Testimonies for his change of Substance, we will give him leave to
deride our change of virtue, as he is pleased to term it. But till then, I have
reason to desire him to stop his Laughter.

I should now pass on to the proving my Proposition, That, the Greeks believe
the Bread and Wine only thus become the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ to the
Faithful; but having already established this Article, in the Sixth Chapter,
and drawn from thence an Argument, to show they believe not Transubstantiation,
I shall therefore for the avoiding needless Repetitions, refer the Reader to it.

I come then to the last Article, which, contains, that the Greeks hold the
Bread, is made the proper and real Body of Jesus Christ, by means of the
addition of his Natural Body. This Point calls for a particular consideration,
for not only, it will further discover to us, what the real Opinion of the
Greeks is; but likewise show us, whence come these emphatical expressions,
which they sometimes use, in saying it is the very Body of Jesus Christ, and no
other Body than that which was born of the Virgin Mary, and likewise show us in
what sense we must understand them.

I. I say then, among other Comparisons, the Greeks use, for the explaining the
manner of this change, which happens to the Bread and Wine; they especially
employ, that of Food, which being received by us, is changed into our Bodies.
Now, every man knows, that the Matter or Substance of Food, is not changed,
into the first Substance which we had before we take it, in such a manner that
the one must be absolutely the other, and by a Numerical Identity; on the
contrary, each substance conserves its proper being, and that of the Food, is
joined to that of our Body, and receives its Form, it augments it, and by way
of Union, Augmentation, and Assimilation (as they speak) becomes ours, and
makes but one and the same Body, and not two, with that which we had before.
And this is the Comparison, the Greeks do most often urge, whereby to express
their Conceptions touching the Holy Sacrament. Theophilact, in his Commentaries
on Saint John's Gospel, having told us, the Bread we eat in the Mysteries, is
not an Antitype of the Flesh of Jesus Christ, but the very Flesh it self,
immediately adds these Words, The Bread is changed into the Flesh of Christ, by
the Ineffable Words, the Mystical Theophil. 1. Joan 6.
Benediction, and coming of the Holy Spirit. No man ought to be troubled, in
being obliged, to believe, that Bread becomes Flesh. For when our Lord was
conversant on Earth, and received his nourishment from Bread, this Bread he
eat, was changed into his Body, being made like unto his Flesh, and contributed
to augment and sustain it after a humane manner. And thus, now, is the Bread
changed into our Lord's Flesh.

THEODORUS Abucara, Bishop, and Metropolitan of Carry, and contemporary with
Photius, according to Gretzer the Jesuits conjecture, borrowed the same
Comparison, whereby to explain, how the Bread is made the Body of Christ. He
introduces in one of his Dialogues, a Saracen disputing Bibl. Patr. Tom. 2.
Graeco-Lat.
with him on this Subject. The Saracen. Tell me, Bishop; why do ye Priests so
impose on other Christians? Of the same Flower, you make two Loaves, the one
for common use, and the other you divide into several pieces, distributing 'em
to the People, which you call the Body of Jesus Christ, and persuade them it
confers remission of sins. Do ye deceive your selves, or the People, whose
Guides you are? The Christian. We neither abuse our selves nor others. The
Saracen. Prove me this then, not by Scripture, but by reason. The Christian.
What do ye say? Is not the Bread made the Body of Jesus Christ? The Saracen. I
know not what to answer to that. The Christian. When your Mother first brought
you forth into the World, was you then as big as you are now? The Saracen? No,
I was born a little one, and became bigger by means of Food, God thus ordering
it. The Christian. Has the Bread then been made your Body? The Saracen. Yes.
The Christian. And how was this done? The Saracen. I know not the manner
thereof. The Christian. The Bread descends into the Stomach, and by the heat of
the Liver, the grossest parts separating themselves, the rest are converted
into Chyle, the Liver attracting them to it, and changing them into Blood, and
afterward distributes 'em by means of the Veins, to all the parts of the Body,
that they may be what they are, bone to bones, marrow to marrow, sinew to
sinews, eye to eyes, hair to hair, nail to nails, and thus by this means the
Child grows, and becomes a Man, the Bread being converted in to his Body, and
the Drink into his Blood. The Saracen. I believe so. The Christian. Know then
that our Mystery is made after the same manner, the Priest places Bread and
Wine on the Holy Table, and praying, the Holy Spirit descends thereon, and the
efficacy of its Divinity changes them into the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ,
neither more nor less, than the Liver changes the Food into the Body of a Man.

THEODORUS Graptus, a Greek Monk, who lived in the Ninth Century, Apud Leonem
Allat. post diatribas de Simeon and ^^ia Collect 1.
uses likewise the same Comparison; We do not call, says he, the Holy
Mysteries, an Image, or Figure, of the Body of Jesus Christ; although they be a
Symbolical Representation thereof, but the very deified Body of Jesus Christ,
he himself saying, if ye eat not the Flesh of the Son of man, and drink his
Blood, ye have no life in you. And this is what he taught his Disciples, when
he said to 'em, take, and eat my Body, not a Figure of my Body; for thus did he
form his Flesh, of the Substance of the Virgin, by the Holy Spirit. Which may
be explained likewise by things familiar to us: for as the Bread, Wine, and
Water, do naturally change themselves into the Body and Blood of him that eats
and drinks them. So by the Prayers of the Priest, and Descent of the Holy
Spirit, these things are supernaturally changed into the Body, and Blood of
Jesus Christ. And this is done by the Priest's Prayer, and yet we understand
not that this is two Bodies, but one and the same Body.

NICEPHORUS, the Patriarch of Constantinople, and Contemporary Allat. de perp.
Cons. lib. 3. cap. 15. M. Arn. lib. 7 cap. 5 p. 662.
with Theodorus Graptus, says the same thing, in a Passage which Allatius, and
Mr. Arnaud after him, has related. If it be lawful, says he, to explain these
things by a humane Comparison, as the Bread, Wine, and Water, are naturally
changed into the Body and Blood of those, that eat and drink them, and become
not another Body, so these Gifts by the Prayer of him that officiates, and
descent of the Holy Spirit, are changed supernaturally into the Body and Blood
of Jesus Christ. For this is what is contained in the Priest's Prayer, and we
understand not that this is two Bodies, but one and the same Body.

THIS way of explaining the change of the Bread and Wine, is not peculiar to
these Authors alone, whom I now alleged. Damascen, who according to Mr.
Arnaud, is to be esteemed as the common Oracle of the Greeks, made use of it,
in his Fourth Book of the Orthodox Faith. As in Baptism, Damascen. de fide
Orthod. lib. 4. cap. 14.
says he, because men are wont to wash and anoint themselves, God has added to
the Oil, and Water, the Grace of his Holy Spirit, and made thereof the Laver of
our Regeneration: so in like manner, because we are wont to eat Bread, and
drink Wine and Water; he has joined to these things his Divinity, and made them
his Body and Blood, to the end that by things familiar to our nature, he might
raise us above nature. This is really the Body united to the Divinity, the Body
born of the Virgin. Not, that the Body which ascended up on high, descends from
Heaven; but because the Bread, and Wine are changed, into the Body and Blood of
God. If you ask how this comes to pass; it will be sufficient to tell ye that
it is by means of the Holy Spirit; and after the same manner as he became Flesh
in the Virgin's Womb. All that we know of it is this, that the Word of God is
true, efficacious, and Almighty; and that the manner of this change is
inconceiveable. Yet we may say, that as naturally the Bread we eat, the Wine
and Water we drink, are changed into the Body and Blood of him, that eats and
drinks, and yet become not another Body than that which he had before, so after
the same manner the Bread and Wine, which are placed on the Altar, are
supernaturally changed into the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ by Prayer, and
Descension of the Holy Spirit; and these are not two Bodies, but one and the
same Body.

IT is probable, that Damascen, and the others aforementioned, who use this
Comparison, have taken it out of the Catechism of Gregory of Nysse; wherein we
find almost the same Conceptions. For, he says, that as the Gregor. Nyss. in
Orat. Cat^chet.
Bread which Jesus Christ eat, was changed into his Body, and received thereby
a divine virtue; the same likewise comes to pass in the Eucharist. For there,
it was the Grace of the Word, that sanctified the Body, which was nourished
with Bread, and was in some sort Bread; and here after the same manner, the
Bread is sanctified by the Word of God, and by Prayer; not being in truth made
the Body of the Word, by Manducation, but by being changed in an instant by the
Word into the Body of Christ, according to what he said himself, this is my
Body.

THIS Comparison does already sufficiently enough declare the Doctrine of the
Greek Church; to wit, that the Substance of Bread conserving its proper being,
is joined to the natural Body of Jesus Christ; that it is made like unto it,
that it augments it, and becomes by this means one and the same Body with him.
For it is thus the Aliment we take, (although it conserves its own Substance and
proper being) becomes one with our Body, by way of Addition, or Augmentation.

DURANDUS a Bishop, and Famous Divine, amongst the Latins, who Durand in 4.
sent. did. 11. quaest. 3.
lived in the beginning of the Fourteenth Century, acknowledged the force of
this Comparison, and made it be observed by those in his time, and also used it
himself, to strengthen his Opinion, which was, that the Substance of Bread
remains, and losing its first form of Bread, receives the natural form of the
Body of Christ. Bellarmin answers, that these Comparisons must not be Bell. de
Sacr. Euch. lib. 3. cap. 13.
strained too far, that they are not in all things alike, and that the Greeks
only use that of Food to show the reality and truth of the change, which
happens in the Bread and Wine in the Sacrament; and not to signify that this
change is made in the same manner. And this is in my mind as much as can be
said with any show of reason. We must then see here, whether in the sense of
the Greeks, we may extend the Comparison of the Food, so as to understand
thereby, that the Bread and Wine are made the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ,
by way of Augmentation of this Body, for if it appears they take it in this
manner, Bellarmin's Answer signifies nothing; and our Proof will be complete
and undeniable.

DAMASCEN, decides the Question himself in his Letter to Zacharias Damascen. E.
pist ad Zachar. Doar. and in Hum. de Corp. and Sanct Dom. in Edit. Biblii.
Bishop of Doare, and in the short Homily which follows it. Observe here, what
he says in his Letter. Touching the Body of our Lord, of which we partake, I
declare to you, it cannot be said there are two Bodies of Jesus Christ; there
being but one alone. For as the Child as soon as he is born is complete, but
receives his growth from eating and drinking; and although he grows thereby, yet
cannot be said to have two bodies, but only one, so by greater reason the Bread
and Wine, by Descent of the Holy Spirit, are made one only Body, and not two by
the AUGMENTATION OF THE BODY OF CHRIST.

BUT to the end it may not be thought this Discourse slipped from him unawares,
observe here how he explains, his mind in the following Homily. This Body, and
Blood of our God, of which we partake, is subject to Corruption, being broken,
spilt, eaten, and drunk, and passes through all the natural Economy of the
Incarnation of the Word, which comes to pass in the same manner, as the GROWTH
of our Bodies. For as to our Bodies, the first thing supposed, is the matter of
which the Embryo consists, afterward the Mother furnishing it with the Aliment
of her Blood, this matter is changed by little and little, and becomes an
organized Body, by means of the virtue which our Creature has given to nature.
In the same manner is formed the Flesh, Bones, and rest of the Parts, by the
assistance of the Faculties destini'd for Attraction, Retention, Nourishment
and Growth. So likewise the Food we take, increases and augments the mass of
our Body, by the ministry of these same Faculties, designed for nourishment;
which attract, retain, and change the Food. And therefore our Lord shows us the
whole divine Economy of his Incarnation, Crucifixion, Burial, Resurrection,
and State of Corruption in this GROWTH of his Body. For the Body of our Lord
became not immediately incorruptible, but corruptible, and passible, till his
Resurrection; and after his Burial became incorruptible, by this same Divine
Power, by which he raised himself, and makes us also incorruptible: But how
comes this to pass? The Holy Virgin has been as it were the Table whereon was
the Substance of Bread, when according to the saying of the Angel, the Holy
Spirit came upon her, and the virtue of the most High overshadowed her, that is
to say, the Divine Word, the Divine Person who took Flesh of her. So likewise
here the Substance which is Bread, and Wine mingled with Water, is placed on
the Mystical Table, as it were in the Womb of the Virgin, for even the Virgin
was nourished with these things, and distributed the Substance of them to the
Body of the Child. In fine, the Priest, he says, in imitation of the Angel,
let the Holy Spirit come upon, and sanctify these things, and make the Bread,
the Sacred Body of Jesus Christ; and the Chalice his precious Blood. Then there
is made not by the virtue of nature, but supernaturally, and by the
AUGMENTATION of the Body and Blood of Christ, there is made, I say, one only
Body, and not two. After this, it is lifted up by the hand of the Priest, as he
was lifted up on the Cross, it is distributed, broken and buried in us, to make
us thereby incorruptible. And thus the Economy is finished.

AND this is the Doctrine of the Greeks, the Bread, and Wine, are made the Body
and Blood of Christ, in the same manner the Food we receive becomes our Body,
and this Example or Comparison exactly comprehends three things. The first,
that as Nature observes the same course, and performs the same Operations in
the Food we receive, as it does in the first matter of which our Bodies are
composed; so Divine Grace keeps the same measures, and does the same things in
the Bread and Wine, as in the Body our Lord took of the Virgin. This is in all
respects the same Economy. They receive the same Holy Spirit; are corruptible,
raised up as it were on a Cross, buried in us, and in fine become
incorruptible. The second, that as the Food increases, and gives growth to our
Bodies; so the Bread and mystical Wine, are a Growth or Augmentation which the
Body of Jesus Christ recieves. The third, that as the Food makes not another
Body, but becomes one and the same Body with that which it augments; so the
Mystery is not a new Body of Jesus Christ, but the same which was born of the
Virgin.

MOREOVER, although the Greeks use the Simile of Food, (whereby to explain the
manner after which the Bread in the Eucharist becomes the Body of Christ) yet
we must not imagine, they believe the Bread receives the physical or natural
form of our Lord's Flesh in the same manner the Food receives that of ours;
whether we understand by this physical Form, the Soul of Jesus Christ, or some
other substantial Form subordinate to the Soul: This is not at all their
Belief; for they only mean, that as the Food we eat receives the physical or
natural Form of our Body, so the Bread in the Eucharist receives the impression
of the inlivening and sanctifying virtue, residing in the natural Body of
Christ; and that as the Food in receiving the physical Form of our Flesh,
becomes an Augmentation of our Body; so the Bread in the Eucharist receiving
the impression of the virtue of the Body of Jesus Christ, becomes an
Augmentation. This is a Comparison, wherein there is some proportion of one
thing with another, but not an entire resemblance. The Greeks conceive the
sanctifying virtue of the Body of Jesus Christ, as its supernatural and
oeconomical Form, which belongs to it not so much for that it is a mere Body,
as that it is the Body of the Word, the Principle of our Spiritual Life and
Salvation.

THERE is made then according to them, not a Communication, or an extension of
the natural Form of the Body of Jesus Christ on the Bread; but a communication
or an extension of its virtue.

WHICH plainly appears by what we have already alleged. For first, hereto
relates this composition of Bread and Holy Spirit; and Union of Bread with the
Divinity which they assert. Secondly, hitherto expressly relate, all the
Passages we have seen touching the change of virtue, to which the Greeks so
strictly keep themselves; never mentioning the impression of the physical Form,
but ever that of virtue. Thirdly, we gather the same thing from their comparing
the Bread in the Eucharist with the natural Body, whereby to establish how the
Bread is made an Augmentation of the Body, they say not that the same physical
Form of the one is communicated to the other; but only that the same Economy,
which is observed in the natural Body, is likewise observed in the Bread. And
explaining in what consists this same Economy; they say, it is in that the
Bread receives the Holy Spirit, as the natural Body receives it, that it is
raised up (as it were) into a Cross, in the like manner as the natural Body,
that it is buried in us, and becomes in fine incorruptible, as the natural Body
does. Now this is quite different from the impression of the physical Form; and
gives only the Idea of an impression of virtue. Fourthly, the same thing
appears from a great part of the Proofs I produced in this third Book, as from
what they teach touching the unconsecrated Particles; that they become in some
sort the Body of Jesus Christ, by connection with that which is consecrated;
and that the People may receive them as well as the Sacrament; for this shows
they mean the consecrated Bread becomes only the Body of Jesus Christ by the
impression of this sanctifying virtue of which we speak. And that which they
believe touching the Eucharist consecrated on Holy Thursday, that it is of a
more excellent virtue than that of other days; for this would have no sense,
did they hold the impression of the natural Form of the Flesh of Jesus Christ
on the Bread. And all the Clauses of their Liturgies, by which it appears, they
restrain the effect of the Consecration, to the Bread's becoming the Body of
Jesus Christ in Sanctification, and Virtue. And what they say touching the
dead; that they receive the same as we do in the Communion; which would be
absurd if they meant the physical Form of the Flesh of Christ was imprinted on
the Bread, for the dead receive not this physical Form. And their not adoring
the Sacrament, with an absolute Adoration of Latria, as do the Latins, and as
the Greeks would do without doubt, if they held the impression of the physical
Form. And that which the Greeks of the Twelfth Century mentioned touching the
Eucharist, namely, that it is not endued with a Soul, or Understanding; which
shows clearly, they do not mean the Bread in the Sacrament receives the
impression of the Soul of Christ. And in fine, that they take so little care to
preserve the Substance of the Sacrament; using it after such a negligent
manner, as would be highly criminal and impious, or to speak better, after such
a manner as is not conceivable, did they believe the physical Form of the Flesh
of Jesus Christ.

BUT to finish the justification of my Proposition touching the Belief of the
Greeks, there only remains to be proved, the Comparison of the Paper, which
becomes the Princes Letter, when it receives his Characters or Seal. For as
concerning that of the Food, we have already sufficiently treated on it; we
have likewise considered that of Wood in conjunction with Fire; that of Wool
which takes the dye, and that of Wax or Matter which receives the impression of
the Seal. As to that of Paper, Nilus Abbot of Mount Sina, (an Author of the
Fifth Century, and who was Saint Chrysostom's Scholar) furnishes us with it,
in one of his Epistles. Paper, says he, consists of a certain Matter, and is
called only Paper, but when the Emperor puts thereunto his Seal or Name, it
becomes Sacred. In the same manner must our Mysteries be conceived. Before the
Words of the Priest, and Descent of the Holy Spirit, it is mere Bread and Wine,
which are offered; but after the Holy Prayers, and coming of the holy and
enlivening Spirit, it is no longer mere Bread and Wine, but the precious and
immaculate Body of Jesus Christ, who is God over all, and therefore those that
receive them with fear and reverence, are cleansed from all filthiness.

HAVING thus historically and sincerely showed, the real Belief of the Greeks
touching the Eucharist, it will be no hard matter to observe wherein they agree
with the Latins, and wherein they differ; which is the second thing I proposed
to do in this Chapter. First, They agree with them, in the general Terms, which
denote the change of the Bread and Wine into the Body and Blood of Christ.
Secondly, They agree in those other expressions, which bear, that the change is
made into the real Body of Christ, into his own proper Body born of the Virgin
Mary, and that he has not two Bodies, but one alone. Thirdly, They agree in
that both of them attribute this change to the Holy Spirit, who descends on the
Bread, and makes it the Body of our Lord. Fourthly, They agree in fine, in that
they both assert, this change to be an effect of the Almighty Power of God,
above all the Laws of nature. So far the Greeks and Latins agree.

BUT they differ in several things. First, In that the Latins believe, that the
Substance of Bread ceases, the Greeks on the contrary believe its existence.
Which we plainly gather from the Proposition I now established, and the Proofs
I offered: For seeing they make the Eucharist to consist of the composition of
a sensible Substance, which is the Bread, and the Holy Spirit, as we have
already observed, seeing they join the Bread to the Divinity, believing that
what results thence is double, that is to say, that it has two Natures, it is
clear the Greeks hold that the Nature or Substance of Bread remains. This same
truth appears likewise, concerning what they hold touching this Augmentation of
the Body of Christ. For if the Bread in the Eucharist augments, or gives growth
to our Lord's Body, as they believe, it ceases not to be, being certain, that
to make an Augmentation, we must add one thing to another, join them together,
conserve them both, and destroy neither of them. To this we are moreover led by
all those Comparisons we find they used, of Wool dyed, of Paper that receives
the Emperors Signet, of Wax that receives the impression of the Seal, of a
burning Coal, or Wood in conjunction with Fire, and Food by which we are
nourished; for in all these Examples, the subject matter looses nothing of its
first Substance. Moreover seeing they will have the Bread pass through all the
Degrees of the Economy of Jesus Christ, that it is first corruptible, then
incorruptible, this sufficiently denotes they mean the Bread remains, whereby
to receive all these changes.

SECONDLY, From this difference there arises another, which is, that the Latins
believe that in the change which happens in the Eucharist, the Substance of
Bread, and that of the Body of Jesus Christ, are (as they speak) the two Terms
of the change, and that of the Bread passes entirely into that of the Body by a
Conversion, not only mystical, but really, and which destroys the Existence, or
matter of the Bread, which the Greeks do not believe. Which appears by this
Augmentation of the Body of Jesus Christ, of which they tell us, and which they
confirm by the Simile of Food. For common sense plainly shows us, that that
which augments a thing is not really changed into the thing augmented, as the
Latins understand their change. For there must always be reckoned a real
difference between the thing augmented, and that which augments. The Opinion of
the Greeks then can in no wise agree with that of the Latins, for according to
the Latins, the Substance of the natural Body of Jesus Christ receives neither
more, nor less, by the Conversion of the Substance of Bread into it, and
according to the Greeks it is augmented by it.

THIRDLY, It must then be granted, the Greeks do not acknowledge this
conversion, specified by the Roman Church; and differ from it in respect of the
nature or kind of this change, admitting only that of an Object, which
receiving a new Form, remains what it was before; and yet becomes what it was
not, which is to say, that the Bread remaining Bread, receives the supernatural
and oeconomical Form of the Body of Christ, that is to say its virtue, and is
thereby made this Body. And this is what is meant by this change of
Sanctification and Virtue, which they establish, and by which they pretend the
Bread becomes our Lord's Body. Their whole Doctrine centers in this, and it is
not possible to see what I alleged from them in this Chapter, and not make
this Conclusion, that their Opinion is, there only happens in the Eucharist a
change of virtue, and that it is only thus, the same Substance, which is Bread,
is likewise the Body of Jesus Christ.

FOURTHLY, The Latins hold that the Substance we receive in the Sacrament is
absolutely the same numerical Substance which our Savior had when he was on
Earth, and which he still retains in Heaven. The Greeks hold not this, their
Hypothesis manifestly opposes it. For although they say the Body born of the
Virgin Mary, and the Bread in the Sacrament, are not two Bodies, but one, yet
the manner after which they explain this Unity, and the reason they give for
it, do clearly denote they mean not thereby an absolute Unity, nor an entire or
numerical Identity, (as the Schools speak) such as the Latins establish. They
say, that as that which a Child eats and drinks makes not another Body, but the
same, although he receives growth thereby; so the Bread in the Sacrament, which
augments the Body of Christ; makes not two Bodies, but one. Now this
necessarily supposes, that this Substance which we receive with the mouths of
our Bodies in the Eucharist, is different from that which our Savior had on
Earth, and which he still has in Heaven. For a Body that is augmented is the
same it was before; but the Augmentation can never be absolutely the same
thing, as that which receives Augmentation. In effect, if the Latins be asked,
and all those that follow their Hypothesis, why the Bread in the Eucharist, and
the Body born of the Virgin, are not two, but one only Body, they will answer,
It Is because they are but one and the same Substance in number. But instead of
this the Greeks take a different course, saying, it is because the Bread is an
Augmentation of the Body of Christ, which puts a real difference between the
two Substances. Whence it follows, that that which they believe they receive in
the Sacrament, is not the same Substance as that of our Lord's natural Body.

FIFTHLY, Hence it appears, the Greeks do not believe the Real Presence of the
Latins. For the Latins by the Real Presence, mean a Presence of Substance;
which is to say, that this same Substance of the natural Body of Jesus Christ,
in which he lived and died, and rose again, and which now exists in Heaven, the
same I say in Number, really likewise exists, substantially, and by it self in
the Eucharist. Now this the Greeks do not hold, as I already showed. They on
the contrary believe that this Substance we receive in the Eucharist, and that
of the natural Body of Christ, are two Substances really different, one of
which is the Augmentation, and the other the thing augmented, the one a true
Substance of Bread, and the other the Substance of the natural Body of Christ:
The one, to wit, that of Bread, receives according to them the impression of
the virtue of the other, and the other communicates this to it. They do not then
believe, that this same natural Body of Christ, this same numerical Substance
in which he died, and rose again, and which now exists in Heaven, does likewise
really exist in the Eucharist, which is exactly, as I already said, the real
Presence of the Latins. They hold the Bread, becomes by Consecration, not a
Figure of the Body of Christ, but an Augmentation, inasmuch as it receives its
Virtue and Efficacy. If this must be called a kind of Real Presence, I say,
this is but a mere amusement of Words, not worth our consideration. In short,
the Presence of the Greeks, is a Presence of Virtue, that of the Latins a
Presence of Substance; so that upon this account they are at a great
difference. In effect, if the things I alleged, as well in this Chapter, as in
this whole Third Book, be exactly considered, it will appear, that the most
part of the Proofs I produced to justify, that the Greeks believe not
Transubstantiation, do equally conclude against the Substantial Presence; and
that they also believe not, there is made any impression of the physical Form
of Christ's Body on the Bread.

SIXTHLY, These principal and essential differences, produce others. For it
hence appears, that although they agree with the Latins in these general
expressions, which bear, that the Bread is changed into the Body of Christ,
into his real Body, into his own proper Body, yet they differ from them in the
sense of these expressions, understanding them in a quite different manner. For
the Latins mean the Bread is changed into the Body by a real
Transubstantiation, which making the Substance of Bread cease, becomes the
proper substance of the Body of Jesus Christ, the same in number which it was
before. The Greeks on the contrary mean, that the Bread, remaining Bread in its
proper Substance, is changed into the proper Body of Christ, in as much as that
it is made an increase or augmentation, by the impression it receives from its
virtue. So that when both one and the other say, the Bread is the Body of
Christ, they in no sort agree, in the sense of this Proposition; the Latins
understanding it in a divided sense (as they term it) which is to say, that
that which was before Bread is now no longer so, but the Body of Jesus Christ;
the Greeks on the contrary, that that which is still Bread, is also this Body.

VII. THE Latins following their Hypothesis, are forced to admit the Existence
of Accidents without a Subject, the Greeks are not. Whence it is, they never
mention this pretended Existence, and we find no such thing in their Authors.

VIII. THE Latins are obliged to give a reason for several natural Experiments,
which denote, that the Substance of Bread remains, and which seem incompatible
with their Belief, as that our Bodies are nourished with the Eucharist, that it
breeds Maggots in it, etc. in which they are extremely puzzled. The Greeks are
not so, neither do we find the least hint thereof in their Books.

IX. THE Latins cannot but admit the Existence of the same Body in several
places at once; The Greeks know not any thing of this, neither are they
concerned at it.

X. THE Latins are forced to make the Body of Christ exist in the Sacrament,
void of his natural proportion and properties. The Greeks do not so, and
therefore we see them never troubled at these difficulties which follow the
Doctrine of the Latins.

XI. THE Latins by an unavoidable consequence of their Doctrine, adore with a
Sovereign Adoration the Eucharist; which is according to them the proper
Substance of our Lord's natural Body, separate from any other Substance. The
Greeks do not so, as we observed in the seventh Chapter.

XII. THE Latins, believe the wicked receive the Body, and Blood of Christ,
with the mouths of their bodies, although to their condemnation. The Greeks hold
that the Bread and Wine are made this Body and Blood, only to the Faithful.

NOT to insist on several other differences, which do not precisely relate to
our Question, as that the Greeks do all of 'em communicate of both kinds,
whereas the Latins give only to the People that of Bread; that the Greeks hold
the Consecration is performed by the Prayer of the Priest, and the Latins on
the contrary by these Words, This is my Body; that the Latins use Wafers, or
unleavened Bread, whereas the Greeks abhorring the Azymes use only that which
is leavened. There are likewise several other differences which I shall not
here repeat, because the Reader may find them, in what has been already said in
the foregoing Chapters.

AND here have I represented, as exactly as I could, the Differences and
Agreements of the two Churches. If it be now demanded in what Points we agree
with the Greeks, this may be easily collected from what I have already said.

WE agree almost with them in all Points wherein they differ from the Latins.
1. In that we do not believe the Conversion of Substances, any more than they,
nor admit, the substantial Presence of the Natural Body of Christ, under the
Species of Bread and Wine, that we adore not the Sacrament, nor acknowledge any
of the Consequences of the Doctrine of Transubstantiation. 2. We agree with the
Greeks, in that they conceive the change which is made in the Bread and Wine,
to be a change of virtue by the efficacy of the Holy Spirit, God not destroying
the Nature of Bread and Wine, but adding his Grace to Nature. 3. In that, we do
not believe any more than they, that the wicked receive the Body of Jesus
Christ. 4. In that we believe with them, that we ought to communicate of both
kinds. 5. In our holding the Consecration is performed by Prayer. 6. In fine,
that we deliver the Sacrament in leavened Bread, although we hold the use of the
Azyme an indifferent thing.

YET it must not be imagined, we pretend there is no difference in the Opinion
of the Greeks and ours. I do not believe any of our Doctors ever asserted such
a thing. Mr. Arnaud would make the World believe I maintained this, and has
triumphed thereupon in several places of his Book, as if I supposed the Greeks
were Berengarians or Calvinists. But this is a groundless charge. I only denied
that the Greeks (which are called Schismatics) believed Transubstantiation,
and the Adoration. It belongs to him therefore to see whether he had reason to
accuse me in this of rashness and inconceivable boldness, or whether he himself
rather was not guilty of this, when he bragged of confounding Ministers with
the number of his Proofs. Perhaps he would have hit better on it, had he said
he had confounded his Readers. But to let this pass, I shall here truly denote
the principal differences between the Doctrine of the Greeks and ours.

I. THE Greeks, since the Eighth Century, rejected the Terms of Type and
Figure, in reference to the Eucharist, although they use them of Symbol and
Representation. We admit equally both as the Fathers of the first six Ages ever
did.

II. THEY seem willing to keep in some sort the literal sense of these Words,
This is my Body, which we do not. For we understand 'em in this sense, this
Bread is the Sacred Sign, or the Sacrament of my Body; or which is to the same
effect, the Bread signifies my Body. They on the contrary, taking the Term est
in some sort according to the Letter, will have the same Substance, which is
Bread, to be also the Body of Jesus Christ; and therefore they so often say,
that the Bread is, not the Figure of the Body, but the Body, not the Figure of
the Flesh, but the Flesh it self, because the Lord did not say, this is the
Figure of my Body, but this is my Body. Whereunto relates that saying of
Theophilact, we already cited, which is, we must not be troubled to believe
Bread is Flesh.

III. IT IS likewise to keep this pretended literal sense, that they would have
the Bread to be made one with the Body by its Union to the Divinity, by the
impression of the Holy Spirit, and by a change of virtue. And therefore they
bring the comparison of Food, which becomes one with our Bodies; and invented
this way of Growth or Augmentation of a natural Body: for all this ends only in
establishing a Unity between the Bread, and the Body, which may make us say
literally, and without recourse to a Figure, that the Bread is the Body. As to
what concerns us, we need not take such a great circuit, because the Question,
concerning a Sacrament, we believe we may take the Words of Christ in a
sacramental and figurative sense.

IV. IT seems likewise, that the Modern Greeks understand some real or physical
impression, of the Holy Spirit, and inlivening virtue of Jesus Christ, on the
Bread, with some kind of inherency; yet I will not positively affirm this was
the general Belief of their Church, although their expressions intimate as much.
But howsoever, this is not our Opinion. We do indeed believe, that the Grace of
the Holy Spirit, and virtue of Christ's Body accompany the right use of the
Sacrament, and that in the Communion we participate of the Body of Christ by
Faith in as great a measure; and more really than if we received him with the
Mouth of our Bodies, but we hold not this impression, or real inherence of
virtue, which it seems the Greeks admit; whence it happens that our expressions
are not so emphatical as theirs.

AND this is what I had to say touching the real Opinion of the Greeks, with
its principal Circumstances, and in reference to that of ours, and the Church
of Rome's. I do not doubt but several People reading this Chapter, will say, I
charge the Greeks with a very foolish and unreasonable Doctrine. They Will make
Objections touching this composition of Bread and Holy Spirit, this Union of
the Symbols with the Divinity, and especially concerning this manner of being
the Body and Blood of Christ, by way of Growth or Augmentation. But to this I
need say no more, than that it concerns me not to justify the Opinion of the
Greeks. Our business here is to know what it is, and not whether it be
justifiable, nor to answer the Objections may be made against it, because we
adopt not either their Expressions or Opinions. Yet I shall endeavor to solve
two difficulties, which may trouble the Readers; the one is, that according to
the Hypothesis of the Greeks, it seems as if it might be said in some sense,
that the Bread is changed into the Substance of the Body of Jesus Christ, after
the same manner we say the Bread we eat is changed into our Substance. The Other
is, that by this Union of Bread to the Divinity, it seems they understand a
real hypostatical Union, like unto that which joins the natural Body to the
Word.

TO the first I answer, the Greeks mean not the Bread receives the natural or
physical form of the Flesh of Christ, as we have proved; neither do they say,
the Bread is changed into the Substance of the Body of Christ, because this way
of speaking, which we use in respect of the Bread we eat is grounded upon the
Food's receiving the Substantial or physical form of our Flesh. Now they mean
no other impression on the Bread in the Eucharist, than an impression of the
inlivening virtue of Christ's Body by means of the Holy Spirit. And thus the
Bread keeps its proper and natural Substance wholly entire, and yet is
augmented by an Augmentation of the Body of Christ, in as much as the
supernatural virtue which is proper to this Body is communicated to the Bread.
As to what remains, although this pretended Augmentation of the Body of Jesus
Christ, by means of the Bread is absurd enough, yet we may give it a plain
sense, in saying it is not necessary for this that the Bread and Body be locally
joined, it being sufficient to conceive the Holy Spirit is the mutual link
which unites them together, and the Bread receiving only the virtue of the
Body, by a dependence thereon, and in as much as it is the Mystery of it, this is
a kind of Growth and Augmentation, a Mystery being as it were an Appendix, or
Circumstance to the thing of which it is the Mystery.

TO the second Question, I answer, that although the whole Hypothesis of the
Greeks, and especially some of their expressions, seem to induce us to
attribute to 'em the Belief of the hypostatical Union of Bread to the Divinity,
yet their Authors not plainly expressing themselves in this matter, and it not
appearing elsewhere by their practice, that they hold this Opinion, there is
more justice in not charging them with it, than in imputing it to 'em, and so
much the more, because there is none of their usual expressions, how emphatical
soever, but may agree with a simple Union of efficacy. The Term of Assumption
used by Damascen, Panis and Vinum, (...), assumuntur, induced me to believe at
first with Mr. Aubertin, he meant thereby a real hypostatical Lib. 4. de Fid.
Orth. cap. 14.
Assumption, but having since carefully examined this Passage, it seemed to me
this (...), may be easily referred not to the foregoing Words in the same
Discourse, but to that which follows in the simple sense, That the Bread and
Wine are used in the Eucharist, because they are things familiar to us.

BUT howsoever, we may here observe, that ever since both Greeks and Latins
deviated from the simplicity of the Gospel; and natural Exposition, which the
Ancients gave this Mystery; how they have fallen, I say, into vainand idle
Speculations, both of 'em wandering from the Truth. Which commonly happens to
such as love rather to follow their own imaginations, than the Word of God. Our
Savior tells us concerning the Sacrament, that it is his Body, and added, that
it was for a remembrance of him; and Saint Paul thus commented on it, This is a
Declaration of the Lord's death till his coming. What could be more easy than
to keep here, and to judge thereof by the very nature of a Sacrament, by the
expressions of our Savior, and his Apostle, and other parts of Christian
Religion? But instead of this, we have abused several excessive expressions of
the Fathers, taking no notice of diverse others, by which they explain
themselves; these have been extended, and although innocent, yet are made a Rock
of Offense. The Latins proceed to a real Presence, a real Transubstantiation,
and Accidents without a Subject, and all the rest of those Doctrines unknown to
the Ancients, which they heap up without number. The Greeks on their side have
imagined a Union of the Bread with the Divinity, a kind of real impression of
supernatural virtue of Christ's Body on the Bread, a Growth, or Augmentation of
this Body.

I hope I shall have this Justice done me, that it will be acknowledged, I have
produced nothing touching the Doctrine of the Greeks, but what has been taken
out of their best Authors, from them I say that are of greatest account amongst
them. And it is in fine from their proper Testimonies, I have clearly shown,
that that which the Greeks hold touching the Eucharist, is not the
Transubstantiation of the Latins; which is the chief and only thing I had to
do. Yet shall I answer in the following Book all Mr. Arnaud's vain Objections;
as briefly as I can; for considering what I already established, it is easy to
judge, that his Arguments will not prove invincible Demonstrations, as he would
persuade the World.

BOOK IV.
Mr. Arnaud's Proofs touching the Belief of the Greek Church refuted.

CHAP. I.
Mr. Arnaud's First Proof, taken from Cerularius his Silence, examined. The
rest of his Illusions discovered.

AFter what I have established in the two former Books, it will be no difficult
matter, to answer, Mr. Arnaud's Objections, and show as I promised, that all
his endeavors to demonstrate the Greek Church ever believed Transubstantiation
are ineffectual, and that the greatest part of his Proofs conclude the contrary
of what he pretends. And this shall be the subject of this Book. Which I shall
divide into two Parts; in the first, I shall examine what Mr. Arnaud has
alleged, to prove his supposition since the Eleventh Century to this present;
and in the second, consider what he has alleged for the same purpose from the
Seventh, Eighth, Ninth and Tenth Centuries.

IN the first Part of this Book, I shall handle four principal Heads, under
which I shall exactly gather whatsoever Mr. Arnaud has dispersed in his Second,
Third, and Fourth Books, and part of his Twelfth Book, wherein he has treated
on some Particulars, respecting this Question.

OUR first Remark shall be touching some of Mr. Arnaud's Delusions, besides
those we already discovered, in the former Books. It is certain we may justly
so term all the Parts of his Work, but more especially, what he has written
touching the Greeks; for it is all delusory. But at present we mean to apply
this Term to certain things only, wherein his Artifice plainly appears, and
which are wholly inconsistent with that sincerity, wherewith Controversies
ought to be managed.

THE second Head contains the Testimonies of some Protestants, whom Mr. Arnaud
has alleged; which seem in effect to attribute to the Greeks the Belief of
Transubstantiation.

THE Third, shall contain the Negative Arguments, drawn from the Silence of
both Greeks, and Latins; that is to say, they never disputed one against
another, on this Article, of the Conversion of Substances in the Eucharist.

IN the Fourth, we shall explain, all the Passages Mr. Arnaud has taken out of
Greek Authors, and from which he would infer by dint of Argument, that the
Greeks hold this Conversion of Substances.

TO begin at his Delusions, the First, or to speak better, the Twelfth, (after
those we already discovered) consists, in that he would have us upon the
account of his own bare word, without any Proof, suppose, that when Michael
Cerularius, Patriarch of Constantinople, and Leo Archbishop of Acrida, wrote
their Letter against the Church of Rome, Leo the Ninth, the then present Pope
had already condemned Berengarius; and that the Greeks could not be ignorant of
this censure. But 'twill not be amiss to hear him speak himself, To show, says
he, the consent of the Greek Church with the Roman, Lib. 2. cap. 5. page 139.
in the Subject of the Eucharist; we have made use (in the refutation of Mr.
Claude' s Answer) of the contest which arose in the year 1053. between Michael
Cerularius, Patriarch of Constantinople, and Leo Archbishop of Acrida on one
hand, and Pope Leo the Ninth, and the whole Latin Church on the other. For
these Persons although such passionate adversaries against the Western Church,
upon the account of the Azymes, yet never reproached her as erring in the
Mystery of the Eucharist; although they wrote against the Latins, AT THE SAME
TIME, AND AFTER, Pope Leo had censured Berengarius, in two Councils of Italy,
the one held at Rome, the other at Verseil; whence we conclude they were agreed
with the Latin Church in the Doctrine of the real Presence, which she so loudly
asserted at that time. This is Mr. Arnaud's first Proof, which he has set forth
to the life, in the best colors wherewith his Eloquence could furnish him;
having turned it several ways by his usual dexterary, in amplifying, and
exaggerating the Subjects he handles.

IT is certain that to make this Argument valid, he must clearly establish
before all things, that, Berengarius his Condemnation preceded Cerularius, and
Leo of Acrida's Letter, and preceded it to, a very considerable time; to show
that these Prelates were well informed of it, and had reason to mention it in
their Letter; for without this, we can conclude nothing from their Silence. Yet
Mr. Arnaud has not troubled himself with the clearing up this matter of Fact;
contenting himself in saying only, that Cerularius, and Leo of Acrida wrote
against the Latins at the same time, and a little after Pope Leo condemned
Berengarius, in two Councils of Italy. A man would then think, this was a Point
out of doubt, and at which Mr. Arnaud has no need to stop a moment, having
judged it evident (beyond contradiction) in his Chronology. But he will be much
startled to find, there is nothing more uncertain, than his supposition; and
moreover, that there is nothing more unlikely than what he says.

TO be ascertained in this Matter, we must know, that Cerularius, and Leo d'
Acrida's Letter was written in the Year, 1053. as Mr. Arnaud and all the World
grants. We must moreover know, that although Baronius, and Binius attribute the
two Condemnations of Berengarius, to the Year, 1050. 3 Years before Cerularius
his Letter was written, yet there are Authors that are better informed in this
Matter than Baronius, and Binius; who refer these two Condemnations to the Year
1053. being exactly the same Year wherein the Letter was written. And these are
such Authors, whose Testimony will go far with Mr. Arnaud. Being those that
published the Office of the B. Sacrament, that is to say, this same Office, to
which, the first Treatise of the Perpetuity, in its primary Design, was to
serve as a Preface; as a Preface; as we have been already twice informed.
Observe here, what they say, Neither Malmesbury, nor Baronius, have exactly
observed all the Office of the B. Sacrament, Hist. and Chron. 11. Cent.
Councils, which were called touching this Heresy of Berengarius. The first of
them, was held at Rome, by Pope Leo the Ninth; the second at Verseil, in the
Month of September, in the same Year, under the same Pope. We cannot doubt,
(after the Testimony of Lanfranc) in his Book against Berengarius, but that
these two Councils were held both in the same Year. But some, (as Baronius and
Binius) will have this Year to be 1050. others the Year, 1053. First, because
Sigibert says, that Pope Leo held two Councils, in 1050. but he immediately
observes likewise this was only to reform the abuses of the Ecclesiastics; and
speaks not of the Troubles raised by Berengarius his Heresy, but only as
happening in the Year, 1051. Secondly, because Durand Abbot of Trorand in
Normandy, who lived about that time, refers the Council of Verseil, to the Year
1053. only. And there is no reason to pretend, as a Learned Lawyer of Angers
does, that there is a mistake, in this Passage of Durand; and that we must read
1050. seeing that according to the judicious Observation of Mr. de St. Beuve,
the King's Professor at Sorbornne; in a Manuscript on this Matter, the same
Durand testifies, that in the Year he speaks of, Alfred was Abbot of the Abbey
of Preaux in Normandy, which was not founded till the Year 1053. according to
Du Bec' s Chronicle.

HERE then we have upon good Grounds, and undeniable Authority, the two
Condemnations of Berengarius, referred to the same Year, in which Cerularius,
and Leo of Acrida wrote their Letter. It remains only to know, whether Mr.
Arnaud may suppose without Proof, that the Letter was written after Berengarius
his Condemnation; and whether it is not a plain Delusion, thus slightly to pass
over a Point of this importance, on which depends the greatest part of his
reasoning. For, if this Letter was written, before the time wherein Berenger
was first condemned; what can be then concluded from Cerularius, and Leo de
Acrida's Silence? Wherefore must they ground an Accusation, against the Church
of Rome, on a Condemnation which was not then in being. Now this is a matter of
Fact, which I affirm to be very uncertain; and which Mr. Arnaud must
demonstrate, and not suppose, without Proof. They wrote, says he, against the
Latins, at the same time, and a little after, Pope Leo had condemned
Berengarius, in two Councils of Italy, the one held at Rome, the other at
Verseil. There being but one Letter, from both Cerularius, and Leo d' Acrida;
we must conceive, 'twas written to the Council at Rome, after Berengarius his
first Condemnation, and near the time they were about calling the other Council
at Verseil. Now this has no likelihood, for as Baronius has well Baron ann.
Eccles. ad ann. 1053.
observed, Leo answered this Letter in the same Year, namely, 1053. whence it
follows, if we reckon right, we shall find, that Cerularius, and Leo d' Acrida
could not have written their Letter, but in the beginning of the Year, at
farthest, and consequently before there was any mention at Rome of Berengarius
his Condemnation; and especially before the news thereof came to
Constantinople. In effect it must not be imagined, that this Patriarch, and
Archbishop, indicted their Letter without mature and deliberate advice, and
consideration, nor that they sent it without communicating the Contents of it
to some of their Clergy, to bring them to take part with them, and engage 'em
in their Interests; seeing the matter concerned the censuring of a Church, such
as that of the Latins, and which, they were sure would highly resent it;
Affairs of this importance are not wont to be precipitated. It required also
some time, before this Letter could come from Constantinople, to Tranys in the
Kingdom of Naples. John Bishop of Tranys, to whom 'twas directed, must likewise
have some time, to send it to Cardinal Humbert, and he, must get it translated
out of Greek into Latin. Humbert must go to Rome, for he carried it himself to
Pope Leo, after he received it from the Bishop of Tranys. In fine, Leo must
examine it, and answer it; For all which Mr. Arnaud allows but three Months.
Cerularius, says he, and Leo of Acrida, wrote against the Latins, Baron. ad
ann. 1053.
and at the same time, and not long after again, Pope Leo condemned
Berengarius, in two Councils of Italy, the one held at Rome, the other at
Verseil. This not long after, can only relate to the Council at Rome, which was
the first, and consequently this, at the same time, must relate to the Council
of Verseil, which being not called till September, as appears by Lanfranc, who
positively affirms it; and the Pope having wrote his Answer at farthest in
December, infr. de. corp. sang. Dom.
it must needs be, (if we believe what Mr. Arnaud supposes) that is to say, if
the Letter was written in the Month of September, that all that which I come
now from observing, was transacted in three Months time. And thus does Mr.
Arnaud hasten the time, that it may answer his necessities.

TO this Delusion, we may add another, which will be the Thirteenth. It
consists in supposing, without Proof, that Leo the Ninth in condemning
Berengarius, precisely established Transubstantiation, and the real Presence.
For if we take not this Fact for a certain Principle, there can be no Pretense
for demanding, wherefore Cerularius reproached not the Church of Rome, about
her erring in the Doctrine of the Eucharist.

YET is there nothing more uncertain, for, there are none of the Decrees of
this Council extant, and I think not one Author that relates the proper Terms
of these Condemnations. They tell us, that Berengarius was condemned, that John
Scot's Book was burnt, but this is not sufficient to conclude, that
Transubstantiation, and the real Presence were established, in Terms which
might offend Cerularius, and the Greeks, and give them occasion to form an
Accusation against the Roman Church. Sober men are not wont to accuse People
upon confused Reports, and equivocal Terms. And it will be to no purpose to
say, we must not doubt, but that Leo's intention was, to assert the substantial
Conversion, against Berengarius; seeing Lanfranc assures us, that he himself
having declared in full Council his Belief touching the Eucharist, in
opposition to that of Berengarius, it was approved, and the other rejected as
erroneous. For he that states an Opinion contradictory to that of Berengarius,
does not necessarily assert Transubstantiation, there being several other ways
and means of opposition. It concerns us not here to inform our selves from
Lanfranc, what was the sense of the Synod, but whether what came to Cerularius
his knowledge concerning that matter was sufficient to make him say, those
People established a real Conversion of Substances. Now to imagine, as Mr.
Arnaud does, that a Patriarch which is at Constantinople, can make such a
Judgment with Discretion, it will not be sufficient to inform him of the
intention and secret design of the Latins (although even this is not to be
supposed without Proof) but he must have before him the distinct and express
Terms relating to this Affair, and this Mr. Arnaud cannot prove, seeing there
is no such matter extant.

HE will say without doubt, that this is a very strange thing (for whatsoever
falls not under his sense is strange) to affirm that a Pope and Council that
intended to establish Transubstantiation in condemning Berengarius, yet have
not done it in intelligible Terms. Neither will he forget to censure me here a
little (as he is wont at every pinch) saying, I consider the matters I write in
a superficial view only, not penetrating into the bottom of things, and that
occasions my falling into such idle fancies; that I multiply my may-be-so's;
and am one of the boldest and fruitfullest men in the World, in Hypothesises
and Systems. To which I have nothing to answer, but that in the Year, 1059.
Baron. ad ann. 1059.
six years after the Synods held by Pope Leo, Nicholas the Second, condemned
likewise Berengarius, in another Synod held at Rome, and made him sign a
Formulary of Abjuration, and that according to Lanfranc, they earnestly desired
Lanfr. de corp. and sang. Dum. lib. 2. cap. 5.
to establish the real Conversion of Substances in this Formulary; that
Cardinal Humbert, who drew it up, did firmly believe this Doctrine, as Mr.
Arnaud protests for him, and yet for all this, it was asserted only in
ambiguous Terms, which might be expounded in a sense that does not at all
contradict the Doctrine of the Greeks; seeing Berengarius himself turned them
to his own advantage. And in effect, the Formulary bears, That the Bread and
Wine are after Lanfr. de corp. and sang.
Consecration, not only the Sacrament, but likewise the real Body and Blood of
Jesus Christ; and are sensibly touched and broken by the Priest's hands, and
chewed with the teeth of the Faithful; not only sacramentally, but really and
in truth. It cannot be denied, but these words need a Commentary to make them
signify Transubstantiation; seeing the natural sense of them is, that those
very things which are Bread and Wine, are also the Body and Blood of Jesus
Christ; which is the Opinion of the Greeks, as I already showed in theforegoing
Chapter. How comes it to pass, that what was done under Nicholas, was not done
likewise under Leo, who preceded him; and wherefore were the Terms of Leo more
expressive and determinative than those of the Pope that came after him? Is it
the Custom in the Court of Rome to recede from, and diminish Doctrines? But
howsoever, if Mr. Arnaud will make advantage of Cerularius his Silence, he must
show us, that Leo decided the Doctrine of Transubstantiation in such Terms,
that the Patriarch of Constantinople could not, when he saw them, expound them
in another sense. But to suppose this without proving it, is a mere Illusion.

SO far is Mr. Arnaud from showing us that this formal decision was carried to
Cerularius, that he does not so much as undertake to inform us whether the
Decrees of these Synods at Rome and Verseil (be they what they will) came to
the hands of this Patriarch. He contents himself with saying, That it had been
already eighteen years since Berengarius his Heresy, became Lib. 2. cap. 5.
page 141.
famous in the World; that Dedowin the Bishop of Liege, and Adelman Bishop of
Bresse testify, that the report of it o'respread all Germany; and that there
is no likelihood, but the Latins at Constantinople, and the Greeks in Italy
were informed of it, and that a Patriarch should be ignorant of so famous an
occurrence.

FIRST, he has forgot what his Friends observed in their Office, that Sigibert
speaks not of the troubles Berengarius his Heresy raised, till 1051. which is
to say, that his eighteen years must be reduced to two, even by his own Friends
consent. And as to what he says of Deadwin, it is true, his Letter produced by
Baronius under the name of Durand, has these Words, That there was a common
report throughout all Germany, that Bruno Bishop of Angers and Berengarius
renewed the Ancient Heresies, in teaching that the Body of Jesus Christ, was
not so much a Body as a Shadow and a Figure; and that they annulled the
Sacrament of Marriage, and that of Baptism of Infants. And this was it
according to this good Bishop, which disturbed all Germany. As to Adelman he
expresses himself more to the purpose, for he says, the report was, that
Berengarius deviated from the Catholic Faith, touching the Body Baron ibid.
and Blood of our Lord; and to use the words of those that accused him, they
said, he taught the Sacrament was not the real Body and Blood, but a Figure or
resemblance of them. Does Mr. Arnaud believe, that these Reports, when they
should come even to Cerularius his ears, were capable of making him take the
Field in favor of Berengarius? On one hand they represented his Doctrine in
Terms very different from the usual expressions of the Greeks; which assert the
Bread to be the real Body of Jesus Christ, and not a Figure, and on the other
hand he had things laid to his charge, which were mere Falsities and Calumnies.
Why will he needs have a Patriarch that was always at Constantinople, and held
little or no communication with the Latins; to know better what Berengarius did
in France, than Dedowin Bishop of Liege; or Adelman, who had been Berengarius
his School fellow, and who by this long acquaintance might have some interest
in his Affairs? Why must it needs be that during these pretended eighteen
years, Cerularius has been better informed by his Spies or Inquisitors, than
the Pope by his? For it does not appear that the Court of Rome concerned
themselves at the matter till 1053. which is as we observed the same year in
which Cerularius wrote his Letter. Nay it is probable they had not so soon taken
notice of it, had not an Ecclesiastic of Rheims brought along with him to Rome
some Letters which Berengarius wrote to Lanfranc. If the Popes remained silent
eighteen years, notwithstanding this great disturbance in the West, I see no
reason why a Patriarch of Constantinople should be any more concerned. I could
wish Mr. Arnaud would tell us, why since the year 1053. (to which Baronius
refers the Letters of Dedowin and Adelman) Bennet the Ninth; Gregory the Sixth;
Clement the Second; Damasus the Second, have taken no notice of so considerable
a matter; and why Leo the Ninth concerned not himself in it, till the fifth
year of his Popedom. All Italy was full of French and Dutch, France and Germany
of Italians, and yet no body all this while could think of waking these sleepy
Popes; and cautioning them against this damnable Heresy; which overthrew the
Faith of the whole Earth. Let him tell us, why the Patriarchs, that preceded
Cerularius, or Cerularius himself reproached them not with this scandalous
neglect: For if on one hand they believed Transubstantiation, as Mr. Arnaud
supposes; and on the other, that there was nothing else almost talked of in the
West, and being so probable, that the Patriarchs of Constantinople were
informed of so famous an occurrence, how came they to be so mute in such an
important Affair, and prodigious neglect of the Popes? Of this he must give us
an account, before he can require a reason of us, for Cerularius his silence.
But to speak plainly, Mr. Arnaud devises matters in his Closet, and having
clothed them with all the rhetorical colors, wherewith the power of his
invention can furnish him, he delivers them to us as the exact Rules of humane
Actions; without considering, that what he offers agrees no better with his own
Hypothesis than ours. But be it as it will, he makes it not appear, that the
Acts of the Synods at Rome and Verseil came to Cerularius his hands, that he
might make a right Judgment of them; and this is one of his illusions, for how
can he expect we should satisfy him touching the Conduct of this Patriarch, if
he does not beforehand show us, that Cerularius had all necessary information,
to make a right Judgment concerning Berengarius his Affair.

I answered the Author of the Perpetuity; That it is possible, Cerularius Answer
to the second Treatise of the Perpet. part. 3. chap. 8.
knew nothing of what passed in France under Leo the Ninth, touching
Berengarius; or if he did, the account given him might be very confused and
imperfect. And that it is likewise possible, matters might be misrepresented to
him; and Berengarius charged with that which was not his Doctrine. Mr. Arnaud
to avoid the force of this Answer, turns it into ridicule. Mr. Claude, says
he, must make the best advantage he can of his may-be-so's. He thinks he has
sufficiently acquitted himself by these three may-be so's, etc.. I am not
troubled at Mr. Arnaud's diverting himself; but I am not willing the truth
should suffer prejudice thereby. Had he been willing to examine seriously my
Answer, he could not but find I meant, that the Argument drawn from Cerularius
his Silence, could not be conclusive, till these three things are showed us;
First, That he knew what passed in France; Secondly, That he had a more certain
and distinct knowledge thereof, than a mere flying report could furnish him
with; And Thirdly, That Berengarius his Doctrine was truly represented to him.
In effect, if either of these three things be wanting, the Argument drawn from
Cerularius his Silence is invalid. There was no great reason than for charging
my Answer with Drollery, and affirming my Hypothesises to be fantastical, and
that I use too often my privilege of supposing. For thus does he shroud the
absurdity of his Answers under two or three lines of pitiful raillery. The
matter concerns not my Suppositions; but those of the Author of the Perpetuity.
For this Author's Argument is grounded on these three Suppositions, already
mentioned; not one of which he either does, or can prove: It Is he then and Mr.
Arnaud that argue on groundless imaginations. Whence have they this privilege
of establishing their Arguments on uncertain matters of fact, or what can
hinder me from calling their unproved Suppositions mere may-be-so's? I have not
used this expression, but seeing Mr. Arnaud imputes it to me, I see no ill
convenience in adopting it; may be then Cerularius knew nothing of what past in
Berengarius his Affair; may be he had only a general and confused account of
it; it may be Berengarius his Doctrine was misrepresented to him. When Mr.
Arnaud shall put these three may be's out of doubt, he shall see what answer we
will make him, but till then I shall have reason to say, that his Proof is
grounded on chimerical Suppositions.

BUT, says he, the Question being once opened, there could be no mistake about
it. For every one knew the Catholics held the real Body of Christ, was present
in the Eucharist; and that Berenger denied this. First, the Question was so
little known, that it came not to the ears of four following Popes, or at least
they pretended not to have heard of it. Moreover, granting it to be as
publicly known as he pretends it was, yet People might be as well deceived in
Italy and Constantinople, as at Liege; where Dedowin was grossly mistaken. In
the third place, who told him, 'twas then held, that Christ's real Body was
present in the Eucharist, and not rather that the Bread of the Eucharist was
Christ's real Body? This was the Language of Nicholas, and his Bishops six
years after; why was it not likewise that of Leo and his Church. It Is not
likely Mr. Arnaud should know better the Style of those times, than the Roman
Church her self, assembled in full Council, in the year 1059. Every one, says
he, know. It seems to hear him thus speak, as if this particular had been
proclaimed in every corner of the Streets, and was the common matter of
Entertainment; all other business over the whole World being suspended and laid
aside; and only that of Berengarius his contest attended to. Mr. Arnaud falls
into the same humor, as those that have Quarrels or Lawsuits; for they
thinking of nothing else both Day and Night; it seems to them, that others are
concerned in like manner as they. His mind at present is so taken up with the
Thoughts of Transubstantiation, the real Presence, and Berengarius his
Controversy; that he imagines both East and West were in the same manner
affected with it then, and that the Echoes of it were heard throughout the
whole World. But this is a mere fancy. There is in the World almost an infinite
number of little Worlds (if I may so say) which divide and multiply themselves
according to the number and difference of Professions and Interests. Every
Affair makes a noise in its Circle; yet there are scarcely any but Historians,
and some curious People, that inform themselves in each particular circumstance
of Affairs, wherein they are not personally concerned; and yet they are often
deceived in these Matters. I confess indeed Matters of Religion, are usually
more publicly known than other things; but besides that they require time for
this, it is moreover certain that these reports have their bounds in respect of
places, and that sometimes they shall make a great noise in one Country, and
yet be little or not at all heard of in another. We may presume this Affair of
Berengarius was of this number; for after the Letters of Dedowin and Adelman,
there passed eighteen years; as we have seen, without any mention of it in the
Court of Rome; neither is there, as I know of, any Greek Author that takes
notice of it. If, what Mr. Arnaud supposes touching this great report, which
passed over from Italy to Greece, was true, the silence of all the Greek
Authors would be every whit as astonishing as that of Cerularius. For why
should not they mention it, being as much interessed as the Latins in
Berengarius his Condemnation; supposing they believed Transubstantiation? Why
did they not complain of the Church of Rome's so long bearing with him, or do
the said Church so much right as to commend it for suppressing him? Peter the
Patriarch of Antioch held at that time a correspondence with the then Pope, he
wrote to him, and desended the Latins against the reproaches of the Greeks, as
appears by his Letter to Cerularius; yet mentions not a word of this
Condemnation, although this offered it self very pertinently to show the care the
Church of Rome took to preserve Orthodoxy, and stifle Heresies, supposing the
Eastern People believed Transubstantiation.

MR. Arnaud finding Berengarius his Affair would not do his Business, betakes
himself to another Artifice. It concerns us not to know, says he, whether Lib.
2. cap. 5. page 143.
Cerularius, and Leo D'Acrida could be ignorant of Berengarius his
Condemnation. Yet this was the Author of the Perpetuitie's Chief Argument, But,
whether they could be ignorant of the Opinion of the whole Latin Church
touching the Eucharist, which was then by the Calvinists own Confession most
clear, distinct, and determinate for the real Presence. But let the Matter
concern what it will, his Proof will be never the better. But instead of
saying, for the real Presence, he should say, for Transubstantiation; for our
Question touching the Greeks, being only on this Point, if Mr. Arnaud will make
advantage of Cerularius, and Leo d' Acrida's silence, he must establish that
the Latins made it then an Article of their Belief. There is a great deal of
ambiguity in these Terms of real Presence; the Greeks do, and do not believe
it, they believe as we already observed, a real Presence of Virtue, but not
areal Presence of Substance. And even we our selves, who deny the real Presence
Mr. Arnaud means, profess to believe another, which we hold not only for real,
but a thousand times more real than that which Mr. Arnaud intends. If then he
designed to explain himself clearly and to the purpose, he must say, that the
Opinion of the whole Latin Church was plainly and distinctly for
Transubstantiation.

BUT it is not enough to say so, it must be proved, for endless and impertinent
Stories will never satisfy our Reason. He tells us, that Cerularius having
sent his Letter, caused the Latin Churches at Constantinople to be shut Lib. 2.
cap. 5.
up, and took away from the Latin Abbots, and other Religious Persons their
Monasteries. That in the following year, Pope Leo sent Cardinal Humbert, and
the Bishop of Blanch Selve, and the Archbishop of Melphus in quality of his
Legates to Constantinople, with Letters to both the Emperor and Patriarch.
Which is no more than what we know already without Mr. Arnaud's telling us.

HE adds, That Humbert wrote a refutation of Cerularius his Letter by way of
Dialogue, and amongst the rest, that the Azyme is made by invocation of the
Trinity, the real and individual Body of Christ. There are so many faults to be
reprehended in this Allegation, that a man scarce knows where to begin to
refute it. Were his Translation as it should be, it would appear these words do
not so clearly assert Transubstantiation, as to give Cerularius an occasion to
reproach the Latins with it. For may we not understand that the Bread is made
the real and individual Body of Christ, in as much as he has not two Bodies,
but one, only? in the same sense Saint Chrysostom says, that Chrysostom. Ep. ad
Ces.
although the nature of Bread remains even then when it becomes worthy to be
called our Lord's Body, Yet do we not say, that the Son of God has two Bodies,
but one. And in the same sense Damascen says, also, That when the Bread
Damascen. I. pist ad Zac. Doar. Humbert cont. Graec. Bibl. Patr. 1. 4 Edit.
and Wine pass into the growth of our Lord's Body and Blood, it becomes not two
Bodies but one. Moreover Humbert says not what Mr. Arnaud makes him say, viz.
that the Bread becomes the Individual Body, his words are, Corpus Singular,
the Singular Body, that is to say, the Body which singly and only belongs to
Jesus Christ, and not to the Father and Holy Spirit; and there is so great
blindness, or rather unfaithfulness in this Translation, that I cannot suppose
it to be Mr. Arnaud's. He has published it without doubt from the Collection of
some of his Friends, and not from Humbert's Text; For how great soever his
prejudice may be; I do not believe he would venture his reputation for so small
an advantage as might be expected from this false Translation. Observe here
what Humbert says, The Azyme being thus prepared, is made by an hearty
Invocation of the Holy Trinity, the real and single Body of Christ. Not as the
Theopaschites would have it, the Body of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Which
it seems you believe likewise, seeing you say the Azyme does not participate of
the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit* as the Leavened Bread does. Leave this wicked
Opinion, unless you will be condemned with the Theopaschites. In the
Commemoration of our Lord's Passion, the Holy and Impassible Trinity has
nothing in common except the single Consecration, wherein all the Persons
cooperate: For the death of the Humanity only of the Son of God is celebrated
in this visible Sacrament, the Apostle saying, every time ye cat of this Bread,
and drink of this Cup, ye show the Lord's death till he comes. Our Lord himself
in this particular Commemoration, delivering the Bread to his Disciples, said
to em, this is my Body which was given for you. Mine, says he, which by the
Grace of the Holy Spirit, I who am the Wisdom of the Father, have built as a
Temple in 46 days, in the Womb of the unspotted Virgin. It now plainly appears
what is the meaning of this Singular Corpus Christi, which is to say, the Body
which the second Person only assumed, and not the Father, nor Holy Spirit. To
make of this the individual Body of Jesus Christ, to conclude from thence
Transubstantiation, is so gross and ridiculous a mistake, that had Mr. Arnaud
met with the like in my Writings; in the humor he seems to be of, he would
have made it the Subject of a whole Chapter. I shall only advise him to take
more care another time; and not labor so confidently hereafter upon other
Peoples Memories. This first Passage is attended by another almost of the same
kind. He says, says he, that the Latins honoring the Body of Truth, that is
to say, the Body of Christ, made of an Azyme, and in the Azymes, taste with
their Mouths and Heart how sweet the Lord is. This, adds he, is clear enough,
and a man must be very dull, not to understand this Language. I confess I am
not quicker of apprehension than another, yet I understand very well Humbert' s
Discourse without Transubstantiation. We say, says he, that the Azyme of the
Christians is very different from that of the carnal Jews, who observed and
pursued the shadow of Truth, invited hereunto by the promise, and desire of a
Terrestial Felicity, such as a long Life, Riches, a numerous Offspring, and
such like things. But as to us, honoring and retaining the Body of Truth,
which is of the Azyme, and in the Azyme we taste with our mouths and heart, how
sweet the Lord is, desiring of him no more, but that he may dwell in us, and we
in him eternally. Is not this to deride People, to allege such a Passage as
this, whereby to establish Transubstantiation, and that so clearly too, that
Cerularius ought to reproach the Latins with it? Had Mr. Arnaud minded, he
might have comprehended that this Body of Truth, is nothing else but the Truth
it self, which is called the Body in opposition to the Shadow of the Jews, that
it is of the Azyme, and in the Azyme, because the Azyme is the Mystery of it,
that in partaking of it with our mouths and hearts, we taste the sweetness of
the Lord, because his Grace thereby is communicated to us, and that in fine
this Truth, of which he speaks, is our Spiritual Communion with Christ; as he
explains it himself, in saying, that he dwells in us, and we in him, in
opposition to the Terrestial Felicity, which the Jews expected in the
participation of their Azyme.

MR. Arnaud adds that Humbert believed Transubstantiation; but it concerns us
not to know whether he did believe it or not; but whether he did sufficiently
explain it to the Greeks, whereby to move Cerularius to make it the head of an
Accusation against the Roman Church.

THE Pope's Legates, says he, excommunicated the Patriarch, and departed from
Constantinople: I agree with him in this; The Patriarch would have them return
to the end they might be torn in pieces by the People. This may be. He stirred
up a Sedition against the Emperor that upheld them. I grant it. They sent the
Emperor a true Copy of the Excommunication they had read, in which they say,
that as to the Pillars of the Empire, and its Honorable and Sage Citizens,
they were most Christian and Orthodox. All this concludes nothing. They blame
not Cerularius in any sort touching the Eucharist; which shows they had not the
least thought that Cerularius differed from them in his Opinion about this
Mystery. Why must they blame him touching this Point, when both the Greeks and
Latins at that time, used the same Expressions? Cerularius, says he,
afterward, giving way to his Passion, wrote to the Patriarch of Antioch to
animate him against the Latins; and makes no mention of their Belief touching
the Eucharist. I believe it. But this still concludes nothing, unless it be
showed that Transubstantiation was then established in the Roman Church. This
is the Point that ought to be proved, without any more words. For all these
Narrations serve only to inform us, in what perplexity Mr. Arnaud finds himself
to make out his first Proof. He carries his Readers backwards and forwards,
from East to West, and from West to East again: when the Question concerns the
Opinion of the Greeks, he goes to seek it at Rome, amongst the Latins: and when
touching the Opinion of the Latins, he goes to seek it at Antioch and
Constantinople amongst the Greeks; and all this amounts to nothing at last, but
mere Delusion; for it proves nothing. Was ever such Confusion beheld in the
entrance of a Controversy, and especially considering the noise there has been
about it?

BUT it will be perhaps said; How can we deny that Transubstantiation was
established, and commonly held by the Church of Rome in Leo's time; that is to
say, about the middle of the Eleventh Century? I answer, we can be no otherwise
informed, than by the Expressions of the Council held under Nicholas II. which
I already related, and which contain not Transubstantiation. I believe there
were then several particular Persons that believed it; and took this way
whereby to explain how the Bread is made the Body of Christ; but howsoever the
Roman Church had not yet declared her self otherwise than in general Terms;
which could not offend either Cerularius, or his Greeks.

THIS is then another of Mr. Arnaud's Artifices, to persuade us as he would do,
that he is not, moreover obliged to prove, the Greeks believed
Transubstantiation, and that it is sufficient to show, that all the Patriarchal
Churches were linkt in Communion with the Roman, when she condemned
Berengarius; and were not parted asunder upon this occasion; This, I say, is a
gross Delusion, for not to mention here, that the Rupture was already made
before the time of Berengarius his first Condemnation, or at least before his
Condemnation could be known in the Patriarchal Churches, as appears by what I
alleged in the beginning of this Chapter, we must further observe, that of all
those Condemnations (which the Authors of the Office make to amount to Eight)
there is never a one, but the last (which was made by Gregory VII. in the Year
1079.) which can be said to establish expressly, Transubstantiation; so that
the Separation of the Greeks being made since the Year 1053. that is to say,
Twenty six Years before, this Presumption (which Mr. Arnaud says, is clearly
on the side of the Roman Church) is void and fantastical, and cannot acquit him
from giving us that Proof which we require of him.

CHAP. II.
Mr. Arnaud's Second Proof, taken from Cardinal Humbert's Dispute with Nicetas
Pectoratus, examined. His Third Proof from the Testimony of Lanfranc, and
Silence of the Berengarians examined. The rest of Mr. Arnaud's Delusions
considered.

MR. Arnaud's Second Proof taken from Cardinal Humbert's Dispute with Nicetas
Pectoratus, consists of Delusions as well as the former. He immediately tells
us, this Dispute, does invincibly Lib. 1. cap. 2. page 150.
prove these Four Points. 1. That the Roman Church held at that time the
Doctrine of the real Presence and Transubstantiation. 2. That this Doctrine was
declared to the Greeks in such a manner, that they could not be ignorant of it.
3. That Cardinal Humbert positively believed the Greeks held the Doctrines of
the real Presence and Transubstantiation. 4. That the Greeks did in effect
believe this Doctrine, and elearly expressed the same. But having thus
distinguished these Four Propositions, and assured us they are the plain result
of Humbert's Dispute with Nicetas, his first Delusion consists in leaving them,
and expressly proving neither of 'em. He contents himself with alleging to us
a Passage of Humbert's, wherein there is not the least mention of the
Conversions of Substances, nor so much as one Clause, but what is expressed in
such Terms as may be well understood without Transubstantiation. Which will
plainly appear, if we take the pains to read over again this Passage, as Mr.
Arnaud has produced it, in the Sixth Chapter of his Second Book.

I confess, he endeavors to infer it thence by way of Consequence, Because,
says he, that Humbert, denying as he does, that the Eucharist is digested,
Ibid. page 151.
and breaks the Ecclesiastical Fast, he can therefore acknowledge no other
Substance, but that of Christ's Body.

BUT, besides that, this is not clearly to prove the Church of Rome then
believed Transubstantiation, and that her Belief on this Point was declared to
the Greeks in such a manner, that they could not be ignorant of it, but must
perceive it to be the Consequence of Humbert's Terms, seeing on one hand we may
still doubt whether Humbert spoke his own Sense, or that of the Church which
sent him, and so much the more, because Mr. Arnaud acknowledges this Cardinal
was very hot in this Dispute, and on the other, it is very uncertain whether the
Greeks went so far as this Consequence. Besides this, I say, the Consequence it
self is neither demonstrative nor unavoidable; for it does not follow from a
man's denying the Eucharist is digested, and breaks ones Fast, that he
acknowledges no other Substance than that of the Body of Christ. He may
believe, the Substance of Bread becomes incorruptible as soon as it is in the
Stomach, and that it passes immediately without Digestion into our Substance,
according to the Opinion of Damascen, Zonaras, and almost all the Eastern
Churches, as we shall see hereafter. For in Humbert's sense, all Food that
breaks our Fast is digested, and passes into Excrements, as the common
nourishments do. Whence I conclude that Mr. Arnaud deceives us, when he says,
this Dispute does invincibly prove the Roman Church then believed
Transubstantiation, and that her Belief was sufficiently made known to the
Greeks; for neither one nor the other of these do hence necessarily follow.

NEITHER can it be thence concluded she believed the real Presence, I mean this
local and physical Presence of the proper Substance of the natural Body of
Jesus Christ, as she does believe it at this day, nor that Humbert thought the
Greeks believed it, and this Mr. Arnaud's last Consequence is moreover found
defective, although this is not the Point in question betwixt us. For supposing
the Bread remaining Bread, becomes the Body of Christ by way of Augmentation of
this Body, being united to the Divinity, and receiving by the Holy Spirit the
impression of the inlivening virtue, which is Jesus Christ, according to the
Sentiment of the Greeks, Humbert might (without being thought senceless or
extravagant) tell Nicetas that in teaching the Eucharist breaks our fast, he
exposed the Body of Jesus Christ to the condition of common Food. For although on
this Hypothesis, the Bread is not the Body of the Son of God in propriety of
Substance, yet is it his Body in such a manner, that seems to exempt it from
the quality of other Food; which is sufficient to occasion Humbert's Reproach,
and render ineffectual all these little Subtilities of Mr. Arnaud.

I replied, in my Answer to the Perpetuity, that this Dispute of Humbert Answer
to the second Treatise.
and Nicetas furnished us wherewith to show that, the Greeks did not believe
the Transubstantiation of the Latins, forasmuch as Nicetas maintains therein
that, the Eucharist breaks our Fast; which supposes it conserves its first
nature of corporeal Aliment, and that, he believed it descends into the Stomach
like other Food, which moreover shows, he held it still for real Bread. I
strengthened this Proposition by the Testimony of Humbert, Algerus, and Cellot
the Jesuit. I added likewise that Durand Abbot of Troarn, tells us, that those
heretofore called Stercoranists were the Berengarians, which is to say, those
held the Bread keeps its first nature, and I confirmed my Proof by several
weighty Considerations, as that it was not to be imagined men that were
Christians would expose the proper Substance of the Son of God to these
Accidents of Corporeal Food, that this Opinion would be inconsistent with that
State of Glory, wherein we all believe it to be, as also with that Sacramental
State wherein it is made to be in the Eucharist.

MR. Arnaud finding he could not establish his own Proof, applies himself to
the refuting of mine, and immediately making use of his Privilege, he singles
out what he pleases, and leaves the rest. He takes no notice of Cellot the
Jesuit's Testimony, for what reason he best knows. He passes over in silence
what I said touching the State of Glory, wherein the Son of God now is, and so
likewise what I mentioned concerning his Sacramental State. And from the
remaining part of my Proof he is pleased to make this Argument. The Greeks are
Stercoranists according to Humbert and Algerus. The Stercoranists are
Berengarians according to Durand. The Greeks Lib. 2. cap. 6. page 153.
then are Berengarians. But seeing my Proof is to be modelled, I crave leave to
take it out of his hands, and state it my self. Observe here then how I
reasoned. Those that believe the Eucharist breaks our Fast, and give cause to
charge them with Stercoranism, hold the Substance of Bread remains. But the
Greeks believe the Eucharist breaks our Fast, and yield occasion to accuse them
of Stercoranism. They hold then the Substance of Bread remains. And thus do I
reason; but by misfortune Mr. Arnaud can neither deny the major, minor, nor
Conclusion of this Argument. He was constrained therefore to new mould it, and
then knew not how to give it a direct Answer.

IT is true, says he, that Humbert charges Nicetas with believing the Body
Ibid.
of Christ was digested; but this is only as a Consequence of what he offered,
touching the Eucharist' s breaking our Fast, and not as a Doctrine which he
expressly asserted. It is all one to me whether he attributes to him this
Opinion, either as a Doctrine or a Consequence, either of 'em being sufficient
to establish the solidity of my Proof. Mr. Arnaud may dispute this Point with
Cellot or Algerus, it not lying upon me to prove it. When it should be true
this Consequence were not well drawn from the Principle which Nicetas lays down
from the part of the Greeks, and that the Greeks might reply thereunto, there
would be still enough in the Principle it self, to make my Conclusion just and
necessary. For those that absolutely and sincerely believe the Eucharist breaks
our Fast, cannot but likewise believe that it nourishes after the manner of
Food, which is to say, that it distributes it self through all the parts of our
Body, being added to our Substance, and consequently that it is still real
Bread. And it will be to no purposE to say, the Greeks might believe, That the
troublesomeness of fasting is effectually eased thereby, and that we are really
Ibid page 155.
nourished, not with the Body of Christ, but by some other means known only to
God. For there being in the Eucharist only the Substance and Accidents, those
that believe it is in Substance the proper Body of Christ, and yet affirm it
nourishes, must attribute this nourishment either to the Body of Christ, or to
the Accidents. As to the Body of Christ, it is absurd to affirm that a
Substance which exists after the manner of an invisible and insensible Spirit,
can nourish our Bodies, that is to say, augment the Substance of them. And as
to the Accidents, besides the absurdity there is in supposing Accidents alone
nourish us, the Greeks know not what belongs to the existence of Accidents
without a Subject, which Mr. Arnaud himself grants, when he says, they trouble
not themselves with these Phylosophical Consequences. To affirm likewise, as
Mr. Arnaud does, that the Greeks, perhaps only asserted the Lib. 2. cap 6. page
155.
Eucharist broke our Fast, because they believed the Oblation of the Sacrifice,
did not belong to the Fast, and that they were permitted to eat after they had
communicated, is a mere Evasion, which plainly denotes Mr. Arnaud's perplexity.
For the Greeks accuse the Latins, not for their eating so soon after the
Communion in Lent, for this Accusation would be false and slanderous, seeing
they know the contrary. But he accuses them in that they break their Fast, by
receiving the Eucharist. Whence have you this Custom, says Nicetas, to
celebrate Nicetas Contra. Lat. Bibl. Patr. Tom. 4. Edit.
the Oblation of the Paschal Mass every day, even on the Holy days of fasting,
as well as on Saturday and Sunday? What Doctors thus taught you? Were they the
Apostles? No; For the Apostles made a Canon, to this effect, that if any
Bishop, Priest, Deacon, Reader, or Chanter, that is in health, fasts not, on
the Fridays and Saturdays in Lent, he ought to be degraded; Seeing then you
celebrate Mass at nine of the Clock; which is the hour in which the Sacrifice
is to be offered, how then keep you the Fast till three in the Afternoon,
breaking it as you do, in the time of the Administration? You do not at all
observe it, and therefore you are accursed. It is plainly seen here the matter
concerns the reception of the Eucharist, and that he means it breaks the Fast,
for he says they break it, in tempore ministrationis Missae. Where then has
Mr. Arnaud found this Evasion, that the Greeks say the Eucharist breaks the
Fast, only because they believe, the Oblation of the Sacrifice does not belong
to the Fast, and that it was lawful to eat after the participation of the
Communion? This is, says he, the conjecture of a very Learned man, who has
taken the pains to read over this Treatise. Is Mr. Arnaud so tired with his
Work, and his time so mightily taken up, that he cannot afford one half hour
for the reading this Treatise himself, for it requires no more? These Anonymous
Learned men do often deceive us with their Conjectures, and when a Person makes
a Book which he designs to render famous throughout all Europe, in sending it
to all the Courts in Christendom, it is absolutely requisite, not to trust all
sorts of People. He says in his Epistle Dedicatory to the Pope, that his
Friends have labored with him. In the Twelfth Book he gives us a Dissertation
of a Religious man of Saint Genevieve on John Scot's Case, and that of Bertram.
Moreover, he tells us, he has desired some Persons to translate for him, that
Passage of Herbert's, about which we have made such a noise, here he gives us
the conjecture of an Anonymous. I am afraid some indiscreet Person or other
will judge hereupon, that Mr. Arnaud's whole Book is made up only of incoherent
Fragments. As for my part I do not thus judge, but I wish Mr. Arnaud had
rectified and digested himself, what others have furnished him with, and not
been like the Sea in this particular, which receiving into its Womb all the
Waters of Rivers, communicates only to them its bryniness.

HUMBERT never thought of giving any of these Senses, to the Passage proposed
to us out of Nicetas. He never imagined that the Greeks believed the Communion
breaks the Fast, either because they were permitted to eat immediately after,
or because our Bodies receive the same impressions, and the same strength by
receiving of the Eucharist, as by any other common Food. But he only understood
they taught that the Eucharist does really nourish us, in the same manner, as
other Food, which changes it self into our Substance, and it is thereupon that
he grounded his charge of Stercoranism. Do Mr. Arnaud and his Anonymouses, know
better now in Paris the true meaning of Nicetas, than Humbert who lived in that
time, and was at Constantinople with this Religious, Leo the Ninth, having
affirmed the latins have the same Faith as the Greeks? Mr. Arnaud thereupon
takes occasion to insult over me, and tells me, he will be judged by my self,
Whether it is likely Lib. 2. cap. 50 page 141.
Leo that lived amongst the Greeks, did not know better than I their Opinion,
who now come six hundred years after, assuring the World upon my own bare word
of the contrary, without any Proof or Testimony. And ten or twelve Pages
further, he would persuade us, that Humbert, who was Contemporary with Nicetas,
and in the same City with him, did not well comprehend Nicetas his meaning; and
that himself, Mr. Arnaud, and Mr. his Anonymous understand it better than
Humbert. Whence comes this partiality?

BUT, says he, Nicetas asserts Transubstantiation, as fully as Humbert Lib. 2.
cap. 6. page 1^^.
could do. Which we must examine. Those, says Nicetas, who walk in the Light,
eat the Bread of Grace, which is the Body of Christ; and drink his immaculate
Blood. In the Bread, says he, moreover, that is to say, in our Savior's Body
there are three living things, which give life to those that eat worthily
thereof, to wit, the Spirit, the Water and Blood, according to that saying,
there are three that bear witness, and these three are in one. He proves the
Water and Blood are in our Saviors Body, by the Water and Blood which gushed
thence in his Crucifixion, and as to the Spirit, observe here what he says;
The Holy and living Spirit remains in his inlivening Flesh; and we eat this
Flesh in the Bread, which is changed by his Holy Spirit, and made the Body of
Jesus Christ. We live in him by eating his living and deified Flesh. Could
Nicetas, adds Mr. Arnaud, more plainly show his Opinion touching the Eucharist,
and more positively exclude Mr. Claude' s vain Conjectures?

AND this is that which in the Style of Mr. Arnaud is precise and positive. I
answer, that by the Bread of Grace, Nicetas means the Bread of the New
Testament, in opposition to the Azyme of the Law, and that his Sense is, that
this Bread is the Mystical Body of Jesus Christ, which the Azyme cannot be,
which he proves. 1. Because the Azyme is not Bread till it receives the
perfection of Leaven. 2. Because the Azyme is a dead thing having no inlivening
virtue in it; whereas the leavened Bread has Leaven, which is to it as it were
Life and Soul; whence he concludes it is proper to become the Mystery of the
Body of Christ, seeing there is in this Body three living things, the Spirit,
the Water, and Blood, the Water and Blood, because they run down from his
pierced side, and the Spirit, because his Flesh was ever joined to his
Divinity. Whence he inferrs, it is in the Bread; and not in the Azyme we eat
this Flesh, and that the Bread being changed by the Holy Spirit, and made
Christ's Body, we live in him, by eating his living and deified Flesh. And this
is Nicetas his reasoning, which I confess is a little odd; but howsoever, it is
as I relate it, as plainly appears to him that reads his Writings, his drift
being only to show, that the Azyme having nothing in it representing the Life,
which is in Jesus Christ, it cannot therefore be used for the Mystery of his
Body. He himself explains his own meaning in these Terms, Saint Peter, says
he, tells us that we are Partakers of a Divine Nature, and not of the Azyme of
the Murderers of God. Now what man endued with Reason will call the dead
Azyme, or the unleavened Bread of the Jews, a Divine Nature? and yet you offer
it to God in Sacrifice, and eat it as a Figure of the living Flesh of Jesus
Christ. How have you Communion with Jesus Christ, who is the living God? eating
dead and unleavened Bread, which appertains to the shadow of the Law, and not
the New Testament. If we compare what he says touching the Azyme, to what he
says afterward concerning the Leavened Bread, we shall find his aim is only
to show, that one is not proper to represent the living Body of Jesus Christ,
and to become the Figure and Representation of it, the other on the contrary to
be most proper. 1. Because it is Bread, which the other is not. 2. Because it is
in some sort living, whereas the other is dead. 3. Because it respects Grace,
and the New Testament, whereas the other respects the Jews, and Shadow of the
Law, there is not one word in all this that savours Transubstantiation. It
appears on the contrary, that he takes for one and the same thing, to be a
Partaker of the Divine Nature, have Communion with Christ in the Eucharist, and
to eat the Bread as a Figure of the living Flesh of Jesus Christ.

BUT we have had enough of this Illusion, let us then pass on to the
nineteenth, which consists in alleging the Testimony of Lanfranc, whereby to
prove to us the Greeks believe Transubstantiation. What can, (says he,) Mr.
Lib. 2. cap. 7. page 162. and 163.
Claude say to this Witness, who so clearly affirms the Greeks were of the same
Belief as the Church of Rome in the Mystery of the Eucharist? I may truly say,
that Lanfranc looking upon Berengarius his Affair as a cause wherein his own
credit was concerned; and resolving therefore to vanquish at any rate, he was
interressed to suppose, that all the World was on his side, and that therefore
his prejudice invalidates his Testimony. I may also affirm Mr. Arnaud's word
signifies nothing without Proof, although it may be as well taken as Lanfranc's. I
can show that Lanfranc does not scruple to offer us a Fabulous History
(touching what passed in Cyrillus of Alexandria's time, and Pope Celestin's)
and to make thereof a good Proof. Whether through Ignorance, or want of
Sincerity, I know not, but sure I am we have little reason to trust that man's
Testimony, who has so grossly deceived us. He was, says Mr. Ibid. page 162.
Arnaud, an Italian by Nation, where there was a great many Greeks. Italy
certainly would be a very happy Country, if it produced none but faithful
Witnesses. Had Lanfranc in effect taken care to inform himself by the Greeks
which were there, what was their Belief touching the Substantial Conversion, he
would have told us so himself, and not left it to Mr. Arnaud's guesses. It
appears, adds he, by his way of writing, that he was a Person worthy of Credit.
It appears by his Writings, that he was a passionate man, and extremely carried
away with vain glory, which are not the best marks of Sincerity. But after all
this, I can tell Mr. Arnaud he is deceived in Lanfranc's own Testimony. For
Lanfranc only says, that all Christians do glory in receiving in the Sacrament
the true Flesh and Blood of Christ, which he took of the Virgin. That this is
the Faith of the Greeks, Armenians, and all the rest of the Christian World.
Which is grounded only on this expression of the Greeks, which bears that the
Bread is our Savior's real Body; and that it must not be said, he has two
Bodies, but one alone. Now we have already showed what they mean by this
expression, namely, that the Bread becomes our Savior's Body by way of
Addition, as the Food we eat becomes our Body, which is very different from
Transubstantiation.

BUT, says Mr. Arnaud, the Silence of Berengarius and his Followers seems to
me also very considerable. I answer, this is another of his wilful mistakes.
For first how can he assure us that Berengarius and those of his Opinion, never
asserted the Greeks did not believe the Conversion of Substances? We have
scarcely any of their Writings, we have no more of their Arguments and Answers,
than what their Adversaries have been pleased to give us. It is true that
Lanfranc says, when they were offered several Passages out of the Holy
Scriptures, and Saint Austin's Works touching the State of the Church, they
answered the Church had erred, and all its Members perished, except themselves.
But it does not hence follow, that they acknowledged the Greeks believed
Transubstantiation. They might say the Church had erred, and was perished from
the Face of the Earth, meaning the Western Church. They might say the same of
the Eastern Church upon the account of other Errors besides
Transubstantiation. And then again, who can assure us that Lanfranc gives a
faithful account of what they said touching this Subject?

IN the second place I will grant that Berengarius, and his Followers never
mentioned the Greeks in their Disputes. Can Mr. Arnaud find it strange, that
People who were every where persecuted, and afflicted, and had enough to do to
preserve themselves, should be ignorant of the Doctrine of the Greeks?
Berengarius, says he, was thrice at Rome, and had opportunity to Ibid. page
164.
inform himself, and we need not doubt but 'twas one of his principal cares.
Why not doubt of it? Because Mr: Arnaud says so? Those that are not bound to
believe him on his own bare word, will still doubt of it: For he is not
infallible, and I my self am one of those that doubt of it, till he proves it.
The Interest Ibid.
of his Cause, adds he, speaking of me, is so prevalent in him, that he may
learn from the Experience of his own Sentiments, what were those of his
followers. I confess the Interest of my Cause is a thousand times more dear to
me than my life, and Mr. Arnaud does me right here; But yet it is certain, that
had I not the Book of the Perpetuity to answer, I should not much trouble my
self about the Opinion of the Greeks; for the discovery of Truth, which ought
to be the aim of us all, does not depend on what the Greeks do, or do not
believe, and I should esteem my self in a very miserable condition, had my
Faith and Conscience no better Grounds than such a pitiful Principle.

BERENGARIUS had the Word of God, which was enough, they need no other Weapons
to defend themselves that have this. But supposing his curiosity had moved him
to inquire after the Sentiments of the Greeks, I know not whether he was in a
capacity to satisfy himself. For as far as I understand, he was a Person that
gave all he had to the Poor. I no where find he was one of those that had great
men's purses at command. And living as he did in the Eleventh Century, wherein
there were no other Books than what were Manuscripts (the Art of Printing not
being then found out) neither I suppose so free a Commerce betwixt
Constantinople and Angers, as at present; and having moreover neither Consuls
nor Emissaries his Friends to help him in that Country, he may be well excused
if he did not exactly know their Doctrine.

BUT in fine, supposing, Berengarius and his Followers, were not ignorant of
the true Opinion of the Greek Church, where lies the necessity, that they ought
to make this an Argument whereby to defend themselves, seeing 'twas never yet
pretended that the Opinion of the Greeks was the same with that of Berengarius.

CHAP. III.
Mr. Arnaud's Twenty first Illusion, is, his charging me with maintaining the
Greeks never knew the Latins believed Transubstantiation. His Twenty second,
consists in offering the Formulary of the Reunion proposed to the Greeks by
the Latins. Twenty third, in that he produces the Passages of Latiniz'd Greeks.
Twenty fourth, in alleging supposed Authors, or at least doubtful and justly
suspected ones. The Twenty fifth, is his producing the Testimonies of several
false Greeks linked to the Interests of the Latin Church.

HAD Mr. Arnaud left out of his Dispute, touching the Greeks, the Illusions I
already observed (as it was very reasonable he should) he would have suppressed
several whole Chapters, and abridged others, and by this means, we should not
have had such just cause to complain of his prolixity. And we should have had
yet less, had he been pleased to retrench all that he has written to prove, the
Greeks could not be ignorant of the Doctrine of the Latins, in reference to
Transubstantiation. This is the most reasonable thing in the World, for his
charging me with attributing to them this ignorance, and the whole Sequel of
his Histories, Arguments, and Reflections, whereby to show the absurdity of
this Supposition, all this I say is but a mere Illusion. I never pretended the
Greeks knew not what the Latins held on this Article; and he that shall read
with a little more Equity than Mr. Arnaud has done, what I wrote in my Answer
to the Perpetuity, will find, that I have been so far from asserting this
Proposition, that I have on the contrary, in several places, supposed they knew
it. The Author of the Perpetuity having told me the Greeks and Latins lived
together in several places, and yet 'twas never known, there was any Dispute
raised amongst them on this Point; I answered, that the Greeks content
themselves with their own Belief, without making it a matter of contest with
Strangers. Now this Answer supposes, that they are not ignorant of what the
Latins hold. I likewise mentioned upon this account a Passage of Phaebadius,
who tells us, that an humble Conscience contents it self with keeping its own
Opinion, and supposes it is better to preserve its own Faith, than to trouble it
self with examining the Belief of Strangers, which also supposes they knew the
Opinion of the Roman Church, but did not trouble themselves about it. This
Author alleging afterward the Reunion of the two Churches made in the
Council of Florence, I expressly acknowledged, that the Greeks seem, to have
tacitly suffered the Transubstantiation of the Latins, which does still
moreover suppose, they were not ignorant of it, for men are not ignorant of
what they tolerate. The same Author producing the Answer of the Greeks of
Venice, to the Cardinal de Guise's Questions; I said, that 'twas an Answer
contrived on purpose not to provoke Strangers; ever supposing, as it is evident,
that they well knew the Doctrine of the Latins.

WHAT could then induce Mr. Arnaud to charge me with a thing I never so much as
imagined, and the contrary of which appears throughout all the Sequel of my
Discourse? The Author of the Perpetuity, told us, that Perpetuity of the Faith,
3. part. cap. 8.
Breerwood, who wrote a Book touching the diversity of Religions; and exactly
denotes all things in which he pretends they differ from the Church of Rome,
yet dared not affirm, the Greek Church differed from the Latin in the Point of
Transubstantiation. That he neither does pretend it of the Assyrians, or
Melchites, Nestorians, Jacobites, Eutychites, Copticks, Egyptians, nor
Abyssins, but only Answer to 2. Treat. 3. part. cap. 8.
Armenians. These are his Words, and this my Answer, As to other Churches, the
Author of the Perpetuity alleges only the Silence of Breerwood, in a Treatise
he wrote of Religions, wherein he does not observe, that either the Greeks,
Assyrians, Melchites, Nestorians, Jacobites, Eutychites, Copticks, Egyptians,
nor Abyssins, do differ from the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, in the Point
of Transubstantiation. But certainly our Author is very bare of Proofs, that he
must have recourse to the Silence of a man that transiently observes the most
noted Differences of Religions, contenting himself with saying, what Points
such a People hold, or positively reject, without proceeding to things which
they do not believe by way of Negation, as not having heard of them.

THESE last Words, as not having heard of them, have it seems given occasion to
all this coyl. But first, Mr. Arnaud may consider, if he pleases, that my
Answer refers to other Communions, which are called Schismatics, and that the
Greeks are mentioned only accidentally and occasionally. Which appears from my
own Expressions, for having seperately handled what concerns the Greeks,
passing to another Subject, I immediately add, As to what concerns People of
other Communions, the Author alleges to us only, etc. Whence it is evident,
that my intention respects only those other Communions, that I name the Greeks
only, because they are comprehended amongst the rest in the Author of the
Perpetuitie's Objection; but yet my Answer primarily respects only the other
People. If it be said, that the Objection including the Greeks amongst the
rest, my Answer must include them also; that in effect it is general, and that
otherwise I should have left the Objection relating to the Greeks, without an
Answer. I reply to this, that my Answer cannot be extended beyond the other
Schismatical Communions, to the prejudice of my own expressions, which restrain
and determinate it. A man would think People might be so just, as not to charge
Persons with those things which are contrary to their express Declarations. Mr.
Arnaud might accuse me for leaving the Objection drawn from the Silence of
Breerwood, in relation to the Greeks without an Answer. He might have brought
it again into the Dispute, if he would, but he could not apply my Words to the
Greeks, seeing I mentioned them in reference to the other Communions, in
opposition to the Greeks, of whom I came from treating. What I said before, and
what I said even there touching the other Communions, sufficiently showed what
might be answered in this respect to the Objection taken out of Breerwood, it
not being necessary to make thereof a particular Article, nor to comprehend
them amongst the rest. I confess the sense of my Answer in general may be
extended as far as the Greeks, in observing the differences of them with other
People, but to apply them to even the very least of my Terms, and make the
World believe that 'twas of them I spoke, is that which Justice and Equity
cannot suffer, having positively said, as I have done, that I spoke of other
Communions.

BUT supposing my Answer was to be understood of the Greeks themselves; could
not Mr. Arnaud understand, that I spoke of People in general, and not of
particular Persons, and meant that the Doctrine of Transubstantiation has made
no noise amongst the People; that their Pastors, never proposed it to 'em in
order to its being received by them, nor declaimed against it, to make them
reject it; and in a word, that they never made of it an Article of Faith, nor
Controversy. My Sense appears by the bare reading of my Answer. Breerwood,
said I, has only transiently observed the common differences of Religions,
contenting himself with telling us what People embrace, or what they positively
reject, without proceeding to the things they do not believe by way of
Negation, as not having heard speak of them. It is clear I distinguish three
sorts of Points, some which these People profess positively to believe, others
which they profess likewise positively to reject, and the third which they do
not believe, or expressly reject. It Is in this third Rank, I put
Transubstantiation in respect of them. They never heard of it, as a Point they
ought to believe, or an Error they ought positively to reject. They meet not
with it either amongst the Articles their Religion teaches, nor amongst those
which it opposes, and expressly condemns. And this is what I call in respect of
this People, the not believing a thing by way of Negation, as not having heard
speak of it. I ought not for this to be charged with an absolute denial, that
the Greeks never heard the Latins believed Transubstantiation, for there is a
great deal of difference betwixt these two things. I speak of People in
general, and not of particular Persons, and I speak moreover of Points which
are not found either amongst the Articles, which are to be believed, nor
amongst those that are actually to be rejected; and not of those concerning
which we may be historically informed that other People hold them.

LET any man judge then of Mr. Arnaud's Character, and with what kind of Person
I am concerned. Besides what I come from observing, we shall immediately see
how he abuses what I said, touching the Halcyon days of the Church. He catches
at the least expressions, and if he can turn any of 'em into a counter sense,
he makes thereof a matter of Triumph. This proceeding seems wholly unworthy a
Person of his Reputation. Had he designed to enrich himself with the Spoils of
Allatius and Raynaldus, and to transcribe as he has done their Histories, could
not he find a juster occasion than this to introduce them into his Volum? Or if
he could find no better, must the love he has to Stories, and the pleasure he
takes in imposing on us, prevail over his Conscience, which forbids him to
charge me with a false meaning, with a Sense (as is apparent) I never had, and
which has no relation to the Sequel of my Discourse.

AND yet it is on no better Grounds than these, that he makes me draw Systems
and build Machines; that he makes general Divisions of the World, assembles
Councils, sends out Ambassadors, transports Armies, fills Jerusalem with
Pilgrims, preaches Croisado's, and conquers the Holy Land, Constantinople and
the Grecian Empire; that he fills the East with Bishops, Abbots, Religious, and
Latin Inquisitors; that he introduces Princes, Kings, Emperors, and Popes, and
sets on foot Negotiations, makes Treaties of Peace, and Reunion between the
two Churches; and all this to prove the Greeks were not ignorant the Latins
held Transubstantiation, which is to say, to prove a thing I never denied. Who
could think that all this costly and stately Pageantry should be carried about
to so little purpose; and all these great Figures be put upon their motion
without any necessity, to convince us of a thing we never denied? Yet is it
true that 'twas only a false equivocation that has occasioned all this
preparation and bustle, an equivocation, which had he but been pleased to
consult me about for a fuller meaning of it (supposing there were need of it) I
could have saved him all this trouble of Translating Allatius and Raynaldus,
and several other Passages from the Greek of Pachimerus and Anne Comnenus.

I would have told him I never intended to deny, but it is possible the Greeks
knew what was the Opinion of the Latins concerning the Substantial Conversion.
But withal, that since the Eleventh Century to this present, this Nation has
been so prodigiously ignorant and careless in matters of Religion, and so
perplexed with their Temporal Affairs, that 'twould be no Paradox to affirm the
greatest part amongst them knew little of what the Latins believe in this
particular, seeing it is certain they scarcely know what they believe
themselves. That which I asserted in the beginning of this Controversy
touching their ignorance, confirms what I say. But observe here moreover what
Thomas a Jesu has written. The Greeks, says he, since their Thomas a Jesu de
proc. Salv. omn. gent. lib. 6. cap. 5.
Separation from the Catholic Church, are fallen into a most desperate
ignorance, which will more plainly appear, if we cast our eyes on the Ages
which preceded the Separation, wherein Greece was the Mother of all Arts and
Sciences. He afterward relates a Passage taken out of Bozius, in these Words.
Since the Sixteenth Century, when the Greek Church began to separate from us,
there has scarcely any Person been found amongst them, excelling in any
Science: It Is certain Gregory relates, that in the Emperor Andronicus his time
(which is about 250 years since) there was not a Person in all Greece that was
able to dispute with our People about Religion; and now there is not one that
can be truly said to be indifferently learned. If any amongst them desire to
learn any thing, they must leave Constantinople, and come to the College at
Rome, which Gregory the Thirteenth built for the Greeks. All the Bishops
amongst them are taken out of the Order of Monks, who have a Law amongst them
to this effect, that all those that study Philosophy shall be excommunicated,
as testifies Belon in the first Book of his Observations. Now there is nothing
more useful to men for the finding of the Truth than solid Philosophy. And
therefore, the Devil to keep the Greeks in this ignorance, has so ordered it,
that the Bishops are still elected from amongst the Monks, and that moreover
the Monks should lay this necessity upon themselves of being ignorant.

IT IS likely Persons in these Circumstances do not trouble themselves with
Inquiries into the Opinions of the Latins touching the Mystery of the
Eucharist; and in effect amongst all those that have written since the Eleventh
Century to this present, (excepting the Latinizing Greeks) there will be found
very few that mention the Belief of the Roman Church, touching the Conversion
of Substances, which shows that they are not well instructed in it.

YET do not I believe this ignorance has been so Universal, but that there have
been some from time to time, who sufficiently understood the Opinion of the
Latins, and especially those that have had most Commerce with them; as for
instance, such as negotiated the Re-unions, those that conferred with the
Emissaries, and were Assessors at the Council of Florence, and such as were
forced to live under the Jurisdiction of Latin Bishops. Mr. Arnaud needed not
trouble himself with proving this, for it is a thing we grant him.

SO that here are already several of Mr. Arnaud's Illsions, and yet we are not
at the end of all those he has imposed on us, touching this single Article of
the Greeks.

WE may moreover reckon into this number the perpetual Quotation of this Form
of a Reunion, which was so often offered to the Greeks, and which the Greeks
have sometimes received when they were at accord with the Latin Church. He
tells us, that the Emperor Michael Paleologus his Deputies Lib. 3. cap. 3. page
275.
being arrived at the Council of Lions, presented the Emperors Letters to the
Pope, containing in express Terms the Confession of Faith, which was sent them
by Clement the Fourth, and Gregory the Tenth, wherein Transubstantiation is
expressly inserted in these Terms. Sacramentum Eucharistae ex Azymo conficit
Romana Ecclesia, tenens and docens quod in ipso Sacramento, Panis vere
transubstantiatur in Corpus, and Vinum in Sanguinem Domini Jesu Christi. He
adds, that this Profession of Faith was sworn to on the Emperor's part by
George Acropolitus, and that the Legate of the Council of the Greeks presented
likewise a Letter to the Pope, as from the Metropolitain of Ephesus, and thirty
Greek Bishops, and that he swore in their name, after the same manner the
Ambassador had done to embrace entirely the forementioned Confession of Faith,
wherein Transubstantiation was expressed. He tells us moreover, that in the
Confession of Eaith, which Ibid. page 277.
John Veccus inserted in his Letters as well in his own Name, as in the Name of
the Greek Bishops, that Transubstantiation was expressly contained in it, although
occasionally upon account of the Azymes; credentes and nos ipsum Azymum panem
in ipso Sacro Officio Eucharistae vere transubstantiari in Corpus Domini nostri
Jesu Christi, and Vinum in Sanguinem ejus per Sanctissimi Spiritus Virtutem and
Operationem. That they likewise do believe the unleavened Bread is
transubstantiated into the Body of Christ. He afterward observes, this
Confession of the Greek Bishops was not expressed in the same Terms, as that
which was sent thence by Clement the Fourth, and Gregory the Tenth; but that
this difference has no after effect in respect of the Article of the Azymes,
and that of Transubstantiation, but that it is expressed more plainly than in
the Confession of Faith compiled by Clement.

SO that if we will believe Mr. Arnaud, we have here Transubstantiation
formally received and acknowledged by the Greek Church. But all this is but a
mere Delusion. This Confession of Faith in the Latin of Raynoldus, from whom
Mr. Arnaud has borrowed whatsoever he has alleged concerning it, has indeed
these Words, Panis vere Transubstantiatur in Corpus, and Vinum in Sanguinem,
but as I alreay observed, in the Greek which Allatius cites Allat. de Perp.
Council. lib. 2. cap. 17.
touching the Reunion of the Emperor John Paleologus, there are these Words,
(...), The Bread is really changed into the Body, and the Wine into the Blood
of our Lord Jesus Christ. Changed, is not transubstantiated. I have already
shown there is a great deal of difference between these two Terms. The Greeks
hold that the Bread is changed into the Body, which is not the Point in
question; but whether they believe it is transubstantiated. Mr. Arnaud was not
ignorant of the difference between the Latin and Greek Copy of this Confession
of Faith, for he has taken notice of it himself elsewhere upon the Subject of
the Reunion of the Emperor John Paleologus, and has no better defense for it,
than saying, that the (...) of the Greeks, and the Transubstantiatur of the
Latins are Synonimous Terms. Why did he not mention this difference in this
place, and wherefore has he grounded his Proof on the Latin Expressions? The
Doctrine of Transubstantiation, says he, is expressly inserted in this
Confession of Faith. I will show Mr. Claude Transubstantiation solemnly
approved by the Greek Church in the Lib. 2. cap. 3. page 273. cap. 2.
same manner as men approve things they ever believed, and of which they have
not the least doubt. And a little after. And thus I obliged my self to show him
the Doctrine of Transubstantiation signed and sworn to by the Greeks. And this
indeed he does show us, if we only consider the Latin Text; but if we consult
the Greek, we shall find quite another thing, than what he pretends. We shall
find indeed the Latins do believe Transubstantiation, and endeavor to
insinuate it amongst the Greeks; but we shall likewise find that the Greeks
depart not from their general expressions. For to tell us that (...), and
transubstantiatur are Synonymous Terms, is what I deny, and have refuted
already, and shall again refute in the following Discourse. This whole Proof
which Mr Arnaud has been so earnest upon, reduces it self to a thing which we
do not deny him, which is, that the Greeks hold the Bread is really changed
into the Body, and the Wine into the Blood. This Confession of Faith informs us
of no new thing, but that which I already acknowledged is to be found amongst
the Greek Authors. Why then must this be made a matter of Triumph? It remains
still to inquire whether they understand it of a change of Substance, which is
our only Question. Moreover Mr. Arnaud must not think to draw advantage from
John Veccus the Patriarch of Constantinople's Letter in that the Confession of
Faith contained therein is not expressed in the same Terms, as that sent by
Clement and Gregory, which was signed and sworn to by the Emperors
Ambassador, and by the Greeks Legate in the Council at Lions, for it appears by
reading this Letter, and comparing it with the Formulary of Clement and
Gregory, that in respect of the Articles of Penance, Purgatory, and the
Sacraments, it is the same thing, and the same expressions, excepting some
slight alterations which were necessarily made, either to make the Greek Church
speak in its own name, or to reserve as they do the Custom of Confirmation by
the Priests, or else moreover to apply to their leavened Bread, what is not
said in the other, but only of the Azyme. But as to essential Terms, and those
that respect the Doctrinal Part, they are absolutely the same, and we must make
the same Judgment of them.

WE may likewise justly rank amongst the number of Mr. Arnaud's Illusions the
Testimonies of several latinizing Greeks, who left their Religion to embrace
the Roman. He cites Passages out of Emanuel Calecas, concerning Lib. 3. cap. 9.
whom he says himself, That he was of the Order of Friar Preachers, and wrote
four Books against the Error of the Greeks touching the Procession of the Holy
Ghost. He quotes Cardinal Bessarion, and one Gregory, who both of 'em wrote
against Marc of Ephesus in favor of the Latins to defend what passed in the
Council of Florence. He alleges several Passages out of John Plusiadenus,
Gennadius, Scholarius, and a certain Religious man named Hilarion, all zealous
Defenders of the same Council, all of 'em openly engaged in the Defense and
Propogation of the Roman Doctrines. Every man sees that such kind of Persons as
these are no more fit to decide our Question, than Thomas Aquinas would be, or
the Trent Fathers, and that it is not fair to bring in such Persons for
Witnesses in this Controversy.

MR. Arnaud will say without doubt he has alleged them only, because they
reproached not the Greeks with their not believing Transubstantiation. But if
he proposed to himself no other advantage, it was not necessary for this to
cite their Passages at length, as he has done, nor mark in great Characters the
places wherein they assert the change of Substance, to dazzle the Reader's Eyes.
It were sufficient to rank these Authors in general amongst the Latins, and
reduce the advantage he would draw from their Silence to this negative
Argument, which we will examine in the sequel of this Discourse; which consists
in that the Latins never accused the Greeks for their not believing the
substantial Conversion. But howsoever it were a just thing to lay aside all
these Passages, as absolutely fruitless and impertinent, and if there be any
reflection to be made on their Silence, it shall be taken notice of in its
proper place.

NEITHER is it less just to retrench from this Dispute all doubtful Authors,
which is to say, such concerning whom we have no assurance, whether the Works
attributed to them are theirs, nor indeed whether there were ever any such
Authors in the World. I put immediately in this Rank Samonas the pretended
Bishop of Gaza. Mr. Arnaud bestirs himself to prove contrary to Mr. Aubertin's
Conjecture, that in the Thirteenth Century, which is to say, in the time
wherein this Archbishop of Gaza is reckoned to have lived, there were Greek
Bishops in Palestine. But he does not undertake to show that Samonas was of
this number, nor that any Person ever mentioned him. There are, says he, five
hundred Treatises of the Fathers, which must be rejected, if it were sufficient
to respect them as Apochryphal, that they were not cited by others. His five
hundred Treatises I grant; but there are not five hundred Fathers of whom no
body ever made mention, and which are not named by others. When a name of an
Author is unknown to Authors that lived in the same Age, and those that follow,
this is certainly a sufficient reason to make his Book suspected. Mr. Arnaud
then needed not find it strange, if we place his Samonas in this order, till
such time as he has more clearly proved his Authority. Supposing Mr. Aubertin
was mistaken in his Conjecture, and that there were indeed Greek Bishops in
Palestine, when the Saracens possessed it, this does not conclude that Samonas
was of this number, nor that his Dispute against Achmet was real. Mr. Arnaud's
Custom is, that when he finds any trivial matter, although of never so little
importance to our Controversy, to stick at it, and use his utmost skill
thereon, to the end, that under the favor of these vain Triumphs, he may
conceal his weakness in Matters of greater moment. Which is what he has done in
this occasion; for seeing he could not give any color to the Testimony of this
Samonas, he therefore falls upon Criticizing; and heats himself to show there
were in the Thirteenth Century Greek Bishops in Palestine, under the Empire of
the Saracens, and by this pretense would obtrude on us this Passage of Samonas.

WE may likewise reckon amongst this Rank of suspected Authors, One Agapius,
whom Mr. Arnaud says was a Monk of Mount Athos, from whom Lib. 4. cap. 8.
Mr. Arnaud has taken some Passages. I believe his Collections are true, and
that he has faithfully translated them. But what assurance have we this was not
a counterfeit Author? Mr. Arnaud tells us, that he lately met with this Book
written in Vulgar Greek. This accidental meeting does already disgust me, as if
'twere mere chance that brought him acquainted with this Author. And yet we
know well enough how careful those of the Roman Church are, to gather up these
kind of pieces that are favorable to them; and which may serve them as well
against the Greeks as Protestants, especially such as this, which expressly
denotes Christ's Substance under the Accidents and Appearances of Bread and
Wine. They could find nothing so emphatical in any other Author; how then comes
it to pass they neglected this Agapius, and that in such a manner, that, Mr.
Arnaud who has his Correspondents every where, in Italy, Greece, Sweedland,
Moscovia, and Syria, yet should light of this Book only by Chance? He tells us
this Book, was perhaps wrote during the time wherein Cyrillus was Patriarch,
for Cyrillus dyed but in the Year 1638, and this Religious's Book was Printed
at Venice till 1641. If this be all that can be said in this Matter, every one
will judge this is not sufficient to give Credit to a Book. The Printing
Presses at Venice are no more free from Fraud and Fiction, than those of other
Cities. Tam ficti pravique tenax quam nuncia very.


CYRILLUS his Confession, offended the Latins sufficiently enough to Oblige
them to Oppose against him a Testimony so Express and Authentic as this is.
Being an Author, a Religious of Mount Athos, of this Mount which according to
Mr. Arnaud is the Seminary of Religious for the whole East, and whose Faith he
says, is that of all the Greek Churches, how then has it happened they have so
much slighted him, as not to produce him against Cyrillus: Caryophylus wrote a
Treatise on purpose to Refute this Patriarchs Confession; but he Apud Habert in
Archierat.
makes no mention therein of Agapius. Leo Allatius has outragiously used the
same Patriarch in his Book, de Perpetua Consensione, and has not failed to
describe at length the Councils of Cyrillus de Berrhaea, and Parthenius; but he
mentions not a word of Agapius. The aforesaid Allatius wrote a Book against Dr.
Creygton, wherein he endeavors to prove the Greeks believe Transubstantiation.
He has made a Collection of whatsoever favors his Cause out of all Authors,
whether Prints or Manuscripts. Mr. Arnaud knows it very well, seeing it is from
thence he has taken his most specious Arguments; but he tells us not a Word of
Agapius, which makes me justly Suspect, that it is the Work of some Imposture:
But be it as it will, it is silly to Triumph with it, till it is proved
Authentic.

IN fine, to clear the Dispute of all Impertinencies, and Illusions with which
Mr. Arnaud has pestered it, we must retrench the Testimonies of the false
Greeks, that is to say of those, who having bin brought up in Latin Seminaries,
(and being in their Hearts Romanists) yet Live in the Communion of the Greek
Schismatical Church, and even sometimes Possess the highest Dignities. Gerganus
Bishop of Arta in the Epistle before his Catechism complains In Refuta.
Caryophr.
very much against these sort of People. He says they are secret Enemies,
outwardly seem to be Greeks, but are Latins in their Hearts, and Caryophilus
that relates this Complaint of Gerganus, agrees in this Particular. We have
already seen by Report of the Jesuits themselves, that one of the chiefest
Employs of the Missionaries in the East, is to gain privately the Bishops and
Priests, to make use of them upon Occasion, or insensibly to insinuate the
Romish Faith into the Minds of the Greek Youth, under Pretense of teaching them
Languages and Philosophy, that by this means they may fill by degrees the
Ecclesiastical Charges with their Creatures. We have already seen even by the
Testimony of Allatius and Thomas a Jesu, that this is the Advantage received
from the Seminary at Rome, wherein Greek Children are brought up in the
Opinions and Maxims of the Roman Church, and from whence they are sent into
their own Countries, to receive Orders from Schismatical Bishops, to the end
they may be promoted to Bishoprics by the Schismatical Patriarchs, and carry
on the Latin Interest under this false Pretense. I do not pretend to decide
here the Question whether this way of Proceeding be justifiable or not, this
being not my Business: Let every Man judge thereof as he pleases. But I Affirm,
it is not possible for People to be more disingenuously dealt with, than we are
by Mr. Arnaud, in making use of the Testimony of these Persons, whereby to
decide the Question between us. If this be his way of Confounding Ministers,
and Triumphing at their Defeat, his Victories indeed will be easy, but his
Triumph neither Honorable nor Just: Is it not a disingenuous Artifice thus to
make use (as he has done) of the Mystery of the Missions and Seminaries to
blind the World, imagining his indirect Dealing will escape being taken Notice
of.

AND thus does Mr. Arnaud gloriously retayl out to us the Testimony of Paysius
Ligaridius together with the Letters of Mr. de Pompone his Nephew. He first
produces some Collections out of him, Translated into our Language, and in fine
has Translated his Treatise into Latin, and inserted it in his 12th. Book.
Would we know who this Paysius Ligaridius is, observe what Mr. Pompone has writ
of him in his Letter. He is a Greek, says he, by Nation, and a Religious of
the Order of St. Basil: He was sometime a Student at Rome and Padoua, and being
returned from thence to Constantinople, was made Archbishop of Gaza in
Palestine. Mr. Pompone seems to make this Acknowledgment with some kind of
Constraint. I the rather tell you, says he, whatsoever I know of this
Archbishop, because I do not doubt, but some Calvinists here, have given notice
of this Treatise to Mr. Claude, and informed him he ought to be Suspected,
seeing he was Educated at Rome, and went out Doctor at Padoua, so that he may
think his Testimony ought to be rejected, being brought up in our Religion.
Should we not have known then of Mr. Pompone, what kind of Man this Archbishop
was, were it not for that he feared some Calvinists at Stockholm would give an
Account of him to Claude the Minister? Alas, we are not beholding to him for
his Account, for we can be informed elsewhere, by a Latiniz'd Greek at Venice,
who goes under the Name of Signor Gradenigo; observe what he lately Wrote
concerning him. Paysius Ligaridius studied at Rome, and when he left that City,
was a Zealous Defendor of the Latins, but I heard since he has publicly
abjured the Romish Religion, when made Metropolitain of Gaza.

TO give the World a more particular Character of this Person, and such as are
like him, it will not be amiss to relate at large this Abjuration mentioned by
Signor Gradenigo. Observe here then what Dr. Bazire an English Divine, (whose
Testimony I have already Cited) wrote to me, who was present at Jerusalem, when
Paysius was made Archbishop of Gaza. In the Year 1646, says he, during the
Troubles in England, King Charles the first of Blessed Memory, sent me over
from England to France, to his Son then Prince of Wales, my now gracious
Sovereign Charles the Second, whom God grant long to Reign. After an abode of
two Years in France, I resolved to make a long Voyage, and to visit all Syria,
Mesopotamia, and Palestine, which I did in five Years time. Being in the Year
1652 at Jerusalem in the Temple of the Sepulcher, (...), to pray and behold the
Holy Places, in Imitation of that Alexander mentioned by Eusebius in the sixth
Book of his Ecclesiastical History, Paysius Ligaridius, came to me from the
Patriarch of Constantinople, (whose Name likewise was Paysius,) to present me
with a Cake, on which was described the whole History of our Savior from his
Annunciation to his Ascension, and in leaving me, Invited me to be present on
the Morrow at his Spiritual Marriage; these were his Expressions, meaning his
Installment into the Dignity of Metropolitain of Gaza. The next Day being the
fourteenth of September 'twas performed, and I was present at the Ceremony. The
Patriarch sat upon his Throne, which was hung with rich Turkey Carpets, and
under him sat the Metropolitains, and a little lower the Bishops,
Archimandrites, etc. Whilst the Office was Celebrating, Ligaridius rehearsed a
Confession of Faith, a Copy of which he afterward gave me: Before his
Consecration, he twice or thrice, trampled under his Feet a Picture which
represented a City situated on seven Hills, with a two headed Eagle, soaring
over it: The Latins there present were extremely offended thereat, for they
knew well enough this City represented Rome. After the Consecration was ended,
I withdrew into a public House of Entertainment in the City, where the Latins
usually resorted, where being at Dinner, I shared my Cake amongst the Company,
giving part of it to the Popes Vicar, the Gray Friars and Priest that dined
with us, who kindly accepted it. But when I would have done the like to the
Laity there present, they refused it with the greatest Detestation, saying
'twas the Cake of that Schismatic Ligaridius, who even now trampled under his
Feet the City and Church of Rome. After Dinner the Popes Vicar, who was a
learned and honest Man, began a Discourse with me touching the Invocation of
Saints, and especially of the Holy Virgin; and as I was about alleging to him
a Passage out of St. Epiphanus, Ligaridius came in and interrupted our
Discourse. He began immediately to desire the Company not to be offended at
what he had done: his Excuse was pleasant, for he told us he thought of nothing
less than the City of Rome in this Action, but by this Ceremony practiced in
the Greek Church, he meant the trampling under his Feet the Vanities of the
World represented by this City, and the renouncing of them; Yet this Excuse was
not well taken by the Vicar, who was a wiser Man than to be content therewith.
When he was gone, he told me that he was a notorious Hypocrite, and received an
Annual Pension from the Pope, which he had paid him for several Years, but he
should have it no longer for the future. And this is this Paysius Ligaridius,
of whom I shall say no more, but leave the Reader to judge of the Validity of
such a Man's Testimony.

ANY Man may likewise judge of the Writings of a certain Moldavian Gentleman,
called the Baron of Spartaris, whom Mr. Arnaud Cites together with Mr. Pompone
his Nephews Letter. In which amongst other things there are these Expressions:
He agrees in general with us in all things, excepting one Particular, namely
the Procession of the Holy Ghost. He comes every Holyday to my House to Mass,
and excepting the Creed wherein he forgets the Filioque, there is not a better
Catholic in the World. Is not this the exact Character of one of those false
Greeks already mentioned by us, who are Greeks with the Greeks, and Latins with
the Latins? Who knows not that the Greeks, I mean the Reconciled ones, as they
are called, differ from the Latins, not only in that they omit the Filioque in
the Creed; but likewise in the use of Leavened Bread, in the Communion under
both kinds, and in abundance of Ceremonies? That those called Schismatics
abhor carved Images, and Invoke not the Latin Saints, nor Believe Purgatory,
reject the Primacy of the Roman and Bishop, and will not Communicate with the
Latins, and so greatly abhor their Sacrifice, that when a Latin Priest says
Mass on one of their Altars, they Wash and Purify it several times, as having
bin Polluted? Mr. Pompone was deceived when the supposed the nearer his Barons
Religion approached to that of the Latins, the more his Uncles Cause was
advantaged, when on the contrary by this Means, the Quality of this Witness is
discovered, and his Testimony appears plainly Invalid. An Excess of Zeal made
Mr. Pompoue go too far, but thus it pleased God to order it, to the end our
Innocence and Simplicity might not be Surprised with these kind of Delusions.
As to what remains, I shall only here Observe the Imprudence of his Witness,
who assures us, that every Year on the first Sunday in Lent, which the Greeks
call the Orthodox Sunday, the Patriarch of Constantinople excommunicates in his
Patriarchal Temple in the Presence of the Archbishops, and Bishops, and also of
the Ambassadors of Christian Kings and Princes, all Heretics, and especially
those, says he, that Oppose Transubstantiation; Mr. Arnaud has caused to be
Printed in great Characters these Words, Maxim vero qui Transubstantiationi
adversantur. Not Remembering that he himself related the Terms of this
Excommunication, wherein there is not a word said touching Transubstantiation,
nor those that Oppose it. Were what the Baron Spataris says true, Mr. Arnaud
has bin Treacherous to his own Cause in suppressing so important and decisive a
Clause, and has bin at a great deal of Pains to no purpose in all this Dispute,
seeing he might have produced this Excommunication and stuck to it.

THAT which we have already seen touching Paysius Ligaridius, and the Moldavian
Gentleman, may serve as a Rule whereby to judge of the Testimony of some Greek
Priests, under the Patriarchate of Antioch. The Care the Emissaries take to
make Proselytes in this Country, will make us cease wondering that there should
be six Greek Priests found ready to acknowledge and sign whatsoever was offered
them. Moreover they live near the Maronites, who have bin (as it is well known)
long since Reunited to the Church of Rome, and governed by Persons who favor
the Propagating of the Latins Doctrines. Cyrillus when Patriarch of Alexandria,
seems to have foretold what has now happened, in his Letter to Wytemboyard; The
Principal, says he, of the Maronites professes the Roman Religion, and the
Patriarchate of Antioch lying near them, I am afraid it will be Corrupted,
although they are advertised of this Danger by that Patriarch, and also by my
self. As to the Synod held at Cyprus in the Year 1688: it is well known this
Island has bin under the Direction of the Roman Prelate and Latin Bishops,
since the thirteenth Century to the Year 1571, in which time the Turks took it
from the Venetians. We need not then wonder if the People thereof follow the
Doctrine of the Latins, especially considering the Pope has still kept up his
Emissaries there from that time. The two Treatises mentioned by Mr. Arnaud,
carry with 'em such Marks as will easily discover them: For the first of them
begins thus, some generous Vide lib. 12. Mr. Arnaud.
French Priests have addressed themselves to us, and requested our Opinion
touching the Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist. The other, that it was
Transcribed from the Acts of the Synod, at the Request of the Reverend Father
Francis de Brisac a Capucin and one of the Emissaries of the Holy Mission of
Larnece. All this is only an Effect of the Missions; and Mr. Arnaud would have
bin never the less esteemed, had he made no use of these Testimonies, for such
kind of Proofs as these will never terminate the Difference betwixt us, seeing
there are on the other side solid Reasons, and authentic Testimonies against
him.

CHAP. IV.
The Testimonies of some Protestants alleged by Mr. Arnaud, touching the
Belief of the Greeks, Answered.

IT appears already that Mr. Arnaud must have greatly abridged his Dispute
touching the Greeks, had he designed to clear it from all its Illusions; and
had reduced it into a lesser Volumn still, had he retrenched all the needless
Matters it contains. I place in this Rank the Testimonies of some Protestants
which he alleges, who seem to acknowledge, either by a formal Declaration, or
by their Silence, that, the Greeks do not differ from the Latins in the Subject
of Transubstantiation. I confess he has not made a Proof thereof, as knowing
the Matter would not bear it, yet has wrote an express Chapter about it, and
produces them with a great deal of Art and Pomp, hoping by this means to make
some Impression on the Mind of his Readers, and prepossess them with this
Imagination, that I alone amongst all the Protestants deny the Greeks believe
Transubstantiation.

THE first he produces is Crusius Professor in the University of Tubinga, who
says, that the Greeks believe the Bread is changed into the Body of Jesus
Christ, and the Wine into his Blood; but this is not Transubstantiation, there
being a vast Difference betwixt this and that. Crusius relates the Terms which
they use, and this is not Contested, the Question is whether by these Terms,
they mean a real Conversion of Substances: Which is what we deny.

HE offers us likewise something out of Grotius against Rivet, and sets again
before us the Testimony of Forbesius Bishop of Edinburg. But we all know these
two Persons (although otherwise learned enough, especially Grotius) suffered
themselves to be carried away by Prejudices and whimsical Projects, in relation
to the Differences between the two Churches, which they pretended to Reconcile
and Accomodate, and thereupon wrote several things which they did not thoroughly
Examine. Moreover Grotius in those Passages alleged by Mr. Arnaud, speaks not
of Transubstantiation in particular, and Forbesius only says, that 'twas
received by most of the Greeks, by most: Here Is a Restriction, Mr. Arnaud says
that Forbesius does not prove it. But whether he proves it or not, we do not
much matter, for it is not by such a man, and his Writings that we are willing
to regulate our Sentiments. It lies upon Mr. Arnaud who cites him, to see
whether the Testimony of such a man be sufficient. He adds, he alleges him
neither as a Catholic nor Protestant, but as a learned Man well skilled in all
the Religions of Europe, and as a great Traveller: that he quotes him as St.
Augustine quoted Tichonius to confirm an important Matter of Fact acknowledged
by this Donatist, who was more sincere than his Fellows.

BUT how comes he to forget so soon the Qualification which the Author of the
Perpetuity gave him, in citing him? Forbesius, says he, one of the most learned
amongst the English Protestants. What account does he think we will make of a
Person whom he can neither alledg as a Protestant nor Catholic, and yet lived
in the midst of the Protestants, he alleges him, says he, as a learned Man, I
grant he may be so. But was this learned Man a Jew, Turk, or Moor, whilst
Bishop of Edinburg? St. Augustine never alleged Tichonius as a Person of this
kind, that was neither Catholic, nor Donatist, but as a real Donatist, although
Tichonius sincerely acknowledged a Truth which the rest denied, accordingly as
we alledg often the Doctors of the Roman Church, which acknowledge those things
others deny, although we do not thence infer they are not of that Religion they
Profess.

FELAVIUS adds Mr. Arnaud, derides the Insolence of Hottinger, who Page 131.
pretends to make advantage of Cyrillus his Confession, and shows it does in no
wise contain the Faith of the Eastern Churches. Felavius does not speak of
Hottinger's Infolence, but on the contrary calls him Virum doctissimum,
Clarissimum Hottingerum. He grants not indeed with Hottinger, that Cyrillus his
Confession Praefat. ad Christoph. Angel.
contains the Doctrine of the Greek Church, and shows his Reasons, but inveighs
not against Hottinger thereupon, nor particularly mentions Transubstantiation.

OF all those that Mr. Arnaud alleges, there are only Sands, and Dannhaverus
Professor of Strasbourg, who attribute this Doctrine to the Greeks, and Sands
adds a term of Restriction, saying, that in the main, they do in a manner agree
with the Church of Rome, in the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, etc. But for
two Authors, who perhaps wrote this without much Reflection, how many others
can we produce, who stick not to deny there is any Conformity in this Article
between the Greeks and Latins? For not to mention here Kemnitius, Boxornius,
Hospinian and Episcopius, whom Mr. Arnaud grants to be of this number, we may
here name the famous Bishop Morton, the Author of a Book entitled, Catholic
Tradition, or a Treatise touching the Belief of the Christians of Asia, Europe,
and Africa. The Learned Saddeel for whom Henry the IV. had such great Esteem
and Kindness. Mr. Mestrezat, Monsieur Ulric Minister of Zurich, Mr. Hottinger
Professor in the same City, Mr. Robert Chreygton an English Doctor who
published the History of Syropulus, and several others which I mention not,
because it is not necessary to make an exact enumeration of them. It is
sufficient that Mr. Arnaud knows I mean the general Opinion of the most Learned
Protestants in this particular.

IF some amongst them, as Chytreus, Breerwood, and Hornbeck for Instance, who
discourse of the Religion of the Greeks, say nothing concerning the Article of
Transubstantiation, Mr. Arnaud must not think to draw Advantage from their
Silence. The reason of their Silence is, that they set not themselves to the
describing any other Points but those that have bin expressly Controverted
between the Greek and Latin Church, that is to say, such Points as have bin
openly and solemnly Debated on both sides, such as the Article of the
Procession of the Holy Ghost, that of the Azymes, that of Purgatory, and some
others. All that then can be gathered from this Silence is, that the Greeks
never openly quarrelled with the Latins about Transubstantiation, nor the
Latins with the Greeks, and that both one and the other contented themselves in
keeping their own Sentiments and particular manner of Expressions, without
condemning one another. But as it does not hence follow, that the Greeks
received the Doctrine of the Latins, so we must not take the Silence of
Chytreus, Breerwood, nor Hornbeck for an Acknowledgment, or tacit Confession,
that there is no difference in this Point between the two Churches. Which is
what I already answered to the Author of the Perpetuity, who would have
prevailed by the Silence of Breerwood, in relation to the other Schismatical
Communions. For I told him, that this Author does only transiently observe
Answer to the Perp P 3 C. 8.
the most common different Religions, contenting himself to say what People
Embrace, or what they positively and expressly Reject, without proceeding to
mention things which they believe not by way of Negation, as not having heard
of them. That is to say, as neither finding them in the Articles proposed to
'em to Believe, nor in those which they were made expressly to Renounce, as I
have already explained. Mr. Arnaud sets himself against this Answer, and says,
I Lib. 2. C. 4. p. 133.
show by this, that provided I say any thing it is enough, for I trouble not my
self whether it be Rational or not. But if he Believes my Discourse to be
Irrational, it lies upon him to show the Absurdity of it, without
Misrepresenting my Sense, and beating the Air as he does. There is certainly no
Discourse more reasonable than that against which an Adversary is forced to
betake himself to Illusions and Wranglings about Terms, for this is a sign he
cannot attack it fairly with downright Blows.

AS to Mr. Aubertin, of whom Mr. Arnaud says, he has tempered himself, and
that although he be otherwise one of the Confidentest Men in the World, in
asserting Ibid. p. 137.
Untruths, yet it appears he finds himself gravelled in the Subject of the
Greeks, and therefore falls to searching Means to escape. I answer, Mr. Arnaud
himself is one of the boldest Men in the World at accusing Persons, and yet
proves his Accusations the worst of any man, as appears in this whole
Controversy, so that what he says touching Mr. Aubertin's Falsities, being
grounded only on his own Word, signifies nothing, in respect of the Greeks;
it is true that Mr. Aubertin has not thoroughly handled the Question of their
Belief, because his Design did not oblige him to do it, for intending only to
show the Innovation which has bin made in the Church of Rome, in the Subject of
the Eucharist, he has sufficiently done it without needless Enlargings on the
Greeks. He says something of them by the way, he explained some Passages out of
Anastasius Sinaite, Germane Patriarch of Constantinople, Damascen, the second
Council of Nice, Theophylact, Euthymius, Nicholas Methoniensis, Jeremias, and
some others. It Is true he conjectured that the Error of the Western people has
communicated it self to several of those of the East, toward the end of the
twelveth Century, there having bin a more free Commerce between them after the
Conquest of the Holy Land. Yet has he sufficiently showed, that although the
Expressions of the modern Greeks, appeared to him Obscure, Excessive, and
Different from those of the Ancients, yet did he not believe, they embraced the
Transubstantiation of the Latins, and it is upon this ground, that speaking of
Cyrillus, he says that he returned to the ancient Faith, and spoke better of
this Mystery than others. This shows us he observed there was more Confusion
and Ambiguity in the others, and more Plainness and Distinctness in the
Patriarch Cyrillus, but not that he believed the Greek Church received the
Doctrine of the Substantial Conversion, nor that she held the Substance of
Bread ceases, for he expressly maintains the contrary.

ALL the rest of Mr. Arnaud's Discourse consisting only of Heats and Invectives
against me, and my Cause receiving no Prejudice thereby, I freely make thereof
a Sacrifice to piety, and Christian Meekness.

CHAP. V.
Mr. Arnaud's negative Arguments drawn from the Silence of the Greeks and
Latins, on the Article of Transubstantiation Examined.

ALTHOUGH the third order of Proofs which Mr. Arnaud has made use of, consists to
speak properly, only in one single Argument, yet this Argument takes up as much
room as all the rest of the Dispute. Mr. Arnaud has so great love for this
Proof, that he is never weary with offering it us. He concludes all his
Histories with it, he makes it the matter of most of his Chapters, and the
perpetual Subject of his Reflections: If he explains to us the Sentiments of
Theophylact, Euthymius, Cabasilas, Simeon Thessaloniensis, he forgets not to
observe they did not Believe that the Greeks had any other Faith than the
Latins, touching the Eucharist, seeing they made no mention of it: If he
relates to us the Conquests which the Latins made in the East during the
twelv'th Century, he fails not to conclude thence, that the Greeks and they,
not reproaching one another on this Subject, it is a Sign they were agreed in
it: If he reckons up to us other Greeks who wrote against the Roman Church, or
Latins that wrote against the Greeks, it is only to draw this Consequence
thence, that there having never bin any Controversy touching
Transubstantiation, it is a Sign these two Churches were agreed in that point:
If he has Occasion to mention the taking of Constantinople, and the
Establishment of the Latins in the Greek Empire, one of the Uses he makes
thereof, is besure to let us know, that seeing there was no public Dispute on
the Article of the Substantial Conversion, they all equally Believed it. It Is
for this purpose he relates the Treaties of Agreement, Formularies of Reunions,
and what passed in the Council of Lions and Florence. In fine, this is his
dearly beloved Argument which he Repeats a hundred times over, without any
Alteration but that of the Terms, and Circumstances he represents it withal.

IT must be acknowledged Mr. Arnaud has some reason to please himself in this
Proof, and to bring it in again so often as he does, for this is the most
specious and best colored Pretense in the whole Dispute, although at bottom,
there will be found no Solidity in it. Which I shall demonstrate in this
Chapter, in which I hope to show clearly the Nullity of his Consequence drawn
from the Silence of the Greeks. For this effect, I shall make use of two sorts
of Means, the one shall show that there is not only a great deal of Weakness,
but Falsity in his Argument, the rest discover wherein this Weakness and
Falsity do consist, the one shall be more General and less Direct, the others
Particular and Direct.

I. FIRST it may here seem strange that Mr. Arnaud who so strictly urges the
Silence of the Greeks and Latins, does not remember what the Author of the
Perpetuity answered to my Proof drawn from the Silence of the Pagans, who
upbraided not the Primitive Christians with Transubstantiation, and the
Consequence I drew from the Silence of the Fathers, who mention not a word of
the many Miracles which Transubstantiation Includes in it. Who knows not, says
he, in general how weak these kind of Probabilities are, and that Perp. of the
Faith Refut. 1. part. p. 121, 122, 123.
there are abundance of things which might be said by the Pagans, or Fathers,
which never came to our Knowledge? And a little farther, Books contain the least
part of Men's Thoughts and Discourses. It Is Chance, or some particular Accident
which determines them to conserve to Posterity some one of their Thoughts,
suffering abundance of others to be lost, which were more common to them, and
many times more important. Perhaps, says he, the Pagans never discoursed of the
Eucharist, and perhaps again they did. How comes it to pass that in so short a
time the negative Argument, which was in my Hands but a weak Probability,
becomes in those of Mr. Arnaud a puissant Demonstration? The things which were
said by the Greeks or Latins during three or four hundred Years, are no more
come to our Knowledge, than the Discourses of the Pagans, or those of the
Fathers, and the Books which have bin written touching these two Churches the
Latin and the Greek, contain no more men's Thoughts than those which were
written concerning the Pagans, or those the Fathers wrote on the Subject of
Christian Religion.

IT seems these Gentlemen Consult only their own Interest: When any Authors
savor them, they are worthy of public Praise, and when they do not, they
deserve to be Contemned, and their Arguments become strong or weak, good or
bad, accordingly as they are serviceable, or otherwise. It is certain if Mr.
Arnaud's and my Proof be compared together in respect of Form, they are equal;
for we suppose the same Principles, and draw thence the same Consequences; but
if they be compared in respect of the matter, the Advantage is wholly on my
side, for all the Circumstances strengthen my Argument, whereas they weaken
his. The Pagans were Learned, they had the Power in their Hands, they needed
not dissemble with the Christians: They knew very well the Doctrines of
Christianity. The matter concerned the pulling down of their Altars, and they
were interessed to conserve their ancient Religion, to decry these Novelties
which had introduced themselves into the World. There can be nothing said like
this, concerning the Greeks, as will appear in the Sequel of this Chapter: And
yet my Argument is not Conclusive in the Author of the Perpetuity's Judgment,
and Mr. Arnaud's Argument, if we believe himself, is undeniably Evident; that
is to say, these Gentlemen bestow on Arguments, when they are pleased to make
use of them, the Title of good ones, but when the same Arguments are urged
against them then they become bad ones. This partiality proceeds only from
prejudice.

BUT in the second place, without wandering from the Subject in Hand, I can
oppose against Mr. Arnaud's negative Proof, several other Proofs of the like
kind I have already made use of in the preceding Book, which conclude with a
thousand times more strength than his, and consequently deserve to be preferred
before them, according to the Rules of right Reason. The Greeks in explaining
the Mystery of the Eucharist, do assert neither the Existence of Accidents
without a Subject, nor the Concomitancy, or Existence of the Body of Christ in
the Eucharist after the manner of Spirits, nor his Existence in several places.
They trouble not themselves with inquiring how our Bodies are nourished when
they receive the Sacrament, nor of what matter the Worms are formed which are
bred in the Eucharist, nor several other Questions. In short they mention not a
Word touching any of the natural Consequences of Transubstantiation, which a
man cannot but consider, and which common Sense discovers without the help of
any Philosophy; as I already showed in the tenth Chapter of the foregoing Book.

ALL that I now desire is, that my negative Proofs be compared with that Proof
Mr. Arnaud draws from the Greeks not making Transubstantiation a point of
Controversy between them and the Latins. The Greeks, says he, have bin silent
on the Transubstantiation of the Latins, they neither opposed nor condemned it;
therefore they believed it as well as the Latins. The Greeks, say I, have for
Example bin silent on the Existence of the Accidents of Bread separated from
their proper Substance, they neither handled this Point, nor so much as made
mention of it, therefore they do not believe it, nor consequently
Transubstantiation. Mr. Arnaud must acknowledge that my Proof is far more
conclusive than his, for it is a thousand times more natural for people that
hold the Substance of Bread ceases, and yet and taste behold all the Qualities,
and Properties thereof to consider how these things subsist, or at least to
speak in some sort of it, than it is natural to those that do not believe
Transubstantiation, to reproach them with it, that do believe it. If we weigh
all Circumstances, we shall find, the Commerce the Greek Doctors have had
either with their own people, or with themselves, in reflecting on what fell
under their Sense, has bin more particular and frequent than that which they
have had with the Latins. That which they saw and believed has bin more
distinctly known to them, than what the Latins taught, or Gregory the VII, or
Innocent the III. determined in their Councils. The Interest of quieting their
own Consciences and satisfying their own Minds, must needs be more prevalent
with them, than that of quarrelling with the Latins. The occasions of
satisfying themselves, and instructing their people oftener presented
themselves, than those of condemning strangers, with whom they dealt only by
their Ambassadors and Interpreters. The reasons of their Silence, in respect
of the Latins, are easilyer found out, than those which would oblige them to be
silent, in respect of themselves. For what signifies the telling us the Glory
of God, and Respect to his Mysteries were the cause of their Silence touching
the Existence of the Accidents without a Subject; For this same Glory of God,
and respect to his Mysteries would engage them to declare the reasons of their
Silence, to the end they may be known to all the Faithful under their Charge,
and to exhort them to the same Silence. Were I willing to enlarge my Book after
Mr. Arnaud's Example, who has hunted after little Stories whereby to bring over
again a hundred times the same Argument, I should tire my Readers Patience, for
I could argue touching all the Occasions the Greeks have had to see, and
administer the Eucharist, to discourse, and partake of it, the Easters in which
time the people do universally Communicate, touching the Sick that desire it,
and received it, the Books wherein they explained the Mystery of it; and in
general touching whatsoever may administer them an Occasion of considering the
Accidents, and I might as often draw this Conclusion that they do not believe
Transubstantiation, seeing they have said nothing concerning this pretended
Miracle of the Existence of Accidents separated from their Subject.

IT IS the same with the other Consequences of the substantial Conversion. A Man
needs only his Eyesight to assure himself that if what we receive in the
Eucharist be really and substantially the natural Body of Christ, according to
the Sense of the Latins, it is not in the usual form of a humane Body; whence
there immediately arises this Consideration, how it can be without this Form.
How it can be in a place after an unlocal manner, neither palbable, nor
divisible, thus more like a Spirit than a Body, and yet without Motion, Sense,
or Action, and in this more like an inanimate Body than a Spirit. A Man needs
but little Sense to comprehend, that if the Substance of Bread ceases, there
can be nothing found in the Eucharist to which may be attributed the effect of
the Nourishment we receive thence. Neither needs there much Study to find out,
that if the Substance of the natural Body of Christ be present in the
Sacrament, he is then in several places at the same time, to wit, in Heaven,
and on all the Altars whereon are celebrated this divine Mystery; Yet do they
make no mention of these things.

WE have seen that one of their Opinions is, that the Wicked do not receive
Christ's Body in the Sacrament. Now every Man sees this Doctrine does not well
agree with Transubstantiation, in as much, as that on one Hand, it is held the
Bread is made the Body of the Son of God in propriety of Substance, and on the
other, that the Wicked in receiving it, eat not this Body. Whence it follows
according to all Rules of Sense, that they are obliged to endeavor to make
these two Opinions agree, and remove the contrariety which appears betwixt
them. Yet so far are they from troubling themselves about this, that we find
not this Contrariety, (whether real or imaginary) ever entered into their
Thoughts.

NOW let any Man compare the Arguments we draw from their Silence touching all
these Consequences, with that of Mr. Arnaud's; and faithfully tell us, whether
ours are not more Conclusive and Evident than his. We have proposed several
things which the Greeks might know without any Study, Reflection, Attention of
Mind, Legates, and Interpreters, only by the sight of their Eyes, and help of
common Sense; Affairs which were neither carried on by Intrigues, Negotiations,
nor public Respects; and wherein the Silence of the Greeks is certain, there
being no likelihood but if they spoke of 'em, we should be soon made to know
it, and concerning which, in fine, they could not be silent as they are,
without doing a notable Prejudice to Religion, and an extraordinary Violence to
Nature. Whereas Mr. Arnaud only offers us one thing, which can scarcely be
known by any but the Learned, and which requires also great attention of Mind,
and reading; a matter which for the most part was in the hands of some
Deputies, and managed by the help of Interpreters, wherein Intrigues and
Interests, Complacency and Fear, and other humane Passions have great share,
and touching which we cannot be assured whether the Silence of the Greeks be
truly such as it is represented to us, seeing we have no more of their Writings
but what the Latins were pleased to give us. A matter in fine, in which the
Greeks might be silent without offering any Violence to themselves, and without
believing they did any Wrong to their Religion. I shall show this more largely
hereafter, what I now mentioned being only to facilitate the comparison of my
Proofs with that of Mr. Arnaud's, to the end the Readers may more clearly and
exactly judge of them.

III. IN the third place, it is necessary that my first Proofs which I offered
in the foregoing Book, be remembered, which were taken from that the Greeks do
not teach the Doctrine of Transubstantiation in express terms, I mean the
substantial Conversion asserted by the Latins; that they receive not the
Councils which have determined it, that they will not use the term of (...),
that they explain themselves only in general Terms, which may be understood in
another Sense, and which at farthest can admit only of a general Sense; and
that Mr. Arnaud is constrained to betake himself to Consequences and Arguings
to render their Expressions favorable. It is likewise requisite that the
Reader call to mind the solid Grounds on which my Proofs are built, and the
Testimonies I have produced on this Subject, and on the other Hand, the
Illusions I discovered in Mr. Arnaud's Dispute, as well in the formulary of the
Reunion with which he has made such a noise, as the Testimonys of Samonas,
Agapius, the Baron of Spataris, Paysius Ligaridius, the Synod of Cyprus, and
that of some Priests in the Patriarchate of Antioch; for the Truth of my
Principle results from the Examination of all these things, the rest of Mr.
Arnaud's Proofs consisting only in Arguings and Consequences. I would likewise
desire the Reader to compare his negative Argument with mine, and judge which of
the two Consequences is the better. The Greeks (say I) when they explain the
Mystery of the Eucharist, use not the Term of Transubstantiation, nor teach the
thing which this Term signifies, they own not the Councils that have determined
it; and in the rejection of them never except this Article, nor show by any
thing else they are agreed in it. They do not then believe the substancial
Conversion of the Latins. Mr. Arnaud says on the contrary; the Greeks reproach
not the Latins with Transubstantiation, they make not a Dispute thereof, they
condemn it not as an Error; they then Believe it. I say that my Consequence is
evident, certain, immediate, and necessary, whereas Mr. Arnaud's has none of
these Qualities. My Consequence is evident, for it is evident a whole Church
that believes the Conversion of the Substance of Bread into the Substance of
the Body of Christ, and would have her Children Believe it, must needs teach it
them in clear and distinct Terms, and such as are able to form the Idea which
she would have them conceive of it; But the Greek Church does not do this;
therefore she does not believe it. For it would be prodigiously strange that a
Church had, concerning the Change which happens in the Eucharist, a Belief as
distinct and determinate, as is that of the Conversion of one Substance into
another, and yet, could not, or would not explain her self in clear and
distinct Terms, although she finds them already made to her Hands, in the Language
of a Church with whom she agrees in this Point. But this the Greek Church does
not do; She does not thus explain her self, She has not then this Belief. My
Consequence is immediate; for the first and most immediate Obligation, the
first and most immediate Effect which arises from the Belief of
Transubstantiation in a Church that holds it, is that of teaching it, and
explaining how she believes it, that is to say distinctly, for it cannot be
believed otherwise than distinctly: But the Greek Church does not explain her
self distinctly; She does not then believe it. I say in fine, that it is
necessary: For there is nothing that can hinder the Greek Church from
expounding clearly and plainly this Opinion, if she held it: Not the Ignorance
of proper Expressions, for besides that they are easily met with, the Roman
Church furnishes her with them, not the Fear of scandalizing her People, for
the Church of Rome asserts these People have held this Doctrine ever since
Christianity was first planted amongst them, not the fear of scandalizing the
Infidels, for the Turks amongst whom the Greeks live, suffer all sorts of
Religions, and the Latins who were mixed with them, and who scruple not to
explain themselves clearly on this Doctrine, have long since taken away this
Pretense from the Greeks; the fear of offending their Emperors, when they had
'em, could not withold them, for the Greek Emperors as we have already seen,
have almost all of 'em favored the Latins. Much less moreover can it be said
they were hindered by the Fear of the Roman Church, and its Power, for this was
a means on the contrary to obtain her Favor. And yet notwithstanding all this
the Greeks do not assert this Doctrine in clear distinct Terms; therefore they
hold it not.

NOW let a man reflect on the Consequence Mr. Arnaud draws, and he will find
that it has none of these Qualities which I come now from observing in mine. It
is not evident, for what Certainty is there that if a Church does not embrace a
Doctrine, she must therefore immediately condemn it, and make thereof a matter
of Controversy? This Proposition taken in its generality is not only unevident,
but false, and contrary to the Principles of Reason and Scripture. Being
applied in particular to Transubstantiation, it has no Evidence, for it must be
supposed that a Church which does not believe it, considers it in a due manner,
whereby to judge that it is a damnable Error, and that she wants not Knowledge for
the making of this Judgment; and supposing she wants not Knowledge whereby to
make this Judgment, we must farther suppose that she believes her self obliged
to pass this Censure, against a Church from which she is actually separated. We
must besides this, suppose she has Courage enough to do her Duty, and that no
humane Respect can withold her from it. Now it cannot be showed that these
three Suppositions are evident in respect of the Greeks, whence it appears that
Mr. Arnaud's Consequence is of no certainty; for what Certainty is there in a
Consequence that depends on three Suppositions, which are not only very
uncertain, but false, as will appear upon Examination. Neither is it likewise
immediate, for it is certain there is no medium between believing
Transubstantiation, and clearly explaining it, in respect of a Church which is
at full liberty to speak on it what she thinks: But betwixt not believing it,
and making thereof a point of Controversy with Strangers that do believe it,
there is a vast difference. In fine, I say this Consequence has no necessity,
for it might bin hindered by a thousand things, through want of learned Men able
to manage this Controversy, by the temporal Interests of their Empire, and
Church, and fear of provoking the Latins, who have bin almost continually their
Masters, by the Intrigues of their Emperors, and several of their Patriarchs
and Bishops; but especially by a Spirit of Superstition which has occasioned
long since the turning of Religion into childish Ceremonies, neglecting the
Essentials of Christianity to apply themselves to Fopperies.

TO Illustrate more clearly this Comparison, which I desire the Reader to make,
between Mr. Arnaud's negative Arguments and mine, it will be convenient to make
here a general Reflection on the state of our Controversy. The Question between
us is to know whether the Greeks believe Transubstantiation, or not; Mr. Arnaud
has undertaken to prove the Affirmative, and I the Negative. Now this being so,
it is evident I am only obliged to prove my Thesis by negative Arguments. The
Greeks teach not Transubstantiation, nor its necessary and natural
Consequences: therefore they do not believe it. This concludes very well
according to the nature of the Thesis which I defend, and this Proof is
sufficient to satisfy a man's Mind, and decide the Question. But it is not the
same with Mr. Arnaud, for he is obliged to prove his Proposition, not so much
by the Silence of these People, as by their Words, not so much by negative
Arguments, as by positive ones. The Greeks says he, believe
Transubstantiation; which is what he ought to show by affirmative Arguments:
Were then the Conclusion he draws from the Silence of the Greeks, more probable
than it is, yet could it not persuade by it self any reasonable Person. Our
Minds might be perplexed with it, but yet 'twill be still said, we must examine
what the Greeks positively teach touching the Eucharist, and see how they
explain themselves concerning it, because this is the just and only means of
deciding the Question. In effect, if it be true the Greeks teach
Transubstantiation, the negative Arguments drawn from their not making a
Controversy of it with the Latins, are superfluous; the matter is decided, and
we need go no farther; but if it be true on the contrary that they do not teach
it, the negative Arguments are of no Consequence, we must keep to what we find
contained in their form of Doctrine. It is then certain there is more show than
real solidity in this part of Mr. Arnaud's Dispute, and that it is more likely
to divert the Fancy, than satisfy the Judgment. It may dazzle our Eyes by a
false appearance, but cannot instruct us, for it decides nothing, a man still
remains in the desire and necessity of knowing what the Greeks teach. If he
satisfies this Desire, it is sufficient, but if not, his negative Arguments
signify nothing. Mr. Arnaud then might well have spared all those Histories,
Accounts of Reunions, and the enumeration of all the Authors that have treated
on the Differences between the Greeks and Latins. All which has bin to no
purpose, seeing that when we have bestowed never so much time on the Discussion
of these things, we must return again to the principal Point, which is to know
positively what the Greeks teach concerning the Eucharist. For as I now said,
Mr. Arnaud's Proposition being affirmative, to wit, that the Greeks believe
Transubstantiation, he must clearly establish it by affirmative Proofs; for
it is on these alone, whereon depends the decision of the Question, and not on
negative Arguments, drawn from what they do not do.

AND thus far touching my general means: Come we now to Particulars. Mr. Arnaud
pretends that if the Greeks have not heretofore believed Transubstantiation,
nor yet still believe it, they ought to make it a point of Controversy with the
Latins. I answer, the Greeks contented themselves with keeping their own Belief
concerning the Sacrament, and held to their usual Expressions, and have not
admitted the Determinations of Gregory the VII. or Innocent the III. nor the
Doctrine of the Council of Trent; and yet never proceeded to a formal
Condemnation of the Sentiment of the Latins, nor made it a matter of Dispute
and Controversy. In a word, they do neither believe, nor oppose
Transubstantiation: They do not believe it, for it is not to be seen in the
Doctrine of their Church; in their Confessions of Faith, Books of Divinity,
Decisions of their Councils, Liturgies, Catechisms, nor Sermons; neither do
they oppose it, for as far as we can find, they never disputed this Point with
the Latins, nor formally debated it in their ancient Differences. I say, as far
as we can find, for it is impossible but some have Disputed on it, although all
Records thereof have bin lost, or suppressed, seeing none of them ever came to
our Knowledge. But be it as it will, at worst, it only concerns us to know
whether my Answer is reasonable, and whether in effect the Greeks not believing
the Conversion of Substances, it is possible they have not condemned this
Opinion in the Church of Rome. Now I maintain this is not only possible, but
most probable: whence it follows that Mr. Arnaud's Argument is neither
Conclusive in genere necessario nor probabili (as the Schools speak) when we
nearly examine it.

I. To show this, I first of all produce the Example of the Church of Rome it
self, which condemns not several Opinions which she knows are held by
particular Persons, and even by whole Societies too under her Jurisdiction, and
yet does not receive them, nor approve of them. She keeps Silence in their
respect, for Reasons best known to her self, yet would not have it argued from
her Silence, so resolutely as Mr. Arnaud does from that of the Greeks. The
Question whether the Infallibility resides in the Pope, or Council, has
remained hitherto undetermined, several Persons still debate it, and we know
which side the Court of Rome favors; yet we cannot positively say that they
have condemned, or opposed as an Error, the Opinion of those who prefer the
Council above the Pope; and yet, they will be loath men should argue from their
Silence. How long has the Church of Rome suffered the Sentiment of the
Dominicans touching the Conception of the Virgin, without opposing or
condemning it, although she does not approve of it? This Consequence drawn by Mr.
Arnaud is so little solid, and if I may say the Truth, so captious, that
Innocent the X. advised us not to abuse thus the Silence of Persons; for in his
Constitutions wherein he condemns the five Propositions supposed to be taken
out of Jansenius his Writings, he expressly declares that although he has only
condemned these five Propositions, yet he would not have any Man think he
approves by his Silence the rest of that Book. If I say then that the Greeks in
disputing only on some Articles, never pretended to approve by their Silence on
the rest of the Religion of the Latins, much less in particular of the Doctrine
of the substantial Conversion, I assert nothing but what may be judged
Reasonable from the Church of Rome's own Example, and Maxim of Pope Innocent
himself.

IT will not be amiss to observe two things in these Examples I now instanced,
the one, that the Point before us is concerning what passed in the very Bosom
of the Roman Church, between Persons that belonged to it, and whom she is
obliged to instruct and reduce into the right way; and 'thother that she had
just cause to fear, lest under the Favor of this Toleration, the Error would
communicate it self to several Persons, and in fine, the whole Body of the
People be infected with it. Now the first of these things has no place in
reference to the Greeks, for the Point before us does not concern an Opinion
sprung up in their Church, but in a foreign and separate one, and over which
they pretend no Jurisdiction. As to the second thing, I confess, had the Greeks
reflected, as they ought, on this their Silence, they could not but perceive
that the Latins (who make advantage of every thing) would not fail to endeavor
the bringing in of Transubstantiation into Greece, under the benefit of this
Silence, and take from thence occasion to persuade simple People that the two
Churches are agreed in this particular. But how manifest soever this Danger
was, it is clear that that wherein the Church of Rome ventures her self, in
suffering those Opinions to take root which she tolerates in her own Bosom, is
yet more evident; and yet notwithstanding she remains Silent: Which shows the
Vanity of Mr. Arnaud's Consequence. For if the Roman Church can suffer Opinions
in the very midst of her, which she does not approve, why cannot the Greeks use
the same Forbearance toward an Opinion of the Latins, and if we may not
conclude from the Church of Rome's not opposing a Doctrine, that she holds it,
or teaches it, why may we not make the same Conclusion in respect of the Greeks?

II. IN the second place, I instance in several other important Articles,
wherein the Greeks do not agree with the Latins, and yet we do not find they
made them a matter of Dispute any more than Transubstantiation. For Example,
the Greeks believe the Pains of the Damned, are eased by the Prayers of the
living. They farther believe that so great is the efficacy of their Prayers,
that they sometimes deliver these Wretches absolutely from their Torments, and
rescue them from Damnation. They are, says Allatius, extremely found of this
Opinion, that the Prayers of good People profit the Infidels Allat. Diss 2. de
lib. Eccl. Grec.
and those condemned to eternal Misery, and that they are eased, and sometimes
wholly delivered by them. Which he proves by several Passages in their Triode
(which is one of their ecclesiastical Books) and other their most famous
Authors. The Latins are of a contrary Opinion. It is certain, says Bellarmin,
that the Prayers of the Church are beneficial neither to the Blessed Bellarm de
purg. lib. 2. C. 18.
in Heaven, nor Damned in Hell, but only to the Souls in Purgatory: Which
Doctrine is held by all the Schoolmen that follow St. Austin' s Opinion. Yet do
we not find the two Churches ever made a Point of Controversy thereof, or
charged one another with Error, about it. We do not find this Question was
agitated when the Unions were in hand, whether in the Council of Florence or
elsewhere, nor mention made of it in the Confession of Faith which the Popes so
often sent them, in order to an agreement.

THE aforesaid Allatius observes another Opinion of the Greeks, which has some
Relation with that I now mentioned. For they believe that when Allat Diss. 2.
de Pentecost.
our Savior descended into Hell, he preached his Gospel to all the Dead, as
well to the Damned as Saints, and saved from amongst them all those that
believed in his Word, and raised them up. It appears from the Passages produced
by Allatius, as well out of their Pentecostare, (which is one of their Church
Books,) as other Writings, that this is their Opinion: Whereas on the contrary
it is evident, this is not the Opinion of the Latins, for they look upon it as
Erroneous and Heretical. None of the damned Souls, says Bellarmin, were
delivered: For Philastrius and St. Augustine, say it is Heretical, to assert
Bellarm. de Christi. anim. lib. 4. Cap. 16.
that any of the Wicked were converted and saved by Christ's preaching in Hell.
Allatius adds, that St. Ireneas and Epiphanius condemned this Error in
Marcion, and that Gregory the I. who lived toward the end of the sixth
Century, censured it likewise as an Heresy in the Persons of George and
Theodorus, Allat. Diss. 2.
the one a Priest, and the other a Deacon of the Church of Constantinople. Now
although the Difference which is between the two Churches on this Article is
manifest, yet we do not find they made thereof a Controversy, or that the
Authors on either side wrote one against another on this Subject, nor any
mention of it in the Reunions.

WE may moreover reckon amongst the Differences of the two Churches, the
Rejection which the Greek makes of several Books in the Bible, which they
esteem Apocryphal, whereas the Latins receive them, as Canonical Scripture. For
it is certain the Greeks follow in this point the sixtieth Canon of the of
Council Laodicea, and the Authority of John Damascen, as appears by the
Testimony of Metrophanus Cytropulus, who reckoning up the number of Canonical
Books, which he says are thirty three in all, has these Words. As to other
Books which some admit into the Canon of Scripture, as the Books of Metroph.
Confess. Eccl. Orien. C 7.
Toby, Judith, Wisdom of Solomon, of Jesus Son of Sirach, Baruc, and the
Maccabees; We do not believe they ought to be wholly rejected, seeing they
contain several excellent moral Precepts. But to receive them as Canonical and
Authentic Writings, is what the Church of Christ never did, as several Doctors
testify, and amongst others St. Gregory the Divine, St. Amphilocus, and after
them St. John Damascen. And therefore we ground not our Doctrines on their
Authority, but on that of the thirty three Canonical Books. So that here is the
Opinion of the Greeks very opposite to that of the Latins, and yet we do not
find they made a point of Controversy of this Difference, nor any mention of it
in their Reunions.

WE can give another Instance to the same purpose, and that touching the
Eucharist too. The Greeks since the seventh Century, reject the terms of Type,
Figure, and Image, but the Latins use them, and yet they never made this a
point of Controversy betwixt them. It cannot be said they slighted this Point;
for when they explain themselves thereon, they add to their Rejection a form of
Detestation. God forbid, says Anastasius Sinaite, that we should say the Holy
Communion is the Figure of Christ's Body. God forbid, says Damascen, we should
think the Bread and Wine are the Figure of Christ's Body, and Blood. Yet how
averse soever they have bin to this way of speaking, they never objected this
as a Crime to the Latins, nor accused them of Error in this matter.

WE can Instance in several other Examples of Differences between the two
Churches, about which the Greeks never fell out with the Latins; but those I
already denoted are sufficient to show Mr. Arnaud the nullity of his
Consequence, and at the same time the possibility of my Proposition: For why
may not Transubstantiation bin passed over in Silence, as well as other
Articles? Why must the negative Argument which is of no validity in these
particulars, be good in that of Transubstantiation? If the Greeks could remain
in their own Opinions, and keep their Belief to themselves touching the Damned,
and Christ's preaching to them, touching the number of Canonical Books, etc.
without entering into Debate with the Latins, and charging them with Error in
these Points, why may not the same have happened touching the Change relating to
the Eucharist.

MR. Arnaud will reply without doubt, the Doctrine of Transubstantiation is a
Point of greater Importance, than those I now mentioned, and therefore it might
well happen that these slight and inconsiderable Matters were never disputed
of; but that we must not suppose the same Moderation in reference to the
substantial Conversion, which holds a higher rank in Religion. I answer, first
it cannot be said these Articles I mentioned are of small Importance. For as to
the first of them, it is of great Importance to Christian Piety, not to give
this Encouragement to the Wicked, that live how they will, they may hope to be
delivered one day from the Pains of Hell. As to the second, it has bin already
reckoned amongst the Number of Heresies, by St. Ireneus, Epiphanius,
Philastrius, St. Austin, and Gregory the great. The third concerns the Canon of
Holy Scriptures, which ought to rule our Faith, and the fourth is attended with
the Execration of the Greeks. These things then cannot be slighted as small and
inconsiderable Matters. But in the second place I answer, to judge rightly of
the Importance of Transubstantiation, we must consider it, not in it self, nor
in relation to our present Disputes, but to the Greeks and their Disputes with
the Latins; which is to say, we should consider what Judgment Persons plunged
in Ignorance, could make of it, and whose whole Religion, almost wholly
consists of Grimaces and superstitious Ceremonies; who have lived hitherto in
Disorders and perpetual Confusions, and have had the Latins continually to deal
with, and bin forced to accommodate themselves with them as much as possible,
who never found Transubstantiation amongst the Points about which the two
Churches disputed in the beginning, and separated afterward, in fine, Persons
with whom the Latins never openly quarrelled about this Article, but agreed
with them in certain general Terms. Let any Man consider whether Persons in
these Circumstances are capable of making all due Reflections on the Opinion of
the Latins, and examining the Importance and Weight of this Difference, which
is between the Doctrines of the two Churches. Let any Man judge whether it is
impossible they should abstain to make thereof a particular Controversy, and
content themselves with their own Opinion, and Expressions, without concerning
themselves with other People's.

III. I produce in the third place, Examples of the Silence of the same Greeks,
touching some Opinions of other Eastern Christians, who have a nearer Commerce
with them than the Latins, and yet we do not find they reproach them with their
Opinions, nor dispute with them about 'em. The Jacobits reject the Custom of
confessing their Sins to the Priest. They hold another Jacob. a Vitri hist.
Orient. cap. 76.
Error, says De Vitry, which is no less an Error than that of Circumcising
their Children, which is, that they do not confess their Sins to the Priest,
but to God alone in Secret. They confess not their Sins to any Man, says
Villamont, but Vallim. lib. 2. cap. 22.
to God alone in private: They cannot endure to hear of auricular Confession,
says Boucher, but when they have committed any Fault that troubles their
Consciences, they confess themselves to God alone. They do not allow of the
sacramental Confession, Itinerar. Hierosol Joa. Cottoric. lib. 2. c. 6.
says Cottoric, although it is admitted by both the Greeks and Latins, saying we
must confess our Sins to God, who only knows the Hearts of Men. The Jacobits
are dispersed over all Palestine, Syria, Egypt and all the rest of the East.
One of their Patriarchs resides at Aleppo, and they have an apartment, as well
as the other Christians, in the Church of the Holy Sepulcher at Jerusalem, and
consequently hold a perpetual Commerce with the Greeks. And yet do I not find
the Greeks have ever disputed with them about auricular Confession, nor denoted
the Rejection they make thereof, as if it was an Error, Damascen mentions them
in the Treatise he wrote of Heresies. He remarks their Opinion touching the
Unity of our Savior's Nature, but mentions not a Word of Confession.
Nicephorus Callistus observes likewise in his Ecclesiastical History, their
Heresy touching the Unity of our Savior's Nature, but takes no notice of their
rejecting the Article of Confession.

THE Nestorians which are another Christian Church in the East, and have as
well as others their apartment in the Temple of the Holy Sepulcher at
Jerusalem, and are consequently continually amongst the Greeks in this place,
where their common Devotion brings them, do acknowledge no more than the
Jacobits the Doctrine of Confession, nor that of Confirmation, as appears by
the Profession of Faith of Sulak their Patriarch, which is inserted in the
Bibliotheca Patrum. Let Mr. Arnaud show us if he can, that the Greeks have
raised any Controversies on this Subject; he I say that believes these latter,
are at agreement with the Latins touching the number of seven Sacraments.

THOMAS a Jesu tells us that the Pope having sent Apostolical Legates for the
Reforming of the Maronites, and purging their Books from some Thom. a Jesu.
lib. 7. part. 2. c. 7.
Errors, which were common to them, says he, as well as to other Eastern
Nations, that is to say other Christians in that Country, they found they
misunderstood some Passages of Scripture, and especially that touching the
Institution of the Sacrament, this is my Body. They affirm, says he, that we
must read, this is the Sacrament of my Body. Let Mr. Arnaud be pleased to tell
us whether the Greeks ever censured the Proposition of these other Eastern
Churches in the midst of whom they live. For if it be true that the Greeks
believed Transubstantiation as well as the Latins, it is the strangest thing in
the World they should approve such a Corruption, or such an Interpretation of
the Words of Christ, seeing it is only on the literal Sense of these Words the
Church of Rome pretends her Doctrine is grounded.

I shall prove in its place, as clearly as it is possible to prove a thing of
this nature, that the Armenians do not believe Transubstantiation, nor the
substantial Presence. This Truth will be plainly manifest, and yet it will not
appear the Greeks ever upbraided them with this their Opinion, or made thereof
a Point of Controversy. Were it fair to argue from the Silence of the Greeks,
might I not conclude from their not disturbing the Armenians in reference to
this matter, that they are agreed with them to reject these Doctrines, and
conclude it too with a thousand times more Strength and Evidence, than Mr.
Arnaud concludes they are at Agreement with the Latins to believe it, because
they do not make thereof a Controversy.

AND here methinks are Instances enough to overthrow Mr. Arnaud's Argument, and
discover the weakness of his Consequence. But we must proceed farther, for
having showed him that the Principle on which I ground my Answer is reasonable,
to wit, that the Greeks do not believe Transubstantiation, although they never
disputed against it, I will likewise show him there is all the likelihood in
the World that the matter is as I lay it down, whence it will follow that not
only his Consequence has no Necessity, but even no Probability.

I. FOR this Effect it will be necessary to call to mind the profound Ignorance
wherein the Greeks have lived from the eleventh Century, till this present. For
I already related in the second Book what Wm. of Tire, James de Vitry, Belon,
Cottovic, Anthony Caucus, Francis Richard, Allatius, du Loir, Thevenot, and
Barbereau the Jesuit have written of this matter. I moreover produced the
Testimonies of Bozius, and Thomas a Jesu. All which has no other end but to
show us the miserable Condition wherein this Church has for so long time layn.
Observe here likewise what says a Latiniz'd Monk called Barlaam, who lived
about the beginning of the fourteenth Century. There are, Barlaam Epist. 1.
Bibl. patr. Tom. 2. Edit. 4.
says he, few Persons amongst them that trouble themselves with Learning: And
there are yet fewer that apply themselves to the Study of the Scriptures,
preferring the Heathenish Sciences above it, to which they willingly apply
themselves. All the People in general are ignorant especially of that Holy Word
that brings Salvation; So that for one Person amongst them that understands the
Summary of the Christian Faith, there are Millions ignorant of it. Observe here
moreover what Cyrillus Lucaris (the same Patriarch mentioned in the preceding
Book) writes. I can bear with the Ignorance of the common People, for I know
their Ignorance Epist. ad Wittemborg in Epist. Virro erudi.
and Simplicity can defend them against the Enemies of their Faith, whom they
Combat not with Arms, but Patience, and so remain faithful to Jesus Christ. But
I cannot bear with the Ignorance and Stupidity of our Pastors and Bishops; and
therefore I continually upbraid them with it, but to no purpose. The Jesuits
making their advantage thereof, have settled themselves in Constantinople to
instruct Youth, and are like Foxes amongst Geese. It is certain we can find no
Book from this People worth our Reading, written since Photius's time,
excepting some few Histories, and Collections of the ancient Canons, the rest
only consisting in Explanations of their Liturgy, and some pitiful Treatises,
wherein they Transcribe one out of another Word for Word, without any Art, or
Sense almost.

II. WE should likewise consider the temporal State of Greece since the
eleventh Century to this present, for there can be nothing imagined more
dreadful and miserable. Most of their Emperors have been either lazy or
effeminate, continually accompanied with Misfortunes, or Profane and Impious
Persons that made a Mock of Religion, or Villains that ascended the Throne by
Seditions and Murders, by means whereof Greece became divided into Factions
and horrible Confusions. In the Year 1034, Romanus Argirus Peteau. Rat. tempor.
ex Curopal L 8. Chapter 18. Ibid.
the Emperor having lost Syria, was cruelly murdered by the Treachery of Zoa
his Wife, who gave the Empire afterward to her Adulterer Michael. Michael
Reigned seven Years possessed by the evil Spirit: He lost Sicily and Bulgaria,
and at length turned Monk in the Year 1041. Zoa his Wife adopted one Michael
Calaphatus, and made him Emperor; but four or five Months Ibid.
after, she caused his Eyes to be bored out, and gave the Empire to Constantin
Monomaque whom she espoused. He lost Poville and was terribly beaten by the
Serviens, who killed forty Thousand of his Men. Constantin dyed in 1054, and a
Woman named Theodora succeeded him, who Reigned but one Ibid.
Year. After her came one named Michael Stratiotique, who Reigned also but one
Year. Isaac Comnenus dispossessed him and took his Place, wherein he remained
Ibid,
orewhelmed with Diseases for the space of two Years and some Months. He
resigned the Empire in the Year 1059 to Constantin Ducas a dull Ibid.
and mean Spirited Prince, who suffered the Barbarians to wast Greece by their
Incursions. Romanus Diogenes succeeded him, who was taken by the Turks and
afterward released, but being returned, his Subjects put out his Eyes, and
made him dye a miserable Death. Michael Parapinacius who came after him, Ibid.
was not more fortunate. Nicephorus Botionatus having Dethroned him, put Ibid.
him into a Monastery. Nicephorus having ill Reigned was treated after the same
manner by Alexius Comnenus, who took the Empire in the Year 1081: Alexius Ibid.
Reigned thirty seven Years, and dishonored his Reign by a thousand perfidious
Actions and Wickednesses; The French beat him several times, and in fine, he
dyed forsaken by all the World.

HIS Son John Comnenus succeeded him, and after him Emanuel, a wretched Idem.
Lib. 8. Cap. 21.
and perfidious Prince who delighted to disturb the Peace of the Church by his
curious Questions and new Decrees, and who in fine, to crown his Life with the
most horrible Impieties, designed to bring in Mahometism into his Empire.
Emanuel left his Crown to his Son Alexius, who kept it but three Ibid.
Years, for he was miserably put to Death by Andronicus who seized on the
Throne as the Reward of his Crime: Yet did he not enjoy it long, for two Years
after Isaac Angelus stirred up the People against him, who cut him in pieces.
Alexius Angelus a while after caused his Brother Isaac's Eyes to be put out,
and took from him the Empire. His Nephew whose Name also was Alexius,
addressing himself to the Latins, they drove out the Usurper from the Throne,
and settled him in it, against whom arose one Mursulphus, and both one, and the
other, having undone themselves by their Perfidiousness, the Empire fell into
the Hands of the Latins in the Year 1204.

THE Latins held the Empire fifty eight Years till 1261, wherein Michael
Paleologus took the City of Constantinople from them. Which Michael obtained
the Empire by Murder, he caused the lawful Emperors Eyes to be put out (who
was John Theodorus Lascaris's Son, being but twelve Years of Age, and seated
himself in his Throne. He was both a cruel and crafty Prince, and abused his
Subjects in a thousand manners, being ever ready to Sacrifice the Church and
Religion to his Interest. Andronicus his Son succeeded him, against whom his
Grandson named likewise Andronicus arose several times, and at length took from
him his Crown, and reduced him to the condition of a private Person. His
Successors were all of 'em effeminate Persons, under whom the Greek Empire
retained not the least Shadow of its first Dignity, till such time as at length
in the Year 1453, Constantinople was taken by the Turks, and every one knows
how since that time the Greeks have lived under the Domination of those
Infidels.

A Man may easily imagine Greece could not be long happy nor quiet under such
Emperors. There were nothing but Seditions, Monopolies, Revolts, and civil Wars
within, and unfortunate Wars without, sometimes against the Saracens,
otherwhiles against the Turks, and Latins.

Peteau the Jesuit discoursing of the State of this Empire under the
Paleologues, Ration. ^em. Lib. 9. C. 7.
did not stick to compare it to a Sea Monster, whom the Element had thrown on
the Shore, deadly wounded, yet still struggling with Death; or a Poisoned Body
that with much difficulty sustains it self, and crawls along, till such time as
the Poison strikes into the Heart, and then it falls to the Ground and gives up
the Ghost.

III. IT already appears to be no wonder, if a Church amids such dreadful
Confusions and Circumstances, and orespread with such Clouds of Darkness, never
exactly discussed the Difference betwixt its Doctrine and the Latins, but
contented her self with keeping her own Belief. But consider we moreover the
Influence the Latins had on the Greeks, and the manner after which they handled
them, wheresoever they got the mastery. We have seen in the second Book how
they drove the Greek Bishops from Syria, and Palestine, as soon as ever they
settled themselves, as likewise in Greece. We have also observed that the Greek
Emperors instead of encouraging their Patriarchs and Bishops, and upholding the
Interest of their Church, have on the contrary favored to the utmost of their
Power the Latins, and under pretense of an Union endeavored to subject the
Greek Church to the Roman. Not that these Emperors had any kindness for the
Religion of the Latins, but feared their Power, and therefore used all possible
Compliance with the Court of Rome. They would not suffer its Doctrines to be
ill spoken of. We have seen that in Leo the ninths Quarrel with Cerularius,
Constantin Monomaque failed not to take Leo's Part, countenancing his Legates,
and constraining Nicetas Pectoratus to burn his own Book, which he wrote
against the Latins. We have likewise observed that John Veccus Library keeper
of the Church at Constantinople, saying one day in the Emperor's hearing, that
although the Latins were not termed Heretics, yet they really were so. Michael
Paleologus was thereupon so enraged, that he resolved to ruin him, causing him
soon after to be imprisoned, and had effected his Resolution, had not Veccus
changed his Mind. Moreover 'twas not two or three of these Emperors that were
of this Temper, but almost all of 'em, as appears by what I already related in
the second Book. We must then add to the second Preceding Considerations this
third Remark, that the Greeks were forced to be silent for fear of the Latins,
and their own Emperors. It may be perhaps replied, this hindered them not from
Disputing on the Procession and Azymes. I grant it, but there is a great deal
of Difference betwixt maintaining old Controversies, and raising new ones,
which commonly beget Hatred. The Latins and the Emperors labored to make them
silent in the old Controversies, how then could they suffer without the
greatest Punishment, there should be others begun, which would render the
Design of a Reconciliation more difficult?

IV. BUT besides what I already mentioned, it is requisite to observe for what
end the Emperors endeavored this Reconciliation, seeing this will give us a
great deal of light into the Question. Pachymerus relates that Michael
Paleologus used this only Argument with his Bishops, namely, that
notwithstanding the Agreement, there should be no alteration made in their
Religion. Do not doubt, says he, but after this Peace the Church shall remain
in its Pachymer. hist. lib. 5. cap. 18.
former state; It shall not be my Fault if it does not: And again, You need not
be told by me how ready our Forefathers have been to comply, as often as the
public Good required it. They considered that even God himself has not
disdained to accomodate himself to our Weaknesses, in taking upon him our
Flesh, and Suffering the Pains of the Cross, by which he has purchased the
Salvation of the World, so ready was he to comply with our Exigencies; no man
can then blame us if from the like Intention we endeavor to avoid the Dangers
that threaten us, but on the contrary we shall be the better approved of, by
those that understand the nature of Affairs. And again, You must not affright
the People by telling 'em, we design to proceed any farther in this
Reconciliation than we ought, and as if we intended to change our ancient
Customs and Ceremonies for those of the Latins, and make the same Confession of
Faith as they do. Which Discourse does manifestly show us three things. First,
that there is a great deal of Difference between being silent in the Doctrine
of the Latins, not Disputing and Charging them with Error, nay proceeding so
far as a Union with them, and the Embracing of their Doctrines; let Mr. Arnaud
say what he pleases. For Michael desires but the first of these, and protests
he intends not thereby to proceed to the other. The second thing that appears
from the Discourse of this Emperor, is that the Principle on which I ground my
Answer, and by which I pretend to overthrow Mr. Arnaud's Argument, is not a
Proposition forged in my own Brain from the necessity of my Dispute, but a
Principle not only well known by the Greeks, but approved and practiced in an
Occasion, far more important than that now in question betwixt us. For it is far
less important to lay aside one of the Doctrines of a Church, and not Dispute
on it, than to be united with her, and yet it is certain the Greek Church
consented to this Reunion, in hope she should keep her Religion Entire, and not
receive any of the Doctrines of the Latins. In fine, I gather from Michael's
Discourse, and the Effect it had on the Minds of his Clergy, that the only care
the Greeks took was to keep their own Religion, being willing to be silent, and
Embrace the Union, provided they were not forced to Embrace the Religion of the
Latins. If it be replied that this was indeed the Disposition of Michael
Paleologus, but not that of his Church; I answer that Michael engaged 'em to
consent to the Reunion upon this Regard, that each of the Churches should keep
its own Opinions, and not contend and charge one another with Error. Now People
are not wont to be prevailed on by Principles which they do not acknowledge to
be good, and therefore plausible Pretenses and fair Colors are made use to win
them. Whence it follows, that the Greeks were far from imagining, 'twas the
same thing not to dispute against the Latins on an Article, and to receive and
own it with them. Whence it likewise follows, that if this Reason or Hope which
Michael proposed to them was sufficient to make them do a thing in which they
feared he would deceive them, (as indeed he did) a matter which was contrary to
their Duty and Conscience, and against which they had moreover the greatest
Aversion, it might likewise be sufficient to withhold and hinder them from
doing another thing, to which they did not believe they were obliged, and from
which they might refrain without the least Violence to their Inclinations.

THIS Reflection will be strengthened by considering after what sort Veccus the
Patriarch justified himself when he became a great stickler in the Union, which
he endeavored to promote as much as in him lay. I never Hottinger ex Allat in
Orth. Grec. Page 65.
designed, says he, by any thing I either thought, said, or did to disparage
any of the Ceremonies or Doctrines of the Greeks, but only to establish the
Peace of the Church. If any Person in embracing this Peace has despised our
Rites and Ceremonies, and preferred the Doctrines and Ceremonies of the Roman
Church before them, let him be excluded the Kingdom of Heaven, and have his
Portion with the Traitor Judas and his Companions, who Cracified our Savior.
We see here this Patriarch supposes a great deal of Difference between the not
Condemning the Latins, and letting them alone with their Doctrines; Nay so far
is he from granting Mr. Arnaud's Consequence, that he makes this a Principle
whereby to justify himself to the Greeks, which is a Sign that this Proposition
agreed with the Genius of that Nation. For People are not wont to justify
themselves by Maxims odious and publicly abhorred; if Michael Paleologus,
Veccus, or the Greeks in general, have displeased Mr. Arnaud by this their
Deportment, they are excusable: For in those Days the World was not acquainted
with the Secrets of his Reasoning: The Rules of his Logic were not then
published. They may henceforward become a Rule to Posterity, but he must not
expect they should be more privileged than the Edicts of Princes which have no
retroactive Virtue.

V. TO convince Mr. Arnaud that the Greeks are averse to Controversies; I need
only represent to him what Anthony Eparkus of Corcyra wrote to Philip
Melancthon. For having told him how careful the Turks are to establish their
Religion every where, and to extend the Limits of their Empire. It Turco. Grec
1: 8. Page 545.
would be very absurd, adds he, for us to Dispute of sublime Matters, in the
Condition we are in. It behooves us to watch and apply our selves diligently to
the avoiding the Danger threatening us, lest we lose our Possessions here on
Earth, whilst we idly and over curiously inquire into the things of Heaven.
It Is certain the Greeks do not care to concern themselves overmuch about the
things of the next Life: Their Thoughts being wholly taken up with their
worldly Interest, this being the Key that opens and shuts their Mouths.

POSSEVIN the Jesuit distinguishes the Greeks into three Ranks, the first of
People who are very Ignorant: The second, of those that having some Biblioth.
selert. de rat. ag. cum Grec. lib. 5. cap. 24.
Experience, and beholding on one hand the Majesty of the Roman Church, and on
the other the Misery of the Greek one, the Pomp of the Sacrament of the Latins,
and the Neglect wherewith the Greeks treat theirs, conclude that the Roman
Church is better beloved by God almighty than the Greek one. The third is of
those who having some knowledge of the World, are yet transported by an habitual
Hatred against the Latins, although their Bishops and most prudent Persons amongst
them are of another Temper, and not knowing for the most part, what they say or
would have; they Compare the Greek and Roman Church together, their Ceremonies
with ours, and prefer their Priests to our Latin Priests, supposing them not so
vicious as ours. Yet they dare not affirm we are in an Error, or that what we
believe or practice touching the Sacrament is unwarrantable. But they affirm as
to themselves, that they are in the right Way, and do not doubt of Salvation in
their own Religion. Observe these two things, first that the Greek Bishops and
prudentest Persons in their Church, are averse to Controversies. And secondly,
that those that are not, content themselves with maintaining their own
Doctrines, without condemning those of the Latins.

VI. BUT it will be demanded why then did they Dispute on the Procession of the
Holy Spirit, and the Azymes? I answer because these two Points first occasioned
the Separation of the two Churches. Photius adhered especially to the first of
these, and Cerularius to the latter. The reason why the Greeks have so
earnestly stuck to these two Particulars, seems to be out of a Principle of
Constancy. They have followed the first and original Causes of their Quarrel
with the Latins, treading in the Steps of their Predecessors. Had they found
the Article of the substantial Conversion in their way, they had without doubt
stumbled at it, but not meeting with it, it is no marvel if they took no notice
thereof, no more than of other Doctrines. But why was not this point at first
comprehended amongst those that caused the Separation of the two Churches? The
Answer is easy; because Transubstantiation was not then established in the
Roman Church. Photius began the Separation toward the end of the ninth
Century: Cerularius renewed it about the middle of the eleventh, and the first
that determined the substantial Conversion was Gregory the VII, in the Year
1079, so that it is no marvel if they disputed not about it.

VII. NEITHER do I understand the Greeks could have just Cause to dispute this
Point against the Body of the Latin Church in general, before the Council of
Constance, that is to say, before the fifteenth Century: For although Gregory the
VII made his Determination in the Year 1079, as I already said, and Innocent
the III had done the same in the Council of Latran, in the Year 1215, yet there
were several People that did not esteem these kind of Decisions as legitimate
and authentic Declarations of the Church. Every body knows that Rupert who
lived in the twelveth Century, publicly Rupert. in Joan. lib. 6. and in Exodus
l. 2. c. 10.
taught that the substance of Bread remains in the Eucharist, and becomes the
Body of Christ by an hypostatical Union with the Word. Anselm wrote against
him, and Algerus disputed against his Opinion, but he was never Condemned for
an Heretic. We know likewise what Durand of St. Porcien taught, who lived in
the beginning of the fourteenth Century, to wit, that the Substance of Bread
remains, and that losing its first form of Bread, it receives the form of the
Body of Christ, in the same manner the Food we take receives the form of our
Body. Bell. de Sacr. Euch. l. 3 c. 13. Thom. Waldens. tom. 2. de Sacr. cap. 65.
and cod. Ms. qui asservatur in Biblioth. S. Victor Paris. cuititul.
Determinatio fratris. Joan. de Pariscis. praedieatoris de modo existendi
corporis Christi in Sacr. Altar etc. Intendo dicere v^ram existentiam and
realem corporis Christ's in Sacramento Altaris, and quod non est ibi solum in
signo, and licet teneam and approbem ill^rum solemnem opinionem, quod corpus
Christi est in Sacramento Altaris per conversionem substanciae panis in ipsum,
and quod ipsi maneant accidentia sine subjecto, non tamen audeo dicere quod boc
cadet sub fide mea, sed potest aliter salvari vera, and realis existentia
corporis Christi in Sacramento Altaris. Protestor tamen quod si ostenderetur
dictus modus determinatus esse per Sacrum canonem, aut per Ecclesiam, aut per
Concilium generale, aut per Papam, qui virtute continet totam Ecclesiam,
quicquid dicam volo haberi pro non dicto, and statim paratus sum revocare, quod
si non fit determinatus, contingat tamen determinari, statim paratus sum
assentire. In 4. Sent. Quaest. 6. Art. 4.
Bellarmin acknowledges that this Opinion, may be called a Transformation, but
not a Transubstantiation. Yet was not Durand Prosecuted nor Condemned as an
Heretic, nor his Doctrine Censured. We moreover know what was taught by John
of Paris of the Order of Friar Preachers, and Divinity Professor at Paris, who
lived toward the end of the thirteenth Century. That although he approved of the
common Opinion touching the Conversion of the Substance of Bread into the Body
of Christ, yet he durst not affirm this to be an Article of Faith, necessarily
to be believed as determined by the Church, and that there was another more
popular Opinion, and perhaps more rational and conformable to the true Doctrine
of the Sacrament, namely the Assumption of the Substance of Bread by the person
of the Word. We know in fine, what Peter Dailly, Cardinal and Bishop of Cambray
wrote, who lived about the beginning of the fifteenth Century, namely, that it
does not follow (in his Opinion) from the Churches Determination, that the
Substance of Bread ceases.

BUT to the end it may not be said, these are the Opinions of particular
Titulus Judicium facultatis Theologiae in presentia Collegij magisir^rum in
Theologia dictum est, utrumque ^^cdum ponendi corpus Christi esse in Altari
tenet pro opinione prohabil^ and approbat utrumque per (hic est lacuna) and per
dicta Sanctorum dicit tamen quod nullus est determinatus per Ecclesian and idco
nullum cadere sub fide. Et si aliter dixisset minus benc dixisset and qui
aliter dicunt minus benc dicunt, and qui determinate asseveret alterutrum
praecise cadere sub fide incurreret sententiam Can^nis Anathcmatis.
Persons who might be mistaken, I will here produce the Judgment of the Divines
at Paris in the beginning of the fourteenth Century, that is to say, about the
Year 1304, touching John of Paris, and concerning the Assumption of the
Substance of Bread, as is contained in a Manuscript of the Library of St.
Victor in these Words. The Opinion of the Faculty in Theology, in the Presence
of the Masters of the College, touching both the Ways whereby the Body of
Christ may be said to exist on the Altar (to wit, that of the Conversion of the
Substance of Bread, and that of the Assumption of this Substance by the Word)
both which Opinions it holds and approves by -- and by the Testimonies of the
Fathers. Yet it says that neither of these two ways has been determined by the
Church, and therefore never a one of them is an Article of Faith, and if it
said otherwise, it would not have said so well, and those that express
themselves otherwise, say not so well, and he that positively asserts that
either one or the other of these Modes is an Article of Faith, incurs the
Sentence of an Anathema. I denote in the Margin the proper terms of the
Manuscript according as they lie under this Title, Judicium Facultatis
Theologiae.

JOHN of Paris met with Opposition from William of Orillac Bishop of Paris, and
several other Bishops. Yet did they not condemn his Sentiment, nor contradict
what the Faculty of Theology said, but silenced him, and forbad him the Chair;
Whereat he made his Appeal to Rome, where he came himself, and had a Committy
appointed to hear him, but John dying before his Affair was ended, the Court of
Rome proceeded no farther in it. Mr. Arnaud who will needs have the Greeks not
to be ignorant of what passed amongst the Latins, and supposes all Greece to
resound with Berengarius's Condemnation; and Peoples Italy with Greeks, and
Greece with Latins, with order to give one another account of whatsoever
concerned the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, who will have the very Soldiers
entertain themselves with it in the Army, as well as the Pilgrims in their
Voyages; can he I say find in his Heart to tell us, that the Greeks knew not
what such famous Authors as Rupert, Durand, John of Paris and Cardinal Dailly
publicly maintained in the twelvth, thirteenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth
Century, that they knew not what passed in one of the chief Cities in the West,
and in a Faculty so illustrious as that of Paris, that they knew not an Affair
that was carried to Rome, and touching which that Court made no Decission? In
truth if they knew nothing of this, and that neither the Pilgrims, nor
Ambassadors, nor Soldiers, nor Inquisitors, nor the Greeks in Italy, nor the
Latins in Constantinople, gave them no Notice thereof, they may have been
ignorant as well of other things, and Mr. Arnaud's Assurance signifies nothing,
that their Curiosity made them search into all things. For although that in some
of these Centuries there were no more Croisado's into the Holy Land, nor Latins
that held the Greek Empire; yet the Commerce between the Greeks and Latins was
frequent, and both one and the other were often together in Italy, and several
other places; and it was a very easy matter to send Notice to the Greeks of
what passed in the West, concerning these Doctors. Should Mr. Arnaud say they
knew this, he must not take it ill, if they made this a Reason for their
Silence and Reservedness; For why should they accuse a Church wherein it is
permitted to affirm, that the Substance of Bread remains, wherein it is
affirmed that there is nothing to be positively asserted concerning the Subject
of Transubstantiation, and Appeals made to Rome it self thereupon, and yet this
Court does not so much as declare the contrary.

VIII. SUPPOSING the Greeks believed Transubstantiation, how came it to pass
they were not scandalized at the boldness of all these Authors? Why would they
not satisfy themselves in so considerable a Point as that which these Authors
handled, namely that the Church had not yet determined any thing touching the
Conversion of the Substance of Bread? Why did they not reprove the Latins for
this, and especially the Roman Church for being silent in a Particular wherein
her Belief and Practice were concerned. Let Mr. Arnaud give us a Reason for
this Reservedness of the Greeks, who makes them such great Disputers? And let
him also show us a Reason for the Church of Rome's Silence? That the Doctrine
of Transubstantiation is not an Article of Faith, and that the Church has not
yet determined it so to be, we find John of Paris ready to justify within the
Walls of Rome it self, and yet she takes no notice of it. She suffers a Person
to dye in this Error, neither Condemns his Opinion, nor Memory, and that which
is moreover worse, is, that she leaves the whole World in suspense about a
Point wherein the Faith of all her Children are concerned. For if a man doubts
whether the Conversion of Substances be a Point of Faith, he cannot believe it
as a Point of Faith. And if a man cannot believe it as a Point of Faith, how
will he be persuaded of the Truth of it? And if it must be held only as a
probable Opinion of Learned men, what will become of it when we shall find it
so improbable, and so little agreeable to right Reason? Yet does not the Church
of Rome mention a Word of this, but lets the Question ly Dormant, so that
should we argue from her Silence, as Mr. Arnaud does from that of the Greeks,
we might conclude she approves John of Paris his Opinion, seeing she does not
condemn it. Yet will I not go so far; It suffices me that the Church of Rome
has not condemned the Proposition in Question. This is enough to hinder the
Greeks from Reproaching the Latin Church with Transubstantiation.

THIS Affair of John of Paris, together with the Judgment of the Faculty in
Theology, and Silence of the Roman Church, is of such Importance, that this
alone is sufficient to decide the Question, and manifest to Mr. Arnaud that the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation has not been perpetual in the Church. For that a
Faculty so considerable as is that of Paris should assure us this manner of the
Existence of Christ's Body in the Eucharist, is not determined by the Church,
nor is an Article of Faith, and whosoever shall assert that it is so, ought to
be Anathematized. That the Affair having been carried to Rome, and that Court
be silent therein, and determine nothing about it; I say this is enough to
refute this pretended Perpetuity, which Mr. Arnaud has taken upon him to defend.

BUT return we to the Greeks. We may add to what I already mentioned this
considerable Remark, which is, that the Latins never raised a Dispute with the
Greeks about the general Expressions which these last make use of touching the
Eucharist.

BUT before we carry on this Consideration any farther, it is necessary that I
put the Reader again in mind, that the Question is not to know whether the
Greeks have the same Opinion with us touching the Eucharist, much less whether
they explain themselves after the same manner. This is Mr. Arnaud's perpetual
Illusion, to suppose we make them Berengarians; and it is on this wrong Ground
whereon he builds his whole Discourse. We scarcely meet with any other but
these kind of Arguings in his Dispute, viz. Whether the Greeks were
Berengariens? Whether they Believed the Bread in the Sacrament to be only a
Figure? Whether they understood our Savior's Words in the Sense of Significat,
etc. To the end then the Reader may not be deceived, I do here again acknowledge
that the Greeks believe a great deal more touching the Eucharist than we do,
that they express themselves otherwise about it, and follow neither the
Sentiments nor Expressions of Berengarius. Neither have we given Mr. Arnaud any
Occasion to assert what he does. We only affirmed they do not believe the
Transubstantiation of the Roman Church, nor worshipped the Sacrament with a
sovereign Adoration; and it is upon this Mr. Arnaud ought to argue to deal
sincerely.

AND therefore I say the Latins never disputed with the Greeks touching their
Expressions, how general soever they have been; They have indeed done what they
could whereby to introduce insensibly amongst them the Terms of (...), and of
(...), Transubstantiation, change of Substance. They have for this purpose made
use of their Proselytes, and Scholars of the Seminaries, to whom they have
given the Confession of Faith which we observed in the preceding Book, in which
those Terms are found. They have set 'em down in Latin in the Acts of the
Reunion. But in the Greek of these same Acts, they have contented themselves
with the general Expressions of (...), as we have already seen. They have not
quarrelled with them about 'em, for Reasons not hard to be understood, and
which we shall see hereafter, and when the Proselytes and Scholars of the
Seminaries found their Terms were not received, they became angry thereat, but
on the contrary accomodated themselves to others. We cannot then wonder if this
Conduct has kept the Greeks from discussing any farther the Differences which
separate the two Churches. They agreed in the general Expressions, that the
Bread is made the Body of Jesus Christ, that it is changed into his Body, and
the Latins required no more.

THE Snare lay hid under this Compliance, and this Conduct kept off the Greeks
from all Inquiries. For, for to find the Difference there is between the
Doctrine of the Greeks, and that of the Latins, and make a right Judgment
thereon, we must not lightly and superficially examine them, seeing they
require an application of Mind and Study. We must read Latin Authors, compare
them with the Doctrine of the Ancients, and with that of the Greek Church, and
not suffer our selves to be surprised with false appearances, but consider the
two Doctrines themselves, and especially their Consequences, to find wherein
they differ; For at first Sight the Difference seems not great. They explain
themselves sometimes in the like manner, but their Consequences infinitely
differ, as has been observed in the last Chapter of the preceding Book. Now how
few amongst the Greeks have been able to go through with this Discussion; and of
those that were capable, how few were in a condition to make a right Judgment?
We have seen what Bozius said of 'em from the Relation of one Gregory, that
under the Empire of Andronicus, (he means I suppose Andronicus the younger, in
whose Reign the Reunion of the Churches was again proposed) there was no Person
to be found in all Greece, that was able to Dispute with the Latins about
Religious Matters. Can it seem strange, that People (who could not maintain
their ancient Controversies, so greatly insisted on by their Fathers, and which
are as it were hereditary to them,) should neglect to discuss those new
Doctrines I speak of, and content themselves with keeping their own Belief,
without concerning themselves with that of Strangers?

X. MOREOVER we must consider that the Greeks have ever referred to almighty
God, the knowledge of the Change hap'ning in the Eucharist, without offering to
determine it. This appears as well by their general Terms, as by what I already
related, concerning the Confession of Metrophanus the Patriarch of Alexandria,
and the profession of Faith compiled for the Sarracen Proselytes, from the
Prayer in their Euchology, the Judgment which Nicetas made on the Conduct of
the Patriarch Camaterus, and the Dispute of John the Patriarch of Jerusalem.
When then they hear the Latins who determine the manner of this Change, saying
it is a real Conversion of the Substance of Bread and Wine; we must not find it
strange, if they contain themselves in their generalities, and neither Receive
nor Condemn this Doctrine. Whether they do well or ill in this, I shall not
here determine: But howsoever, it is in no wise strange that People of that
Temper the Greeks are of, should thus deport themselves. I have already
observed elsewhere that he that showed himself most forward amongst them, was
the Patriarch Cyrillus; for he proceeded so far as to a positive Rejection of
Transubstantiation, and yet he rejected it only under the Title of Rash, (...),
says he, (...), Transubstantiation rashly invented.

ALL which things being considered, let any Man judge whether what I say
(concerning the Greeks not expressly opposing the Doctrine of the Conversion of
Substances, although they did not believe it) be not grounded on all imaginable
Probability, and whether on the contrary Mr. Arnaud's Consequence, how
surprising soever it may seem at first, is not in effect void of all kind of
Probability. They have lived time out of mind in most stupid Ignorance; They
have been overwhelmed in Confusions, and oppressed with domestic Misfortunes:
They have been continually urged by their Emperors to comply with the Latins,
that they might thereby avoid their Displeasure, and procure their Favor; They
have been persuaded that this Compliance will bring no Prejudice to their
Religion. They are moreover a People that were ever noted to be naturally more
than others fixed to their temporal Interests, preferring the Preservation of
their Estates, before their Religion. They are not ignorant how the Roman
Church resents it, when accused of Error, as appears by the Complaint of
Cyrillus, who speaking of the Latins, says that they obstinately defend
whatsoever they do, right or wrong, let their Errors be made Epist. Cyrill. ad
Wittemb. in Epist. Viror. erud.
never so apparent. That they maintain they can neither Err in Belief nor
Practice, and that which is yet worse, they fly in the Faces of those that
Christianly admonish them, and show them their Errors. That they persecute such
with Fire and Sword, as if it were not lawful to repel the Injury they do to
Christianity, and to guard and defend our selves against the Evil. It appears
in their ordinary Conversation, how reserved and fearful they are of offending
the Latins. The Question of Transubstantiation is not to be found amongst their
primitive and original Disputes. They might likewise reasonably doubt whether
the Roman Church determined it before the Council of Constance. The Latins have
not disputed with them about it, but accommodated themselves to the form of
their Expressions. It is no easy matter for them to penetrate as far as the
real Differences which distinguish the Doctrines of the two Churches. And in
fine, one of their Maxims is, that they may very well leave the Knowledge of the
Change which happens in the Eucharist, unto God, without troubling themselves
any farther about it. Is it not nearer to Truth to say as I do, that it does
not follow these People believed Transubstantiation, although they have not made
thereof a Point of Controversy, and kept themselves in a kind of Medium,
neither Believing it, nor Condemning it; than to say as Mr. Arnaud does, that
if they have not opposed it, nor disputed on it, nor reproached the Roman
Church with it as an Error, it inevitably follows, they have, and do still
believe it.

CHAP. VI.
A farther Examination of Mr. Arnaud's Negative Arguments. A particular
Reflection concerning what past in the Treaties of Reunion, and especially in
the Council of Florence, and afterward.

THE more we consider the Principles on which Mr. Arnaud Reasons, the plainlier
appears the Nullity of the Consequence he pretends to draw thence. He says for
Example that Theophylact, reduces all the Differences which separated in his
time the two Churches Lib. 2. c. 9^ p. 174.
to the single addition of the Filioque in the Symbol. So that if this
Principle be true, the Greeks and Latins agreed in all other things but this
one of the Filioque. He says that Basil the Archbishop of Thessalonica,
writing to Pope Adrian the IV, Protests to him that the Greeks differ not from
the Latin Church. If this be true, Theophilact has deceived us, when he tells
us they differ in the Filioque. He tells us that the sharpness of Balsamon, who
was very much against the Church of Rome, would not suffer him ^o dissemble
this Accusation, (to wit, to believe Transubstantiation) which would be the
most specious of all others, and the most proper to alienate the Affections of
the Greeks, and hinder their Reconciliation with the Latins. But if we must
refer our selves in all particulars to Balsamon's Silence, in how many Points
shall we establish Peace, wherein there was a real Division? He tells us
Eutymius wrote a Book against Lib. 2. c. 11. p. 204.
the Latins, in which he only treats of the Procession of the Holy Spirit, that
Chrysolanus the Archbishop of Milain reduced to this single Article, all
whatsoever he upbraided the Greeks with; that John Phurnius wrote against Ibid.
Chrysolanus, and mentions only the Procession; and that this same Phurnius
Ibid. p. 205. Ibid. p. 204. Ibid. p. 205.
disputed against another Archbishop of Milain named Peter, on this Article
alone. But if Mr. Arnaud goes on after this rate, what will become of the
Controversy touching the Azyme. He tells us that Nicolas Methoniensis answers
Chrysolanus, and that he wrote another Treatise concerning the Azymes, that
Eustratius Bishop of Nice, Theodorus Prodromus, Nicetas Seidus, and several
other Authors of the twelveth Century that wrote against the Latins, applied
themselves only to the Controversies touching the Holy Spirit, and the Azymes.
He makes an exact Computation of all the Greeks of the fourteenth Century, that
wrote against the Roman Church, and assures us they Lib. 3. c. 7.
all of 'em restrain^d themselves to these two Points. He farther shows us Lib.
3. c. 2.
that in the Treaty of Agreement, which was begun in the Year 1232, between
Gregory the IX, and Germain the Patriarch of Constantinople, there Lib. 3. c. 4.
were no more mentioned than these two Questions; and that the Patriarch Veccus
having been condemned under Andronicus, for favoring the Latins, his whole
charge consisted only of the Procession of the Holy Spirit. So that if we stop
here, we may restrain the differences of the two Churches to these two
Articles, and establish an entire Conformity in all the rest.

AS fast as Mr. Arnaud produces each of these things in particular, he fails
not to conclude that the Greeks and Latins had but one and the same Faith
touching Transubstantiation. But how happens it he has not seen, that if his
Consequence be good, it may be likewise concluded they have the same Opinion
touching other Articles, wherein yet is found a manifest Difference? His Proofs
have this Property, that if we take each of 'em in particular, they overthrow
one another. For if the Greeks and Latins taught only, one and the same thing,
why are they made to dispute touching the Procession of the Holy Spirit. If all
their Differences may be reduced to the Article of the Holy Spirit, why do they
dispute on the Azymes? If they be divided only in these two Points, wherefore
in the Council of Florence was there mentioned the Doctrine of Purgatory, the
beatifical Vision of the Saints, and primacy of the Sea of Rome? What certainty
is there in all these negative Arguments, seeing that each of 'em in particular
overthrow one another?

HE will tell us we must take them all together, and conclude from thence in
general that the Greeks and Latins are not at all at Variance touching
Transubstantiation, seeing that in all their Disputes agitated since so long a
time, by so many several Authors, and so many several Occasions, we do not find
any Contest touching this Point. I answer, we have taken them thus in the
preceding Chapter, and found they conclude no better in general than in
particular. I consent they be taken in any sort; for if they be examined each
of 'em apart, their weaknesses will soon be discovered, being contradictory to
one another, and if joined together, they can produce no greater effect by
their Union, than to persuade us the Greeks never made Transubstantiation a
Point of Controversy with the Latins. But this is no more than what we already
granted to Mr. Arnand. But that it follows hence the two Churches held this for
an Article of both their Faiths: This we deny, and have given our Reasons why
we do so.

BUT the more to facilitate the Judgment which ought to be made of these
things, it will not be amiss to examine some particular Circumstances, by which
Mr. Arnaud has pretended to give Color to his Argument. He tells us then,
first, that the Greeks have been often together with the Latins in Councils,
and yet there was never any mention made of Transubstantiation Lib. 2. c. 8. p.
171. Lib. 2. c. 11. p. 210. Ibid.
therein: That they were together at the Synod of Barris where Anselm disputed
against 'em: That the Abbot Nectairus was an assessor at the Council of Latran
under Alexander the III. That the Emperor Emanuel assembled a Council at
Constantinople in order to a Reunion, wherein the two Parties failed not to
appear: That there was one held at Nice upon the same Occasion: That Michael
Paleologus called several Assemblies in Greece for the same purpose: Lib. 3. c.
2. p. 262. Lib. 3. c. 3. Ibid. Lib. 4. c. 2.
That he sent his Legates and Deputies from the Greek Church to the Council at
Lions, in which the Reunion was concluded, and that in fine, they met together
in the Council of Florence.

I answer, there was never any Council held, either in the East or West, by the
Greeks alone, or Latins, nor by Greeks and Latins both together, wherein all
the Differences of the two Churches were proposed to be examined. There were
never any Points handled in them, but those which were ever openly and expressly
controverted, and even not all of them neither. In the Synod of Barry, there
was only handled the Point of the Procession of the Holy Ghost. Does this argue
they agreed in all the rest? There was not, says Mr. Arnaud, any other
Difference in the Doctrines of Faith. But what matter is it whether the other
Differences were concerning Articles of Faith, seeing the Greeks made them the
occasion of their Separation, and stuck to 'em with all possible earnestness?
Moreover, who told Mr. Arnaud that the Greeks esteem not the Article of the
Azymes as a Point of Faith, and likewise those of Purgatory, and the Pope's
Supremacy, etc? Neither the Greeks nor the Latins, says Mr. Arnaud, supposed
there were any other Differences between them in Points of Faith, than that
touching the Procession of the Holy Ghost. Yet did they not agree in their
Opinions about Purgatory, nor the Pope's Supremacy, and yet according to Mr.
Arnaud the Latins of those times reckoned not these Doctrines amongst the
Articles of their Faith. Sure I am there are People of his own Communion who
will not justify him in this Assertion.

IT IS the same in reference to the Council of Lateran. He is willing to make
use of it, because he finds it amongst his Collections, but it will be a hard
matter for him to show what past therein touching the Greeks, for all that he
can know of it, is contained in the Letters of George Bishop of Corcyra to the
Abbot Nectairus, and from the Abbot's Letters again to George, Baron. ad ann.
1179.
mentioned by Baronius, and which relate not a Word to the purpose.

TO refute what he tells us concerning the Council of Constantinople under
Emanuel Comnenus, I need only mention what he himself relates. That the Latins
require no more of the Greeks, than that they should mention the Lib. 2. c. 11.
p. 210.
Pope's Name in their public Offices, acknowledge his Supremacy, and right of
Appeals. Which is as much as to say, that all the rest signified nothing,
provided the Pope be satisfied.

AT Nice were only examined the Procession of the Holy Spirit, and the Azymes,
other Differences were laid aside. And as to what passed under Michael
Paleologus touching the Reunion of the two Churches, Mr. Arnaud forgets to put
us in mind of that Violence, Deceit, and Tyranny which that Emperor used to
accomplish his Design, as we already observed, which was managed by Cruelty,
Imprisonments, Punishments, and Banishments, and which drew on Michael such a
deadly Hatred from the Greeks, that they refused him Burial after his Death; an
Affair wherein after all he cheated the Greeks, in making them believe that
each Church should keep its Doctrines and Ceremonies, and that it signified
nothing to amuse the Pope with granting him his Supremacy, right of Appeals,
and commemoration of him in their Liturgy.

AS to what concerned the Council of Florence, the Author of the Perpetuity
having already made use of it, I believed 'twas sufficient to answer him that
whatsoever passed in it, was a mere politic Intrigue, as well in respect of
the Latins, as the Greeks, that Pope Eugenius and his Court acted therein with
Violence, and the Greek Emperor managed his Business after a very timorous and
interessed manner, and the Greek Bishops bewrayed Answ. to the 2d. Treatise. 2.
p. c. 8.
a most pitiful Ignorance and Weakness, several of 'em being won by the
Latins, the rest signing the Act of Reunion without any Consultation held first
together, whence I conclude there must not be advantage taken hence, as if the
Greeks and Latins were agreed in the Point of the substantial Conversion under
pretense it was not debated in that Council, and that the rather because the
Greeks upon their return into their own Country openly renounced this pretended
Reunion.

BE my Answers never so reasonable, yet do they not relish well with Mr.
Arnaud, wherefore it must not be expected he was satisfied with this. Much less
inquire whether 'twas with or without a Preface, that he offered his new
Objections; For 'twould be a kind of Miracle if he who reproaches me with my
Prefaces, should so much as once enter upon Examination of a thing, without
preparing the Readers by long Discourses. Mr. Claude, says he, here, Lib. 4.
c. 2. p. 333.
who can speak when he pleases, Court Language in his Books of Divinity,
pleasantly reproaches in the Preface of his Book the Author of the Perpetuity,
that he decides Questions like a Soldier. I examine not at present whether he
had Reason for his application of this Expression, I reserve this for the
Discourse wherein I design to treat of his personal Differences with this
Author. But seeing he has introduced this term in a serious Dispute: I think I
may borrow it of him, whereby to express after what sort he gets clear of some
considerable Difficulties, and touching which we may say with great reason,
that never Man fought his way through them more Soldier like than he did. And a
little further; I cannot produce a better Instance of Mr. Claude's Soldier like
Humor, than the manner in which he treats of whatsoever passed in the Council
of Florence.

IT sufficiently appears Mr. Arnaud designed to censure the use I made of the
Term of Soldier-like, and the Author of the Perpetuity likewise Criticiz'd on
another of my Expressions, viz. Fly in a man's Face. But if I may speak my
Thoughts of these Censures: It seems to me these kind of dealings become not
Persons, that profess a more profound Literature, and consequently should mind
things, more than Words, not to say these Remarks are far Remote from the
Subject we handle, and contribute little to the clearing up of our Question.
Moreover what have we to do with the Court, and its Language in our Dispute. I
pretend not to speak the Language of the Court, my Condition and Profession
keeps me at such a Distance from it, that I know not what Language is spoke
there. I do not question but they express themselves politely and rationally,
but passing my Life as I do out of the Palaces of great Personages, and far
from the Honor of their Commerce, their ways of Expressing themselves are
unknown to me. I am not perhaps sufficiently in Love with the Age I live in, to
leave my common Expressions, to accommodate my self to that of the Court. In
short, I pretend not to speak so neatly, as to suppose my Style is without
Fault. I leave to others the Clory of becoming Masters of Language; to
discredit received Expressions, and introduce new ones, whether justly or not,
I refer my self to others to judge, that understand them. In the mean time
methinks Mr. Arnaud should not so greatly find fault with this Term of
Soldier-like, considering the use I made of it. I believed, said I, I ought
much less to make use of this new Method which that Author has found out
whereby to refute Mr. Aubertin' s Book, and in effect this is to do like
Alexander, who cut the knot he could not untye, and to Dispute Soldier like.
This Term thus used in a Preface seemed supportable: Yet I am sorry it has
offended Mr. Arnaud, if it be because we made his Friend a common Soldier, let
him consider likewise, we represented him also as an Alexander.

BUT howsoever let us see whether my Answer concerning the Council of Florence,
is so Soldier like as he pretends. Policy, says he, has its Bounds, it has not
a part in every Affair, nor effects all things: Who doubts it? All that I
attribute to the Effects of that Policy which reigned so much in that Council,
was, that it obliged the Greeks to Reunite themselves with the Latins, without
a Pre examination of all the Differences between the two Churches, in hope each
of 'em should keep their own Doctrines, and suffer no Innovations. This was the
same Policy Michael Paleologus inspired his Bishops with, as we already
observed, and made them consent to the Union at the Council of Lions, under
Gregory the X. Now this is called in my Dictionary, (for Mr. Arnaud tells me
too of Dictionaries of my own making) this is called, I say, a plastered Union,
an external Agreement which has no more than the Shadow and appearance of a
Union, seeing that within there is a real Separation.

THE Judgment which ought to be made of my Answer, depends on two Questions,
the first, whether in effect Policy had any share in this Affair, or not: the
second, whether we may justly say that it so far prevailed on the Greeks as to
make 'em silent in the Point of Transubstantiation, although they did not believe
it.

FOR the deciding of the first Question, I desire no other Person than Mr.
Arnaud himself, it is no great Mystery, says he, to tell us that in this Design
of an Ibid p. 337.
Union, touching the Differences which divided the Greeks from the Latins,
there should be politic Respects, and humane Interests; this is neither
marvelous nor unjust. But whether Just, or Unjust, is not the Question, it is
sufficient to me there were such Respects in this Affair. The Turks, says he
likewise, made great Progresses, and reduced the Emperor to the greatest
Extremity. And a little lower, The Emperor chose rather to treat with the Pope
and Cardinals, as being more able to procure him that Assistance, he needed and
hoped to obtain by means of the Union, than with the Council of Bale. Here then
we have the Policy and Interest of the Greeks described. The Fathers of Bale,
says he moreover, were very desirous to raise up the Dignity of their Council,
by an Union with the Greeks, and therefore they made the most advantageous
Offers they were able, to the Deputies of the Emperor John Paleologus Emanuel'
s Son and Successor. But Eugenus the IV intending to transfer the Council from
Bale to Ferrara, he made use of the Reunion of the Greeks for a Pretense of
this Translation, and so ordered it with the Greek Emperor, that he engaged him
to send word he could not come to Bale. So that here we have again the
political Interest of Eugenus and his Bishops. We might here relate several
matters touching the miserable State of the Greeks, and of the Negotiations of
the Council of Bale, and of Pope Eugenus with the Emperor and Patriarch,
touching the Reasons why the Pope was preferred, and several other
Circumstances. But it is needless to prove a Point that is granted.

COME we then to the second Question, whether it may be truly said that Policy
so far prevailed on the Greeks as to make 'em silent on the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, although they did not believe it. For the clearing up of this
Point, the Reader must here remember what I proved in the foregoing Chapter. 1.
That there are two sorts of different Opinions between the Greeks and Latins,
some of which broke out into open Disputes, and others not. 2. That although the
Doctrines of the two Churches touching the Change hap'ning in the Eucharist,
are in the main infinitely different, yet is their Difference concealed under a
Vail of Expressions common to 'em both. On these two Principles I say we must
not imagine there was made in this Council a general Discussion of all the
Points wherein these two Churches differed, nor that the Union was carried on
upon this Account. It was indeed at first the Sentiment of George Scholarius
who told the Emperor, that to make a solid and lasting Union, it was needful to
examine all the Doctrines on both sides, Syrop. Hist. Council. Flor. Sect. 3. c.
6.
without omitting any. But for the making of a politic temporary Union, the
sending of three or four Deputies was sufficient, which would produce the same,
if not a better Effect, and would be more beneficial to their Country, than if
the Emperor and his whole Clergy were present. This Advice was presently liked
of, but not taken. For there was neither mention in the Council of Christ's
descent into Hell, the Salvation of the Damned, Apocryphal Books, nor of any
other Points but what had been openly controverted, and of them how many were
passed over in Silence? There was no mention of the Communion in both kind,
although the Greeks hold the necessity thereof, nor of the Priests Coelibacy,
although this had been formerly debated, nor use of carved Images, which the
Greeks esteem Idols, nor Ministry of Confirmation, which the Latins hold
belongs only to the Bishop, whereas the Greeks administer it by their Priests,
although Photius made it a Cause of Separation. Neither was there any mention of
the use of Blood, and Creatures strangled, which the Greeks hold unlawful,
although Cerularius made it his chief Accusation, nor of the visible Light which
shined about the Body of our Savior on Mount Tabor, which the Greeks hold to
be a Beam of God's eternal Light, nor several other Errors broached by Palamas
which the Greeks have embraced, nor of the Pope's Power to grant Indulgencies,
which the Greeks deride, nor of the three Immersions they believe necessary in
Baptism. There was only mention of the Procession of the Holy Ghost, the
Azymes, Purgatory; the beatifical Vision of the Saints, and papal Supremacy.
And yet there were but two of these five Points discussed neither, namely that
of Purgatory, and that of the Holy Spirit; the others passed into the Decree
without Examination, as appears by the Acts of the same Council. And now would
Mr. Arnaud make us believe that Policy could not so far prevail on the Greeks,
as to make 'em silent in the Point of Transubstantiation? It made 'em silent in
Points expressly set down in their Books, in others which were publicly
controverted betwixt them and the Latins, and agitated in the time of their
Separation, and yet it could not shut their Mouths, in Reference to an Article
on which they saw nothing determined in their Church, neither for it, nor
against it, on which neither they nor their Fathers had yet Disputed, and of
whose Importance they could not judge, being hindered by their Ignorance.

MOREOVER, had Transubstantiation been proposed to have been either approved or
rejected, Mr. Arnaud's Argument would have some Color perhaps. I say perhaps,
for after all, if their Policy was so prevalent as to make 'em sign a Decree
against their own Consciences, wherein they renounced their ancient Opinions
touching the five Articles, and received those of the Latins; who sees not that
it might as well obliged 'em to receive the Doctrine of the substantial
Conversion? But howsoever they were not put upon to acknowledge it, and their
Silence signifies no more on either part, but that both were quietly permitted
to enjoy their own Opinions. We must not imagine they pretended to approve by
Virtue of this Union all the Doctrines of the Latins, and there could be no
more concluded thence at farthest, than a simple Toleration, as of other Points
which were not discussed; Now if humane Interest was so powerful over the
Greeks as to make 'em abjure their own Opinions, and embrace in appearance
others, can it be thought strange they should pass over in Silence an Article
of that kind. It seems on the contrary that Zeal for their Religion, if they
had any spark of it yet left, should oblige 'em to restrain the Dispute to a
few Points, for they would lose as many of 'em as they proposed. The necessity
of their Affairs forced them to make a Sacrifice of 'em to the Latins, so that
all those they could smother by their Silence, were as so many Points won,
because they were not lost.

MR Arnaud tells us, that their politic Interests were not so prevalent over
Lib. 4. c. 2. p. 337.
'em, as to take away from 'em all kind of Liberty, and carry them forth to the
betraying of their own Judgments without resistance; that on the contrary they
managed their Pretensions, and that the Question touching the Holy Spirit was
discussed in this Council, with as much exactness as ever any was in any
Council. That if they betrayed their Conscience, it was through humane Weakness,
having first rendered to their Opinions all the Testimonies which could be
expected from weak Persons: But what could be alleged to less purpose? All
this is true in respect of the Doctrines which they were forced to abandon, to
subscribe to contrary ones; but this signifies nothing to others they mention
not, and which consequently they were not obliged to receive, amongst which
that of Transubstantiation was one, and moreover this Resistance and Management
he speaks of, only appeared in the Doctrine of the Procession, and not in other
Points contained in the Decree, for they passed them over without Examination
and Discussion, except that of Purgatory, which was slightly regarded.

MR. Arnaud sets himself to show afterward that the Latins did not suspect the
Greeks held not Transubstantiation; that they betrayed not their own
Sentiments, nor were wilfully ignorant of those of the Greeks. We shall
hereafter consider the Conduct of the Latins; But make we first an end of
examining that of the Greeks. Does Mr. Claude, says he, know what he says
when he makes such unreasonable Suppositions? Does he consider into what
absurdities he plunges himself. Or will he pretend the Greeks agreed amongst
themselves before they parted from Constantinople, to conceal their Opinions on
this Point from the Latins, and carried on this Design so dexterously, that
amongst so many Greeks there were not one of them that discovered this Secret
to the Latins? There are certainly judicious Persons enough still in the World
to determine which of us two seems to consider most what he says. I do not
pretend that either the Greeks plotted together at Constantinople, or that they
carried it so closely at Florence, but that the Latins might know (if they
would) what was their Belief touching the Eucharist; Their Books speak their
Minds. These Complots and Conspirations are Phantasms which appear to Mr.
Arnaud in the heat of his Study. I pretend no more than what is true, to wit,
that the Greeks passed over in Silence several Articles on which they had not
the same Sentiments as the Latins, and I believe Transubstantiation was one of
them. If Mr. Arnaud pretends the contrary, it lies upon him to produce his
Reasons. Let him tell us what Complot there could be between the Greeks and
Latins, in reference to their Silence in so many other Points, which were not
discussed. Let him tell us at least why in the Acts of the Council, and other
Writings, wherein is mentioned the Eucharist, when the Latins say,
Transubstantiate, the Greeks on the contrary say only Consecrate and Sanctify.
Wherefore in the Decretal of the Union, whether we read it in Latin or Greek,
we find no mention there of the substantial Conversion. Why the Article of the
Sacrament was expressed in these general Terms, Corpus Christi veraciter
confici, (...). Was it Policy or Ignorance, or Complot, or Conspiration which
made them reject the Terms of Gregory the VII. The Bread and Wine are changed
substantially into the true, proper and living Flesh, etc. or those of Innocent
the III. The Bread is transubstantiated into the Body, and the Blood into the
Wine? For, for to tell us that the Greeks meant by their (...), a true and real
Transubstantiation, because 'twas thus the Latins understood their Confici, is
a frivolous Pretense which I have already refuted.

MR. Arnaud takes a great deal of Pains to prove the Latins could not be
Ignorant of the Sentiment of the Greeks, nor the Greeks of the Latins; But to
no purpose. It signifies nothing to me whether they did, or did not know one
another Opinions. We will suppose if he will, they made this their particular
Study, but then what signifies this to our Question? I am satisfied they were
reunited without any formal Declaration of their Agreement in this Point, for
as it cannot be concluded from their Silence on other Points, that there were
no difference betwixt them, so is it the same concerning Transubstantiation.
Mr. Arnaud reasons ill, because he argues from this Principle, that the Greeks
disputed on all Particulars wherein they knew they differed from the Latins.
This is a false Principle, as appears by the Instances I already produced. It
appears from the very Acts of that Council that the Emperor wearied with the
Debate, hastened to Expedients whereby to conclude the Union. We have left,
(says he to his Greeks) our Families in danger, exposed to the Council. Flor.
Sess. 23.
Fury of the Infidels. Time slips away, and we advance nothing, let us lay
aside these Disputes, and betake our selves to some Medium. And therefore we
find Sess. 25.
the Greeks telling the Latins: That they were not for Disputing, because
Disputes generally engendered Trouble. But they should endeavor to find out
some other means of Union. We have already told you, says the Emperor to
Cardinal Julian, that we are not for any more Disputes, for Words are never
wanting Sess. 25.
to you. Your Dialect will never suffer you to acquiesce in any thing, being
ever ready at a Reply, and to speak the last. Let us I pray then lay aside
these tedious Controversies, and betake our selves to some other means for
reuniting us.

BUT the Greeks assisted at the Service of the Latins, and adored the Mass in
the same manner as the Roman Church, says Andrew de St. Cruce. I answer Lib.
4. c. 2. p. 343.
they were present at the Service of the Latins, not to show they approved
their Doctrine touching the Conversion, but only in token of their Union, each
Church keeping its own particular Belief. Who will wonder if People who could
against their Consciences sign a Decree wherein they expressly abjured five of
the Articles of their Faith, whereby to reconcile themselves with the Church of
Rome, should yield to be once present at its Service? Yet this was not without
offering Violence to themselves, for Syropulus observes, that the Pope having
sent them word that on the morrow they must celebrate Mass, and consummate the
Union, and that if there were any amongst them would partake of the Mysteries
of the Latins, they should prepare themselves; at these Words the Greeks were
seized with Horror, (...). Hist. Conc. Flor. Sect. 10. cap. 9.
Moreover I know not whether what Andrew de St. Cruce says be true, that they
adored the Mass in the same manner as the Latins, for the same Syropulus
relates that they stood all the time of the Office; We stood, says he, in our
Sect. 10. c. 10.
Vestments during the Liturgy. But supposing it were true they used the same
external Ceremonies as the Latins, it would not hence follow they believed the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation, nor gave the Eucharist a sovereign Adoration.
For to kneel before an Object is not in the Sense of either Greeks or Latins, a
token that a Man adores it; neither with an absolute Adoration, nor that of
Latria.

I am so far from excusing this Action, that I believe it is on the contrary
inexcusable both before God and Men; But how great soever their Fault was in
assisting at the Service of the Latins, which they so greatly abhorred, it
appears that what they did, was not to testify they believed the same things as
they, but that the Union after a sort was accomplished. For they were present
at their Service, only in hope the Latins would likewise assist at theirs, and
in effect the Emperor was very urgent with the Pope for this. To which the Pope
replied, he would first examine their Liturgy, and particularly consider in
what manner they celebrated it, and see whether he could satisfy their Demands.
Whereupon the Emperor finding himself abused, thus expressed Sect. 10. c. 11.
himself. We hoped the Latins would have amended several Errors, but I find
them not only Innovators and Blame worthy in several things, but that which is
worse, they take upon them to reform us. It is worth while to observe what kind
of Union this was, which being perfected, the Pope declares on his side, that
neither he nor his Latins had considered the Liturgy of the Greeks, and the
Emperor on the other hand, protests the Latins are Innovators, and guilty of
several Errors.

BUT, says Mr. Arnaud, supposing Policy hindered the Greeks from opposing the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation, what end could Syropulus have in concealing
from us this Mystery? Why discovering to us as he does, his Countrymens
weakness; he mentions not one word concerning that which ought to be the chief
Subject of his History? Why does he not blame the Ceremonies of the Latins? Wh^
has he not detested in his History the Adoration of the Host, and Feast of the
Holy Sacrament, of which he was a Witness? Why did he not deplore the
Abominations of those of his Nation, that were present at the Popish Mass, who
showed it the same Respect as the Latins, which is to say, adored the
Eucharist. To all these Wherefores, I shall oppose others: Why didnot Syropulus
take notice of the Silence of the Greeks and Latins, on the Article touching
the Salvation of the Damned, and Christ's descent into Hell, and offering them
his Gospel? Why did he not censure the Neglect of both one and the other, in
that they mentioned not a word concerning the Marriage of Priests, nor
communion under both kinds, nor of all those other Articles I denoted in this
Chapter? These kind of Questions which Mr. Arnaud makes, are good for nothing
but to impose on inconsiderate Persons? Syropulus is an Historian that contents
himself with relating what passed of moment in this Affair, and sometimes to
give his Opinion in general thereupon; but it plainly appears he never intended
to reflect on every Particular wherein his Nation was concerned. A History is
not a Dispute: Wherefore then should he Discourse of Transubstantiation in it?
Why blame the Ceremonies of the Latins, or detest the Adoration of the
Sacrament, and its Feast? Why tell us of the Adoration which the Greeks
rendered to the Host of the Latins, seeing he assures us on the contrary, that
they stood bolt upright during the Liturgy? Mr. Arnaud who calls upon others so
much, to think upon what they write; has he I say, considered what he says
concerning the Feast of the Holy Sacrament? Wherefore, says he, has not
Syropulus detested the Feast of the Holy Sacrament, of which he was a Witness?
For I shall only tell him: He has not mentioned a word of it, and yet it is
certain the Greeks do not approve it, but on the contrary condemn it, as I
already showed in the foregoing Book. It does not then follow the Greeks hold
Transubstantiation, although Syropulus speaks not of it.

AND thus much concerning the Council of Florence. Mr. Arnaud likewise draws
some Arguments from what passed after the Greeks had renounced this Union. And
first he takes for granted, that Transubstantiation was established in this
Council, and that the Greeks solemnly approved of it. On this Principle he runs
on arguing beyond all bounds, that those that violated the Union, should
inveigh against this Doctrine of the Latins, and those that approved it. He
introduces again Syropulus, and alleges Marc of Ephesus, and describes his
Hatred against the Latins: He tells us of a Synod held at Jerusalem, against
the Patriarch Metrophanus, and those of his Party. This was the time, says he,
if ever, to reproach those with Transubstantiation that had consented to the
Union, and approved this Doctrine in it. He takes Occasion Lib. 4. c. 3. p. 355.
hence to bless God the Greeks had renounced this Union, acknowledging the
Divine Providence therein, which permitted it thus to come to pass, to the end
he might not want matter for his Book. Whatsoever we related, says he,
touching the Greeks approbation of Transubstantiation would have less force,
had Page 347.
this Agreement subsisted. It would have been alleged that politic Interest
having made the Greeks consent to the receiving of this Doctrine, they were
afterward withheld by Fear from condemning it, and being insensibly accustomed
to it, dared not immediately reject it, by reason of the bad estate of their
Affairs. But to the end their real Belief might appear in this Subject, it was
necessary this Agreement should be disturbed, and their Passion at liberty to
break out, that they should endeavor to make void whatsoever they had
confirmed at Florence: That they should attack the Union in all possible
manners, and denote whatsoever they could gainsay, reproachfully charge and
caluminate the Latins with whom they had treated, and the Greeks who had
consented to the Union, that their Hatred and Rage should discover it
self-without Disguise and Constraint.

ADMIRE I beseech you this flight of Fancy, and vast extent of Thought. The
Good and Evil which befell the Christian World two hundred Years ago, appears
designed for the Glory of Mr. Arnaud's Book, with this only Difference, that
the Evils contribute to it more than the Good; for it is the Schism, Passion,
Hatred, and Rage of the Greeks which give him a complete Victory. It was
necessary, says he, they should be thus furious, which is as much as to say,
it was necessary half of the World should be damned, according to him, that God
should be dishonored by a thousand Crimes, and his Church torn to pieces by a
dreadful Division. And why? For to furnish Mr. Arnaud with an Argument, and
that he might have Matter for one Chapter more.

BUT he will be much amazed to find this Argument so dear bought, to conclude
nothing, being grounded on a false Supposition. For it is false the Greeks
approved Transubstantiation in the Council of Florence: That they Disputed not
of it, I acknowledge, but that they approved it I deny. Bessarion speaking in
their Name, says, that the Bread is Consecrated, and made the Body of Christ;
and the Decree bears, that the Body of Jesus Christ is truly Consecrated:
Therefore they approved Transubstantiation. What a Consequence here is? Mr.
Arnaud has a Secret above my Apprehension, for he can change the very Nature of
things, he can diminish and augment them as he pleases. But the Misery on it
is, this appears contrary to Reason. Why will he have the new Schism of the
Greeks, to have happened merely for the furnishing him with an Argument? It was
not known in those days he was to make a Book. Why will he have the Greeks
approve Transubstantiation at Florence? Seeing there was not the least mention
of it? Why must those that broke the Union, reproach the others with approving
the Doctrine of the Latins? Why will he have Syropulus, Marc of Ephesus, and
the Council of Jerusalem, to declaim on this Point, seeing they had no reason
to do so. Certainly such gross Illusions as these, deserved not such
Exclamations.

IT only remains for the finishing of this Chapter, and this matter of Negative
Arguments, to show a Reason for the Silence of the Latins, and that will be no
hard matter to do. The Latins have innovated in the Doctrine of the Eucharist:
They have grounded their Innovations on certain Expressions of the Fathers,
which bear that the Bread is the Body of Jesus Christ, that it is changed into
the Body of Jesus Christ. They have made it their Business for some Ages, to
make the World believe these Terms signify a true and real Conversion of the
Substance of Bread, into that of the Body of Christ, to defend themselves by
this means from the Reproach of Innovation. Observing then that the Greeks do
commonly use these kind of Expressions, and even added to 'em some others which
seem more emphatical; as for Instance, that the Bread is not a Figure, that it
is the true Body of Jesus Christ, and that the Body born of the Virgin, and the
Bread, are not two things, but one and the same; they well knew it was their
Interest to rest satisfied with these general Expressions, although in effect they
signify nothing less than Transubstantiation. Had they condemned them as
insufficient, and urged the Greeks to admit of theirs, they would at the same
time condemned themselves as Innovators. They chose then rather to pass over
softly this Article, than to venture near a Rock against which their Cause ran
a risk of being dashed to pieces. And this obliged them in their Dealings with
the Greeks, to content themselves with their Expressions, and accommodate
themselves to 'em, that they might not move 'em, as appears by the Formulary of
the Reunions already mentioned, and Decree of the Council of Florence, wherein
was used only the word (...) in Greek, and Confioi in Latin.

YET we must not imagine but that judicious Persons amongst the Latins, and
especially those that had the Government in their Hands, saw well enough the
Difference, between these general Expressions of the Greeks, and the precise
and determinate ones of the Roman Church. That learned Man I mentioned in the
seventh Chapter of the foregoing Book, (who was consulted on the Articles which
the Russians in Poland, proposed in order to their Reunion with the Roman
Church, amongst which was this, that they should not be obliged to Celebrate
Corpus Christi Feast, nor carry about the Sacrament in Procession) answered,
That as to what concerned the Procession, it was not a Thom. a Jesu. Lib. 6. p.
3. c. 3.
matter to stick at, but there were things of greater Importance to be
considered touching the Sacrament. De processione infesto corporis non
laborarem, multa tamen circa hoc Sacramentum examinanda sunt. And therefore
when particular Persons amongst the Greeks embrace the Roman Religion, the
usual terms of their Church are not counted sufficient, but they are made to
understand distinctly the substantial Conversion, and to receive the term of
Transubstantiation, as we already offered in the Procession of Faith they are
obliged to make. Hence proceed all those Efforts since so long a time, to
introduce insensibly amongst the Greeks this Belief, by means of false Greeks,
as appears by the Example of that Monk mentioned by Mr. Basire, who had slily
insinuated the word (...), in his Catechism, and was censured for it by the
rest. When the Scholars of the Seminaries are sent into Greece, to live amongst
the Schismatics, and procure the establishment of the Roman Religion, they are
made to sign the Confession of Faith I now mentioned, which expressly denotes
Transubstantiation: So likewise is their Language far different from that of
the real Greeks, as appears by the Example of the great Paysius Ligaridius, and
the terrible Baron of Spartaris. And this is evident in the Greeks that embrace
the Romish Religion, for they speak not as others, nor as they did themselves
before their Conversion, as I already instanced in Bessarion, Emanuel Calecas,
and John Plusiadene.

IT is the Latins great Interest not to dispute against the Greeks on all the
Points wherein the two Churches differ; And therefore they give in charge to
the Emissaries, to use the greatest Caution in handling Controversies. It is
sometimes expedient to fall upon Controversies, says Possevin, but they must
be Possevin. Bibl. select. l. 5. c. 24.
warily and moderately handled: Neither must a Man mention any of these five
Articles which were heretofore the principal ones, and which the Synod of
Florence and Gennadius handled. For now the Controversies of the Azyme and
Eucharist are no longer agitated, neither in Candia, nor any other of the
Eastern Parts. And therefore these Points cannot again be received, without
giving just Offense. As to the Article of the Procession of the Holy Spirit,
there are few that understand it, and should it again be controverted, it is
likely 'twould happen that those who were ignorant of it before, would after
Inquiry into that, pass over to other things.

THE Latins greatest Interest then, consists in two things; the first, to
subject the Greeks by any means to the Roman See; and the other, insensibly to
change the ancient from of their Religion, and slily introduce amongst them the
Doctrines and Rites of the Latin Church. To accomplish the first of these, the
Latins act and yield every thing as far as the Honor of their Church will
permit them, and according as they find fewer or more Difficulties. Mr. Arnaud
himself has discovered something of this, when he told us that in the Council
of Constantinople held under Emanuel Comnenus, The Latins only required Lib. 2.
c. 11. p. 910.
of the Greeks that they should mention the Pope's Name in their public
Prayers, acknowledge his Supremacy, and the right of Appeals to him; the rest at
that time being not regarded. We have likewise seen that Michael Paleologus
persuaded his Bishops to Embrace the Union, seeing there were no more required
of them than these three Points. Yet the Article touching the Holy Spirit, was
so ancient and famous a Difference between them, that 'twas a hard matter to
reunite therein, and take no notice of it, and we find the Greeks themselves
mentioned it, because it had been one of the chief Causes of their Separation.
The Latins then not being able to pass over this Point in Silence, offered the
Greeks sometimes, that provided they received this Doctrine in their Belief,
that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father and the Son, they might keep
their Symbol as it was, without expressly adding the Filioque. And this the
Popes Legates who were at Nice after the taking of Constantinople, told them as
from him, according to Mr. Arnaud's Relation. Lib. 3. c. 2.
The Pope, say they, will not constrain the Greeks to add this Clause expressly
in the Symbol, when they shall sing it in the Church. And it was upon this
Condition that the Reunion was made in the Council of Florence: But when the
Latins saw a more favorable Occasion, they extended their Pretensions farther,
and changed their Custom, as will appear by what I am now going to say.
Nicholas the III sent Legates into Greece to the Emperor Michael Paleologus to
solicit him, to oblige his Patriarch and Prelates to make their Profession of
Faith, which they had not yet made, and renounce their Schism. The Emperor
earnestly besought the Pope to leave the Symbol untouched, and not oblige the
Greeks to sing it with the addition of the Filioque, to prevent all Tumults:
But Michael being known to be a Prince devoted, (for his interest) to the Roman
Church, and therefore might be easily prevailed on, the Pope gave order to his
Legates to answer him touching this Article, as follows. That the Unity of the
Catholic Faith permits not Diversity in its Confessions, either in the Act of
Profession, or in the Chaunt, or any particular Declaration of Allat. de Perp
Cons^l. 2. c. 15.
Faith. Much less was this to be suffered in the public singing of the Creed,
wherein Uniformity ought especially to appear, in as much as this Chant comes
often in their Service. Wherefore, adds he, the Church of Rome has determined,
and resolved that the Creed shall be sung in Conformity as well by the Greeks
as Latins, with this addition of the Filioque. The Greeks were not so
rigorously dealt withal at Nice, nor Florence: The Unity of Faith suffered
under Gregory the IX, and Eugenus the IV, what it could not bear under Nicholas
the III: Which is as much as to say, that the Faith yields as often as need
requires, to this great Interest of submitting the Greeks to the Sea of Rome.
The Greeks are complied withal, when it cannot be helped, and the Spirit of
Domination becomes Master of that of the Dispute.

AS to the second Interest, which consists in changing insensibly the Religion
of the Greeks, and slily insinuating the Doctrine and Rites of the Roman Church
in its stead, it appears from the Course they take, that this is the Design of
the Latins. It is for this purpose that Seminaries have been set up at Rome,
and other places, and the whole East long since orespread with Emissaries. It
is in order to this, that the Emissaries apply themselves to the converting of
the Greek Bishops, and instructing of Youth in the Roman Religion, under
pretense of teaching them the Tongues and Philosophy. And it is for this end
likewise, that the Scholars of the Seminaries are entertained and sent into
Greece; they have the Liberty to receive Orders from the Hands of schismatical
Bishops, and the Bishoprics are endeavored to be filled with them, and they
are sometimes promoted to Patriarchates. It is clear that in taking this
Course, they have no need to dispute it out with 'em.

IT will not, I suppose be amiss to observe here what Thomas a Jesu (who wrote
a Book touching the means for the Converting of Infidels, Heretics, and
Schismatics) tells us, is the ready way to convert all Greece to the Catholic
Faith. His Holiness, says he, who is so vigilant for the Salvation of Souls,
Lib. 6. c. 4.
must take care, that as soon as ever the Patriarchal Church of Constantinople
becomes void, to pitch upon one of the Scholars of the Seminaries, or Monks who
have taken upon them Ecclesiastical Charges in Greece. He must choose one whom
he thinks most fitting, and give him notice thereof, but as privately as may
be, lest the Greeks come to know it is he that gives him the Patriarchal Church
of Constantinople, Elects and Confirms him Patriarch. For this effect his
Holiness must order him to betake himself to Constantinople, where he will find
Ambassadors already prepared by his Holiness, who by the Presents they shall
make the Turk, (on whom the Election and Confirmation of the Patriarch depends,
although unjustly,) will obtain, by adding something to the usual Tribute, that he
command the Greeks to choose for their Patriarch, him whom his Holiness shall
design. They will no sooner demand this, than obtain it; for Money will make the
Tyrant do any thing, as appears by the little Difficulty he makes of taking
away the Patriarchal Dignity from those that have it already. Moreover there
ought to be no scruple made of this, as if it were a kind of Simony: For this
is not a setting the Patriarchate upon Sale, seeing his Holiness has already
given it, Money is only made use of to remove some Difficulties. Now Divines
are unanimous in their Opinions, that we may free our selves from Vexations and
Obstructions, by means of Money. Neither can it be alleged that hereby the
Metropolitains will be deprived of their right of Election; for it is clear
their Elections are invalid, being as they are Schismatics, and consequently
have have no Jurisdiction: Moreover it seems to be rather the Turk that makes
the Election, than they, for they Consecrate him whom he Presents. So that here
will this Advantage redound from this aforementioned Election. 1st. That as
fast as the Schismatical Bishops dye, the Scholars of the Seminary, or others,
of whose Judgment there is no cause to doubt, will take their places. 2d. The
Reformation of the Schismatics may be happily undertaken and effected in
particular Synods. But his Holiness must never despair nor be weary, or think
it sufficient that he has elected one Patriarch. He must on the contrary
substitute another again and again, ever putting Scholars of the Seminary into
the places of the Deceased, until all the old Schismatical Prelates be dead,
and their places filled with Catholics. And seeing that the Election of
Patriarchs of Alexandria and Antioch depend likewise on the Turk, because they
are Greeks; and that the Government of these Churches is in the Hands of
Greeks, the same Measures must be taken in respect of them, by means of
Ambassadors. It is certain that this Affair will be successful, for Money does
all things in this Country. So that all the Patriarchs being Roman Catholic,
and their Duty obliging them to establish Catholic Bishops and Curats
according as their Wisdom shall direct them; nothing will hinder us from saying
in a short time, behold one Flock, and one only Shepherd. The Schismatical
Prelates will be rooted out, and those who from their Infancy have been piously
brought up in the Bosom of the Catholic Church, will take their places. These
new Prelates by the uprightness of their Lives, and soundness of their
Doctrine, may govern a People who are only Erroneous upon the account of their
natural Facility and Proneness to believe what their Bishops tell them. And
this is the Course Thomas a Jesu would have taken, and not that of Disputes and
Controversies.

CHAP. VII.
Several Passages of Greek Authors (Cited by Mr. Arnaud) Examined.

THAT which remains to be examined of Mr. Arnaud's Dispute touching this matter
of the Greeks since the eleventh Century, will not long detain us. He produces
some Passages out of Theophylact, Euthymius, Nicholas Methoniensis, Cabasilas,
Simeon de Thessalonica, Jeremias the Patriarch of Constantinople, and several
of the Greek Books of Divinity. They are the same we find in all the
Controvertists in Bellarmin, Cardinal Perron, Coccius, Father Nouet, and
especially Allatius, from whom it seems Mr. Arnaud has taken them, rather than
from their Originals. It will be a needless Labor to relate them at length,
one after another, together with Mr. Arnaud's Commentaries on them: It will be
sufficient I examine as much as is necessary to give the true Sense of them,
and to discover Mr. Arnaud's Errors; which I hope to do so clearly, that the
Readers will remain satisfied.

FIRST, Theophylact, Euthymius, Cabasilus, and Jeremias, assure us that the
Bread of the Eucharist is not an Antitype, that is to say a Figure, or
Representation, but the very Body it self of Jesus Christ, because he did not
say, this is the Antitype, but this is my Body. I grant all this, and I join
all these four Authors together on this Head, that I may thereby avoid Mr.
Arnaud's Prolixity, who having proposed them one after another, could not avoid
the often repeating of the same Inductions and Arguments: One Answer shall serve
for all. Theophylact, says he, keeps to the propriety of Words, he excludes
Lib. 2. c. 9. p. 180.
whatsoever varies from 'em: He overthrows and absolutely rejects all
metaphorical Significations, and keeps close to the literal Signification of
the Word EST. C. 12. p. 215.
Euthymius, says he, excludes the Key of Figure, and plainly shows he has not
taken the Word EST in the Sense of SIGNIFICAT. He has then taken it in a Sense
of Reality. From whence he concludes that these Authors could not mean that the
Bread is the Body of Christ in Virtue, seeing they would argue contrary to
their Intention; For as our Savior said not, This is the Figure, nor that the
Bread he would give should be the Figure; so neither has he said, that he would
give the Virtue of his Flesh, or that the Bread he would give, should contain
the Virtue of his Flesh.

I answer, Mr. Arnaud need not trouble himself with showing us that the Greeks
admit not the figurative Sense in our Savior's Words, neither take the Term
EST in the Sense of SIGNIFICAT. We grant it him: And we grant likewise that we
agree not with them in this. But the Question here is to know, whether it
thence follows they believe Transubstantiation. Now I maintain that not only
this does not follow, but that the contrary does; for they hold a kind of
middle way between the Sense of Figure and that of Transubstantiation. In a
word, they believe that the Bread remaining Bread (as to its Substance) is yet
the proper Body of Christ, by Augmentation of the natural Body, as we already
showed in the last Chapter of the foregoing Book. What does Mr. Arnaud desire
more? Would he have us show, that the Greeks believe the Bread is made the Body
of Christ by this means, in the same manner the Food we eat becomes our Body?
They say so in express terms. Would he have us show him, that by this means,
the Substance of Bread loses not its Existence, nor is changed into the proper
Substance of the Body that 'twas before? The thing it self speaks as much, and
we have showed it in its place, as clearly as a thing of this Nature can be
showed. Does he doubt that the Greeks believe by this means, to keep the
precise and literal Sense of our Savior's Words? They do themselves declare
that they understand them no otherwise. Would he have this, in fine, to be but
a bad way of keeping the literal Sense? The Greeks maintain the contrary, and
alledg for this Effect the Instance of Food which is made one with our Body, by
this same way of Assimulation and Augmentation, and that it cannot be said
these are two Bodies, but one and the same Body.

BUT as, says he, our Savior said not, this is the Figure, so neither did he
say, this is the Virtue of my Body, but this is my Body. 1st. This is to
dispute against the Greeks, and not against us, who never undertook to warrant
the Truth of their Opinions. 2d. They will answer him this Impression of Virtue
is sufficient to make the Bread our Lord's Body without a Figure, and there is
no need of a change of Substance, because the Substance of Food is not
precisely changed into that which we have already, but only added to it, to
make a Growth, or Augmentation, yet becomes our Body in a proper and literal
Sense, not a Figure, but our Body it self, not another Body, but the same we
had before. Besides they will affirm that the Sense of the Roman Church is not
a literal Sense: For the literal Sense of our Savior's Words must retain two
things. First, that it is Bread, and secondly, that it is the Body of Christ,
which Transubstantiation does not.

BUT, says Mr. Arnaud, Baptism contains the Virtue of Christ's Blood, and yet
we do not say, Baptism is not the Figure of it, but the Blood it self of
Christ. Lib. 2. c. 9. p. 179.
I answer, that this is still to dispute against the Greeks, and not against
me. For supposing it were more true than it is, that the Water of Baptism is
not mentioned, like as the Greeks speak of the Bread in the Eucharist; yet
still these two things are certain; First, that they affirm the Bread to be the
Body of Christ by this Impression of Virtue; and secondly, that it is thus they
Understand the Words, This is my Body. Ely de Crete having told us that God
Comment. in Orat. 1. Greg. Naz.
changes the Oblations, into the Efficacy of his Flesh. Immediately adds, and
doubt not of the Truth of this, seeing he himself plainly says, this is my
Body, this is my Blood. It is apparent he grounds this change of the Bread into
the Efficacy of Flesh, on the express Words of our Savior; Whence it follows
that it is thus he understands them. Cyrillus of Alexandria, having likewise
said in the same manner, that God changes the Oblations into the Efficacy of
his Cyrill. apud Victor. Ante MS. in Bibl. Reg.
Flesh, adds, that we must not doubt of the Truth of this, seeing he has said
it, which evidently shows that according to him, these Words, this is my Body,
signifies no more, than that this has the Efficacy of my Body, or is my Body in
Efficacy. Yet should we take upon us to reply in behalf of the Greeks, to the
Instance or Example Mr. Arnaud alleges touching Baptism; We might tell him
that the Reason why they express not themselves in the same manner in reference
to the Water, as they do to the Bread, is because our Savior never said of it,
this is my Blood, as he said of the Bread, this is my Body; and that the Holy
Scripture having differently explained it self touching Baptism, and the
Eucharist, we must not think it strange, if Divines have expressed themselves
about them in a different manner. He may be moreover answered, that the same
Economy observed touching the Body and Blood of Christ, is not observed in the
Water of Baptism, as it is observed in the Bread and Wine in the Eucharist, and
therefore it cannot be so well said that the Water becomes the Blood by this
way of Growth and Augmentation, as may be said of the Bread, although it receives
the Impression of the Virtue of Blood.

AS to what Mr. Arnaud adds that the Ministers acknowledge these Words, this is
my Body, must be either understood in a real, or figurative Sense, whence it
follows according to him, that Theophylact understood them in one or the other
of these. I say this Reasoning is false, as well in its Principle, as
Consequence: For the Ministers do not acknowledge either that we ought, or can
understand these Words, in this Sense of Reality the Church of Rome gives them.
We all hold that this is an absurd and impossible Sense, and that none but a
figurative one can subsist. But supposing the Ministers should say what he
makes them, why would he have us regulate thereby the Sense of Theophylact and
other Greeks. They have argued on their own Hypothesis, and not on that of the
Ministers: Whether their Hypothesis be justifiable, or not, is not to be
disputed with the Ministers, for Mr. Arnaud was never yet told that the Greeks
were agreed in all things with us. It is sufficient that on one hand, he be
showed in what manner the Greeks pretend the proper Sense of our Savior's
Words is observed, and on the other, that this manner, whatsoever it be, Good,
or Bad, Justifiable, or Unjustifiable, Conformable, or not Conformable to what
the Ministers say, is directly opposite to Transubstantiation, for our only
Question is, Whether the Greeks believe Transubstantiation or not.

THIS is then a mere Illusion to explain Theophylact by what the Ministers say
or not say, and it is yet a greater, to tell us as if it were a thing earnestly
Disputed between him and us, that Euthymius excludes the Key of Figure, and
does not take the Word EST in the Sense of Significat; that it is not likely we
would borrow Euthymius his Words to instruct a Man in our Opinion, and Lib. 2.
c. 12.
that we are not wont to say, that Christ gave us not the Figure of his Body,
but his Body, because he said, this is my Body. And thus do Men argue that
impose on the World, which Mr. Arnaud never fails of doing.

HAVING produced these Arguments, which in my Mind have not proved very
successful to him, he offers us others, drawn from the Doubts or Difficulties,
which the Greeks propose to themselves, as arising from their Sentiment, and
which they endeavor to resolve in the best manner they can. Theophylact, says
he, testifies there arises naturally a Doubt from what Faith teaches concerning
this Mystery, that the Bread is really the Flesh of Christ, which difficulty
Lib. 2. c. 9. p. 183.
he expresses in these Words. Quomodo, inquit, neque enim caro videtur; How can
this be? For this Bread does not seem to me to be Flesh: Whence he observes the
natural Consequence of this Change must be, that the Bread being Flesh must
appear to be so, and seeing it does not, it is astonishing. Et quomodo, inquit
aliquis, non apparet caro sed Panis? Now, says he, let a man take Aubertin's,
or Mr. Claude's Gloss, to expound Theophylact, and we shall find nothing can be
more Extravagant. For this is as much as to say according to them, if it be
true the Bread contains the Virtue of Christ's Body, how comes it to pass, that
it does not appear to us to be Flesh? Whence is it we see only Bread and not
Flesh? Is it not ridiculous to make People reason after so absurd a manner. And
why must this Bread containing only the Virtue of Christ's Body appear Flesh,
when it is not so? Does it follow from the Breads partaking of a spiritual
Quality of the Flesh of Christ, either morally or physically, that it must
appear Flesh? Would it not be on the contrary a dreadful Prodigy, if the Flesh
of Christ being only in Virtue in the Bread of the Eucharist, should appear
Flesh.

AND this is Mr. Arnaud's Reasoning, set forth with its usual Sweetness, that
is to say, of Extravagancies and Absurdities, with which he charges both me and
Mr. Aubertin. I answer he is under a Mistake, and such a kind of Mistake too,
wherein his Reputation is deeply concerned; for he takes for the Ground of
Theophylact's Doubt, that which is on the contrary the Solution of it, as will
appear by what follows. Now a Man cannot fall into a greater Error, than to
take for the cause of a Doubt, that which is the Solution thereof, and which
makes the Doubt cease. To Dispel then this vain Shadow, under which he has
disguised the Passage of Theophylact, we need only examine the several Parts of
this Author's Discourse, and show their mutual Dependence. Immediately treating
on the Words of Christ, he rejects the Sense of Figure. Jesus Christ, says he,
in his Commentary on St. Comm. in Mat. c. 26.
Matthew, by these Words, this is my Body, shows us that the Bread which is
Consecrated on the Altar, is the Lord's own Body, and not an Antitype. For he
did not say, This is the Antitype, but, this is my Body, this Bread being
changed by an ineffable Operation, although it appears to us to be still Bread. He
says the same thing on the sixth Chapter of St. John, and the fourteenth of
St. Marc. So far he asserts that the Bread is the Body it self, and Flesh of
Christ; but he does not explain after what manner it is so. Now because from
this Proposition thus generally conceived, and not explained, there may arise
two difficulties; one, how the same thing can be Bread and Flesh; the other, how
it does not appear to us to be Flesh, but Bread; Theophylact proposes 'em both,
Com. in. Joan.
and resolves 'em. He proposes the first in these Terms: The Bread is changed
into our Lord's Flesh by mystical Words, by the mystical Blessing, and coming
of the Holy Spirit: And let no body be troubled that he must believe the Bread
is Flesh. He resolves it by the Example of the Bread which Christ eat, and
which was changed into his Body, and became like unto his Flesh in augmenting
it, and nourishing it. The Lord, says he, when as yet in the World, receiving
Ibid.
his Nourishment from Bread, this Bread he took, was changed into his Body, and
became like unto his Flesh, and contributed to augment and sustain it after a
natural manner, so in like sort this Bread is now changed into our Lord's Flesh.

IT is plain, this Answer supposes that the Bread is made the Body of Christ by
way of Augmentation, and by a kind of Assimulation, as the Bread which he eat
whilst on earth, became his Body. Now first we see that this is not the Roman
Transubstantiation: The substance of Bread which the Lord eat, was not changed
into the same Substance which he had before, it was joined unto it, and made
like it: But moreover what relation has this with the Difficulty which
Theophylact proposed to himself? Is it not evident that it must be solved after
another manner, supposing he believed Transubstantiation. For it must be said
that the Bread is not Flesh, but only as it is really and substantially
converted into the same Substance of this Flesh. The Romish Hypothesis would
unavoidably lead him to this; but instead of this, he answers by an Example
wherein Transubstantiation is not concerned, and this shows clearly that he had
not this Transubstantiation in his Thoughts.

AS to the second Difficulty, which consists in that if the Bread were Flesh,
it would appear Flesh, as it may equally spring both from the Solution which he
came from giving to the first Doubt, to wit, the Comparison of the Bread which
Christ eat, which was changed into his Flesh; and from the general Proposition
he established in the beginning, to wit, that the Bread is the Flesh and the
Body it self of Jesus Christ, not his Image; he considers it likewise as coming
from both one and the other of these two Principles. He proposes it in his
Commentaries on St. John, as arising from the Solution he had given it: For
having related this Comparison of the Bread Christ eat, which became his Body,
he adds, how then can it be said? Why does it appear to us to be Bread, and not
Flesh. In effect, if it be the same with the Bread of the Eucharist, as that
which Christ eat, it seems it ought appear to us, to be Flesh as the other did.
To this Theophylact answers, that if it appeared Flesh to us, we should be
struck with Horror at the sight of it. It is, says he, to the end we may not
conceive Horror in the eating of it: For if it appeared to us to be Flesh, we
could not but abhor the Communion. It is then by an effect of God's
Condescension to our Weakness, that the Mystical Food appears to us to be such
as we are used to. This Answer suffers us to conclude that it is not the
Physical or Natural from of Flesh, which is communicated to the Eucharistical
Bread, but the other; For if it received the Physical Form, as the Bread Christ
eat did, it would appear Flesh as well as that Bread did. All this agrees still
very well with the Greeks Hypothesis.

BUT some will reply, this Answer is short, for it does not sufficiently
explain what is this other Form which the Eucharistical Bread receives, and
which makes it the Body of Christ? I reply, the Answer would be short indeed,
had not Theophylact clearly explained himself thereon in his Commentary on St.
Marc, wherein he proposed the same doubt, as arising from the general
Proposition, that the Bread is Flesh. This Bread, says he, is not a Figure of
our Lord's Body, but it is changed into the Lord's Body: The Bread which I
shall give is my Flesh. He does not say it is the Figure of my Flesh, but my
Flesh. And in another place, if you eat not the Flesh of the Son of Man. But it
will be replied; how does it not appear to be Flesh? O man, it is because of
thine Infirmities: For because the Bread and Wine are Food familiar to us, and
that we are not able to suffer Blood and Flesh before us; God full of Mercy, in
Condescension to our Weakness, conserves the Species of Bread and Wine, but
changes them into the VIRTUE OF HIS FLESH AND BLOOD. It is clear he means that
our Weakness not suffering us to eat Bread which received the natural form of
Flesh, God conserves the Bread and Wine in their proper Species; but to make
them his Flesh and Blood, imprints on them this supernatural Virtue. Who sees
not that the whole Scope of his Discourse tends to this; The Bread is the real
Flesh of Christ, not its Representation, because there must a proper Sense be
given to our Lord's Words? But if it really be this Flesh, why does it not
appear Flesh? It is by an effect of God's Condescension, which seeing we are
not able to bear the sight of Flesh and Blood, makes the Bread his Flesh, not
by an Impression of the substantial Form of Flesh; but by an Impression of
Virtue.

IT appears then from the Explication which I now gave to Theophylact's
Discourse. 1st. That Mr. Arnaud has been strangely mistaken when he imagined
that to expound him according to our Sense; he must say, if it be so that the
Bread contains the Virtue of Christ's Body, why does it not appear Flesh to us?
For this Doubt does not arise from the Bread's being Flesh in Virtue; on the
contrary, it is that which dissipates the Doubt, and makes it vanish: It comes
either from the general Proposition that the Bread is Flesh, and not the Figure
of Flesh; or from this other Proposition, that it is Flesh even as the Bread
which Jesus Christ eat was changed into his Flesh; but the Doubt resolves it
self by this last Proposition, that it is changed into the Virtue of Flesh and
Blood.

SECONDLY, It appears likewise from thence, that Theophylact had not
Transubstantiation in his Thoughts: For if he had it in his Thoughts, he must
have solved the Difficulty in another manner: He must have said that the
appearance of Bread remains; but that its Substance is changed into the Flesh
of Christ, and for this Reason does not appear Flesh, but Bread. But yet
notwithstanding the Doubts would not have ceased as they do now, for it might
be demanded, how this appearance of Bread subsisted alone, without its natural
Substance, how our Senses could be deceived by an appearance of Bread, which
was not Bread; and by a real substance of Flesh, which appears not Flesh; how
this same Substance of the Flesh of Christ can be in Heaven, and on Earth at
the same time; and several other such like Questions, which are not to be found
in Theophylact's Text. 3dly. It appears likewise that Theophylact believed,
that if the Bread was Flesh otherwise, than by an Impression of Virtue, it must
needs appear Flesh. For in saying that it is in Condescension to our Weakness,
that God changes it into the Virtue of his Flesh; he leaves it to be concluded
that otherwise our Infirmities would not be succored, and we must unavoidably
behold Flesh in its natural Form.

MR. Arnaud not liking this change of Virtue, which is found thus described in
proper terms in Theophylact's Discourse, endeavors to give three different
Explications of them, and leaves us at liberty to choose either of them. First,
that by the virtue of Flesh, we must understand the Reality, the internal
Essence of this Flesh. The second, that this is a way of speaking, which is
usual with the Greeks to say (...), or (...) the Force, or Power of Flesh, to
signify Flesh full of Efficacy. The third, that when two things are joined
together in Truth, and in the Mind of those to whom we speak, it often happens
These 2.
that in expressing them, we denote but one, without excluding the other, and
with a design to make the other understood, which we do not express by that
which we do. Which he afterward explains in these Terms. It is certain that
the Consecrated Bread is changed into the Body of Christ: It is certain
likewise that it becomes full of its Virtue and Efficacy. These two Truths are
joined, and are the Consequences of each other: And therefore it often happens
that Authors do jointly express them, as does Euthymius, who tells us in
express Terms, That as Jesus Christ deified the Flesh he took by a supernatural
Operation, so he changes the Bread and Wine after an ineffable manner into his
proper Body, which is the Fountain of Life, and into his proper Blood, and into
the Virtue of both one and the other. But as these two changes are still joined
in Effect, and the Fathers supposing they were joined in the Spirit of the
Faithful; It sufficed them to express the one, to make the other understood:
And thus they tell us a hundred times that the Bread is changed into the Body
of Christ, without expressing it is filled with its Virtue, because one follows
the other, and Theophylact having told us several times that the Bread is
changed into the Body of Christ, tells us once, that it is changed into its
Strength, as the sequel of a Mystery which makes it conceived wholly entire,
because the Faith of the Faithful does not separate the virtue of Christ's Body,
from the Body it self, nor his Body from its Virtue, it never having entered
into their Minds, that Christ's Body was in Heaven, and that we have only in
the Eucharist its Strength and Virtue, whereas they believe that we have only
this Strength and Virtue, upon the account of its being really and truly
present in our Mysteries. And it is by these Engines Mr. Arnaud pretends to draw
Transubstantiation from the Passage of Theophylact.

BUT in general, all these three Explications appear to us to be forced, and
neither of 'em to be chosen: There needs not this great stir to find
Theophylact's real Meaning. He means no more than what his Expressions plainly
intimate, to wit, That the Bread and Wine are changed into the Virtue of the
Flesh and Blood of Christ, and he means nothing else. Had he believed a change
of Substance, he would have said so: as well as a Change of Virtue, and so much
the rather as I observed, that the Difficulty which he proposed to resolve,
obliged him to explain himself clearly about it. Why does not the Bread being
Flesh, appear to be so? Because its Substance is only changed, and its
Accidents remain. A Man that believed Transubstantiation must needs say thus.

THE first Explication especially, can have no grounds, because that when we
speak of the Virtue of a thing to signify its Truth, Reality, and inward
Essence: It is only when the Question concerns this Truth, or this Reality in
respect of its Operation or Effects, and Mr. Arnaud's Instances confirm what I
say. For when St. Paul said, speaking of Hypocrites, that they have a Form or
Appearance of Godlyness (...), but that they denied the Power, (...), he means,
they have only a false Appearance of it, a vain Shadow, but not the Reality of
it, which is seen by its Effects. So when Hesychius says that it is to receive
the Communion ignorantly, not to know the Virtue and Dignity of it, and to be
ignorant that it is the Body and Blood of Christ according to Truth: That this
is to receive the Mystery, and not know the Virtue of them; he did not mean
that the Mysteries were the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ in Substance, but
according to the spiritual Understanding, which is what he calls the Truth of
the Mystery, it is the Body and Blood of Christ, because what offers it self to
our sight, is only the Shadow and Vale of the Mystery; but that the Divine
Object represented by these sensible things, is the Body and Blood of Jesus
Christ: Which is what he calls the Virtue of the Mystery, because its whole
Operation and Effects depend only on them: As to what he alleges of
Paschasius, besides that he is an Author who affects Obscurity, as is usual
with Innovators, and that there is a great deal of Injustice in regulating
Theophylact's Sense, by his Expressions, besides this I say, there is nothing
can hinder us from saying that when he called the internal Essence of things
their Virtue, it was in respect of their Operation and Effects. But this cannot
be said of Theophylact, for his Discourse does not concern the Effects of the
Eucharist, but only to know, why the Bread being the Flesh of Christ, yet does
not appear Flesh. If then he would say, it is because the appearance of Bread
remains, and that its Substance is changed into the Substance of the Body of
Christ, to what purpose should he explain himself in this manner, it is changed
into the Virtue of the Body. Why should he say Virtue for Substance, seeing
that here there was no Question raised about the Efficacy of the Sacrament.

MR. Arnaud's second Explication, is no better than the first. He tells us it is
an usual way of speaking amongst the Greeks, to say (...) or (...) the
Strength, or Power of Flesh; to signify the Flesh full of Efficacy. But not to
enter into the Discussion of his Criticism, concerning which much might be
said, did he only pretend to prove it by two Verses of Horace, by a Passage of
Paschasius Ratbert, and another of St. Bernard's. I say that when Authors
express themselves in this manner, the Virtue of a thing, to signify a thing
full of Virtue or Efficacy, it is only when they consider this thing under the
Idea of its Virtue or Efficacy, and not otherwise; Thus when Horace says, The
Virtue of Scipio, and the Wisdom of Lelius: It is because he considered them
under the Quality of Virtuous and Wise, as we call the King his Majesty, then
when we are filled with the Idea of his Greatness. It is the same in these
Expressions (...), the Force or Rapidity of the River, for a swift River, (...)
the strength of Hercules, for the valiant Hercules, for then they are
considered under the Idea of their Strength. Our Savior says, the Virtue of
the Holy Spirit, when he meant the Effects of the Power of the Holy Spirit on
the Apostles. St. Bernard says likewise in the same Sense, that the wise Men
acknowledged the Virtue of God in the weak Body of a Child, because he designed
to oppose the eternal Power of the Divinity, to the weakness of Childhood. But
there is no such thing in the Passage of Theophylact, for he does not consider
the Flesh of Christ in respect of the Effects which it displays on the
Faithful, but simply considers it in Reference to the Bread which is changed
into it, and the Point is not to know, as I have already said, why this Bread
produces so great Effects; but only why being Flesh, it does not appear Flesh,
but Bread. So that these two pretended Explications of Mr. Arnaud's are but
mere Evasions, being Groundless and Improbable.

AS to the third, did ever any man see any thing more forced, and Illuso^y,
than this whole Discourse he makes to establish it. When the Bread, says he,
is changed into the Body of Christ, it becomes full of its Virtue and Efficacy.
What means Mr. Arnaud by this? If the Bread be changed into the Substance of
Christ's Flesh, it ceases to be Bread: Now that which ceases to be, is no
longer filled with any thing, because it is absolutely no longer in being. There
remains only the external Figure, and when we understand that it is this
external Figure that is filled, we cannot say that that which is changed is
filled, for it is not the Figure that is changed. It is certain when a Man's Head
is overy full of Philosophical Notions, they make him forget himself.

IT sometimes happens, adds he, that Authors express these two Truths jointly
together, as Euthymius has done. But I already showed that Euthymius in saying
the Bread and Wine are changed into the Body and Blood, and into the Virtue of
both; never designed thereby to express two different things; but only made use
of two different Expressions, to signify one and the same thing; the latter of
which is only the Explication of the former, his Et, being to be taken, for a
that is to say.

MR. Arnaud goes on and says that Theophylact having said several times the
Bread is changed into the Body of Christ, tells us once it is changed into his
Strength, as an effect of the Mystery, which makes it conceived entire. But it
is easy to answer him, that when Theophylact says the Bread is changed into
the Body, and that it is changed into the Virtue of the Body, these are neither
two distinct things, nor two parts of the Mystery, but two Expressions which
signify at bottom but one and the same thing; with this Difference, that the
one is general, and the other particular, the one more confused, and the other
more distinct, the one, which gives way in some sort to the Doubt by its
generality, and the other which resolves it. It is certain he has said several
times the Bread is changed into the Body, and only once, 'that it is changed
into the Virtue of the Body, but it is also true, that he never said it is
changed into the Substance of the Body. If he only once spoke of the Change of
Virtue, this once is sufficient to show his meaning. Others have mentioned it
as well as he, as Theodotus, Cyrillus of Alexandria, Victor of Antioch,
Eutychius, Euthymius, Ely de Crete. Who could ever be persuaded all these
Authors (who lived in diverse times) have conspired together to say always
Virtue, and never Substance, although they had in their Thoughts a Change of
Substance, and not of Virtue.

THE Language of the Greeks is Conformable to that of Paschasius his
Adversaries, as he shows us himself in his Commentary on St. Matthew. They said
the Bread was changed into the Virtue of the Flesh of Christ, and Paschasius is
not so nice in his Language as Mr. Arnaud. He neither says the Virtue
signifies Verity, Reality, internal Essence, nor that the Virtue of the Flesh,
signifies the Flesh full of Virtue, nor that it is only one part of the Mystery
which signifies the other. All these Turnings were not in fashion in his time:
He very honestly takes this Term in the true Sense of those that used it. I am
astonished, says he, at what some say now, viz. that the Eucharist is not
Paschas. Rat. 6. in Mat. 26.
the Flesh and Blood of Christ really, but Sacramentally; a certain Efficacy of
the Flesh, not the Flesh itself, the Virtue of the Blood, but not the Blood
itself. In this manner did they understand it, who spoke of a change of Virtue,
and thus was it taken by Paschasius: But Mr. Arnaud has found that according to
the Rules of his Grammar it must be taken otherwise, and as if he were the sole
Judge of men's Thoughts, and Interpreter of their Sense, he assures us that this
Change of Virtue, signifies a Change of Substance, by three Explications, of
which he gives us the Choice.

MOREOVER I know not why he should tell us, that the Faith of the Lib. 2. c. 9.
p. 288.
Eaithful never separates the Virtue of Christ's Body, from the Body itself,
nor his Body from its Virtue. For if he means this generally, as his
Expressions intimate, he should remember what he said just before, That Baptism
contains the Virtue of Christ's Blood, in the same manner the Ministers imagine
this Virtue to be Ibid. p. 179.
contained in the Eucharist. He should have observed that in his Chapter on
Nicholas Methoniensis, he positively asserts, that the Virtue of Christ's Body
is Lib. 2. c. 13. p. 223.
communicated to the Water of Baptism, and the Oil of Confirmation. It seems to
me here is a manifest Contradiction, for if the Faithful do not separate the
Virtue of Christ's Body, from the Body it self, that is to say according as he
understands it from the Substance of his Body: How does the Water of Baptism,
and the Oil of Confirmation contain the Virtue of this Body, seeing it is out of
Doubt that they contain not the Substance of them? But whence has he learned
such a profound kind of Doctrine, that the Faith of the Faithful does not
separate the Virtue of Christ's Body, from the Body it self? Does not this
Virtue accompany the Word of God which St. Paul calls the Power of God to
Salvation, and in which, notwithstanding there is not to be imagined a Presence
of the Substance of Christ's Body? Does he not know that the Fathers teach, We
eat our Savior's Flesh, as well in the hearing of the Word, as in the
Participation of Baptism, which can only be understood of the Virtue separated
from the Substance? If Mr. Arnaud says that he understands this as meant only
of the Eucharist, besides that his Terms are general, and in manner of a
Principle, which he afterward applies to the Eucharist; besides this I say,
this does not at all resolve the Question, seeing our Debate is, Whether the
Virtue of the Body is in the Eucharist together with the Substance, or whether
it be in it alone, and without the Substance. Wherefore must not the Faithful
who acknowledge in other Particulars this Virtue without the Substance,
acknowledge the same thing in the Eucharist?

AND this is what I had to say to the Passage of Theophylact, and which may
likewise serve for an Illustration to what Mr. Arnaud alleges out of Nicholas
Methoniensis. This Author wrote a Treatise which is inserted in the Bibl. Patr.
Tom. 2. Greco. Lat.
Bibliotheca Patrum, under this Title (...). Against those that doubt, and say
the Consecrated Bread and Wine are not the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

MR. Arnaud, says he, finds the Ministers very much perplexed touching this
Doubt. But this is only an imaginary Difficulty: For what Perplexity is Lib. 2.
c. 13. p. 223.
there in it? These People doubted whether the Bread and Wine were the Body and
Blood of Christ: But did they doubt that the Bread and Wine were the Signs or
Representations of the Body and Blood of Christ? No, this was not the Cause of
their Doubt: Did they doubt that 'twas the Body of Christ in Virtue? Should we
take their Doubt in this Sense; 'twould not be such a strange Matter as Mr.
Arnaud makes it. He may declame if he pleases, Why could not they believe
Christ might morally communicate to the Bread, the Virtue of his Body? Is it a
harder matter to communicate to the Ibid.
Bread the Virtue of Christ's Body, than to communicate it to the Water of
Baptism, and the Oil of Confirmation? This is but a Flourish, for Palladius
tells us that a Monk doubted of this very thing, having had no Respect to Mr.
Arnaud's Remonstrances. He doubted touching the Gifts, and said, how can the
Pallad. Hist. cap. 73.
Gifts sanctify me. St. Ambrose in his Treatise de Initiatis, combats the same
Doubts touching the Virtue of Baptism: Is this then this great Mystery which
Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor yet has entered into the Heart of Man to
conceive? I see the same Water which I see every Day, is this that which must
cleanse me? Mr. Arnaud must not imagine it is so easy a matter for weak and
profane Persons, to believe a supernatural Virtue to be communicated to the
Bread and Wine. We have already seen that Cyrillus of Alexandria, and Ely de
Crete, having told us that God changes the Bread into the Virtue of his Body;
add, that we must not doubt of it, seeing Christ himself says it, which shows
that this is as much a Subject of Doubt, as any thing else.

BUT there is no necessity of expounding in this Sense the Doubt of those of
whom Nicholas Methoniensis speaks: His Expressions must not be altered. They
doubted whether the Bread and Wine were the Body and Blood of Christ, and this
Doubt arose from the general and usual Expressions of the Greeks, who
positively affirm it. What can be concluded hence? The Greeks then understand
these general Expressions in a Sense of Transubstantiation, or real Presence. I
deny it, and that with Reason; for this does not follow: But it will be
replied, these Doubters at least believed their Church, took them in this
Sense, and it is likely this was the Occasion of their Doubt. Which I also deny,
for if these were their Thoughts, why did they not tell us so? Why could not
they say they doubted of the Truth of this Doctrine, that the Bread and Wine
are changed into the Substance of the Body and Blood of Christ. To what purpose
so many Words? This Proposition, the Bread is the Body of Jesus Christ,
offended them; and which way soever they turned it, it could not seem to them
capable of a rational Sense. Whether this Doubt arose through want of a
thro-Consideration, or whether in effect they had examined the matter, or had
considered the Proposition, either confusedly in it self, or in the Exposition,
the Greeks gave of it, is more than we know, for Nicolas Methoniensis says
nothing of it, and we cannot inform our selves elsewhere. This is a matter of
Fact, on which every Man may make his Conjectures, but yet this Principle must
remain undeniable, that their Doubt arose from this Proposition, the Bread is
the Body of Jesus Christ; and not from this other, the Bread is
Transubstantiated into the Body of Jesus Christ.

LET Mr. Arnaud show us if he pleases, how it happens that between these two
Doubts which Theophylact and Nicolas Methoniensis propose, there arises never a
one touching the substantial Conversion; for supposing the Greeks believed it,
it could not be, but some must doubt and say, how is the Substance of Bread
changed into that of the Body of Christ; even as they said, how is Bread
Flesh? How is Bread the Body? The Languages, which Lib. 2. c. 13. p. 223.
according to Mr. Arnaud, are not so barren but they can furnish us with
Expressions to say, I doubt whether the Bread contains the Virtue of Christ's
Body, I doubt whether it is the Figure of the Body of Christ? Can they not
likewise supply them with proper Terms, who would say, I doubt whether the
Substance of Bread is changed into the Substance of Christ's Body?

THERE is nothing then in the Doubt of these People which Nicholas Methoniensis
handles, which can favor Mr. Arnaud's Cause. Neither is there any thing in his
Answer which will do him any Kindness. Nicolaus Methoniensis says, that the
Bread is changed into the Body of Christ. That this Mystical Sacrifice takes
its Original from our Lord himself: That we must not despise what has been
taught us by this Divine Mouth which cannot lie: That 'twas he himself told us,
this is my Body, this is my Blood, and if you eat not the Flesh of the Son of
Man, nor drink his Blood, you have no Life in you. That we must not charge him
with want of Power, seeing he is Almighty: That his Body was born of a Virgin
above the course of Nature, and above the Thoughts and Apprehensions of Men.
Mr. Arnaud is so well satisfied with these Expressions, that he cries out in a
Transport of Joy, that they are just, natural, and befitting Ibid. p. 226.
a Bishop to Utter, that believes Transubstantiation, and Refutes those that do
not! But what is there in all this, which does not agree with the Sentiment of
the Greeks, being such as I have represented it, in the thirteenth Chapter of
the foregoing Book? The Bread is changed into the Body of Christ, by the
Impression of his supernatural Virtue, and is made this Body by way of
Augmentation: This is an Effect of his almighty Power, which acts above the
Course of Nature; But it does not follow that this is a Transubstantiation. Had
Nicolaus Methoniensis meant a Change of Substance, why could he not say so, the
Tongues which Mr. Arnaud has so enriched when the Virtue of the Body was in
Question, must they immediately become so poor again, when the Question
concerns that of Substance? Could not they furnish this Bishop with proper
Terms, to say that the Substance of Bread is changed into that of the Body?
Which is what he ought to find in Nicholas his Expressions to bear him out in
his Exultations. But Mr. Arnaud can find matter of Triumph when he pleases.

NICOLAUS Methoniensis continuing his Discourse, adds, perhaps you doubt of
this Mystery, and do not Believe it because you do not see Flesh and Blood. He
means according to Mr. Claude, says Mr. Arnaud, perhaps you do not believe P.
226.
the Bread and Wine contain the Virtue of Christ's Body and Blood, because you
do not see Flesh and Blood; as if there must appear Flesh and Blood, that we
may believe the Bread and Wine contain the Virtue of them. These Peoples
Reasoning, adds he, would consist according to Mr. Claude in a very pleasant
Argument, if the Bread and Wine Contained the Virtue of Christ's Body, there
would appear Flesh and Blood in the Eucharist, but there does not appear Flesh
and Blood; Therefore they do not contain the Virtue thereof. He enhaunceth this
Remark by an Example taken from my Book, which contains, says he, morally my
Virtue, so that it may be demanded why my Person does not appear in all the
Chambers wherein my Book is read.

THIS Discourse is so full of Error, that I can scarce believe it is Mr.
Arnaud's own. 1st. Supposing we do attribute to these Dubitants the Argument he
has formed, he cannot call it a pleasant and ridiculous Argument, as he has
done, without contradicting himself, and deriding his own Maxim, which he laid
down in his Chapter touching Theophylact, That the Faith of the Faithful P. 188.
does never separate the Virtue of Christ's Body, from the Body it self, nor
his Body from his Virtue, and that it never entered into their Thoughts the Body
of Christ was in Heaven, and that we receive only in the Eucharist its Strength
and Virtue, whereas they believe we receive only this Strength and Virtue, from
its being really and truly present in our Mysteries. Supposing that Nicolaus
Methoniensis his Doubters, reasoned on the Principle of Mr. Arnaud's Believers,
their Argument would contain nothing but what is natural and reasonable. For if
the Virtue of Christ's Body be only in the Eucharist, upon the account of his
Body being really and truly Present in it, it naturally follows there must
appear Flesh therein, seeing the Virtue thereof cannot but be accompanied by
this Flesh, according to Mr. Arnaud and his Faithful. This Reasoning must be
wholly grounded on two Propositions, the one, that wheresoever the Body of
Christ is substantially present, there must appear Flesh, this is a natural
Consequence; the other, that the Virtue of this Body is only in the Eucharist,
because the Body it self is substantially in it, this is Mr. Arnaud's Faith. If
this Reasoning be Pleasant and Ridiculous, it cannot be so upon the account of
the first Proposition; for as I said, it is self Evident. It must be so then by
reason of the second, that is to say, upon the Account of Mr. Arnaud's Faith.
Is it not strange Mr. Arnaud should forget himself so soon as ever he has
leaped out of one Chapter into another, and ridicule himself. I confess it may
happen that a Man, although otherwise considerative may fall into Contradiction;
for there are few Persons but what are liable to Mistakes; But it is strange a
Man should combat and fall foul on himself, because that when we are earnestly
intent on any Subject, the Ideas thereof return, and Attention furnishes us
with that Matter which offered not it self at first. But that such a man of
Parts as Mr. Arnaud, should Contradict and Confute himself, and Scoff at his
own Assertions in the same Book, at three Chapters Distance, is in my Mind a
little amazing.

II. BUT moreover, it is certain Mr. Arnaud has been plainly mistaken in the
Arguing which he attributes according to us, to Nicolaus Methoniensis his
Dubitants. For we never told him their Doubt was grounded on the Bread's being
the Body of Christ in Virtue. Perhaps, says Nicolaus Methoniensis, Ye doubt of
this Mystery, and do not believe it, because ye do not see Flesh and Blood in
it. Their Doubt was grounded on the general Proposition of the Greeks: That the
Bread and Wine were the Body and Blood of Christ. Nicolas says, perhaps this
Proposition appeared to them incredible, because they did not see Flesh and
Blood in the Eucharist. We should know whether these Doubters acknowledged,
this was in effect the real Cause of their Doubt; but supposing it were, all
that can be concluded thence, is that they would Reason in this sort, If the
Bread be the Body of Christ it must appear Flesh; But it does not, therefore it
is not Flesh. This Reasoning opposes the Expression of the Greeks, that the
Bread is the Body of Christ, as also the Example which they gave of it, to wit,
of the Bread which our Savior eat; but it does not disagree with the
Exposition which they gave of it, which is, that it is the Body of Christ in
Virtue; on the contrary we have already observed, that Theophylact uses this
Exposition for the solving of the Objection contained in this Reasoning: Which
plainly shows that whilst this Proposition, the Bread is the Body of Christ,
stands alone, and unexplained; it may give occasion to Ignorant People to form
this Objection, but as soon as it is explained and showed in what Sense the
Greeks understand it, the Doubt vanishes.

AND this will more plainly appear, if we consider the Answer which Nicolaus
Methoniensis made to those that doubted, for it comes very near to that of
Theophylact. God, says he, respecting our Weakness, lest we should conceive
Horror at the Pledges of Eternal Life, as being not able to endure the sight of
Flesh and Blood, does therefore deliver to us things familiar to our Nature,
and has joined to them his Divinity, saying, this is my Body, this is my Blood.
This Answer does in a manner explain in what Sense the Greeks believed the
Bread was the Body of Christ, to wit, by its Union with the Divinity, which
does very well solve the Argument of the Doubters, and bereaves it of its
Strength. For if it be the Body of Christ only by this means, to wit, by its
Union with the Divinity, there is no longer occasion to say it should appear
Flesh.

IT is then clear that this whole Dispute of Nicolaus Methoniensis overthrows
Transubstantiation, as well as that of Theophylact. For as to those that
doubted, had they known the Greek Church taught that the Substance of Bread is
changed into that of the Body, they would have grounded their Objection, not on
the general Proposition, that the Bread is the Body; but on the particular one,
to wit, that the Bread is changed into the Substance of the Body, whence it
more strongly and distinctly follows that it ought to appear Flesh after the
Change. And as to the Answer returned them, they must have been told that the
Substance only is changed, and that the Accidents of Bread remain to serve as a
Vail to the Flesh of Christ; This is what ought to be answered on the
Hypothesis of Transubstantiation, and not that the Bread is joined to the
Divinity. This Answer would be absurd if we suppose Transubstantiation, of the
Difficulty would still remain, Why the Bread becoming the Substance of our
Lord's proper Flesh, it does not appear Flesh? Yet Nicolaus Methoniensis will
have these Objectors rest satified with his Answer, and extends not their
Doubts any farther.

CHAP. VIII.
The Profession of Faith which the Sarracens were caused to make in the
twelveth Century, considered; several Passages out of Cabasilas, Simeon
Archbishop of Thessalonica, Jeremias the Patriarch of Constantinople, and
several others, Collected by Mr. Arnaud out of Greek Authors: Examined.

WE have already rehearsed the Profession of Faith which the Greeks of the
twelveth Century caused the Sarracens to make, that embraced the Christian
Religion; to show the Greeks kept themselves to the general Expressions of the
Bread and Wines being the Body and Blood of Christ, and how they are changed
into this Body and Blood; leaving to God the Knowledge of the manner thereof. It
is certain this is all can be concluded thence, and yet Mr. Arnaud has not
failed to draw this Profession of Faith to his Advantage: But seeing he
designed to make a Proof of it, it seems to me, he ought at least to rehearse
truly the Terms of it, and not alter them as he has done in his Version. I
believe, says the Convert, and confess the Bread and Wine which Bibl. Patr.
tom. 2. Grec. Lat.
are mystically Sacrificed by the Christians, and of which they partake in
their Divine Sacraments. This Clause thus expressed, has not contented Mr.
Arnaud, and therefore he has not thought good to relate it in this Form, although
it be so in the Greek and Latin Version. I believe also, says the Sarracen,
that these things are in truth the Body and Blood of Christ, being changed by
his Divine Virtue intellectually and invisibly above all humane Understanding,
AS IS BEST KNOWN TO HIMSELF. These are so far the true Expressions of the
Profession; Here follows Mr. Arnaud's Version. I am persuaded, Lib. 2. c. 15.
p. 247.
I believe, I confess that the Bread and Wine mystically Consecrated by the
Christians, and of which they partake in the Celebration of the Holy Mysteries,
are in truth the Body and Blood of our Lord, being changed by his Divine
Virtue, in a manner not to be perceived by our Eyes, and discernible only to
the Mind, but surpassing all the Thoughts of Men, and which is only
comprehended by God alone, and so I promise that I will partake of it with
other faithful People, as being in truth his Flesh and Blood. By this means.
1st. He confounds two things which the Proselyte distinguishes; The one is to
Confess the Bread and Wine of which the Christians partake, and the other, to
Confess that this Bread and Wine are in truth the Body and Blood of Jesus
Christ. These two Clauses being thus distinguished, it is clear the first
supposes that it is Bread and Wine; and this Mr. Arnaud would conceal by
confounding them in one. 2dly. Instead of rendering (...) Intellectually and
Invisibly, he has taken such a Circuit as changes the Sense: In a manner, says
he, which our Eyes do not discover, and which is discernable only to the Mind:
To hinder the Readers from observing that the Change in Question is Spiritual
and Mystical, not Sensible, or Material, for this is precisely what is meant by
this (...). 3dly. Instead of these Terms, As he alone knows (...) which gives
us to understand that God only determinately knows what this Spiritual and
Mystical Change is; He has Translated, In a manner Comprehended by God alone,
to accommodate this to the Doctrine of the Roman Church, which expressly
determines the Change of one Substance into another; But not being able to
disintangle herself from the Difficulties she finds in this Doctrine, sends us
to God.

AND yet with all these Alterations Mr. Arnaud can conclude nothing from this
Profession of Faith, unless it be, that the Bread and Wine are in truth the
Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, and that they are changed by his Divine Virtue:
But this is not the Point we disputed on: They are then changed in respect of
their Substance: It is this Consequence which we deny* In Effect, whether the
Bread and Wine are the Body and Blood of Christ by a change of Virtue, and by
way of Augmentation, as the Greeks explain it, or otherwise; it is certain that
they are so truly, and not falsely; So th^s Profession of Faith then means no
more than this, that we must believe the Bread and Wine are not vainly and
imaginarily the Body and Blood of our Lord, but really and truly, although God
only knows how they are changed, or what kind of Change happens to them. Now
this supposes on one hand that they are still Bread and Wine, and on the other,
that we must not proceed so far as to a change of Substance.

MR. Arnaud then advertises the World to no purpose, That these kind of
Writings are designed to represent the General, Public, and Universal
Sentiments of the Church, and not the Particular Sentiment of Authors. That
they contain an P. 246.
Exact, Precise, and Plain way of Speaking without Figure, or Metaphor, their
End being only to give an Exact and True Account of Points of Faith. It is easy
to turn these Remarks against himself; For seeing these kind of Writings speak
Precisely, and Exactly, he ought to show us Distinctly, and Exactly the
Conversion of Substances contained in them: And seeing it is not to be found in
them, and yet this Profession of Faith represents the General, Public, and
Universal Sentiment of the Greek Church; It follows that this Public, General,
and Universal Sentiment is not Transubstantiation.

TO little Purpose likewise does he add, That the Church would not have the P.
247.
Converted Sarracens believe that the Bread and Wine were not truly the Body
and Blood of Christ, but only his Figure endued with their Virtue. This is not
the Point; the Question is to know whether they were taught the Conversion of
Substances, which is what he ought to show, but this he will be never able to
do. For, for to teach that the Bread and Wine are really the Body and Blood of
Jesus Christ, (which is what is precisely contained in this Profession of
Faith) is not as (as I have already said) the teaching the Conversion of
Substances. Moreover I never told him the modern Greeks asserted the Eucharist
to be a Figure: And as to the Change of Virtue we do not prove it, it is true
by this Profession of Faith, but we prove it by other Testimonies, which are so
plain and expressive that Mr. Arnaud can give no solid Answer to them.

THERE only remain now of all those pretended Proofs of Mr. Arnaud, some
Passages out of Cabasilas Bishop of Thessalonica, Simeon Bishop also of
Thessalonica, Jeremias the Patriarch of Constantinople, and some other Greek
Authors. They all say near upon the same thing, which is, That the Bread and
Wine are the Body and Blood of Christ: This very Body and Blood. That they are
changed into this Body and Blood. But Mr. Arnaud must disabuse himself once for
all, touching the Thoughts he has, that from these kind of Expressions may be
concluded the Doctrine of the Conversion of Substances: For so far are we from
granting this Conclusion to be good, that we pretend we have Reason to draw a
contrary Consequence. In effect. 1st. There is nothing more usual in Authors
than to say, That the Poor are Jesus Christ, even Christ himself, that the
Church is the Body of Jesus Christ, the very Body of Jesus Christ, that we are
changed into Jesus Christ, changed into his Body, transformed into him, changed
into his Flesh: and such like ways of speaking, Examples of which are infinite.
It is then a great Abuse to pretend these Terms are to be understood in a Sense
of Identity and substantial Conversion, as they term it. For (as I said
elsewhere,) these Expressions being liable to be Expounded in diverse particular
Senses, and seeing they may be taken in a general and indistinct one, there can
be no Reason for the taking them, in the Sense which Mr. Arnaud gives them.

II. THE Conversion of the Substances of Bread and Wine into those of the Body
and Blood of Christ, does of it self, form so precise and distinct a Sense,
that when Authors would assert it, they explain it in clear and distinct Terms,
which answer the distinct determinate Conception they have of it. Whence it
follows, that if the Greek Authors had on this Subject the same Belief as the
Roman Church, they would explain themselves so clearly, that there would be no
need of running to the Baron of Spartaris, nor Paysius Ligaridius, nor yet to
the six Syrian Priests to make us understand it.

FOR whilst he produces no other kind of Passages but such as these, we shall
have still Reason to conclude from hence, that the Greeks do not believe
Transubstantiation, because if they did believe it, they would without doubt
speak otherwise of it.

III. BUT supposing these Reasons Invalid, we have showed (when we treated of
the real Belief of the Greeks) in what Sense they understand these Expressions.
In effect, if we compare the Doctrine of the Greeks with that of the Latins,
and throly comprehend what they hold in common, and wherein they differ, we
shall easily perceive Mr. Arnaud's Sophism, for whatsoever he alleges from
Greek Authors, respects this Equivocal part of their Hypothesis, which he
believed to be like that of the Latins, although at bottom it is not so; but he has
studiously avoided the relating any thing concerning this other Part, by which
the two Hypothesis's distinguish themselves, and vary from one another. The
Greeks and Latins agree in these general Expressions, The Bread is made the
Body of Jesus Christ, The Bread is changed into the Body of Christ, it becomes
the very Body, the proper Body, the real Body of Christ. They are not two
Bodies, but one Body. So far you see they hold the same Language.

BUT go farther, ask them whether the nature of Bread ceases to be. The Latins
answer, there remains nothing of its Substance, nor Matter, nor inward Form,
but only the Accidents. The Greeks on the contrary say, That the Bread is
joined to the Divinity, that from this Union results one composed of two
Natures, that there is made a Composition of Bread and the Holy Spirit. Ask the
Latins how the Bread is made the Body of Jesus Christ; They Answer, by the
Conversion of its whole Substance, into the Substance which this Body had
before the Conversion. The Greeks on the contrary say, the Bread becomes an
Augmentation of the natural Body of our Lord, and is made by this means his
Body: Ask them what Change the Bread receives; the Latins say it is a real
Transubstantiation, (that is to say) the change of one Substance into another.
The Greeks on the contrary answer, that it is a Sanctification which the Bread
receives, and that it is changed into the Supernatural Virtue of Christ's Body.
Ask the Latins how the Bread becomes the real Body, the very Body, the proper
Body of our Lord born of the Virgin Mary: They answer, it is because in effect
the same numerical Substance, without any Difference. The Greeks on the
contrary say, that it is because an Augmentation makes not another Body, than
that which receives Augmentation, and they make use of the Example of a Child,
which Eating, and Drinking and Growing by this means, has not two Bodies, but
one.

MR. Arnaud then has in vain, collected all the Passages of Cabasilas which
assert, The Gifts are changed into the Body and Blood of Christ, that the Bread
is Lib. 3. c. 8.
the very Body of our Savior, the Sacrifice offered for the Salvation of the
World, that the Lord is seen and handled by means of the Holy and Dreadful
Mysteries, and that we receive him in the Eucharist. These Expressions are
common both to the Latins and Greeks, from whence he can conclude nothing, to
the Prejudice of these Differences we have observed, and which decide the
Question.

IT is in vain he tells us, that Cabasilas Disputing against the Latins, on the
Subject of this Prayer which they make after the Consecration: Jube sursum
ferri dona haec in manu angeli ad supercaeleste tuum Altar: Reasons on these
four Principles which include the real Presence, and Transubstantiation. 1st.
That we ought not to wish the Body of Christ be taken up from us. 2ly. That the
Body of Christ being in Heaven and on Earth, we ought not to desire it should
be carried up into Heaven, because it is there already. 3dly. That it cannot be
offered by Angels, because it is above Angels. 4ly. That we cannot without
Impiety wish the Gifts a greater Dignity, seeing they are the Body of Jesus
Christ.

AS to what concerns the first of these: Cabasilas says only, We must not pray
that the Holy Gifts be taken away from us, but on the contrary, that they may
remain with us, and must believe they do so, because it is thus that Christ is
with us to the end of the World: Hitherto we see neither Transubstantiation,
nor Cabas. expos. Liturg. c. 30.
real Presence. As to the 2d. Cabasilas says, That if the Latins acknowledged
it to be the Body of Christ, they must believe he is with us, and that he is
above the Heavens, seated at the right Hand of the Father, in a manner known to
him, which still supposes neither real Presence, nor Transubstantiation. For
according to the Greeks, the Eucharist which is on the Earth, being the Growth
of the Body of Christ, is one and the same Body with that in Heaven. So that in
manner, the same Body is in Heaven and on Earth; In Heaven, in respect of its
natural Substance, and on Earth, in respect of the Mystery, which is its
Growth; which is far from the Sense of the Latins, and does not suppose any
Transubstantiation. As to the 3d. How, says Cabasilas, can that be carried up
by an Angel which is above all Principalities and Powers, and above every Name.
But, methinks this would be to extend the use of Consequences too far, to
conclude from hence that the Eucharist is the Body of Christ in propriety of
Substance. For it is sufficient to establish the Truth of what Cabasilas says,
that the Bread is the Body of Christ in Virtue, and by way of Growth, as we
have already observed the Greeks explain it, seeing it is true that this
Dignity raises it up in some Sense above the Angels themselves, not in respect
of its Nature or Substance, but in respect of the Virtue which accompanies it,
which is the supernatural Virtue of our Lord's Body. As to the 4th. It is
certain that Cabasilas has had reason to say that if the Latins desired the
Gifts might after their Consecration receive some new Dignity, and a Change
into a better State, their Prayer would be impious, seeing they acknowledged
they were already the Body of Christ. For, as he afterward adds, to what more
excellent or Holy State can we believe they pass into? His Reasoning is good,
but I do not see it includes (as Mr. Arnaud tells us) the real Presence, and
Transubstantiation: He ought to show us this, and not assert it without Proof;
for it may very well be said in the Sense of the Greeks, that the Bread is
capable of no higher a Dignity, than that of receiving the Impression of the
Virtue of Christ's Body, and to be made this Body by way of Growth and
Augmentation.

IT is moreover in Vain Mr. Arnaud endeavors to show that in the Sense of
Cabasilas Christ does not really dye in the Eucharist, for we never imputed
Lib. 3. c. 8.
to this Author so strange a Doctrine: Neither have we ween deceived touching
the Participles (...) as Mr. Arnaud has imagined. For we find that Cabasilas
calls the Body of Christ not (...) as Mr. Arnaud supposes, this is a Fault in
Grammar which has escaped his Pen for want of heed, and which we must not impute
to a Greek; but (...), we have seen likewise he deny's the Body is, not (...)
as Mr. Arnaud does again assert by a Mistake through Incogitancy, for we are not
willing to attribute it to any thing else. The Greeks do not say (...) in that
Sense, to say the Sacrificed or Slain Body, no more than (...); but (...),
which is to say that Cabasilas means that the Body has been slain heretofore,
and not at present. But this does not hinder it from being true, as I said in
my Answer to the Perpetuity, that Cabasilas has respect to the Body of Christ
in the Eucharist, as dead, that is to say under a respect or quality of Answer
to the 2d Treat. c. 8.
Death. Which appears by what he says, that it is not an Image or
Representation of a Sacrifice, but a real Sacrifice, not of Bread, but of the
Body of Christ, Cabas. expos. Lit. cap. 32.
and that there is but one Sacrifice of the Lamb, of him which was once
offered. Whence it follows that Christ is in the Eucharist as Dead, and
Sacrificed on the Cross, which is precisely what I said.

MR. Arnaud will say that the Consequence which I draw, to wit, that Christ is
not substantially present in the Eucharist, is contrary to Cabasilas his
Discourse, who assures us, That the Bread is changed into the thing Sacrificed,
although the Sacrifice is not presently offered; But Mr. Arnaud having never well
Ibid.
comprehended the Hypothesis of the Greeks, it is no marvel if he has
misunderstood Cabasilas his Sense in this Discourse which he makes of the
Sacrifice in his thirty second Chapter. The Greeks will have the Bread pass
through all the Degrees of the Economy, through which the Body of Christ has passed,
that as the Holy Spirit came upon the Substance of the Holy Virgin, so does he
come upon the Bread; that as the Body of Christ was in a corruptible state,
Crucified, and Buried; so in like manner the Bread is first Corruptible, lifted
up as it were upon a Cross, and buried in our Bodies, as in a Sepulcher. That,
in fine, it becomes incorruptible as the Body of Christ was after his
Resurrection: which they establish by this Reason, that the Bread is an
augmentation of the Body of Jesus Christ; and that as Nature observes on the
Food which nourishes us, and augments our Body, the same order she kept in the
first matter from which we were formed. So Grace observes in the Eucharistical
Bread, the same order she observes in the Natural Body. By this means they will
have the Bread become first the Body of Christ, in as much as it is Mortal and
Corruptible, that it be afterward this dead Body; and in fine, this
Incorruptible and Raised Body. Cabasilas his Sense then is, that when the Bread
is mystically sacrificed, it is made the dead Body of Jesus Christ, as he
speaks himself, the Lamb slain, not that the Body suffers Death in this Moment,
but because in this Moment the Bread passes through the Economy of Death. And
thus the Bread is changed into the dead Body of our Lord, not that our Savior
dies in effect, but because the Bread which is the Growth of his Body, is then
changed into this Body, in as much as it suffered Death heretofore. And this is
Cabasilas his real Sense, which is conformable to the Hypothesis of the Greeks,
and not that which Mr. Arnaud attributes to him.

HE likewise uses to no purpose several Passages out of Simeon of Thessalonica.
They say nothing but what I already often answered, to wit, That the Bread is
the real Body of Jesus Christ, that it is the very Body of Christ, and I showed
in what Sense the Greeks use these Expressions, and therefore will not any more
repeat it. I likewise answered what he alleged touching the Adoration and the
unconsecrated Particles.

AS to Jeremias the Patriarch of Constantinople, we may well wonder that he
should so confidently offer him us as a Person that teaches Transubstantiation,
seeing that not only Jeremias holds the same Language as the others, but
asserts several things which opposes the Roman Doctrine. Mr. Arnaud having
according to his Custom impertinently related several historical Passages, Lib.
4. c. 4.
tells us, That the Article of the Ausbourg Confession, which respects the
Sacrament, expressly asserting the real Presence, but not mentioning
Transubstantiation; Jeremias answers, that Point is handled in it very briefly
and obscurely, and adds, that the Catholic Church holds the Bread is changed
into the very Body and Blood of our Lord through the Holy Spirit. So that then
Jeremias held Transubstantiation: And thus does Mr. Arnaud draw his
Consequences; But he is too quick. Some Protestants in Germany sent the
Ausbourg Confession to the Patriarch of Constantinople without any Commentary
or Exposition on it. The Patriarch examining its tenth Article, which runs
thus, Touching the Lord's Supper, they hold the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ
are really present in it, and are distributed to those that participate
thereof, and condemn the Opinion of those that hold the contrary: He says,
This Article treats of the Lord's Supper very briefly, and to say the Truth,
somewhat obscurely; For, adds he, we are told several things of you which we do
not approve. To say hereupon that the Lutherans understood this Article in the
Sense of the real Presence, and that the Greeks could not be ignorant of it,
signifies nothing. For it appears that the Patriarch only considered the
Expressions of the Article barely as they are laid down, and found them
obscure. And as to those things which were told him of them on this Subject,
and which he disapproved, he does not specify them. When then he adds, That the
Catholic Church holds, the Bread is changed into the Body and Blood of our
Lord through the Spirit. It is clear his Design is without proceeding any farther
into the Examination of their Belief, to tell them that of his Church, and
oppose it against their Article, so that we must always return to the Inquiry
whether by these Expressions, The Bread is changed into the real Body, he means
Transubstantiation, or the other Change by way of Augmentation, and Impression
of Virtue; for it is certain, the Article of the Ausbourg Confession respects
neither of these Changes.

MR. Arnaud tells us, This was a proper place wherein to assert the Body and
Ibid. p. 361.
Blood of Christ are not really present in the Sacrament, seeing only their
Virtue is in it. I answer, a presence of Virtue, is a real Presence of the Body
and Blood of Christ, even as the Sun is really present with us by the Efficacy
of its Beams, so that Jeremias had no reason to oppose the reality of the
Presence; but 'twas better said by him, that the Terms of the Confession were
Ambiguous, and that they ought to acknowledge clearly, the Body and Blood are
substantially present in it, supposing he believed this substantial Presence.

MR. Arnaud adds, That the Patriarch does not say the Bread is changed in p.
362.
Virtue, Power and Efficacy. I answer, neither does he say it is changed in
Substance, and there is this Difference betwixt Mr. Arnaud and I, that I add it
was not necessary that Jeremias should explain himself touching this change of
Virtue, because the Greeks who preceded him, had already plainly done it; but
the same cannot be said touching the change of Substance, for not one of the
Greeks ever mentioned it any more than he, so that he was necessarily obliged
clearly to express it, if he intended it should be understood.

BUT Mr. Arnaud further says, The Divines of Wittemberg, and Tubinga, believed
upon the Answer of the Patriarch, that he taught the real Presence and p. 370.
Transubstantiation. When this were true we need not be astonished thereat: For
it might well be that Divines who held the Consubstantiation should take the
Words of Jeremias in a Sense which opposed only one part of their Opinion,
rather than in another which would wholly overthrow it. Their Prejudication
signifies nothing, to the Exposition which the Greeks make themselves of their
own Opinion.

BUT Mr. Arnaud says moreover, If the Divines of Wittemberg Misunderstood the
Patriarchs Sense, it lay upon him to rectify their Mistakes. I answer, there
cannot be any Advantage made of Jeremias's Silence in this Respect. For it is
certain that in these Divines first answer, they reckon amongst the Points in
which they agreed with the Patriarch, this, That the Communion, or Supper of
our Lord, unites us to him, in as much as we truly partake therein of his Flesh
and Blood: But these were the proper Expressions which this Patriarch used, and
so far there was no reason to say they charged him with believing what he did
not, seeing they only repeated what he said. It is likewise true they denied
the Bread was changed therein, which they grounded on the Testimony of St.
Paul, who calls it Bread; yet did they make use of the same Term Jeremias did,
which is that of (...), without the least mention of a change of Substance. So
that so far Jeremias had no cause to tell 'em they mistook his Words: Neither
does he do it in his Reply or second Answer, but still continues to say, The
Bread is changed, without proceeding any farther. It is true, in fine, that the
Divines having replied to Jeremias his second Letter, they expressly oppose the
change of Substance, and seem thereby to suppose they had taken the (...) of
Jeremias in the Sense of a real Transubstantiation, which might then oblige
this Patriarch to explain himself more clearly than he had done in his former
Writings. But it is also true that he returned them no particular Answer
touching the Article of the Eucharist. He contented himself with telling them
in general concerning the Sacraments, That seeing they admitted only some of
them, and moreover erroneously perverted and changed the Expressions of the
ancient and modern Doctrine to obtain their Aim, (...), They therefore deserved
not the Title of Divines. Which sufficiently shows his Complaint against them,
for their misunderstanding of these Terms, in understanding them of a change of
Substance, and at the same time certifying them, that for his Part he would not
deviate from the general and usual Expressions of his Church.

IT is certain there is in these Writings of Jeremias, such Matters which
cannot agree with the Roman Transubstantiation, as that which we have already
related when we treated on the real Belief of the Greeks, That God has given us
the Sacraments double, that is to say, consisting on one Hand of the Grace of
the Holy Spirit, and on the other, of sensible things, which are Water, Oil,
Bread, and the Chalice by which our Souls are sanctified; For a Man that speaks
thus, clearly shows he understands the Substance of Bread remains. We may
likewise reckon in this Rank what he says concerning the Church, That she is
set forth to us in the Mysteries, not as in the Symbols; But as the Members are
in the Heart, and the Branches of a Tree in the Root, or as the Branches in the
Vine according to our Savior's Words. For here is not only a bare Communion of
Name, or relation of Resemblance, but the Identity of the thing it self: For
the Mysteries are really the Body and Blood of Christ, and they are not changed
into our Body, but we are changed into them, the strongest part prevailing. The
Iron when put in the Fire, becomes Fire it self, but the Fire becomes not Iron.
As then when the Iron is red-hot, we perceive no more Iron, but Fire, the Fire
dispelling all the Proprieties of Iron, so he that beholds Christ's Church, in
as much as it is united to him, and partakes of his Flesh, beholds nothing else
but the Body of our Lord.

THIS Discourse is taken Verbatim out of Cabasilas, as I have observed
elsewhere, and shows the Change of Bread and Wine, must not be urged as if they
understood it of a Change of Substance, seeing he uses the same Term in respect
of the Communicants, saying, We are changed into the Mysteries. They likewise
show us we must not take in a Counter-Sence what he says concerning the
Mysteries, being really the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, seeing he tells us
the Church is the very Body of our Lord. I alleged these last Words in my
Answer to the Perpetuity, and said, That Jeremias speaks of the Church which
has received the Impression of the Spirit of Christ. Mr. Arnaud accuses me of
Falsifying this Passage: But this Accusation comes from his being out of Humor.
The original Words I recited are these (...), he will perceive nothing else but
our Lord's Body: And as to what I said, that he speaks of the Church which has
received the Impression of the Spirit of Christ, I affirm this is his Sense,
and that Mr. Arnaud (as prejudiced as he is) cannot give it any other: For to
what relates this Comparison of Fire which changes the Iron, but to the
Impression of the Spirit of Christ on the Church, and this Union of the Church
with Christ, but to his spiritual and mystical Union? It is true he says, That
it is in as much as she is partaker of his Flesh: But this does not in any sort
change his Sense. For it is from the mystical Participation of his Flesh that
comes the Impression of his Spirit, and it is the Impression of his Spirit
which effects this admirable Change. These two things are subalternate, but not
contrary to one another: So that Mr. Arnaud impertinently charges me with
falsifying the Passage of Jeremias. But it is not the same with this other
Passage which Forbesius alleged, and concerning which I have complained of the
Author of the Perpetuity. Mr. Arnaud may say if he pleases, That my Complaint
is unreasonable; yet will it be found both Just and Reasonable. Forbesius was a
Person who making outward Profession of the Protestant Religion, yet wrote in
favor of the Church of Rome, under the specious pretense of Peace and
Agreement. To soften what we believe is hard in the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, he assures us that almost all the Greeks believe it, and
instances Jeremias who teaches according to what he says, That the Bread is
neither a Figure, nor an Azyme, but the real Body of Christ contained under the
species of leavened Bread.

The Author of the Perpetuity alleges this Forbesius as a Person whose
Testimony ought to be of great weight with us, being a Protestant. The cause
then of my Complaint is, that we must have a false Translation of Jeremias
imposed upon us, under the Name of a Protestant, without telling us what kind
of Man this Protestant was. When we make use of a Witness, we ought certainly
to consider what he is, and if it appears there be just Exceptions against him,
we must not offer him; and when we would use a Passage which he alleges, we
must take care his Translation be true. It is to no purpose to say, We are not
obliged to justify the Translations of Protestants, and that if he be mistaken
it is his Fault. This might be indeed alleged, supposing the P. 365.
Author of the Perpetuity had disputed against Forbesius, or were ignorant who
this Forbesius was; but this Man's Character sufficiently shows it self by the
bare reading of his Book. Neither does it signify any thing to say, That
Forbesius is not the Author of this Translation, but Transcribed it Verbatim
from Socolovius. Neither is it less a Deceit in Forbesius himself, who ought
not to make us Believe that Jeremias said what he did not, and when a Person
that pretends to be of our Communion deceives us, we have right to inveigh
against him. Let us come then to the Point, and inquire whether the Translation
of Jeremias be false. Mr. Arnaud says it is not, and I affirm it is: The
Question will be decided by the reading of Jeremias his own Words. The Bread,
says he, of the Lord's Body, which is administered by the Priests, is neither a
Type, nor an Azyme, but it is (...), a leavened Loaf, and the very Body of our
Lord, and the Translation runs, Illud ipsum verum Christi corpus, sub speciebus
fermentati panis contentum, The Body it self, the real Body of Christ CONTAINED
UNDER THE SPECIES OF LEAVENED BREAD. Mr. Arnaud affirms that this is not a
Falsification, because Jeremias his true Sense is represented in it. For says
he, these Words, (...), are capable of two different P. 366.
Senses. First, This Bread is called (...) Leavened, because it remains in
effect leavened Bread, and that it is only the Body of Christ, in Figure or
Virtue. Secondly, It is called by this Name of leavened Bread, because it was
originally leavened Bread, and does still appear so, although it be the Body of
our Lord. But the first of these Senses has been several times excluded by
Jeremias his own Words, wherein he clearly asserted that after the Consecration
the leavend Bread is changed into our Lord's real Body, that it is not a
Figure, but our Lords Body, that it is this Flesh concerning which he speaks;
The Bread which I shall give you is my Flesh. It is excluded in what follows
sundry different ways, and by the very Words of that passage which asserts it
is our Lord's Body. Whence it follows it is not then really leavened Bread.

I answer, that this pretended Sense which Mr. Arnaud attributes to Jeremias is
precisely the Point in Question. Now whilst a matter is in Dispute, we must
never translate a Passage according to the Sense of one of the Parties which
the other denies him. To deal sincerely, the proper and natural Signification of
Terms must be kept, and every man left at his liberty to judge of them. For when
men translate according to the Pretention of one Party, they are no longer the
Words of this Author, but the Prejudication of this Party, and consequently an
Alteration, even when the Prejudication of this Party should be just and
reasonable in the Main. Moreover Mr. Arnaud is mistaken, if he believes the
other Passages of Jeremias determine a Sense of substantial Reality, for
according to the Hypothesis of the Greeks, the Bread still remains Bread in
Substance, although it be changed into the Body of Christ, and be the very Body of
Christ, and not a Figure, as we have often already declared, whence it follows
the Translation in question cannot be justified.

A Man of never so mean Capacity may perceive that Jeremias his Sense, is not
that which Mr. Arnaud attributes to him. For in the same place where he says,
The Bread is changed into the real Body of Christ, and the Wine into his Blood,
and wherein he alleges the Words of Christ which tell us, not, This is an
Azyme, or this is the Figure of my Body, but this is my Body; He adds by way of
Explication, This is not to say that the Flesh which our Savior then had, was
given to be eaten by his Disciples, nor his Blood to be drunk, nor that now in
this sacred Ordinance our Lord's Body descends from Heaven: This would be
Blasphemy. But then and now by Prayers and the Grace of the almighty Spirit,
which operates in the Mysteries by means of the Holy Orisons, the Bread is
changed into our Lord's real Body and Blood. These Words being applied to the
Hypothesis of the Greeks, that the Bread remaining Bread, and receiving the
Impression of the Holy Spirit, is changed into the Body of Christ by way of
Augmentation, are clear, and void of Difficulty. But if we apply them to the
Hypothesis of the Latins, who affirm the Substance of Bread is changed into the
natural Flesh of Christ, and becomes the Same numerical Flesh which our Lord
had when on Earth; In what Sense shall we understand that saying of Jeremias,
namely that the Flesh which Christ had then, was not given to be eaten by his
Disciples? For if we grant Transubstantiation, it is certain the Disciples eat
the same Flesh which Christ then had, and Jeremias his Proposition can not
subsist. Mr. Arnaud endeavors but in vain, to expound Jeremias his Discourse
in saying, That Christ gave not to be eaten by his Disciples the Flesh which he
had, in ceasing to have it, and to appear before them in his usual manner, in
cutting his Body into Morsels, or having no other place of Abode than his
Apostles Stomach. To make us receive this Gloss, it must be grounded on
Jeremias his own Words, and not on Mr. Arnaud's Imagination. These Corrections
and fine Explications hinder not, but that the Patriarch's Proposition is
absolute and contrary to the Doctrine of Transubstantiation. For that which
Jeremias denies, is not that our Savior disappeared before his Disciples, nor
cut his Flesh into Morsels, but that he gave them to eat the Flesh he then had.
The Question respects not the manner in which our Lord gave his Flesh to be
eaten, but whether he did give it, and Jeremias asserts he did not. What
likelihood is there that a Man who believes Transubstantiation, would thus
roughly offer a Negative which is directly opposite to his Belief? What
likelihood is there he would offer it in the same place and Discourse wherein
he asserts Transubstantiation, without explaining, and lessening the Offense,
which might be taken at his Words? But in short, how is it probable he would
treat as Blasphemous the Proposition contrary to his Negative? Of these two
Propositions, Christ gave to be eaten by his Disciples the Flesh he bore, and
Christ gave not the Flesh he bare to his Disciples to eat. The first would be
the only true one according to the Letter, without Gloss and Commentary,
supposing Transubstantiation. The Other taken literally would be false and
heretical, and to make it tolerable, it must have Expositions and Molifications
contrary to what the Letter bears. Mr. Arnaud is forced to change the first and
natural Sense of the Terms, and impose on them a forced and unusual one. Who
can then imagine that a Man who believed Transubstantiation, or the real
Presence, and positively asserted it, should be so senceless as to condemn the
first of these Propositions which expressly contains his Belief, to condemn it I
say as Blasphemous, and establish the second as the only true one, without
using any Corrective or Illustration? This is wholly improbable.

AND this is what I had to say concerning Jeremias. There remains nothing more
of all Mr. Arnaud's pretended Proofs, than the Passages taken out of some
common Authors, wherein there being nothing extraordinary, and containing only
that the Bread is the Body of Christ, and that it is changed into his Body: The
same Answer being applied to them will be sufficient.

CHAP. IX.
Several Passages of Anastasius Sinaite, Germane the Patriarch of
Constantinople, and Damascene, Examined.

HAVING satisfied Mr. Arnaud's Objections concerning the Greeks since the
eleventh Century to this present, we must not any longer defer the
Consideration of his seventh Book, wherein by an odd kind of Humor he ascends
upwards to the seventh Century, and so descends down again inclusively to the
tenth. I call this an odd and proposterous way of proceeding; For why, begin at
the eleventh Century, seeing he designed to treat of the seventh and following
Ages? Why skip over the first and six Centuries, if he sincerely designed to
prove the Perpetuity of the Doctrines of Transubstantiation and the real
Presence? The Question being to know whether these Doctrines were ever believed
and taught in the Christian Church, and especially in Greece, there is no other
direct way than that of taking Tradition from the Source, and to pass on from
the first Century to the second, from the second to the third, and so on to the
last. If he thought this Method tedious, he would have done better to have
abridged it in showing these Doctrines were taught in the first six Centuries,
and suppose the same in those that followed, than to show them established from
the eleventh and seventh, whereby to suppose the same in the six foregoing
Centuries. To speak sincerely there ought to be neither of these Suppositions
made; for it does not absolutely follow from a Point's being held in the first
Ages, that it has been likewise held in the last, neither does it any more
follow from a Points being held in the last, that it was so in the first. This
does not follow in respect of Fact: Yet it is certain that in respect of Right,
which is far more considerable than Fact, it is more advantageous to show a
Doctrine in the beginnings of Tradition, than in the sequels of it. For it
rather follows from a Doctrine's being held in the beginnings of Tradition,
that it ought to be held still, than it does follow from its being held at
present, or since the eleventh, or seventh Century, that it ought to be held,
or that it was held in effect in the first Ages of the Church. Why then has Mr.
Arnaud divided his Tradition into three parts; one since the eleventh Century,
to this present, the other since the seventh to the tenth, and the third, from
the first Century to the sixth, seeing Tradition ought to be taken successively
in order? Why has he in his Division made the last part the first, seeing in
effect it is the last in order? Why in short, thus injure his Cause in spending
all his time upon the two least important, and which signify nothing, as to the
main of our Question, and remit the most important to another time, when his
Convenience will serve him to consider them? Howsoever we purpose to follow him
every where, and therefore shall examine here his seventh Book, because it
treats still of the Belief of the Greeks; For by this means the Readers will
see in order whatsoever Mr. Arnaud has alleged in relation to this Church.

THE Public having nothing to do with our personal Quarrels, and the Cause
which I defend, depending neither on what I am, or am not, I shall therefore
pass by all the Invectives with which the first Chapter is filled. The first
thing which appears in it is my Picture, which cannot but be well done, coming
from his Hands; for persons Characters are the chief Weapons Mr. Arnaud and his
Friends use in their Disputes. But he may describe me how he pleases, for I
shall not be much moved thereat. Those that read our Discourses, will do us
both right I hope. I shall only say then that Mr. Arnaud has captiously abused
my Words touching the eight first Centuries when I called them, The Churches
happy Days, peaceable and blessed Days, wherein the Pastors took care to
instruct their Flocks, and remove all the Difficulties which might arise Answer
to the 2d. Treat. 2, p. c. 3.
from the Sacrament's being commonly called the Body of Christ. 1st. I joined
all these Centuries together, when I spoke of them in this sort, and Mr. Arnaud
only considers the two last of them, taking no notice of the other six, as if
what I said of these two last were to be taken alone and apart. 2dly. That
although the two last are comprehended amongst the number of the eight, yet I
never meant that the Title of happy Days, Days of Peace and Blessing, belongs
equally to all of them. The happy Days have an end, and although their last Hours
which draw nearest to Night, are darker than those which preceded them, yet are
we wont to comprehend them amongst the rest, under the Name of happy Day,
because when we distribute the Sense of these kind of Expressions to all the
Parts, or Hours; rational Persons make this Distribution proportionably to what
each of them deserves. May not that Person be justly derided for his
Impertinency that carps at the calling of a happy Day a time wherein there is
scarcely any longer Light, under pretense that the last Hour, which approaches
nearer the Night, is darker than the rest. Now this Mr. Arnaud exactly does, he
pretends it is impertinently that I call the eight first Centuries, The Churches
happy Days, seeing the other Ministers assert the seventh and eighth, that is
to say, the two last were Ages of Ignorance and Superstition. To dissipate all
these Subtilties, we need but distinguish these Centuries in two respects, in
which we may consider them, either by comparing them with the preceding, or
following Ages. In the first they were Ages of Ignorance, and Superstition. And
in the second, they were the last Hours of the Churches happy Days, or the
approaches of a Night, that is to say in one Word, that although Knowledge and Zeal
suffered very much Diminution in them, and several Errors troubled the Purity
of Religion, yet this was nothing in comparison of what followed afterward.
This is the Judgment I think we ought to make of them in general. But in
particular, in respect of the Mystery of the Eucharist, I firmly believe that
the Doctrine of the real Presence and Transubstantiation, were not then
established in the Church during these two Centuries; we may indeed meet with
some hard Expressions, and such as are contrary to those of the preceding
Ages, but no substantial Conversion. We shall find the care of instructing the
People in the sound Knowledge of the Sacrament greatly slackned in comparison of
the preceding Ages, yet were they not wholly ignorant how the Eucharist is the
Body of Christ; to wit, in that it is the Sacrament or Mystery of it. It was in
this Sense I understood the seventh and eighth Centuries were comprehended
amongst the Churches happy Days. Let any Man judge now what Reason Mr. Arnaud
has to represent me as a Person, That never respect Lib. 7. c. 1. p. 614.
things as they are in Effect, but only as I would have them, that has no
regard to Truth, nor Probability, but only the advantaging of my Cause, that
disposes of Historical Passages and real Events with more liberty than
Adventures are dealt out in Romances, that builds Castles in the Air, and makes
all Men in the World Senceless, provided they speak and think according to my
Desires and Pretensions, that prefers the smallest Reasons, before the
strongest and clearest Proofs, and proposes all this in a confident insulting
manner, giving myself those Applauses which I would willingly receive from
others, and treating my Adversaries with Contempt and Disdain. And here is the
Tempest which has followed my Sunshine, my happy Days. But I am sorry Mr.
Arnaud should be thus angry upon no occasion: Howsoever we will Examine the
Passages he has offered.

THE first is a Passage taken out of Anastatius Sinaite, wherein a Monk argues
against Heretics who asserted Christ's Body was incorruptible before his
Resurrection. To prove that it was Corruptible, he takes it for granted by his
Adversaries, That the Eucharist is really the true Body and Blood of Christ,
Anast. Sin. (...).
not mere Bread, such as is sold in the Market; nor a Figure, such as was the
Sacrifice of the paschal Lamb amongst the Jews. To this Principle he adds
another, which is, That the Eucharist is corruptible, as Experience shows us;
and from these two Propositions he concludes, That the Body of Christ was
Corruptible before his Resurrection. Every Man sees this Reasoning is grounded
on this Supposition, That the Eucharist is the Body of Christ, such as it was
before his Resurrection, that is to say in the same State. Now it is likewise
manifest that this Supposition is wholly inconsistent with the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, and that of the substantial Presence. For besides that,
it is both foolish and impious to imagine that our Lord's Body which is risen
out of its State of Humiliation descends into it again, and exists still
Mortal, Corruptible and Passible, as it was heretofore: This is moreover
directly contrary to his Sacramental State, wherein we must necessarily suppose
it, if we would have it to be in the Eucharist in proper Substance. For it is
not to be imagined that a Body which exists after the manner of a Spirit
impalpable and indivisible, which can be neither seen nor touched, should be at
the same time Mortal, Corruptible, and Passible, as our Savior's Body was
before his Resurrection: These two States are inconsistent with each other;
whence it follows that whatsoever otherwise the Sense of this Author might be,
he held neither Transubstantiation, nor the Reality which the Church of Rome
holds.

YET if we believe Mr. Arnaud he is a Witness for him. For as soon as ever he
finds in any Passage that the Eucharist is not a Figure, but the true Body of
Christ, he requires no more for the making of a Proof, although he sees otherwise
several things absolutely contrary to him. One of the usual Artifices with
which he imposes on his Readers; is, that when he offers any Passage importing
what I now mentioned, or something like it, he sets himself to show not that
it is the Roman Transubstantiation therein contained, but that it is not our
Doctrine. And thus has he done in that Passage of Anastasius's, Can any Man,
says he, that has but the least spark of Sense, and believes the Ibid. p. 625.
Eucharist to be only a Figure of Christ's Body, and not the real Body of
Christ, Express this his Opinion by these Terms. The Eucharist is not the
Figure, but really the true Body of Christ. Can any Calvinist in the World
refuse to acknowledge this Discourse overthrows his Doctrine? And I say, can
there be any Man that has but the least dram of Sense, that believes the Body
of Christ exists in the Eucharist after the manner of a Spirit, and is therein
in a Sacramental State, and yet expresses this his Belief in saying the
Eucharist is subject to Corruption; and concluding from thence that the Body of
Christ was then Corruptible before his Resurrection? Is there ever a one of Mr.
Arnaud's Friends that can contain himself from believing this Discourse
overthrows his Doctrine? When I speak in this manner, I keep to the State of
our Question, and deceive no body; But when Mr. Arnaud speaks as he does, he
wanders from the Point in hand, and deludes his Readers.

WHATSOEVER Anastasius his Doctrine may be, it is certain it is not that of the
Church of Rome, which cannot consist with the Principle on which Anastasius
argues. He expresses himself, says Mr. Arnaud, a little crabbedly toward the
end of his Discourse, in making use of weak Arguments, not only here, but in
almost all parts of his whole Discourse. But if Mr. Arnaud be forced to confess
that this man's Expressions are of hard digestion, when applied to the
Hypothesis of Rome; Why may not I as well say they are so, being applied to our
Hypothesis, and consequently they must not be urged against us? If Anastasius
could not carefully consider the Consequence he drew himself, how could he
foresee that which Mr. Arnaud would one Day draw from his Discourse? If it be
usual with Anastasius to argue weakly, why may it not also be usual with him to
Discourse with little foresight? Why must Advantage be taken from some of his
Expressions against us, and we withheld from taking any against Mr. Arnaud,
from the whole Sequel of his Discourse, and Coherence of his Thoughts, which a
Man more minds than his Terms, or manner of expressing himself?

MR. Arnaud endeavors, but all in vain, to molify Anastasius's Sense, in
saying, That he concludes the Body of Christ was corruptible before his
Passion, Ibid. p. ^3^.
seeing he suffers still in the Eucharist an apparent Corruption, by the
sensible Corruption of the Species, which are the Symbol of the State wherein
he was before his Death. This Arguing, adds he, is very weak and roughly
Expressed, but it is no unusual thing for this Author to Reason weakly, and it
would be but a bad Consequence to conclude that an Argument is not his, because
it is weak. It is sufficient that it be not extravagant in the highest Degree,
as is that which Aubertin attributes to him.

ANASTASIUS his Argument according to Mr. Arnaud, must be put in this Form. The
Body of Christ before his Resurrection was such, as is in the Eucharist, the
Symbol of the State wherein he was before his Death; But this Symbol is
corruptible: Therefore the Body of Christ was then Corruptible. This Argument
is like that which Mr. Aubertin imputes to him according to Mr. Arnaud. That
which happens to the Figure of Christ's Body; P. 629.
happened to his Body before his Passion. Now it happens to the Bread which is
the Figure of it, to be subject to Corruption: The Body then of Jesus Christ
was Corruptible before his Passion. Take the Word Figure from this Argument,
insert that of Symbol, which Mr. Arnaud has used in his, and the two Arguments
are the same. Yet he will have his to be good, and Mr. Aubertin's ridiculously
Extravagant.

BUT, it will be perhaps replied, these two Arguments which in respect of Terms
are alike, yet do differ in Sense; For Mr. Arnaud by the Symbol, means the
Accidents or Species which cover the Body, and Mr. Aubertin by the Figure
understands a real Substance of Bread. So that howsoever alike these Arguments
do at first appear, one of 'em may be reasonable, and the other Extravagant. I
grant all this; but I say if Mr. Arnaud's Argument be good, Mr. Aubertins is so
likewise, and that if there be any Extravagancy in either of them, it must be
in the first, and not in the second. Why must Anastasius rather argue on the
State of the corruptible Species, than on that of the corruptible Bread? His
Arguing, take we it how we will, must be grounded on two Qualities attributed
to the Eucharist, one, That it is a Sign, and the other, That it is a
corruptible Sign, and from hence he will conclude that Christ's Body before his
Resurrection was Corruptible as well as its Sign. Now these two Qualities of
Sign and Corruptible, are found as well, or rather better in the Bread which
Aubertin means, than in the Accidents, or Mr. Arnaud's Species. It will no ways
avail to say that Anastasius denies the Eucharist to be a Figure, and that thus
he would contradict himself, saying on one hand that it is not a Figure, and
supposing on the other that it is one. This I say signifies nothing, for it is
only changing the Term of Figure, into that of Symbol, which Mr. Arnaud uses,
and which he believed not to be comprehended in the Rejection of the Word
Figure. Neither signifies it any thing to say Anastasius assures us the
Eucharist is the real Body, which hinders us from understanding by the Term of
Symbol, contained in his Argument, that it is Bread in Substance. For I deny
that by the true Body he mentions, we must understand the Body in proper
Substance. It is then certain that if we may attribute Mr. Arnaud's Argument to
this Author, we may as well attribute to him that of Mr. Aubertin.

BUT I say moreover, that if there be any Extravagancy in either of these two
Arguments, it will be found to be rather in that which Mr. Arnaud imputes to
him, than the other: Which we shall soon find if we consider what means in
Anastasius his Discourse the Term of Eucharist, according to Mr. Arnaud's
Commentary; for it signifies, the Incorruptible Body, Invisible and Impassible
of Christ, under the Corruptible Species of Bread and Wine. Anastasius then
will Reason after this manner, The Body of Christ before his Resurrection was
immediately Corruptible in it self. Why? Because now in the Eucharist it is
Incorruptible in it self, and Corruptible in respect of the Species which cover
it. Was ever such absurd Arguing known? Would not the Heretic Gayanite say the
contrary hence followed; for seeing our Lord is Incorruptible in himself in the
Eucharist, this is a Token he was so before his Resurrection. And as to the
Species, being only Appearances of Bread, the Corruption which happens to them,
is no more than an appearance of Corruption, which can at farthest but figurate
an apparent Corruption in our Lord's Body before his Resurrection; which does
not differ from the Doctrine of these Heretics. Moreover Anastasius
establishes in his Argument this Principle, That an incorruptible Nature can
neither be Cut, nor Wounded in the Side and Hands, nor Pierced, nor put to
Death, nor Eaten; That it can neither be held, nor touched. Now is it not a
most extreme folly to strengthen this by instancing the Eucharist, that is to
say the real Body of Christ which is Cut, Pierced, Chewed, in respect of the
Appearances which cover it, and which are yet incorruptible. For this is just
as if a Man should prove it is Night in pointing to the Sun shining. In effect,
if we introduce the Heretic defending himself against Anastasius his
Proposition, by the Example of the Eucharist, and saying, I distinguish an
incorruptible Nature can neither be Hurt, nor Cut, nor Pierced, nor put to
Death, immediately and really in it self: I acknowledge it, in respect of the
Appearances which cover it, and I prove my Negative by the Example of the
Eucharist, wherein the Body of Christ wholly incorruptible as it is, is yet Cut,
Chewed, Pierced, in respect of the Appearances which are to it instead of a
Vail. Should (I say) the Heretic be brought in Disputing against Anastasiu's
Principle in this manner, he would make a very just and reasonable Answer,
whence it appears that this Example of the Eucharist, if taken in the Sense Mr.
Arnaud gives it, is an extravagancy and Folly in Anastasius his own Mouth.

MR. Arnaud then may be pleased to acknowledge that he cannot rely on this
Hypothesis, neither justify the other Evasion; which is, That Anastasius
believed this whiteness, and other sensible Accidents of the Eucharist, to be
the Ibid. p. 631.
Accidents of the Body of Christ, and so that when the Bread is broken, it is
the Body of Christ that is broken. By the Body of Christ Mr. Arnaud understands
not the Mystical Body only, but the Natural Body in proper Substance. Now what
greater Extravagancy can we charge a Man with, than to impute to him the
Belief, that the Substance of the Body is in Effect, of the same Form, and
Figure as the Bread in the Eucharist, that it is divided, and broken in several
Particles, as the Bread is divided; that each Particle is a part of this Body,
and that the Substance of this Body has really the Savor and Color which
Bread has? And seeing we must believe the Concomitancy, in the same manner as
the Substance of Bread will be liquid, and fluid as Wine in the Cup, so that of
the Blood will be in the other Species, hard and solid as Bread. In Truth, if
Anastasius could have this Sentiment, we must say he was a Person unfit to be
instanced in this Dispute, add Mr. Arnaud cannot render him more contemptible
than in attributing to him such kind of Fooleries. What he alleges concerning
Tertullian, that he believed the Divinity had a Body, is liable to be
questioned. There are abundance of Passages in this Author which will not
suffer us to entertain such a Thought of him, and which oblige us to expound in
a good Sense what he has otherwise expressed a little roughly. Theodoret makes
the Euthychiens fall into Contradictions it is true, but they are different
from the Extravagancy with which Mr. Arnaud charges Anastasius, for they do not
immediately discover themselves, whereas the others presently manifest
themselves. In short, if Mr. Arnaud cannot make use and advantage of his
Authors, unless he accuse them first of Extravagancy, and afterward excuse
them by Example of the Extravagancies of others: Let me tell him, he must get
better Witnesses, and not think to weary us out with the Language of Persons,
who neither know what they say, nor what they believe.

WAS there ever any thing more impertinent than Anastasius his Argument, if
what Mr. Arnaud imputes to him be true? He concludes that the Body of Christ
was corruptible before his Resurrection (that is to say) whilst he was in the
World, because it is corruptible in the Eucharist. Now to the end his State in
the Eucharist may be of Consequence, to that wherein he was before his
Resurrection; It follows that when he was in the World, he was in it under the
Sensible Accidents of Bread, entirely such as he is in the Eucharist; Which is
to say, that when he Talked, Walked, and Conversed, he did all these things
under the form of Bread. For unless this be so, there can be no Consequence
drawn from one to the other. Anastasius could not have denied that the
incorruptible Body of Christ could not take on it a corruptible Form, seeing he
knew that this Body is now incorruptible in Heaven, and that yet according to
the Hypothesis which Mr. Arnaud attributes to him, it becomes every Day
corruptible in the Eucharist, which cannot be but by changing its Form. It must
needs be then that Anastasius supposed the Body of Christ was in the World, in
the same Form it is now in the Sacrament, for supposing it changes its Form, I
understand not the Conclusion. The Heretic Gaynite might still alledg, that as
it does not follow this Body is corruptible in Heaven, although it be so in the
Eucharist, neither does it follow that it was corruptible during the time he
was on Earth; and that it is the Form he takes upon him in the Sacrament that
renders him corruptible. And thus Anastasius his Argument concludes nothing,
unless we suppose Christ's Body had absolutely the same Form when he was
conversant on Earth, that it has now in the Sacrament. Now this Supposition
being the greatest Degree of Folly, (there being no Man of Sense that will own
it,) we may easily then perceive what Judgment to make of Anastasius, as Mr.
Arnaud handles him.

BUT it is certain by what I now said that Anastasius believed neither
Transubstantiation, nor the real Presence, for had he believed it, he would
never have reasoned as he does, nor supposed (as he has done) a Principle
altogether inconsistent with the Roman Doctrine.

BUT what is then this Author's Sense? I answer, that when he says the
Eucharist is not common Bread, such as is sold in the Market: His meaning is
manifest; to wit, that it is consecrated Bread; when he adds, That it is not a
Figure as that of the He-goat, which the Jews offered: It is clear he does not
absolutely reject the Figure, but in the Sense of a legal Figure, which
represented Christ only obscurely and imperfectly, whereas the Eucharist is a
Mystery, which clearly and perfectly represents the whole Economy of Christ's
Incarnation, and Mr. Arnaud himself acknowledges, That although the Greeks deny
the Eucharist to be the Figure of Christ's Body, yet do they affirm it Ibid. p.
630.
is a Representation of the Mysteries of his Life, and that the same Authors
which teach the one, teach the other. So that so far, there is nothing in
Anastasius's Discourse but what is easy. When he adds, That it is the real Body
of Jesus Christ: He means that it is the Mystery of his Natural Body, which not
only is so perfect a Representation of it, that one may say it is the true
Body, and not a Figure; but which even has received the supernatural Form
thereof, or if you will, the Character of it, which is its Virtue, in the same
Sense that we say of Wax, which has received the Impression of the King's Seal,
that it is his real Seal. If we find any roughness in this Expression, we must
remember Mr. Arnaud finds the same in the Sequel of his Discourse, and that we
have showed that what he calls Roughness is mere Absurdity. Whence it follows
that it is more reasonable to suffer that which is only a bare Roughness and
Offensiveness in the Terms, and which moreover does well agree with Anastasius
his Reasoning, than that wherein common Sense is not to be found. We must
likewise remember the Exposition which the Greeks themselves do give to these
kind of Expressions, that the Eucharist is the true Body, the Body it self, the
proper Body of Christ; to wit, inasmuch as it is an Augmentation thereof which
makes not another Body, but is the same, as we have already showed in the
foregoing Book. We must know, in fine, that the Eutychiens against whom
Anastasius Disputes were wont to attribute to Christ in their Discourses when
urged, no other than a fantastical and imaginary Body, and not a real humane
Body, which obliged Anastasius to say that the Eucharist is the real Body of
Christ, that is to say, the Mystery, not of a chimerical, but real Body.

THIS being thus cleared up, the Sense of Anastasius his Argument lies open
before us. He means, that seeing the Bread is a Mystery in which is expressed
the whole Economy of Christ's Incarnation, being as it is corruptible, it must
necessarily be concluded, that the Body of Christ was in like manner
corruptible before his Resurrection, because the Bread was the Mystery of the
Body before its Resurrection, and that the same Economy which was observed
touching the natural Body, whilst it was in the World, is observed in the
Bread. Let but Anastasius his Discourse be compared with that of Zonaras, which
I related in the ninth Chapter of the foregoing Book, and Damascen's in the
short Homily which I likewise mentioned in the Chapter touching the Belief of
the Greeks, and with what I said in the eighth Chapter of this Book, for the
explaining Cabasilas his Sense, and there will appear no difficulty in it.

AS to that other Passage of Anastasius which Mr. Arnaud proposed, wherein this
Author disputes against an Heretic called Timotheus, who affirmed Ibid. p. 634.
the Nature of Christ after the Incarnation, to be the only Divinity. We must
make the same Judgment of it as the former. For as to what he says, That the
Divinity cannot be Detained, Chewed, Divided, Changed, Cut, etc. as is the
Eucharist, and that we must according to this Heretics Doctrine deny the
Eucharist to be in truth Christ's visible, terrestial, and created Body and
Blood; He means that the Accidents which happen to the Eucharist, being in no
wise agreeable to the Divinity of Christ who is not subject to Change and
Alteration; but only to his Body, we must therefore say the Bread does not pass
through the same Economy under which our Savior passed; whence it follows
that it could not be said as it is, that the Bread was in truth the Body and
Blood of Christ, being said to be so only upon the account of the Unity and
Identity of this Economy. Had he believed Transubstantiation, how could he
miss telling his Adversary, it is not to be imagined the Substance of Bread is
really changed into the very Substance of the Divinity, and that he must of
necessity either deny what the whole Church believes; to wit, the Conversion of
the Substance of Bread, or fall into this other Absurdity of maintaining that
this Conversion is made in the Divine Nature? Common Sense leads him to this,
and yet we find no such thing in all his Discourse.

AFTER Anastasius comes Germain the Patriarch of Constantinople. Mr. Aubertin
has placed him according to the common Opinion in the eighth Century; but in
effect, there is more likelihood, according to Allatius his Conjecture that he
lived in the twelveth, and the Reflections Mr. Arnaud makes on this Subject,
seem to me just enough to be followed till we have greater Certainty. But
howsoever this Author says no more than, That the Bread is changed into the
Body of Christ, and that it is his Body. To which we have Lib. 7. c. 3.
so often already answered that it will be needless to say any more. Mr. Arnaud
sets to Phylosophising on some Passages which Mr. Aubertin alleged in his
Favor, but this is an Illusion; for when what Mr. Aubertin alleges concerning
Germane to show that it is contrary to Transubstantiation, should not be
Conclusive, 'twould not thence follow he believed it, nor Taught it, if this
does not appear elsewhere from good Proofs, and Mr. Arnaud is obliged to
produce such, without supposing it is sufficient he Refutes Mr. Aubertin's
Consequences: For Refuting is not Proving.

GERMAIN sufficiently shows us toward the end of his Treatise, in what Sense
he understood the Bread to be the Body of Christ. Moses, says Germ. Theor.
rer. Eccles sub finem.
he, sprinkling the People with the Blood of Goats and Heifers, said, This is
the Blood of the Covenant. But our Savior Christ has given his own proper
Body, and shed his own Blood, and given us the Cup of the new Testament;
saying, This is my Body which was broken for you, this is my Blood shed for the
Remission of your Sins. As often then as ye eat this Bread and drink of this
Cup, ye declare my Death and Resurrection. Thus believing then we eat the Bread
and drink of the Cup, as of the Flesh of God, declaring thereby the Death and
Resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ. We have already observed in the
foregoing Book, that the Greeks do often use this Expression, As the Flesh, As
the Body, to mollify and abate in some sort their usual way of speaking, which
is, that the Bread is the Body of Christ, and to signify that the Bread is to
us instead of this Body. It appears from the sequel of Germain's Discourse, his
Sense is, that for the better applying our Minds to the Death and Resurrection
of our Lord, we eat the Bread and drink of the Cup, in the stead of his Body
and Blood.

AS to John Damascen, the Author of the Perpetuity having alleged him as a
Witness of the Doctrine of the ancient Church. I said, He ought not Answer to
the 2d. Treatise of the Perpet. c. 2.
to produce the Testimony of a Person whom we except against, and that with
good Cause, seeing he was one of the first that left the common Road of the
Churches Expressions, and betook himself to affected and singular ones, which
are at as great distance from the Roman Church as the reformed one. Now this
Exception is so just in respect of the Question concerning the Sentiment of the
ancient Church, that excepting Mr. Arnaud, I do not believe there is any Man,
how little Conversant soever in the Writings of the Fathers, but grants it. For
all the Ancient Fathers term the Eucharist a Figure or Representation of our
Lord's Body, and Damascen not only deny's that it is one, but also that the
Fathers thus termed it after Consecration. He is one of the first that brought
into Credit the Comparison of Food which changes it self into our Bodies,
whereby to explain the Change which happens to the Bread, in as much as it is
made an Augmentation of the Body of Christ, that of the Blessed Virgin which
the Holy Spirit overshadowed, and that of Wood united to the Fire. His
Expressions being compared with those of the Ancients, are wholly
extraordinary. He tells us that the Sacramental Bread, and the Body born of the
Virgin, are but one and the same Body, because the Bread is an Augmentation of
the Body, and that the same Economy has been observed in both. I suppose
Damascen was not the first that had these kind of Conceptions, seeing we have
met with something like this in Anastasius his Discourse, and if I mistake not,
some Trace of this in Gregory de Nysses his Catechism; but howsoever it must be
acknowledged I had reason to call these Conceptions Affected and Singular in
respect of the usual Expressions of the Fathers, and to say, they vary as much
from the Doctrine of the Roman Church as ours.

YET to hear only Mr. Arnaud, a Man would imagine that Damascen clearly taught
Transubstantiation. To prove it he alleges these same Passages of his fourth
Book touching the true Orthodox Faith which has been a thousand times canvass'd
by Controvertists, and which conclude nothing. Damascen says, That God makes
the Bread the Body of Christ, and the Wine his Blood, that it is an effect of
his Almighty Power, which has created all things; that seeing the Lord took his
Body from the pure and immaculate Blood of the Virgin, we must not doubt but he
can change the Bread into his Body, and the Wine into his Blood; that if we
demand how this Change happens, he answers, that this is wrought by the Holy
Spirit, that the Word of God is True and Almighty; but that the manner is
Incomprehensible. But yet it may be rationally said, that as the Bread and
Wine (wherewith a Man is nourished) are changed into his Body, so that they
become another Body than that which they were before; so the Bread and Wine
mixed with Water, are changed into the Body and Blood of Christ in awonderful
manner, by Prayer and Descent of the Holy Spirit, and that they are not two
different Bodies, but one and the same Body.

HAD not Damascen expressed himself as he has done, it would be to no purpose
for us to tell Mr. Arnaud the Change he speaks of is not Transubstantiation,
seeing his Sense is that the Bread becomes a growth of our Lord's Body, and is
made by this means one with this Body, that this is the effect he attributes to
the Holy Spirit, and Almighty Power of God, acting above Nature, and not that
of a real Conversion of the Substance of Bread into the same Substance which
the Body had before: Mr. Arnaud would not fail to term this Extravagancy and
Dotage. But seeing we say no more in this matter than what is grounded on
Damascen's own Words, as it appears by what we related when we treated on the
real Belief of the Greeks; This Illustration will be sufficient, without
proceeding any farther, to make Insignificant this long Chapter which Mr.
Arnaud has written touching the Equivocal Expressions of this Author. In
effect, let him say as long as he pleases, That the Point here concerns neither
Figure nor Virtue, that this effect Lib. 7. c. 3. p. 650. 651.
which surpasses humane Conception is in Damascen' s Sense this; to wit, That
the Bread is made the Body of Jesus Christ, that it is the Body really united
to the Divinity, the Body taken from the Virgin, because the Bread and Wine are
changed into the Body and Blood of God. That Damascen speaks of it as if he
designed to refute expressly all the Attempts and Shifts of the Ministers, some
of whom turn his Words into a change of Virtue, and others to an Imaginary
Union of the Holy Siprit, with the Bread remaining Bread. That the Fathers have
expressed themselves after two different manners, that is to say, sometimes as
Philosophers, and otherwhiles as Divines. All this signifies nothing,
considering the Explication which Damascen himself has given us of his own
Sense, in his Letter to Zacharias Bishop of Doarus, and Homily at the end of
it. These two Pieces published by the Abbot Billius, and which were
acknowledged for Authentic by Labbus the Jesuit, the learned M. de Marca
Archbishop of Paris, and Leo Allatius himself, Mr. Arnaud's great Author:
These two Pieces I say end the Difference, and suffer us not any longer to
dispute about Damascene. I shall only say that Mr. Arnaud has not done fairly
in relating the Passages of the fourth Book of the Orthodox Faith, to leave out
this Homily and Letter as he has done.

CHAP. X.
An Examination of the Advantages which Mr. Arnaud draws from the two Councils
held in Greece in the eighth Century, upon the Subject of Images, the one at
Constantinople, and the other at Nice.

IT cannot without doubt but trouble good People to see how Mr. Arnaud suffers
his Pen to be guided by his Passion, and fills up his Book with Injuries, so
ill becoming a Man of his Age and Profession; making them continually the
Subject of his Eloquence: Yet in truth are we obliged to him for this way of
proceeding, not only for that thereby he gives us Occasion to exercise our
Christian Patience, but does also himself furnish us with an assured means of
bringing his Chapters into a lesser Compass. And to this end we shall pass by
all his personal Reflections as Matters which concern not our Dispute. Let us
then consider those four terrible Chapters wherein he Treats of the two
Councils which were held in the eighth Century, the one at Constantinople
against Images, and the other at Nice for them.

MR. Arnaud begins with the Council of Nice, that is to say with a Writing Lib.
7. c. 5. p. 661.
which the Fathers of this Council caused to be read in the sixth Session, from
whence he forms these five Propositions. 1st. That the Eucharist was not called
by the Name of Image or Figure, by the Apostles and Fathers after Consecration.
2dly. That they have called it the Body it self, and the Blood it self. 3dly.
That the Gifts are properly Body and Blood. 4ly. That they are not Images, but
Body and Blood. 5ly. That it is impossible they should be both the Image and
Body of Christ, so that being the Body, they are not the Image. He moreover
tells us that Anastasius made use of the same Reasoning to show the Eucharist
is not an Image. That John Damascen likewise used it, and Nicephorus the
Patriarch of Constantinople concludes after the same manner, that the Eucharist
is not the Image of Christ, because it is his Body. Whereupon Mr. Arnaud cries
out, These are the very things wherein Arguments are useless, and wherein the
Impression of Truth appears so plainly, that those that deny it are P. 663.
to be regarded as Persons no longer to be reasoned with. But how clear soever
his Motives may be, we can assure him this comes from his Prejudice, and not
from the Truth. The Understanding of all these Discourses of the Adversaries of
the Iconoclastes, depends only on the knowing in what Sense they meant the
Eucharist is properly the Body and Blood of Christ. For this Point being once
dispatched, we shall soon perceive why they denied it was an Image, and
wherefore they thus reasoned, that being an Image, it could not be the Body. We
must observe all these Greeks have followed the Opinion of Damascen, and speak
as he does; that they borrow all his Conceptions and Expressions, as appears by
the Writing which was read in the second Council of Nice, by the Fragment of
Theodorus Graptus, and Mr. Arnaud's own Author Nicephorus.

NOW after the Notices Damascen has given us, we can no longer doubt but their
Sense is, that the Bread and Wine are made the Body and Blood of Christ,
inasmuch as that receiving the Supernatural Virtue of this Body and Blood, they
are a Growth and Augmentation thereof, and therefore are not two Bodies, but
one and the same Body, the proper Body of Christ, as the Food becomes our
proper Body.

AND this will appear from the bare reading of a Passage in Nicephorus, Allat.
de Eccles. Occid. and Orient. Perp. Consens. Lib. 3. cap. 15.
which Mr. Arnaud himself has related and taken from Allatius: And if it be
needful, says he, to explain these things, by what passes in our selves, as
the Bread, Wine, and Water are naturally changed into the Body and Blood of
those that eat and drink them, and become not another Body, so these Gifts by
the Prayer of him that Officiates, and Descent of the Holy Spirit are changed
supernaturally into the Body and Blood of Christ. For this is the Contents of
the Priest's Prayer, and we do not understand they are two Bodies; but we
believe it be but one and the same Body. And this is the Greeks Hypothesis, the
Bread is made the proper Body of Christ, as the Meat we eat becomes our Body;
to wit, inasmuch as it is united to it, and receives its Form, increases and
augments it.

THE same will appear if we compare the Discourses of the Fathers of
Constantinople with the Censure past on them in the Council of Nice. The
Fathers of Constantinople called the Eucharist, a chosen Matter, a Substance of
Bread. Those of Nice were not offended thereat; Neither at the others calling
the Eucharist, Bread filled with the Holy Spirit, an Oblation translated from a
common State, to a State of Holiness, a Body made Divine by a Sanctification of
Grace: So far they agree. But when the Fathers of Constantinople call the Bread
an Image, those of Nice could not suffer it, neither could they bear with them
in saying it is the Body by Institution. Why do they make this Difference, but
because these first Expressions which are contrary to Transubstantiation and
the substantial Presence, yet do not contradict their Hypothefis of
Augmentation by an Impression of Virtue, whereas the others oppose it? For they
do not say the Food is the Image of our Body, nor our Body by Institution, but
that it becomes our Proper Body, not another; but the same we had before.

THIS Point being thus cleared up, it is easy to perceive why these Persons
denied the Eucharist to be an Image. For it was not because they believed the
Substance of Bread did not remain, or imagined it 'twas absolutely and by a
numerical Identity (as the Church of Rome speaks) the same substance of the
Natural Body; but because they believed that the Bread keeping its proper
Substance became the proper Body of our Lord by this way of Growth or
Augmentation, in receiving the Impression of his Supernatural Virtue, so that
in this Respect it was the same thing with them, whether the Bread was
Virtually the Body of Christ, or properly. They found then that the simple
Notion of Image was inconsistent with that of Propriety, and thereupon denied
the Eucharist to be an Image or Representation.

THEY Argued from the same Principle, when they said it is not possible these
Gifts could be both, The Body, and the Image of the Body, and being the Body,
they could not be the Image of them. For they believed the Term of Image
excluded this propriety of Virtue which they established, and that to call them
Image, was to regard them in no other manner than that wherein they were before
their Consecration.

IT is easy to perceive that their Arguing on the Discourse of the Fathers of
Constantinople is but a mere Sophism. For besides that these Fathers, termed
not the Eucharist, the proper Body of Christ, and consequently could not be
charged with Contradiction, nor told, Si imago est, non potest esse hoc
Divinum: besides this I say, all their Subtilty lies in a mere Quible about
Words. They will not receive the Term of Imago, and yet admit those of
Representation, a Remembrance and Symbol, as Mr. Arnaud himself acknowledges.
We do not call (says Theodorus Graptus (an Author of the ninth Century) Origin
rerumque Constantinopl. variis author. manipulus a Francis. Combefix. ubi supra.
the sacred Mysteries of Christ, the Images of his Body, although they become
Symbols thereof, (...). Nicephorus says the same thing, We do not call these
Gifts, either Images or Figures of this Body, although they be Representations
thereof: Which shows they regarded more the manner of expressing the Thing,
than the Thing it self.

BUT let us see what Advantage Mr. Arnaud pretends to draw hence. P. 664. 665.
First, he endeavors to prove that these Authors who wrote against the
Iconoclastes did not believe 'twas contrary to the notion of an Image to
contain the Virtue of the Original, nor established this Principle: The Image
is not the thing it represents, in this Sense here; The Image is not virtually
the thing it represents. For says he, In the same place wherein they establish
this Principle, the Image is not the thing it self which it represents, they
bring Instances of Images which contain really the Virtue of their Original,
and even its Essence. Nicephorus the Patriarch of Constantinople who Refutes
the Iconoclastes by the same Argument, by which the second Council of Nice
says, That that which is the Image of a thing, cannot be its Body, for every
Image is another thing than what it represents. It is True, adds he, That the
Scripture calls the Son the Image of the Father, but he is likewise
distinguished from him by an Hypostasis and Person.

I Answer Nicephorus his Sense is, that to exclude the Notion of Image, we must
say it is the thing it self: And on the contrary to establish it, there must be
no means left to say, it is the thing it self. Now although the Son has the same
Nature and Essence as the Father, yet we cannot say he is the Father, for they
are different Persons: So the Son may be well called the Image of the Father.
But although the Eucharist be not in Substance the Body of Christ, and contains
only its Virtue, yet we may very well say, it is this very Body, because an
Augmentation does not make another Body than that which was before, but is the
same; and thus the Eucharist cannot be called an Image.

BUT, says Mr. Arnaud, The Son contains the Virtue of the Father, Nicephorus
understands not then his own Principle, That the Image is not the thing Ibid.
which it represents; in Mr. Claude's fantastical Sense, that it is not
virtually the thing whose Image it is: For it would necessarily follow hence
that the Son of God is not an Image, seeing he contains not only the Virtue,
but the very Essence of his Father. This must necessarily follow according to
Mr. Arnaud, but not according to right Reason; For it is true the Son contains
the Essential Virtue of the Father, as being not the Image of his Essence; but
he does not contain the personal Virtue of it, for he has not the Virtue of
begetting another Son, nor according to the Greeks, that of the Emanation of
the Holy Spirit, and consequently he may well be called the Image of the
Father's Person. Had Nicephorus understood his Principle in this Sense, no
Image is in Substance the thing it represents, as Mr. Arnaud supposes he did,
and as in Effect he must understand it to add, But the Eucharist is in
Substance the Body of Christ, it is not then the Image of it, It would sooner
and more naturally follow, that the Son of God would be in no wise an Image;
for he most really contains the Nature, Essence, and Substance of his Father.

Nicephorus, adds Mr. Arnaud, Supposes the Eucharist is not really
distinguished from the Body of Christ, and thereby proves that it is not the
Figure Ibid.
of it. Si igitur Sanctum corpus quod in communione sumitur, imago Christi est,
aliud dicitur esse praeter corpus Christi; That is to say, if the Eucharist
were an Image, it would be really a distinct thing from the Body of Christ: But
it is not distinct from it; Therefore it is not an Image. Nicephorus will
suppose the Eucharist is not a real distinct thing from the Body of Christ,
when we admit Mr. Arnaud's that is to say; but he will not suppose it when we
shall consider that the Proposition he rejects is this, Sanctum corpus in
communione quod sumitur est aliud praeter corpus Christ. The Holy Body we
receive in the Communion, is something else besides the Body of Christ: and
that the contrary Proposition which he establishes is, Sanctum corpus quod in
communione sumitur non est aliud praeter corpus Christi: The Holy Body we
receive in the Communion is nothing elce but the Body of Christ; That is to say
in a Word, that they are not two Bodies, but one, because the Growth of a Body
does not make another Body. But this is not to say but that there is a true and
real Difference between the Substance which increases a thing, and the thing it
self which is increased.

The Bishops of Nice and Nicephorus, (says moreover Mr. Arnaud) did they not
know that the Water of Baptism and Oil, are the Figure of the Holy Spirit
according to the Fathers; which made Aubertin himself say: Docent veteres aquam
and oleum post consecrationem repraesentare spiritum sanctum. And were they
ignorant that they contained and communicated the Virtue of it? It is strange a
Person so confident of his own Abilities, should be so grossly mistaken in what
he alleges concerning Mr. Aubertin, and not observed that in this place Mr.
Aubertin takes the Term of Repraesentare in the Sense which Cardinal Perron
gives it, for Praesens reddere, exhibere; that is to say for, to make present,
give, communicate, and not for to figurate, as appears through the whole Sequel of
his Discourse. The Question concerned a Passage of Tertullian, which bears That
Christ represents his Body by the Bread: Cardinal Perron alleged that by
Represent, we must understand, make Present, Communicate, Exhibit. Mr. Aubertin
having showed that this Expression was used by the Fathers to signify to
Figure, supposes Perron's Sense to be good, and shows thereupon that the
Passage out of Tertullian does notwithstanding overthrow Transubstantiation;
for it must still be said that the Bread remains Bread. And because it might be
answered that by the Bread we may understand Albertin. de Sacram. Euchar. Lib.
2. Page 322.
the Accidents of Bread: He Refutes this Evasion and says, Docent veteres
aquam and oleum post consecrationem repraesentare spiritum sanctum sicut ait
Tertullianus pane repraesentaricorpus Christi, sic enim Cyrillus, sive Author
Catecheseon illi tributatum, oleum post invocationem, etc. Christi and Spiritus
sancti charisma est and divinitatis ipsius praesentiae operativum, Sic Basilius
and Ambrosius in aqua Baptismi praesentiam spiritus esse asserunt, Nec tamen
quis dixerit per oleum and aquam intelligenda esse accidentia olei and aquae,
Whence it appears that Mr. Arnaud can be mistaken as well as other People, for
this Passage of Mr. Aubertin cannot be alleged to prove the Fathers taught
that Baptism and Oil are the Figures of the Holy Spirit, but by a very great
Mistake.

BUT to proceed, I say it is not sufficient to show what the Fathers taught
concerning Baptism and Oil; it must be showed that Nicephorus and the Council
of Nice have expressly called them Images of the Holy Spirit, for otherwise
there can be nothing concluded in respect of them. They knew, says he, that
they are the Figure of the Holy Spirit according to the Fathers. But they might
likewise as well know that the Eucharist is the Figure, and Image of the Body
of Christ according to the Fathers, and yet they for all that deny it, and
affirm none of the Fathers so term it after Consecration. Moreover Nicephorus
and the Fathers of Nice may tell him, that whatsoever Virtue accompanies
Baptism and Oil, yet they are not made the Growth of the Holy Spirit, as the
Bread and Wine of the Eucharist are made the Growth of the Body and Blood of
Christ, and consequently they are not Virtually the same thing.

WHAT Mr. Arnaud adds, That they themselves made use of the Miracles Ibid.
wrought by Images, to establish the Worship of them, and that the Author of
the Theory of Ecclesiastical Matters, says, That the unconsecrated Bread,
which is the Type of the Virgin Mary' s Body, communicated to those that
participated of it an ineffable Benediction. This I say, does not deserve an
Answer, for it does not appear these People ever attributed to Images a
supernatural Virtue, ordinarily residing in them, which might make them say
that the Images are changed into the Virtue of Christ, or his Saints; much less
that the Image is a Growth of Christ or his Saints. And as to the Bread which
according to Germain is the Type of the Virgin Marry's Body, the ineffable
Benediction which he says it communicates, is not the Virtue of the Virgin's
Body, of which it is the Type.

NEITHER does it in fine, signify any thing to say, That the Figure refers P.
665.
it self to the Original, and not to the Virtue; that it is opposite to the
Original, that it is from the Original from which it is distinguished, that when
it is deprived of Virtue, it is by Accident, and that it is every whit as
ridiculous to say a Figure ceases to be a Figure, because it becomes
Efficacious, as to say a Statue ceases to be a Statue when it is gilt. For it
is true that the first and most natural Opposition is between the Figure and
the Original, and that the Figure is only opposed to the Virtue, inasmuch as
that by the Impression of Virtue, a thing becomes in some sort the Original in
a proper Sense. Thus the Food we eat becomes in some sort in a proper Sense the
Body we had before, although it be in effect of a distinct Substance, or Matter,
seeing it is not the same Substance, or the same Matter in number, but an
addition to our former Substance, yet do we oppose it to the Figure, and say
it is not the Image of our Body, but our Body, our proper Body, the very Body
which we had before and not another. Now it is thus the Fathers of Nice oppose
the Figure to the Eucharistical Bread, and say it ceases to be a Figure; to
wit, then when by the Impression of the supernatural Virtue of our Lord's Body
it becomes this proper Body, not another, as we have already a thousand times
explained.

AND this is what Mr. Arnaud has said of most Moment touching the second
Council of Nice, and other Adversaries of the Iconoclastes. What he after adds
consists only in Repetitions, or Matters of small Importance, and Lib. 7. c. 6.
p. 678.
which may be easily Refuted by his own Words. For Example, what he says
touching the Water of Baptism, and Oil, that they are Figures which contain
Virtue, is an Objection he has several times made, and which we have already
answered. What he says touching the State of an Image, that it has C. 6. p.
674.
not any Inconsistency in it self, neither Real nor Apparent, with a
Consecration which would fill the Bread and Wine with the Virtue of Christ's
Body, has been already refuted; For in the Sense of the Greeks the State of
Image is Inconsistent, with what the Bread and Wine become by the Impression
they receive from the Virtue of Christ's Body, because they become in a certain
Sense, the proper Body and Blood of Christ. So that whatsoever Mr. Arnaud says
in general touching the two States, the one Consistent, and the other
Inconsistent, has no Foundation. We know there are Consistent and Inconsistent
States; but the Question is whither the Greeks might not believe without being
Extravagant and Senceless, that there was an Inconsistency between these two
Expressions, The Eucharist is the Image of the Body of Christ, and the
Eucharist is the proper Body of Christ, although they understood a Propriety by an
Impression of Virtue. I confess there is not between these two States of Image,
and proper Body in the Sense wherein those of Nice understood them, a real
Inconsistancy; But we must likewise acknowledge that there is an apparent one,
especially when it is made to consist only in the Terms, as I believe these
Greeks have made it. If Mr. Arnaud will have them make it to consist in the
same thing, besides that this Difference will be of small Importance as to the
Main, I need only offer him what himself has told us concerning Anastasius and
others, who denied the Eucharist was a Figure. That Lib. 7. c. 2. p. 630.
these were not two inconsistent Principles, nor two contrary Expressions in
the Language of those Times, to say that the Eucharist is not the Figure of
Christ's Body, and yet a Representation of the Mysteries of his Life, and that
the same Authors that teach the one, teach us likewise the other. I need only
tell him that in the same Place wherein they earnestly deny the Eucharist to be
an Image, they acknowledge it is a Symbol, and that Damascen himself who will
not suffer it to be called an Image or Type, yet assures us that the same
Economy which was observed in Christ's natural Body, is observed in the Bread;
which establishes a true Resemblance at bottom. I need only offer him the
Exposition Bessarion makes of Damascen's Words. By the Figure, says he, he
means a Bessarion de de Sacram. Eucharist.
Shadow which is no more than a Figure barely signifying another Subject, yet
without having any Substance for acting.

MR. Arnaud answering this Passage of Bessarion, which I offered against the
Author of the Perpetuity, says, That Bessarion had reason to say St. John
Damascen, in denying the Eucharist to be a Figure, means a bare Figure without
C. 6. p. 680.
Efficacy. Not that he pretends an efficacious Figure is not a Figure; but he
supposes to say the Eucharist is the Sign of Jesus Christ, and not his Body; is
as much as to say it is a bare Figure without Virtue and Efficacy, because the
Quality of a Figure does not include any Virtue, and that it would have no
other which could give it this Virtue. So that according to Bessarion it is
certain that Damascen in denying the Eucharist to be a Figure of Jesus Christ,
means by the Word Figure a Shadow, and a Figure without Efficacy, because that
in effect if the Eucharist be a bare Figure, it would be a Figure without
Efficacy, and there would be no place of Scripture which could prove this
Efficacy, as we will show elsewhere. This Proposition then is true in one
Sense, if the Eucharist were but a Figure, it would be but an empty Figure. But
this is not true in any Sense, seeing if the Figure were an Efficacious Figure,
it would not be a Figure.

HE means it is impossible to attribute any Virtue to the Eucharist, if it be
not acknowledged the Body of Christ in Substance. But 1st. This Principle is
false in it self, and the contrary may be proved by an Instance from Scripture,
which St. Paul calls The Power of God to Salvation, Romans 1. And by the Example
of Baptism, which is accompanied with the Virtue of Christ's Blood, and which
according to the Scripture is the Laver of our Regeneration. In effect, to
apply to us the supernatural Virtue of the Body of Christ, it is not necessary
that the Substance of this Body be locally in the Eucharist, it is sufficient
that his Spirit be in it, and operates therein. 2ly. It is false, there is no
Passage of Scripture whereby to prove this Efficacy. That which our Savior
himself says, Do this in Remembrance of me; and what St. Paul adds, That as
often as we eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup, we show forth the Lord's
Death till he comes; this I say includes the Communication of his Virtue. For
Christ and his Death, are not Objects of a mere historical Consideration. It is
the same with this Divine Savior as with the Sun; which it is impossible to
behold without being enlightened by it, and cheared with its Rays. If we behold
him, says one of the Prophets, we are enlightened by him. To declare his Death
as we ought, is without doubt an Action inseparable from the feeling of his
Efficacy; and that Man who deny's this Truth, knows little of Christ. 3ly.
Neither is it true that Damascen opposes those that deny the Eucharist to be
the Body of Christ in Substance, and say it is only so in Virtue, neither is it
true Bessarion imputes to him this Reasoning, Were not the Eucharist the proper
Substance of Christ's Body, it would be no more than a mere Figure without
Virtue and Efficacy. This is one of Mr. Arnaud's Circuits which has no Grounds
either in the Passage of Damascen, nor in that of Bessarion. Bessarion indeed
would have Damascen to believe Transubstantiation and the substantial Presence;
for being a Cardinal in the Roman Church, it is no marvel he maintained not the
contrary; but he does not say Damascen argued as Mr. Arnaud supposes. 4ly. Mr.
Arnaud does himself furnish us wherewithal to dissipate all his Subtilties
touching the Council of Nice; for we need only apply to the Council of Nice
what he says concerning Damascen, in making these Fathers argue after this
manner; To say the Eucharist is an Image of Christ, is the same as to say it is
no more than a bare Image without any Efficacy, because the Quality of an Image
includes not any Virtue, and the Eucharist cannot have elsewhere this Virtue,
there being no place of Scripture which attributes it to it, nor from whence it
can be concluded. Now the Iconoclastes affirm the Eucharist to be an Image.
They say then that it is a bare Image without Virtue and Efficacy, and
consequently they contradict themselves, when they afterward call it the Body
of Jesus Christ; for if it be a mere Image, it cannot be Virtually this Body.
This Reasoning attributed to the Fathers of Nice, would be better grounded than
that which he Imputes to Damascen, because it does not appear Damascen Disputes
against Persons that Expounded the Words of Christ, This is my Body in this
Sense, This is the Figure of my Body; whereas it appears that the Iconoclastes
had Expounded them in this Sense, This is the Image of my Body; whence it
follows they might been told better than they have been by Damascen, that
having no other Passage of Scripture whereby to prove it was the Body of Christ
in Virtue, it was no more according to them, than a mere Image without any
Efficacy.

AS to what Mr. Arnaud says, That although Paschasius his Adversaries Expounded
C. 6. p. 683.
these Words, The Body of Jesus Christ, the Virtue of Jesus Christ, yet did
they not say it was the Body it self, that they made not use of this Principle,
the Figure is not the Original, to show the Eucharist was the Original and not
the Figure; That they did not make this ridiculous Argument, The Eucharist
contains the Virtue of Christ's Body; It is not then the Figure of it. I
answer, we Cited not Paschasius his Adversaries for that purpose. We instanced
them to show, that it is no new or extraordinary Matter, to understand by the
Body of Christ, his Body in Virtue, seeing several in the ninth Century
understood it in this manner. But, says he, they said not the Eucharist was
properly and Ibid.
truly the Body of Christ. It does not in effect appear to us they did say it,
nor denied it was a Figure, nor reasoned like the Adversaries of the
Iconoclastes, and from thence we may well conclude they admitted not the entire
Hypothesis of the Greeks, which is, that this Body of Christ in Virtue, is an
Augmentation of the natural Body, to infer from thence that it is properly his
Body, and not the Figure of it. But this does not hinder but that by the Term
of Body, they understood the Virtue of the Body. Had their Error, says Mr.
Ibid.
Arnaud, led them to understand by the Word Body, the Figure and Virtue, common
Sense would have forced 'em to explain themselves in proper Terms, to make
themselves understood. But I say the Greeks do explain themselves in proper
Terms. Ely de Crete who assisted at the Council of Nice, does not he Com. in
Greg. Naz.
plainly say, That the Bread is changed into the Efficacy of Christ's Body? Did
not Cyrillus of Alexandria, and Eutychius, say the same thing? Did not
Theophylact Express himself in the same manner? Has not Damascen said That it
is Bread united to the Divinity, a Growth of the Body of Christ? Does not
Nicolaus Methoniensis tell us, That Christ Joins his Divinity to these Things
which are familiar to our Natures? And how many more such like Expositions are
to be met with in the Passages I already produced? Let Mr. Arnaud say as long
as he pleases, This Language is so Unnatural and Strange, that to make this
pretended C. 5. p. 669.
Sense of it Intelligible, it ought to be proclaimed with sound of Trumpet
throughout all the East, and Notice given to all People that these Words were
to be understood in this unheard of Sense: Otherwise all these Authors ought to
be esteemed as Cheats and Impostors. The Greeks will answer him that all his
Rhetoric is void of Reason, in whatsoever Humor it comes from him: They have
sufficiently Explained themselves to those that have Ears: They are not
Deceivers; for they never so much as once said the Eucharist was the natural
Body of Christ in Propriety of Substance, but often the contrary, namely his
Body in Virtue.

IT were better in my Mind to reserve these Proclamations he speaks of, to
publish to the World there ought no more of those Passages of the Fathers to be
alleged, seeing they are so troublesome to Mr. Arnaud. For seeing I have
incurred his Indignation, for quoting a Passage out of Facundus, it is fitting
the World should henceforward know how to avoid offending him. This Passage,
says he, of Facundus must be brought in every where right or wrong. -- The
Question is whether the Term of the Body of Jesus Christ may C. 6. p. 684.
be taken for the Virtue and Efficacy of this Body, in which Point Facundus is
silent. The Question is whether the Term of the Body of Christ can be taken in
another Sense, than for the Substance of Christ's natural Body, and of this
Facundus speaks. To contain the Mystery of Christ's Body, and to contain the
Virtue of it, are two Expressions which signify at bottom the same thing in
Facundus his Sense, and it is upon good Grounds we have alleged him. But when
a Passage perplexes Mr. Arnaud, it must be laid aside, because it disturbs his
Brain. Omitting then Facundus for this time, in compliance to Mr. Arnaud; pass
we on to the Council of Constantinople, termed Iconoclastes.

THIS Council says first, That our Savior has commanded us to offer an Image,
Apud. Council* Nicen. art. 6.
a chosen Matter, that is to say the Substance of Bread. It is clear their
Sense is, that that which is offered in the Eucharist, and which is an Image,
is the Substance of Bread. To say thereupon their Sense is, not that it is in
Effect a Substance of Bread, but only a Matter which keeps the Figure and
Resemblance of it, is in my Mind as frivolous a Shift and Evasion as ever was
used; for what may not a Man elude if he may expound these Terms, The Substance
of Bread, by these, Not the Substance of Bread, but the Figure and Resemblance?
Besides this Mr. Arnaud tells me, That I may not so much as humbly C. 7. p. 689.
propose my Doubts, and must be known to be a Person extreme modest, otherwise
all People will wonder so easy a matter should startle me, that I consult not
common Sense, touching what I ought to say, and that my Head is so full of
Calvinistical Subtilities, that I cannot speak after the rate of other Men. He
afterward Ibid. c. 7.
falls upon a Discourse which takes up six great Pages, which amount to this;
That when the Judgment of Reason or Faith, is contrary to the Ideas of Sense
and Concupiscence, there is formed two sorts of Languages which subsist
together, the one Conformable to the Ideas of Sense and Concupiscence, and the
other to Faith and Reason. To establish this Principle he says, That Faith
changes the Judgment of Sense and Concupiscence, and shows us that what we call
Good is a real Evil, that our Evils are real Goods, that those who are called
Happy, are really Miserable; the Rich, Poor; the Poor, Rich; the Wise, Foolls;
the Prudent, Imprudent; and the Knowing, Ignorant. He adds, That Philosophy often
overthrows the common Notions of things: That the Thomists affirm Matter has no
Existence, that a dead Body has nothing in common with a living one, that some
Philosophers of this Age teach that Animals are only Machins, and Automates,
and sensible Qualities are not in the things themselves, but are the
Impressions of our Senses. That several of the most profound Astrologers
believe with Copernicus, that the Sun and Stars are unmovable, and that it is
the Earth which by its various Motions makes Day and Night, and Variety of
Seasons. He tells us afterward, That there is in all these things a twofold
Language, the one according to Appearance, and the other according to Truth.
That it is the same in respect of the Eucharist, Faith correcting in it the
Ideas of Sense, and from thence comes this twofold Language, the one by which
we call the Eucharist Bread, Substance of Bread, Matter of Bread, and the other
by which we call it the Body of Christ.

NOT to proceed without profiting by Mr. Arnaud's Advertisement, lest he should
accuse me of Dullness: I shall venture again humbly to offer the Doubts
wherewith common Sense furnishes me after Consultation with it, against his
pretended Solution. 1st. It seems to me to contain all the Characters of a Mind
perplexed and tormented with Study, how to extricate it self out of a
Difficulty, through which it can find no natural Passage. What relation has the
Ideas of Concupiscence, the Philosophy of the Thomists, Cartesians,
Coperniciens, with the Discourse of these good Greek Bishops who lived in the
eighth Century, and who without doubt had none of this Philosophy in their
Heads? Who can Imagine that their Expressions which are plain and simple,
should be grounded on the Model of these twofold Languages, that is to say, on
an Observation which scarcely ever any Person before thought of, so remote are
these twofold Languages from the Sight and common Use of the World? In truth, I
could never imagine the Ideas of Concupiscence, the dead Bodies of the
Thomists, nor the Impressions, or Automates of the Carthesians, and Copernicus
his Systems, should ever be brought into our Dispute, to decide the Question,
whether the Greeks believe Transubstantiation or not.

II. WHAT likelihood is there that Bishops assembled in Council, whose Words
were to regulate the Peoples Faith, and whom it behooved moreover to speak
discreetly, having Adversaries at their Backs, should lay aside the Style of
Religion, if we believe Mr. Arnaud, to take up that of Sense, which Religion
condemns? That they should call the Eucharist without any Necessity, a Matter,
and Substance of Bread, considering it even after Consecration, without adding
to it either any Exposition or Mollification, and expose themselves so
imprudently to the Reproaches of their Enemies, from whom they could expect no
Favor nor Support, and who waited for an Occasion to render them Odious to the
People.

III. BUT how came it to pass their Adversaries, (who, that they might censure
them touching the Term of Image, dared assert contrary to the Truth, that none
of the Fathers gave the Term of Image to the Eucharist after Consecration,)
were so mild and favorable as to pardon them of Substance of Bread, were their
Faith in effect that of the Church of Rome, that it is no longer the Substance
of Bread? Did they do this upon the account of the Thomists dead Bodies, the
Cartesians Automates, or Corpernicus his System?

IV. IF we examine these Instances of a twofold Language which Mr. Arnaud
proposes, we shall find they are all Defective, either in respect of
themselves, or in the Application he makes of them: It is not true Religion
absolutely teaches that what we call Goods, are real Evils; and that our Evils
are real Goods; nor that it turns Felicity into Misery, Riches into Poverty,
Poverty into Riches, Wisdom into Folly, Prudence into Imprudence, and Knowledge
into Ignorance. Religion teaches that these things are, in Effect and in
themselves, what we term them, because they are either Blessings and God's
temporal Favors, or Chastisements and Afflictions which come from his Hand;
and so far its Language agrees very well with the usual Speech of Men. But it
also shows us that these things change their Name and Nature by the good, or
bad Use which is made of them; that Riches become real Poverty; Happiness,
Misery; Wisdom, Folly; Prudence, Imprudence; and Science, Ignorance; to the
Vicious who corrupt these Gifts of God, and change their natural Destination,
that Afflictions likewise become Benefits; Poverty, Riches; Misery, Felicity,
to a Virtuous Person, and one that fears God. If Concupiscence would oppose it
self against this Language, and speak otherwise, Religion will not let her: So
that the double Language that there is in respect of these things, is grounded
not on the Ideas of Concupiscence, but on Truth it self. When we call Riches,
Goods; and Afflictions, Evils; we consider what they are in their own Nature,
and when we call them otherwise, we consider 'em in relation to what they are
by Accident. These two Languages agree very well, and they are both proper and
true, the Ideas of Concupiscence having no part therein. Besides Religion
moreover considers temporal Goods and Evils, either absolutely in themselves,
or by Comparison with Spiritual Goods and Evils. In the first respect it tells
us that these are Goods and Evils, as they are in effect. In the second she can
hardly give them that Name, because they are not considerable in comparison of
eternal Goods or Evils. If Concupiscence opposes it self against this Language,
and speaks otherwise, Religion restrains Her. It is then certain that the
double Language is grounded on various Respects, and is ever true: But it is
not the same with the Point in hand. For supposing Transubstantiation we cannot
in any respect call the consecrated Eucharist a Substance of Bread, nor say
that we Offer the Substance of Bread, and that the Substance of Bread is the
Image of the Body of Jesus Christ. But Religion will Condemn these Expressions
as False in every Sense, and contrary to that Faith which injoyns us to believe
the Substance of Bread does no longer remain. To say that by the Substance of
Bread is meant, the bare Figure and Resemblance thereof, as the Author of the
Perpetuity does: This cannot be, for the Substance, and the simple Appearance
are two Terms directly opposite in the Language of Men; and to say the
Substance of Bread, is as much as to say Real, and not barely Bread in
Appearance. Moreover the Fathers of Constantinople compare this Substance of
Bread, with the Humane Substance which Christ assumed. As our Lord, say they,
took on him the Matter only, or Humane Substance, without the Personal
Subsistence, so he commanded us to Offer an Image, a chosen Matter, that is to
say the Substance of Bread; which shows they took the Term of Substance in a
proper Sense, and not for a simple Appearance. In fine, they say that as the
Humane Substance which Christ assumed has not the Personal Subsistence, so this
Substance has not the Form or Humane Figure, which clearly shows that as by the
Humane Substance they meant a Subject capable of having personal Subsistence,
so they likewise understood by the Substance used in the Eucharist, a real
Subject which may have a Form or humane Figure, and consequently a real
Substance, capable of Representing an external Form and Figure.

TO say likewise as Mr. Arnaud does, that this is the Language of Sense, which
is contrary to the Judgment of Faith, is as much as if he had said nothing. For
if Faith rectified the Language of Sense, it would not suffer its Expressions
to be Regulated by the Falsity of their Testimony, and much less in a Decree of
Council, whose Expressions according to Mr. Arnaud's Maxims, or the Church he
is of, must serve for a Law to Posterity not only for well Speaking, but
likewise for well Believing. We ought then keep to the Language of Faith, not
that of Sense, against which we must on the contrary Precaution our selves to
prevent being surpised by it. When the Christian Religion came into the World,
and reformed the Abuses of Men, who believed their Idols were Gods; She at the
same time Corrected their Expressions. She no longer suffered Men to speak of
Gods in the Plural, nor of Jupiter, and Mercury, and these other false
Divinities as formerly; especially in the Pulpit, and Sermons, or in the
Decrees of Councils.

AS to the Example of Philosophers, we must not wonder if they accommodate
their Expressions to the Language of other Men, although it be contrary to their
Hypotheses. For they are not the Masters of it, the necessity of making
themselves understood, and the fear of passing for Extravagants should they
affect a new Style, obliges them to express themselves as the World does,
seeing they cannot make it unlearn their Language, and accustom it self to
speak according to their Opinions. This shows their Opinions did not reign when
humane Language established it self, and that moreover at this Day they are not
Popular; but this does not show 'twas the same in the Christian Religion, in
respect of the Eucharist. The Language of the Church touching this Mystery was
not found ready made, it was formed on the Sentiments Men began to have of it,
as soon as ever 'twas Mentioned. Supposing then that from the first rise of
Christianity it were believed the Testimony of our Senses was False and
Deceitful, and that the Substance of Bread was really changed into that of the
Body of Christ; Men would have avoided speaking according to Sense, and
Religion which was the Master of it, would never have suffered it. And so much
the rather, (if the Supposition be made which I mentioned,) it must be
necessarily acknowledged that this Mystery is popular, there being none of the
People but ought to know that the Substance which he receives, is not that of
Bread, but of the Body of Christ. Besides this, there is a great deal of
Difference betwixt Religion and Philosophy; Philosophical Opinions do not so
greatly concern the World in general, nor in particular those that hold them,
that Men ought to be so much troubled about common Expressions, how contrary
soever they may be to these Opinions, and liable to Error. No Man will be
damned for believing a dead Body is the material Part of Man which remains,
that Animals are not Automates, but real living Bodies, nor that Colors really
in the Objects, nor for believing the Sun and Firmament move, and not the
Earth. These Carthesians and Coperniciens have not yet asserted their
Sentiments to be necessary to Salvation, nor obligatory on the Conscience. So
that if the contrary Sentiments be erroneous, they are not believed to be so
dangerous as that humane Speech must be therefore altered. But if Christian
Religion has proposed Transubstantiation, or the Substantial Presence, it is to
be supposed she has offered it as an Article of Faith necessary to be Believed
in order to Salvation, as an Article which obliges the Conscience, and rejected
the contrary Opinion as a damnable Error, inconsistent with Salvation, and
consequently she ought to warn Men touching the Expressions, and not leave to
our Senses; that is to say, to Cheats and Impostors, the Power of making a
Council say in a Determination of Faith, that we offer in the Eucharist a
Substance of Bread.

TO say in fine, this Council only denoted the Matter of the Eucharist, as Mr.
Arnaud does, is an Unjustifiable Evasion. For when we denoted P. 693.
the Matter of it, by the Term of Substance of Bread, we consider it before its
Consecration, supposing it is believed that by the Consecration it is no more the
Substance of Bread, but that of the Body of Jesus Christ. Yet these Fathers
considered it after the Consecration, as appears by their whole Discourse.
Those of Nice have thus observed it, for they censure them for calling the
Eucharist an Image after Consecration. Now in the same place wherein those of
Constantinople call it Image, they call it likewise a Substance of Bread. If
the Censure of those of Nice be just, the Eucharist must be, according to the
Council of Constantinople, an Image after Consecration. What likelihood is
there Mr. Arnaud should at this time understand better the Sense of this
Council of Constantinople, than the Fathers of Nice who had amongst them
several Bishops that Assisted at that Assembly, and amongst others him who
presided over it? But I will grant the Nicene Fathers were mistaken, and that
Mr. Arnaud understands the Point better than they; yet it is certain they ought
to have Censured the Expression of Substance of Bread, seeing they could not
take it but as spoken of the Eucharist after its Consecration. These of
Constantinople call the Eucharist in the same Place and Period, Image and
Substance of Bread. They take the Name of Image, as a Quality attributed to the
Eucharist after Consecration. They must then necessarily have taken the
Substance of Bread, as an Attribute applied likewise to the Eucharist after the
Consecration: Yet those of Nice Censure the first, and do not in any manner
Censure the other; they are Offended at the one, and not at the other; which
concludes as I already said, that their Hypothesis was not Transubstantiation.

THE Bishops of Constantinople comparing the Eucharist with Christ's natural C.
7. p. 6, 6.
Body, say that as the natural Body is Holy, being made Divine; so that which
is his Body by Institution, to wit, his Image is Holy (...). I Translated these
last Words, being made Divine by a certain Sanctification of Grace. Mr. Claude,
says Mr. Arnaud, has falsely Translated that the Eucharist is made Divine by a
certain Sanctification of Grace. If this be a Fault in me, it is the same with
the Latin Translator of the Council in Binius his Edition; for he has inserted
these very Words, Utpote per quandam sanctificationem gratiae santificata, and
in the Margin, deificata, that is to say Word for Word, As being Sanctified (or
made Divine) by a certain Sanctification of Grace. Mr. Arnaud who justified
heretofore Forbesius, saying he could not be justly accused for falsifying the
Passage of Jeremias the Patriarch of Constantinople, seeing he only followed
the Translation of Socolovius; has he so soon changed his Mind, and forgot his
own Maxim, without any other Reason, than that there it concerned Forbesius,
and here my self? Was that which was then Unjust, become now Just and
Reasonable by the only Difference of Persons? But let us see whether it is in
effect a Falsification. He says it should be rendered, Being made Divine by a
Favor entirely Gracious by means of a certain Consecration, because we must
join (...) to (...), but why rather to (...), than to (...)? Why rather
Translate (...), gracious Favor, than Grace? Why rather (...) Consecration
than Sanctification? It is certain the Latin Interpreter could not better
Translate than he has done (...), his Image is Holy, why is it Holy? (...), as
being made Divine by a certain Sanctification by Grace. It is Grace which
Sanctifies it in making it Divine, which cannot be better Expressed in Latin
than by these Words, Utpote per quandam sanctificationem gratiae deificata; And
in English, As being made Divine by a Sanctification of Grace. It appears that
this is the Sense of this Council by the Words which immediately follow after,
For this is what our Lord designed to do, that as by Virtue of the Union he has
made Divine the Flesh he took, by a Sanctification which is naturally proper to
him, so he would have the Eucharistical Bread (as being the true Image of his
Flesh) be made a Divine Body by the coming of the Holy Spirit, the Oblation
being by means of the Priest Transferred from a common Estate, to a State of
Holiness: And therefore as the natural Flesh of Christ endued with a rational
Soul, was anointed by the Holy Spirit, being united to the Divinity; so his
Image, to wit, the Divine Bread is replenished with the Holy Spirit. It is
clear that they oppose the Sanctification which the natural Flesh of Christ has
received by Virtue of the Hypostatical Union, to the Sanctification which his
Image receives by the coming of the Holy Spirit. There, say they, the natural
Flesh was Anointed with the Holy Spirit: Here his Image, to wit, the Bread is
filled with the Holy Spirit. The Question then is concerning a Sanctification
which the Bread receives in quality of the Image of our Lord's natural Flesh,
and this Sanctification is the Grace of the Holy Spirit wherewith the Bread is
filled. The Sanctification which the natural Flesh has received, is not a
Consecration which has changed the Substance of it into another, but an
inherent Sanctification which letting the Humane Nature subsist, has made it
become a Source of Grace; the Sanctification likewise which the Bread receives,
is not a Consecration which changes its Substance into that of another, but an
inherent Sanctification in the Bread, which letting the Bread subsist makes it
full of the Holy Spirit. We could not then better Translate (...), than by
these Words, being made Divine by a certain Sanctification of Grace. It will be
to no purpose for Mr. Arnaud to wrangle about these Words, The Oblation being
Transferred from a common State, to a State of Holiness, (...), as if they were
to be Rendered, from a common State, to a State of Consecration; for here the
Matter is touching a Sanctification, which is the Image of that which the
natural Flesh has received. We must then Translate, to a Holy State, or to a
State of Holiness. And the Latin Interpreter of the Council, who had not those
particular Interests to maintain as Mr. Arnaud has, has faithfully turned it;
Oblationem de communi separans, ad Sanctificationem pertingere facit.

I am sorry I have been forced to entertain the Reader with these grammatical
Niceties, which I suppose cannot be very pleasing; but besides that Mr. Arnaud
having charged me with a Falsification, I was obliged to justify myself: There
will redound hence this Advantage, to wit, that the Sense of this Council will
more plainly appear, and the solid Advantages we draw thence. They make two
Bodies of Christ, the one his natural Body, the other his Body by Institution;
the one is his natural Flesh, the other is the Image of his natural Flesh; the
one a humane Substance, the other a chosen Matter, namely the Substance of
Bread; the one is Holy by a Sanctification which is naturally peculiar unto it,
the other is raised from a common State to a State of Holiness; the one is the
natural Flesh of Christ anointed by the Holy Spirit, the other is Bread endued
with the Holy Spirit. There is not any thing in all this that can agree with
Mr. Arnaud's Conceptions.

NO more then is there in the Fathers calling the Eucharist, not a deceitful
Image of Christ's Flesh, in opposition to the Images which they called
Deceitful. C. 7. p. 698.
To understand rightly their Sense, we must suppose with Mr. Arnaud that they
said the Images of their Adversaries were deceitful, either because they
represented the Humanity separated from the Divinity, and subsisting by it
self, (if it were said they were only Images of the Humanity, they leaned to
the Error of the Nestorians) or because they represented the Divinity Confused
and indistinct from the Humanity, if it were said they expressed our Savior
entire, thus they led to the Error of the Eutychiens who confounded the two
Natures. So far Mr. Arnaud is not mistaken; but he has not been so happy in
Discovering how they understood the Eucharist was not a deceitful Image. For it
is certain that in respect of the Error of Nestorius their Sense is, that as
the humane Substance in our Savior had no personal Subsistence, so likewise
his Image, to wit, the Substance of Bread, has not the Form and humane Figure
of it, although it seems that an Image should have them: So that by this it
represented the humane Nature not as a Person, but as a Nature bereaved of its
Personality, and thus it differed from the Error of the Nestorians: Which is
what they Express in these Terms; As our Lord took on him the Matter only or
humane Substance, without the personal Subsistence, so he has commanded us to
offer an Image, a chosen Matter, that is to say the Substance of Bread, not
having the Form or humane Figure. And in respect of the Error of the Eutychiens
they would have, that as the Body of Christ was not Abolished, nor Confounded
with the Divinity, but Sanctified and made Divine by means of the hypostatical
Union; so the Bread is Sanctified and Deified by the Holy Spirit: Which is what
they expressed by these Terms, As by Virtue of the Union our Savior deified
the Flesh he took by a Sanctification, which is naturally proper to him; so
likewise he would have the Bread in the Eucharist, as being not the deceitful
Image of his natural Flesh, to be made a Divine Body by the coming of the Holy
Spirit, the Oblation being by means of the Priest transferred from a common
State, to a State of Holiness. Now this does necessarily suppose that the
Substance of Bread Subsists, to represent against Eutychus the Substance of the
humane Nature in the hypostatical Union. Moreover this is not one of my
metaphysical Speculations, as Mr. Arnaud P. 669.
is pleased to express himself; it is the Doctrine of the Fathers, and
especially of those who disputed against Eutychus, and I expressly observed it,
having for this effect cited Justin Martyr, Theodoret, Gelasius, and Ephraim of
Antioch. But Mr. Arnaud has thought good in relating my Words to cut off this
Clause, for fear the Readers should see that the Sense I attributed to the
Fathers of Constantinople, and which he is pleased to call a metaphysical
Speculation of Mr. Claude, is in effect, a Doctrine commonly received in the
Greek Church.

I drew Advantage from the Council's saying that our Savior chose a Matter
which does not represent any humane Shape, lest Idolatry should be thereby
Introduced: And pretended that in whatsoever sort these Words were Understood,
they were Inconsistent with the Belief of the real Presence. Mr. Arnaud Answers
that this Passage is capable of three Senses. The First, That Lib. 7. c. 7. p.
700. 701.
God would not let the Eucharist have a humane Shape, lest it should be adored.
The 2d. That he would not suffer the Eucharist to have a humane Form, lest Men
should commit Idolatry in Adoring it under this humane Figure, although it be no
Idolatry to Worship it under the Figure of Bread. The 3d. That he would not let
the Eucharist have a humane Form, lest the due Worship which would be given it
under this humane Figure, should carry Men forth to Adore Images of Wood and
Stone, which being not our Savior as the Eucharist is, could not be Worshipped
without Idolatry. The first, adds he, of these Senses is that which the
Calvinists give to the Words of the Iconoclastes. The 2. Is a ridiculous Sense,
and that which never any Person yet Imagined. The 3d. Is the Sense which the
Catholics give them. Hereupon Mr. Claude to establish his first Sense,
Declames at large against the 2d. which is not a Sense, but an absurd
Imagination which he has formed.

HAD Mr. Arnaud sincerely related all that I said on this Subject, and not
maimed my Discourse, and produced but some part thereof disjoynted from the
rest, that he might turn it into a wrong Sense: It would have been easily
perceived that I offered these two last Senses, and showed that both of 'em
were Inconsistent, with the Supposition of the substantial Presence. That I
afterward established the true Sense of these Words, in supposing the
Eucharist to be an Image really distinct from our Lord's Body. I neither
attributed to the Author of the Perpetuity, nor to any body else any Sense. I
only proposed the two which might be given to these Words upon supposal of the
real Presence, and showed that neither of them were justifiable. I am not at
all troubled at Mr. Arnaud's calling the Second an absurd Imagination; I hold
it to be so as well as he, and as such I have refuted it. But the Last is no
less absurd than the Second: For the due Worship which would be given to the
Eucharist, if it had a humane Shape, would not induce Men to the Worshipping of
Images of Wood and Stone. The Difference would be apparent, for the Eucharist
would be the Body of Christ, the Image of Wood not so: The Adoration of the
Eucharist would not be then grounded on the humane Shape or Figure, but on the
substantial Presence of Christ's Body. Moreover what can be more Ridiculous
than the Opinion which Mr. Arnaud Imputes to these People, which is, that our
Savior would have proposed his Body really in the Eucharist, clothed with
another humane Figure than his own natural Form: Otherwise, says he, it would
not be an Image, but our Savior himself without any Vail. It is true, but this
should make him comprehend that they understood the Eucharist was not the
proper Substance of this Body, but an Image which is of another Substance than
its Original. For a Man cannot be guilty of a greater Absurdity than to imagine
our Savior's Body is really in the Eucharist in a humane Shape, not his own;
but a borrowed one. These kind of Imaginations reside not in the Minds of
reasonable People. But supposing this was their Sense, how could they say that
our Savior would not take upon him any other humane Shape than his own to
prevent Idolatry? Might not their Adversaries tell them on the contrary that
this very Consideration ought to prevail on us the more to make Images? For the
Original of our Savior's Body, in whatsoever State it is, takes Men off from
Images, but it would carry them further off from them if it had a humane
Figure, whatsoever it were, for this is what our Eyes seek in Images, and if
they found this Figure joined with the Original, they need not search it
elsewhere. I confess that the Original Speaking, Moving it self, and Acting
under its own proper Figure, would better produce this Effect; but this does
not hinder but that it may produce it likewise, having a simple borrowed
Figure, without Speech and Action, seeing that also Images have neither Speech
nor Action, and that the Figure they have is no less a borrowed Figure, than
that which the Eucharist would have. It is certain that this sensual Devotion
which seeks after Representations, and visible Lineaments, would be more
satisfied in beholding a humane Shape whatsoever it were, applied on the
Original it self, than to behold one represented on Cloth, or the Walls of a
House. It must then be acknowledged that the true Sense of this Council
supposes the Eucharist to be an Image really distinct from the Body of Christ,
and that our Savior has chosen for this a Matter, or a Substance which has not
a humane Figure, lest this Resemblance should carry Men forth to render to the
Image that which is only due to the Original, and to make others like it, of
other matters, to Adore them. Whosoever shall compare my Exposition with that
of Mr. Arnaud, will soon acknowledge that mine is Natural, Free, and according
to good Sense, whereas his is Forced and Violent, and imputes to Persons such a
kind of Arguing as is absurd and groundless.

BUT, says Mr. Arnaud, the Iconoclastes Adored the Eucharist with a sovereign
C. 7. p. 702.
Adoration: For Stephen the Younger said to Constantin Copronymus, Do not you
design likewise to cast out of the Church the Antitypes of the Body and Blood
of Christ, seeing they contain the true Image of them, and we Adore and Kiss
them, and are Sanctified by receiving them? Stephen proves the Worship of
Images by a Principle common to the Iconoclastes. Now according to them, all
Worship rendered to Images is a real Adoration, and is due to God only, and
consequently they gave to the Eucharist a Worship which they supposed due only
to God.

BUT could not Mr. Arnaud foresee, that we may argue exactly contrary, and say
Stephen proves the relative Adoration of Images by that of the Eucharist.
Neither of them then gave the Eucharist any other than a relative Adoration,
and consequently they neither of them believed, that it was the Body of Christ
in proper Substance. But, says he, the Iconoclastes acknowledged but one only
Adoration, which is, that which is due to God alone, and consequently Ibid.
they gave the Eucharist a Worship which they supposed due only to God. There
cannot be a weaker Argument; Stephen does not only prove the relative Adoration
of Images, by the Example of that which is given the Eucharist, but likewise by
the Example of that which is given to the Cross, Sacred Vestments and Vessels.
If Mr. Arnaud's Consequence be good, we must say likewise that the Iconoclastes
rendered to all these things a Worship which they acknowledged to be only due to
God alone, which is not easy to believe. It must then be necessarily
acknowledged either that the Iconoclastes rejected not absolutely the
distinction of the two Adorations; the one Absolute, and the other Relative, or
that they acknowledged not the Honor given to the Cross, Sacred Vestments, and
the Eucharist, was a real Adoration, and there is a greater likelihood in the
last, than in the other. So that Stephen proves well the relative Adoration of
Images, by the relative Adoration of the Eucharist, and other sacred things;
but this is not by a Principle common to the Iconoclastes and their
Adversaries, but only by external Ceremonies which were common to them both,
and which were variously expounded by both Parties.

CHAP. XI.
Several Circumstances relating to the second Council of Nice, Examined.

HAVING thus cleared the Sense of the Council of Nice, it is scarce worth our
Enquiry, whether this Council was called and held in a regular manner; and
whether its Conduct was so sincere, that there could be no Fault found with it.
I grant it was assembled in the Year 787. ten Years after Stephen Stylytus's
Death, if we refer our selves to the anonymous Author who wrote the Life of
this Stephen; and do thereby acknowledge that according to the best Chronology
it cannot be said, That after Epiphanus had censured in the Council of Nice the
Terms of Figure and Image; Stephen Stylite notwithstanding said, will you cast
out of the Church the Figures of the Body and Blood of Christ? Although Mr.
Blondel, (whom every body knows was very skilful in these Matters of
Chronology) computed Stephen's Death to have happened ten Years after this
Council of Nice was held: Howsoever Mr. Arnaud knows very well that the Bill
Epiphanus read, was not written before this Council was held, that it could not
be seen by Stephen, and that the Clause therein touching the Rejection of the
Term of Image in reference to the Eucharist, was not taken out of Damascen's
Writings, who was Stephen's Contemporary, and a Patron of Images as well as he.
Whence it follows that although the Writing which was read in the Council
condemned the Use of this Term, yet Stephen (who was engaged in the same Affair
as the Author of this Writing) made use of it; which shows that this Doctrine,
that the Eucharist is not an Image or Figure, was neither the Doctrine of the
whole Greeks Chruch, nor even that of the whole opposite Party to the Council
of Constantinople. Now this is the Substance of what I had to say, and to which
Mr. Arnaud was bound to make reply.

IN effect it has not been Stephen only who made use of the Term of Figure, and
believed it to be not Inconsistent with the Doctrine of the Greek Church in
reference to the Eucharist; Balsamon who lived in the twelfth Century did the
same likewise. The thirty second Canon, says he, of the Council called in
Trullo Injoyns the unbloody Sacrifice, be made with Bread and Wine mingled with
Water; because the Bread is the Figure of Christ's Body, and the Wine the
Figure of his Blood. Andrew of Crete, as Goar Reports, scrupled not to say,
That our Savior is Immolated in the Symbols which are the Figures of him;
(...). And Nicetas Pectoratus writing against the Latins in the eleventh
Century, likewise said, You eat the Azyme of the Jews as a Figure of our Lords
true and living Flesh; And again, If as you say the Apostles received an Azyme
from our Lord, and delivered it to you as a Figure of our Lord's Body, to be
the Mystery of the new Testament, etc.

BUT to return to the Council of Nice, it is granted 'twas Tarasus who (before
he accepted of the Sea of Constantinople,) obtained a Promise from the Empress
Irene that there should be a Council called; but this does not hinder but it
may be said, That he was not settled in this See till he had obtained from Irene
the Convocation of this Synod. But whether it was at his Request or not, that
Irene did it, it little matters; for it is still certain they were agreed in
it; and this Condition on which he is said to accept of that See, shows only
that he was far engaged to maintain the Cause of Images, and already became a
Party. Mr. Arnaud cannot deny that Tarasus had already declared himself in the
Letter he wrote to Pope Adrian. Neither can he any more deny the Pope answered
him he would not consent to his Election to the Patriarchate, unless he
Re-established the Worship of Images. All this is expressly contained in
Adrian's Letters, and thence may justly be concluded that this Person was not
at his own Liberty when he presided in this Council, and could at farthest be
considered only as the Head of a Party, which was at that time the strongest,
as being upheld by the Empress Irene, and her chief Minister Stauracius. Now
this by good right makes void whatsoever Tarasus did afterward.

MR. Arnaud cannot deny but that the two Monks Thomas, and John, whom the
Council ever called The Vicars, or Representatives of the Apostolical Sees in
the East, were sent by some Hermit of Palestine, and not by the Patriarchs of
Antioch, Alexandria, and Jerusalem, nor by the Consent of the Patriarchal, or
other Churches. Whence it appears this Council could not rightly call it self
Universal, nor be preferred above that of Constantinople, although so esteemed by
the Author of the Perpetuity, who tells us as a considerable Matter, that all
the Patriarchs were there present.

IT was, says Mr. Arnaud, a mere Favor of the Council toward them, to Lib.
7. c. 3. p. 715.
give them the Place of the Patriarchs. If it were a mere Favor of the
Council, then the Presence of these Men ought not to be made a Ground for the
calling this an ecumenical Council; and by this means to give it the greater
Authority. The Author then of the Perpetuity had no reason so loudly to
proclaim, that all the Patriarchs were present at it. For it is Absurd to
pretend the Patriarchs assisted at it, under Pretense there was given by mere
Favor the Place of Patriarchs to two Religious, who had neither Order nor
Mission from these Patriarchs. Yet this Favor, adds Mr. Arnaud, was Ibid.
granted on good Grounds, seeing no Persons could better supply this Place,
than those that were competent Witnesses of their Sentiments, and were the
Bearers of their Synodical Letters. But to keep in a Council the Rank of
Patriarchs, it is not sufficient for Persons to be Witnesses of their
Sentiments, nor Carryers of their Synodical Letters, which the Patriarchs wrote
to one another, they must be their Deputies sent expressly for this; and it is to
no purpose to say no Persons could better hold this Rank than they, for no body
absolutely could hold it, neither they nor others, seeing they were no
Deputies; to grant a Favor to People on these slight Grounds, to take
afterward upon 'em the Title of ecumenical Council, and to boast of the
Presence of the Patriarchs, this was not so much to Favor them, as to Impose
upon us.

TARASUS the Patriarch of Constantinople sent Deputies toward the others
Patriarchs, but these Deputies returned without executing their Commission,
because they saw the Danger they were in from their Voyage. It is false, says
Mr. Arnaud, that the Consideration of their own Danger was the P. 716.
Cause of these Deputies Return, for they on the contrary protested they were
ready to venture their Lives to acquit themselves of their Charge, and were
only deterred upon the account 'twas represented to them, they exposed the
whole Church to Danger: But Mr. Arnaud falls into a Passion without any
Occasion. He was never yet told as I know of, that the fear of their own
personal Danger occasioned their Return: But only, They understood it was not
safe for them to Answer to the 2d. Treat. of the Perp. 3. p. c. 4.
Travel to and fro to the Patriarchs of Antioch and Alexandria, because of the
Suspicion which Aron the Sarracen King, who governed almost the whole East,
would conceive at their Voyage, which put them upon the Resolution of
Returning. The Hermits Letters of Palestine contain that the Deputies, Were
willing to venture their Persons; but it being showed them that in hazarding
their Lives, they endangered likewise the Peace of the Church, they desisted
for this Reason. It is then certain that the Danger which made them resolve
upon returning, respected their Persons, which is precisely what I said.
Whether this was for Fear, or out of respect of the Trouble which might thereby
happen to the Church, I did not affirm; and therefore Mr. Arnaud had no reason
to charge me with Falsity.

IT is false, says he again, that being resolved to return they assembled
these Ibid. c. 8. p. 716.
Religious, seeing on the contrary these Religious who were gathered together
persuaded them to return: This is still wrangling about a Trifle. When we
perused this Relation, we were not so curious to inquire whether their
Resolution to return preceded the Assembly, or whether it was the Assembly that
advised them to it. The Letters Inform us, that they immediately met with two
of their old Friends, to whom they discovered themselves, that those Friends
joyfully Received them; But Concealed 'em for fear of the Enemies of the Cross,
that being discreet they would not make known their Arrival, nor Counsel them
to perform the Voyage they had undertaken. So that here I think is the Design
of their Return half Resolved upon, through the Persuasion of these two Friends.

IT is false, says Mr. Arnaud, that they assembled these Religious after Ibid.
they understood the Danger there was in going to Antioch, and Alexandria;
seeing it was from these Religious that they understood it. The Care their
Friends took in immediately concealing them for fear of the Enemies of the
Cross, not daring to trust any Body with the News of their Arrival, nor to
assist them in their Voyage, sufficiently convinced them of their Danger in
going farther. Now this is set down in the Religiouse's Letters as a matter
which preceded their Assembly.

IT is false, says Mr. Arnaud again, that these Religious were but five or
Ibid.
six in number. This is a silly Fancy of Mr. Claude: For there was a great
number of Religious then in Palestine, and therefore I see no reason why there
should be no more than five or six assembled upon an Affair of so great
Importance. But this is not so silly neither: For seeing the two Friends we now
mentioned, were forced to hide the Deputies for fear of the Infidels, it is very
likely they called no great Assembly for this Affair, how important soever it
was. The Letter of the Religious informs us that these two Friends having
secured the Deputies, hastened to the Religious, whom they secretly assembled,
and Swore them first to keep secret the Affair they had to communicate to them.
This I think sufficiently shows that the Assembly was but small, and could not
exceed the number of five or six; for a numerous Assembly would not well agree
with this great Fear and Secret.

THE Epithets of Idiots, and Persons of no Experience, which it pleases Mr.
Claude to give them, adds Mr. Arnaud, have not any Foundation but in his unjust
Passion; And this it is to be angry when a Man Writes. The Letter of the
Religious assembled, tells us expressly, that having cast their Eyes on John,
and Thomas, to depute them to the Council, they ingenuously answered, And how
can we who are Idiots, and Persons void of Experience, Ignorant, and Unable to
manage such an Affair. (...), which the Latin Interpreter has well rendered,
Idiotae and inexpertes, and ad tantam causam infirmi and indocti: How can we
undertake this Business which we are not able to manage? To which the others
answered, not that 'twas their Humility which made 'em thus express themselves;
but, That our Lord made use of unlearned and mean Persons for the Reforming of
the whole World, giving them Utterance, and manifesting his Strength in their
Weakness. Now what Unjustice and Rashness have I been guilty of, in using the
very Expressions of a Letter inserted amongst the Acts of a Council? Neither
can Mr. Arnaud say these Monks spoke thus only in mere Modesty, and that their
Words are not to be taken in a strict Sense. For besides that the Modesty of
learned Men does never proceed to this Excess, as to call themselves Ignorant
and Unskilful Persons: it is to be considered the other Religious did not
gainsay but that they were really such as they termed themselves: They Answer
that God will manifest his Power by their Weakness. Is it then Rashness and
Injustice in me to speak according to the Expressions of this Letter? Mr.
Arnaud certainly might have found better Employment, than to fill up a whole
Chapter with these Trifles, and to make such a pudder about them.

HE ought likewise to show greater Sincerity than he has done, in undertaking
Lib. 7. c. 9. p. 722., etc.
to Justify the Translation of a Passage out of the Life of Luke the
Anachorite, related by the Author of the Perpetuity in these Words, Stretching
out a linen Cloth, you must put the Sacred Particles therein, and Perp. of
the Faith, 2. Part, p. 249, 250.
burning Incense, sing Psalms, which Relate to, and Represent this Mystery, or
else the Canticle usually called Trisagion, together with the Apostles Creed,
and WORSHIPPING it thrice with bended Knees, and Hands lift up, you shall take
in your Mouth the Sacred Body of Jesus Christ our God. I complained that this
Worshipping it written in great Characters, was an Addition to the Greek Text,
which only says thus; And bowing thrice the Knee, Answer to the 2d. Treat. of
the Perpetuit. 2. part. c. 8.
and joining your Hands, you shall take, etc. (...), etc. Mr. Arnaud Justifies
this Translation, and first he says, That Mr. Claude may as well Reproach
Bollandus, and Peter Combefis, who first Translated the Greek Words, which
signify no more literally than bending the Knee, by these, Trinaque
genuflexione adorans. To whom Mr. Arnaud may likewise add Allatius his great
Author; for he also Translates Trinaque genuum flexione adorans: But neither do
Bollandus, nor Combefis, nor Allat. in addendis ad lib. de Perpet cons.
Allatius, excuse the Author of the Perpetuity. He ought not to assert any
thing in a matter of this Importance, without a careful Examination of it, for
it is not the Examples of others that will excuse such kind of Faults as these.
Moreover there is a considerable Difference between the Translation of
Bollandus, Combefis, and Allatius, and that of the Author of the Perpetuity.
They Translate, Trinaque genuflexione adorans: This adorans is an Addition to
the Letter, and an Explication of what may be pretended the genuflexion
signifies, but it is not a spoiling of the Sense, for it is certain that in this
Occasion the genuflexion is an Adoration. Mr. Arnaud needed not Expatiate in
long Discourses and Distinctions to prove it; We grant it. All that can be said
in this Respect is, that Bollandus, Combefis, and Allatius, have rather
performed the Office of Paraphrastists, than that of Translators. The
Paraphrastists do not only Explain the Terms, but the Matters Represented by
them: They enlarge upon Matters, and when two Notions are joined together by
any Dependence, they pass easily from one to the other; this is allowable in
them. But Translators must be more exact, they must faithfully render the
Expressions as much as the Idiom of the Language they Translate in will permit
them. They ought especially to keep to the first Sense and Notion which the
Letter gives them, and never take the Liberty to pass over from one Sense to
another, or from one Idea to another, whatsoever Coherence and Dependence there
may seem to be betwixt them: For this is not permitted them. A Paraphrastist
may for Instance very well say on our Savior's Words to Judas: Do thou
betray the Son of Man with a Kiss, in doing him Homage, and showing him Respect
and Friendship. This does explain that which the Kiss given to our Savior does
naturally Signify, and a Man passes thus from one Idea to another. But should a
Translator pretend to this Liberty, it would be justly denied him. A
Paraphrastist may make our Lord say, I am the Spiritual and Mystical Light of
the World inlightning others. A Translator cannot; for although this be the true
Sense of the Word Light, yet it is a second and explicatory Sense, which is not
exactly the first Notion which the Letter gives. We must say the same that when
Bollandus, Combefis, and Allatius have Translated, Trinaque genuum flexione
adorans: They were Paraphrastists, not Translators, and kept not the Character
they took upon them: They cannot be excused by saying as Mr. Arnaud does, that
genuflexion in a Matter of Religion is an Act of Adoration. For although this be
true, this is not the first Idea which the Letter of the Greek Text gives.
(...) if rightly rendered, signifies no more than, ter genu Flectens. Adorans
ought not to be added thereunto, this is Expounding, and not Translating, this
is passing from one Conception to another, which is not a Translator's
Business, and so much the rather, in that there was no Necessity to make this
Addition, the Latin very well bearing that we should say ter genu flectens. It
is to no purpose for Mr. Arnaud to say (as he does) that Combefis, has done no
more than the Evangelists did: For as to St. Luke's saying, That the leprous
Person fell flat on his Face before our Savior Christ: And St. C. 9. p. 724.
Mark, That he kneeled down: And St. Matthew, That he worshipped him. Mr. Arnaud
here Imposes on us as he is wont: St Mark, and St. Matthew were not Translators
of St. Luke. The Evangelists are each of 'em Authors of their own Gospel, and
there is a great deal of Difference betwixt speaking as an Author, and as a
Translator. Had the Translation of Mons rendered these Words of St. Luke,
kneeled down, or worshipped him, instead of falling on the Ground, it might be
justly blamed; and that Man ill understands the Rules of Translation, who
allows in himself or others this Liberty.

SO far concerning Bollandus, Combefis, and Allatius: But the Author of the
Perpetuity did not think good to stop here: Besides the Addition of an
Expression which is not in the Greek Text, he has proceeded to the altering the
Sense in determining it. For he Translates, And WORSHIPPING it in bending thrice
the Knee, and with folded Hands, you shall receive into your Mouth the Sacred
Body of Jesus Christ our God. He has written this Word Worshipping in great
Characters, to show that thereon depends the Decision of the Question, as
referring it self to the Body of Christ which we receive into our Mouths; that
is to say, to the Sacrament it self. The Others left it at the Readers Liberty
to refer this Adoration to God, or our Savior in Heaven: But the Author of the
Perpetuity judged not this sufficient, and therefore would have it only relate
to the Eucharist. Now this is an inexcusable Depravation: For what Right has
this Author to add an Expression, and determine moreover the Sense of it, by an
Article which hinders us from understanding it any otherwise than he pleases.
Is it fairly done of a Translator who cites a Passage in a Dispute to deal
thus. It is apparent, says Mr. Arnaud, that in this Passage these Genuflexions
refer themselves to our Savior P. 725.
Christ: Which I deny, if by the Body of Christ he means the Sacrament;
provided Mr. Arnaud can say, it is Apparent, it is Clear, or it is False, the
Matter is decided, he has done enough. But why is this apparent? Is not there
more likelihood on the contrary that these three Genuflexions respect the three
Persons of the Trinity, to whom is sung the Trisagion? This Answer is, again
says he, Ridiculous; why Ridiculous? Because, says he, that singing of
Psalms, or of the Trisagion, rehearsing the Creed, and folding the Hands, are
several Parts of the whole Ceremony enjoined by the Bishop, all of which
respect the Blessed Sacrament, and serve as a Preparation for its Reception,
and not to one another. It is true they all respect the Celebration of the
Sacramental Action, and serve for a Preparation to the Communion; but that they
all refer themselves to the Sacrament, that is to say, to the Object which is
present before our Eyes, as so many marks of Reverence given to it; this cannot
be truly said, for the Trisagion is adressed to the Holy Trinity, and not to
the Sacrament. What also hinders but that the three Genuflexions may be made in
Honor of the three Persons? Those that know the Temper of the Greeks, need not
be told what great Lovers of Mysteries they are in all things, as Combesis does
somewhere observe; Graeci, says he, sunt valde mystici; it is then very likely
that the number of three in their Kneelings has a mystical Reason and refers it
self to three Persons. But says Mr. Arnaud, It is not P. 726.
necessary to sing always the Trisagion, and when 'twas not sung, yet the three
Genuflexions were made. I grant it, the three Genuflexions then were not made
to God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; this Conclusion is not good: Could they
not think of the Trinity nor Worship it, but they must sing the Trisagion.

MR. Claude, says Mr. Arnaud, must prove that these Terms of the Body of P.
725.
Jesus Christ, do not signify the true Body of Christ, before he can justly
blame this Translation as False. Did ever any Man behold a more unreasonable
Pretension? The Author of the Perpetuity shall bring in his Prejudication into
his Translations, and add unto them what he pleases; and having thus
accommodated them to his Sense, he may give 'em me for good and substantial
Proofs, and I must not have the Liberty to charge his Translations with
Falsity, till I have showed his Prejudications to be False. Is there the least
Dram of Equity in this? After this rate Mr. Arnaud may Translate thus the Words
of Christ, This is my Body in proper Substance; For this Translation is
agreeable to his Prejudication, he may alledg them to me in this Form as a good
and excellent Proof; and if I tell him his Translation is False, and that it is
not thus in the Original, he may maintain against me that I have not the
Liberty to charge his Translation as False, till such time as I have proved
that the Term of Body, does not signify the Body in proper Substance: And the
Laws of Controversy being as well for the Benefit of the one Party, as the
other; I will render the same Words, This Bread is the sign of my Body; and
producing my Translation as an express Proof of my Sentiment, I will likewise
tell him that he must not Accuse my Translation as False, till he has proved
that by the Term of Body, when the Question concerns the Sacrament, we must not
understand the Sign of Christ's Body.

BUT, adds he, as this is an unjustifyable Pretension (to wit, the Pretension
that the Term of Body does not signify the true Body) and is particularly
confuted by all the Greeks of our time, in supposing the Words of our Savior
Christ signify the real Body of Christ, we have had reason to suppose that
those of bending the Knee, signify a real Adoration: What weak Arguing is here?
Suppose these three Genuflexions refer themselves to the Body of Christ which
we receive into our Mouths; Suppose that by the Term of Body, we must
understand the Body in proper Substance; Then Mr. Arnaud's Translation will be
tolerable. There is so great Irregularity in all this, that the plain
Repetition of it is enough to Confute it.

AND thus have we considered whatsoever Mr. Arnaud has proposed of any Weight
in his seventh Book, and in his second, third, and fourth, touching the Greeks,
to persuade the World that Transubstantiation is one of their Doctrines. We
have met with several Delusions, and many Paralogisms, which are the two
Characters of a Person that is deceived himself, and would have others to be
deceived with him. He has not been sparing of his fruitless Histories, false
Suppositions, starcht Prefaces, Amplifications, Exclamations, and in a Word, of
any of the Artifices of Rhetoric; and that which is most strange, is, he has
never less shunned the slipping into these Defaults, then when he has himself
most unjustly accused me of them. I take no Notice of his Invectives, and
Sharpness with which he has stuffed his Discourses to render 'em more taking
and agreeable, nor of that common Custom of his, of taking in a contrary Sense
the most solid Matters, to make them seem Ridiculous. All which has not hindered
but that I have done the three things I took upon me to prove; The first to
show that although it were true the Greeks believed Transubstantiation, it would
not thence follow that this Doctrine has been perpetually in the Church. The
other, That the Greeks do not in effect hold Transubstantiation, nor Adore the
Eucharist: And the Third, That all Mr. Arnaud's Efforts to prove the contrary
Proposition are Ineffectual, and that the greatest part of his Proofs conclude
directly against himself: The First of these has been established by solid
Reflections on evident matters of Fact; The Second by good Proofs; And the
Third by pertinent Answers, and most natural Consequences.

IT only remains now to be concluded from this whole Dispute, that
Transubstantiation and the substantial Presence are in effect an Innovation of
the Latins, and not the ancient Doctrines of Christianity, seeing they are not
found established in the Greek Church. This Conclusion is as every Man may see
directly opposite to that of Mr. Arnaud, but if compared together, it will be
soon found that mine is drawn from my Principle with far greater Evidence, and
Necessity, than the other follows from his. For, supposing the Greeks do
believe the Conversion of Substances, it cannot hence follow that this Doctrine
has been perpetually held by that Church, as we made appear in our second Book.
But if they do not believe it, it is a plain sign that it was neither Believed
nor so much as heard of by the two Churches before their Separation. If the
Greeks do now at this day believe this Doctrine, having not done so heretofore,
we cannot marvel thereat, considering their Condition (as it has been
represented by us) since the eleventh Century, and the unwearied Pains the
Latins have taken for the Propogation of the Doctrines of the Roman Church in
the East; to which end they have used, and do still use all kind of Means. But
supposing they believed it heretofore, it is hard to conceive they have ceased
believing it, because it is naturally more Difficult for Men to give over
believing what they did once Believe, than to begin to believe what they did
not Believe, and because likewise the least Effect this aforementioned Commerce
of the Latins with the Greeks could Produce, would be to Cherish and Preserve a
Doctrine of this Importance amongst the Greeks themselves, and to hinder its
being Lost.

The End of the First Part.
AN ANSWER TO Mr. Arnaud's Book INTIT'LED, The Perpetuity of the Faith of the
Catholic Church, touching the Eucharist defended.
PART II.
BOOK V.
Wherein is treated of the belief of the Moscovites, Armenians, Nestorians,
Jacobites, and other Churches, called Schismatics, of the belief of the Latins
in the seventh and eighth Centuries, and of the Consequences which Mr. Arnaud
draws from the pretended Consent of these Churches, in the Doctrines of the
real Presence and Transubstantiation.

CHAP I.
Of the Moscovites.

That the Moscovites do not believe Transubstantiation.

HAVING thus cleared up the Point in reference to the Greeks, I come now in
order to the Examination of Mr. Arnaud's fifth Book, wherein he treats of the
other Churches called Schismatics, which are separated as well from the Greek
Church, as the Roman. The first of those Churches which he Offers us is that of
the Moscovites, and he immediately acknowledges that she makes up a part of the
Greek one, and that the same Proofs which serve for the one, suffice for the
other. But this acknowledgment ill agreeing with the Design, he had to make
this the Subject of four Chapters; he says afterward, he thought himself
obliged to treat of this at lib. 5. C. 1. p. 423.
large, as well for that the Fallacious arguings which Mr. Claude makes
thereupon, deserve to be represented; as that also, the Opinion of the
Moscovites appeared to him very Considerable in this matter. To speak plainly,
these are mere frivolous Pretenses, as it will appear in the sequel, and unless
he imagined this Multiplication of Objects would contribute something to his
Glory, and make it more Illustrious; there can be no reason alleged for the
mentioning of the Moscovites apart, for if it be true these People profess to
follow the Greek Religion, (as he says;) as soon as ever we are satisfied of
the Doctrine of these last, we need not trouble our selves any longer,
concerning the Belief of the others. Yet we must accommodate our selves to Mr.
Arnaud's method, and treat of the Moscovites seeing he will have it so.

TO begin with the state of these People, Moscovia is a great Nation professing
the Christian Religion, but otherwise extreme Barbarous and Ignorant of the
Doctrines of Christianity. Some have questioned whether they may reasonably be
called Christians; whereupon Mr. Olearius has Pleasantly Voyage into Moscovia,
lib. 3. p. 234.
said: That it may as well be questioned whether they are Men, seeing their
Religion does not so greatly differ from that of other Christians, as their
Morals, and way of Living does from that of other Men; but as they show
themselves Men by speech, and Laughter, so in like manner they appear to be
Christians by Possevin Bibl. sell. lib. 6. C. 5. and lib. de reb. Moscov. Thom.
a Jesu. Lib. 6. C. 5. Olearius voyage Mosc. Lib. 3 p. 237. 234.
Baptism, and the outward Profession of the Christian Religion. They refer
themselves upon all Accounts to their Prince as to their Oracle, saying when
they be asked touching any Point, That God and their Great Czar know it, and
that it is by the especial Grace of their Czar, they are in Health, and can sit
on Horseback. One of their Chief Maxims is to suffer no Preachers amongst them,
and in Effect they have none, but content themselves with the reading of the
Psalms, some Chapters of the Scripture, and S. Athanasius's Creed; to which
they sometimes add an Homely of S. Chrysostom, or the Life of some of their
Saints. Mr. Olearius adds, That one of their Priests setting himself to Preach,
and exhort the People out of the word of God to the duty of Prayer, the
Patriarch deposed him together with some other Priests who followed his
Example; that he excommunicated them and sent them into Siberia,

THERE are neither Accademy's nor Colleges amongst them, and it would be a
Crime punishable by the Laws of that Kingdom, for a man to Possev. ubi supra.
apply himself to the study of Sciences. They have only some small Schools
wherein they teach Children to Write and Read, and perhaps a little Greek and
Latin in one Corner of the Kingdom.

HENCE it is their Ecclesiastics are so Prodigiously ignorant that Olear. Lib.
3. p. 234.
Mr. Olearius tells us; There is scarcely any amongst their very Monks and
Priests that can give an Account of his Faith, because they have none to Preach
the word of Olear. Lib. 3 p. 237.
God to them. And therefore the Patriarch will not permit 'em to Dispute about
Religion, nor inform themselves by means of Strangers. Possevin likewise tells
us, that demanding of their Monks who was the founder of their Order; Possev.
ubi supra.
not one of 'em could return him an Answer. And thus are we informed in the
Embassage of the Earl of Carlisle: The Religion of the Moscovites is the
Relation of the Ambassag. of the Earl of Carlisle.
same which the Greeks profess, for they follow their Faith, Rights, and
Ceremonies; but they are so Ignorant, that they scarce know themselves what
Religion they are of.

THEIR Superstition is no less than their Ignorance, witness their calling
Olear. Lib. 3. p. 261.
their Images their Gods; saying when they enter into any House, I est le Boch,
where is the God? Witness likewise their re-baptizing themselves every year,
and not only their own Persons, but in like manner their Images Olear. Lib. 3.
p. 261.
and Horses. And their giving a Testimonial or Pass port in due form and manner
to their Dead, attesting, they have lived good Christians and observed the
Greek Religion, to the end that S. Peter in seeing their Testimonial may admit
them into Heaven. Witness moreover that fabulous and impious Book, mentioned by
Olearius, wherein they have corrupted the Historical passages of the Gospel,
adding thereto filthy and abominable Circumstances, such as is this amongst
others: That Mary Magdalen prostituting her self one day Olear. p. 249.
out of Charity, her Action was so Meritorious in the sight of God, that it
expiated all her past sins, and caused her to be Canonized in the Register of
Saints.

I could willingly forbear mentioning things of this Nature, did not I find
that Mr. Arnaud in his Discourses concerning these People, seems to represent
us with an Idea of the most happy and flourishing People in the World.

THIS is, says he, a great Kingdom almost entirely separate from all others.
Lib. 5. C. 1. p. 423.
This is a Nation which has ever had but little Commerce with the rest of the
Nations of the World, few Persons Voyaging into those parts, and few Moscovites
into Asia and Europe. There was never in this Country a mixture of Persons of
diverse Communions. It cannot be said the Latins have brought over their
Opinions here by Croisados; and it is observed by all Authors that these People
are exceeding careful to preserve their ancient Customs, and Doctrines. In
fine, there is no Country in the World more tenacious of their Opinions, and
which less easily admits a new one. The Church of this Kingdom is a Church
purely Greek, and owes it is Conversion to the Greek Church, having received
from her the Doctrine she Professes. There are scarcely any other Books read
amongst them, than some Greek Fathers translated into the Sclavonian Tongue.
The writings of these Fathers are expounded amongst them; they have no other
Sentiments than those which Nature imprints in their Minds. Will not a man be
apt to say in reading this Description, that this Land is a kind of spiritual
Canaan?

BUT what signifies disguising of things at this rate? Besides what I now
related touching the Ignorance, and Superstitions reigning in this Church; we
need only observe what judgment Possevin who lived several years in Moscovia
makes of them. In respect of Schism, says he, it cannot be imagined how deeply
Possev. de reb. Moscov. p. 24.
they are engaged in it, holding their Opinions for inviolable Maxims, or
rather, adding still something to them, than abating any of them. It is the same
with the Moscovites as with those who once have wandered from the Unity of a
Principle, the forwarder they go, the more they multiply their Errors, just as
may be observed in the Innovators of our times. The Moscovites having received
their Schism from the Greeks have departed from 'em, and having no Books, nor
Learning they therefore abound with impertinencies. And yet according to Mr.
Arnaud, this is the only Country in the World for conserving a Doctrine already
established, and the least likely to embrace a new Opinion. The same Possevin
tells us that the Great Duke Possev. de reb. Moscov. p. 1.
Basil having caused a Greek Priest to come into his Country, whom the
Patriarch of Constantinople sent him, he threw him into Prison, and would not
release him although requested by the Turkish Emperor, because the Priest told
him, he found the Moscovites had erred from the Doctrine and Ceremonies of the
Greek Church; and from that time, they had no more Recourse to the Patriarch of
Constantinople, for his Confirmation of the Metropolitain of Moscovia. In
another place, he observes expressly that they differ in several Ibid. p. 38.
things from the Latins: Which caused Sacranus the Channon of Cracovia, Elucid.
error. ritus. Ruth. Joan. Sacra.
to say, that they abuse in several things the Rights of the Greeks, and have
been ever Reputed by the Greeks for Heretics, which have departed from them.
This proposition of Sacranus may be excessive, but it may be well concluded
thence, that the Moscovites are indeed of the Grecian Religion, but, have not
so carefully preserved it, but that it is altered in several things.

THIS pretended firmness which Mr. Arnaud attributes to them, has not hindered
the Greek Religion, from being corrupted amongst them, neither has it hindered
the Latins from using their utmost Endeavors, to introduce their Doctrines
amongst them; nor Possevin from laying his Designs in Order thereunto. It has
not hindered the Popes from sending their Emissaries amongst Possev. de reb.
Mosc Com. 1. and 2 Chap. 4.
them, as I have already showed in the second Book, nor from making use of
Merchants, who under pretense of Commerce obtain an easier access into these
Countries, as appears by the History of Paul Jovius, nor Arcudius Paul Jov.
Lib. de Legate Mosc.
a Latiniz'd Greek, from spending twenty years in Lituania, Russia, and
Moscovia, in the propogating of the Romish Religion, as he himself testifies
Arcud. Epist. dedicat. ad Sigism.
in his Letter, to Sigismond King of Poland, nor Seminaries from being set up
in Lituania and other places, for the instructing of the Moscovites Children in
the Romish Religion, as Possevin tells us. This firmness does not hinder,
Possev. Bibl. select. Lib. 6. C. 1.
but that they have made use not only of Polanders for the Reduction of these
People, who hold a particular Commerce with them, but especially, of the
reunited Russians who appear less suspected to the Moscovites; because they
Possev. Bibl. select Lib. 6. C. 1.
observe still the Greek Rites. In fine this does not hinder the false Greeks,
who having finished their studies in the Seminary at Rome, do return into
Greece, from promoting the interest of the Roman Church, under the habit and
disguise of Schismatical Greeks, and from passing over from Greece into
Moscovia when occasion Offers, as appears by the Example of Paysius Ligaridius,
who wrote in Mosco it self, his Treatise of the Eucharist in favor of Mr.
Arnaud, and at the Solicitation of Mr. de Pompone.

IS not this then a delusory Remark which Mr. Arnaud has made, That it cannot
be alleged, the Latins have brought their Opinions into these parts by
Croisado's? This is true, but if they have not brought them thither by
Croisado's, they have done whatsoever they have been able in order to the
introducing them by Missions and Seminaries, by Commerce of Merchants, by
Poland, Russia, and Greece it self which is their Mother Church. Now can it
seem strange to us if with all these Machins, and by abusing the Ignorance and
stupidity of these People, they have been made to believe that
Transubstantiation is a Doctrine of the Greek Religion, and consequently one of
theirs? And can it be imagined, we are such Fools to make our Faith depend on
that of this People? What Mr. Arnaud adds: That there is scarcely any other
Books Possev. de reb. Moscov. Comm. 1.
read amongst them, than the Writings of some of the Greek Fathers translated
into the Sclavonian Language, does not well agree with what Possevin tells us,
that they understand not any more of the Sclavonian Language, than what nearly
relates to theirs, or that of Poland. What signifies the reading of Greek
Fathers Translated into a Language which the People understand not?

BUT let us see what kind of Proofs Mr. Arnaud brings to Convince us, that the
Moscovites believe Transubstantiation. The first he Offers is the silence of
all Authors, that have written on the Religion of this Church, who do not
Remark that it differs in this Point from the Roman: To enhance the Value of
this Proof, he Immediately complains that I have not alleged any thing that is
Real and Positive, whereby to maintain my Thesis. It is strange, says he, that
Mr. Claude treating of this Matter, should choose rather to devine the Opinion
of these People on weak Conjectures, than to inform himself whether he might
not meet in so many Books, that mention the Religion Lib. 5. c. 1. P. 425.
of the Moscovites, real Proofs of what he would willingly find. He afterward
reproaches me with my Negligence in not reading those Books, and Protests he
has not been guilty of the like, having read whatsoever he could find written
on this Subject, eight Authors on one side, several Treatises on the other,
such as Possevin, Baronius, Raynoldus, Botter, Breerwood, Hornbeck, and several
others.

THERE is no need of this Account. There being no body as I know of that
questions Mr. Arnaud's industry; we on the contrary blame him for taking so
much Pains for nothing. As to my own part believing as I do, that the World
does not much concern it self, whether I am Diligent or Lazy, I shall not make
this a matter of Debate, only say, that Mr. Arnaud with all his Reading will be
no less perplexed than my self, how negligent soever I am, should either of us
be put upon the producing of the Testimony of one single Moscovite Author, that
expressly mentions Transubstantiation, either one way or other. If then by real
Proofs, he means passages of the Moscovites themselves, I beg of him to show me
who are the Authors of this Nation, that have treated of the Mysteries of
Christian Religion, for excepting the Letter of John the Metropolitain of
Moscou, which Sigismond d' Herberstein has Sigism. Com. rer. Mosc.
published together with the Canons of another John, and the Answer of Niphon
Bishop of Novograd, I know none that have written about Religion, or any thing
else, and these three Pieces aforementioned, are but five pages of Paper in
all. But if by these real Proofs Mr. Arnaud means the Testimonies of those who
have described the Religion of these People, his Complaint has no grounds. We
have already told him that Travelers, and those that make Discourses of
distant Nations, give us seldom any other than a general Relation of their
Opinions, without descending to Particularize what they hold or reject. So that
there can be nothing certainly concluded from the silence of these Authors.

IT is to no purpose to say, that in the Comparisons they make of Religions, it
is always with the Roman Catholic Religion, that they Compare all others, and
that Lib. 5. c. 1. P. 427.
in this Comparison, the Principal differences are designed to be marked out.
For supposing they all of 'em took this Course, it is certain they must reduce
all these Principal differences, to those which spring from an express and
actual Opposition, wherein on one hand the Roman Church professes to believe
such a Point, and the Church which is compared with it, professes on the
contrary to oppose and reject it. So that we must not wonder if those that have
discoursed of the Religion of the Moscovites have observed, that they hold as
fabulous the fire of Purgatory, acknowledge not the Authority of the Pope,
Communicate under both kinds, and give the Communion to Children, and yet have
not observed that they do not hold Transubstantiation. These Points are openly
controverted between the Greek Church of which the Moscovite makes a part, and
the Latin, but that of Transubstantiation is not so. They do not teach it,
neither yet do they make thereof a point of Controversy.

IF there can be any advantage drawn from the silence of these Authors it falls
to me. For being most of them Roman Catholics, and knowing well the Importance
of this Article, and how greatly controverted in our Western parts, there is no
Likelihood if they had found it held, established, and taught amongst the
Moscovites, but they would remark as much, on purpose to gratify in this the
Roman Church, and endeavor to clear it from the reproach of Innovation;
neither must Mr. Arnaud imagine, that he is the only Person that had in his Eye
the Schismatical Churches for the defense of the controverted Points in our
Europe. These aforementioned Authors are not wanting to tell us of the Devotion
which these People have for Images, the worship they give their Saints, their
Prayers for the Dead, their fastings, Monks, Confession, extreme Unction, and
in a word of all particulars wherein they are agreed with the Roman Church, and
are contrary to the Protestants. How then comes it to pass they have forgotten
that of Transubstantiation? It is to no purpose for Mr. Arnaud to say, that
they do not particularly Remark the Articles of the Trinity, the Incarnation,
touching the Death of Christ, nor the others in the Creed, for besides that
this is not absolutely true, there being some of these Authors, who declare the
Moscovites hold Athanasius's Creed, and the seven first Councils, and
consequently the Doctrine of the Trinity, the Incarnation, etc. Besides this I
say, these Articles are not debated between the Romanists and Protestants, as
the others are, and especially that of the Conversion of Substances.

BUT says Mr. Arnaud, we will show Mr. Claude that they are not all of 'em
silent on this Point, there being some that clearly affirm the Moscovites Ibid.
p. 426.
hold Transubstantiation. Which we are to Examine. He tells us then, that
Paulus Jovius having observed they reject Purgatory, and disown the Popes
Supremacy, and follow the Greeks Ceremonies, makes a general Conclusion
concerning all the other Articles, that they hold the same as we do: In
caeteris Eadem, quae a nobis de Religione sentiuntur constan^^ssime credunt. I
think, adds Mr. Arnaud, that the Real presence and Transubstantiation are
Articles P. 428.
important enough to be comprehended under this general Proposition. Were this
a right consequence it would likewise follow hence, that the Moscovite Priests
do not marry no more than those of the Latins, for Paulus Jovius says nothing
of that. It would follow they baptized not with three Immersions, and hold all
other Baptism to be of none Effect, for Paulus Jovius does not remark this.
Neither does he any more take Notice, that they reject the Confirmation of a
Bishop, hold fasting on Saturday to be a great Crime, abhor the eating of
Creatures strangled, and yet these Articles are as important in respect of the
Moscovites as any others, seeing they make them principal Controversies, not
being able to bear with them that are of contrary Opinions. Mr. Arnaud must not
be so quick at drawing Consequences, or imagine that Paulus Jovius has been so
exact in all that Paul Jovius Com. de legate. Mosc.
he has written concerning the Moscovites. For he tells us, they have St.
Ambrose's works, St. Austin's, St. Jerome's, where St. Gregory's translated into
the Sclavonian Tongue, and highly respect them; and Possevin the Jesuit tells
us, that having made an exact inquiry into this particular, he could find no
such thing, neither believes the Name of these Authors is known to Possevin
Com. 1. de reb. Mosc.
these People, although those of St. Ambrose and Gregory, may be seen in their
Calendar, and that at the Princes Court, he could hear nothing of this.

SACRANUS a Chanon of Cracovia, adds Mr. Arnaud, who gives us the largest
Catalogue he could of the Errors of the Moscovites, says touching the eigth
Error. That according to the Moscovites, the Body of our Savior Lib. 5. c. 1.
p. 431.
Christ cannot be Consecrated with Azymes, and on the sixteenth Error. That
they cut a Morsel of the Bread prepared for the Sacrifice into the form of a
Triangle, and Consecrate it to make thereof the Body of our Savior Christ, in
Corpus Christi consecrant, and in the eighteenth Error, Consecrant panem in
Corpus Christi.

IT IS certain Mr. Arnaud makes a small matter serve for a Proof. The Moscovites
Consecrate the Bread, in Corpus Christi, into the Body of Jesus Christ, or to
be the Body of Jesus Christ. They believe then Transubstantiation; It Is evident
for the Establishing of this Conclusion, there is need of Ibid.
something more precise than this. But, says he, this is a Catholic that
speaks thus, and who would be understood to speak of the real Body of Jesus
Christ, that attributes this same Belief to the Moscovites. When Sacranus or
any other that professes the Roman Religion speaks as from himself, and the
question concerns his own Faith, we can easily believe that in a Discourse of
the Eucharist, by the Body of Christ, he means the proper substance of this
Body, for we know that this is the Sense, and Style of the Roman Church. But
when he Discourses of the Moscovites, and the question concerns their Faith, we
believe that in saying they Consecrate the Bread in Corpus Christi, he pretends
no more, than to use the same Terms which the Moscovites use, without
concerning himself with the Sense in which they take these words. They must be
taken in the Sense the Moscovites give 'em. What Sense is that? This Sacranus
does not determine, and to go about to decide it, by what Sacranus himself
believed concerning the Sacrament is a mere Illusion.

AS to what John le Far Confessor to the Archduke Ferdinand relates,
Moscovit. Religion.
that the Consecration is performed amongst them, by pronouncing our Savior's
words, and that they attribute to them so great Virtue, that as soon as ever
they are uttered by the Priest, they believe the Creature gives place to the
Creator; we must tell Mr. Arnaud, that he does not do fairly in offering us a
Fabulous relation, such as is this le Ferre's. This Author assures us, that
only the Bishops amongst the Moscovites Administer Confirmation, that they do
it by the laying on of Hands, in making the sign of the Cross, and anointing
the Party Confirmed on the Forehead. That one of the chief Offices of the
Priest is to Preach the Gospel of Christ to the People, which they do not only
every Sunday, but also on the Festivals of the Blessed Virgin and Apostles.
That God's Word is Preached and heard with great Devotion. That they certainly
hold the Doctrine of Purgatory. Acknowledge the Supremacy of the Roman Prelate,
as being Christ's Vicar, and St. Peter's Successor. That they freely assist at
Mass with the Latins. This is all false, as appears by other Relations of these
People. Possevin Com. 2. de reb. Mosc.
And therefore Possevin has not scrupled to reckon this John le Far amongst
those Authors, which are counted fabulous, because, says he, they have been
misinformed, or did not write with a Design to discover the Venom, to apply
thereunto a Remedy. What signifies then such peoples Testimony.

NOT to take notice that these Terms, The Creature gives place to the Creator,
are not sufficient to make us conclude from hence Transubstantiation. It being
a general Expression capable of diverse Senses. For when we should say with
Theodoret, that the Divine Grace accompanies Nature, or with St. Austin, that
the Bread becomes of an Aliment a Sacrament, or with the Greeks, that it is
changed into the Virtue of Christ's body, the Creature will still give place to
the Creator without any Conversion of substance. So that howsoever we take John
le Ferre's Testimony it is invalid; and does not at all help Mr. Arnaud's Cause.
But he having made a general Collection of good and bad Authors, John le Far
must have his place amongst the rest.

I Confess that Lasicius the Polander that relates this Testimony, has taken it
in the Sense of Transubstantiation, and as we need not doubt but that the
Design of John le Far, was to make the World believe that the Moscovites hold
this Doctrine, so likewise we must not find it strange if those that refer
themselves to his Authority, as Lasicius has done, do take it no otherwise. Had
Lasicius well examined this Relation of John le Ferre's, he would have found it
full of false Reports, and easily find his Authors main Design was to render
the Moscovite Religion, as Conformable as he could to the Roman; and by this
means to deceive his Readers, and especially, the Protestants whom he had at
that time in his Eye. He would then have absolutely rejected the Authority of
such a Man, who has palpably disguised the Truth: He might at least distinguish
in respect of the Words in question, Ferre's Sense, from the Sense of the
Moscovites themselves, supposing they were their own Words. But this he has not
done, although he ought to have done it, and thence it is that on this bare
Testimony without any other Proof, Lasicius has believed that the Opinion of
the Moscovites leaned toward Transubstantiation. Whence it follows, we ought
not lightly to Credit whatsoever a suspected Author shall tell us, concerning
the Religion of Strangers, but it does not follow it is true in the main, that
the Moscovites believe the Conversion of Substances.

WE must then come to the Testimonies of Dannaverus professor of Strasburg, and
Mr. Olearius the Duke of Holstein's Library Keeper; Persons of greater
Reputation. Both say the Moscovites hold Transubstantiation: They put, says
Dannaverus, into the Wine contained in the Chalice, the Bread broken into
pieces; they Bless it, and believe it is Transubstantiated. They hold
Transubstantiation says Mr. Olearius. So that here we have two express
Testimonies, and against which it seems there can be nothing alleged. As to
Dannaverus, he has only followed Olearius's Authority, knowing no more of the
Religion of the Moscovites, than what he has received from the reading of
Authors, as appears by his Treatise. But as to Mr. Olearius, he is a Person of
great Learning, and has lived in those Countries, and made it his Business to
be informed of this Point, and who not only gives us this Account in his Book,
but has likewise Confirmed it, in a Letter written to one of Mr. Arnaud's
Friends upon occasion of this present Dispute, and Mr. Arnaud has not failed to
make thereof a matter of Triumph.

IT will be no hard matter to reply to Mr. Olearius's Testimony, and clear it
from all Perplexity. And this will be done by considering his own Perpe. of the
Faith Part 3. C. 8.
Words, as well in his Book as Letter. Those in his Book as the Author of the
Perpetuity relates them, from the Original High Dutch are, They believe
Transubstantiation, that is to say, that the Bread and Wine are really changed
into the Body and Blood of our Savior Christ. Those of his Letter Lib. 5. C.
3. P. 438.
related by Mr. Arnaud: I wrote expressly in the Relation of my Voyage, that the
Moscovites hold Transubstantiation, that is to say, they believe the Bread is
changed into the Body of Christ, and the Wine into his Blood. Distinguish then
Mr. Olearius's Testimony, from his private Judgment, and you will clear the
Difficulty. His Testimony is, that the Moscovites believe the Bread and Wine
are changed into the Body and Blood of Christ which he has denoted by these
Terms, which is to say that they believe the bread to be changed into the Body
of Jesus Christ, and the Wine into his Blood. His private Judgment is that this
may be termed the belief of Transubstantiation, which he signifies by these
following words. They hold Transubstantiation.

SO that the whole of this Testimony amounts to no more than the change of the
Bread into the Body, and the Wine into the Blood, and his saying that they
believe Transubstantiation has no other grounds than his own persawsion that
this is in effect a conversion of Substance. He does not attribute this to them
but under the favor of his that is to say, They hold Transubstantiation, says
he, that is to say, the Bread is changed into the Body of Christ, and the Wine
into his Blood.

THIS that is to say explains what he means, and punctually determines what the
Moscovites hold. If to change and transubstantiate are one and the same thing,
his Proposition must be received in its full extent, if they are not, the
Change belongs to the Moscovites, the Transubstantier to the private sense of
M. Olearius. We then respectfully receive his Testimony without the least
question of his sincerity; but as to his particular Judgment, we hope he will
be so equitable as to lay no necessity upon us to receive it. For should we
judge otherwise then he has done he will have no just cause to be angry.
Neither had he any reason to be offended Answer to the Perp. Part 3. C. 8.
at the Answer I made the Author of the Perpetuity. That it is very likely he
was mistaken by false conjectures, and that having heard of the change of
Bread, he imagined this was the change of Substance. which is the same thing I
say now. The distinction which I make between his Testimony and his Judgment is
grounded on his own proper Terms, and the liberty which I pretend to have of
rejecting the one and receiving the other is no more than what common Justice
will allow me. I can therefore see no reason for his stuffing his Letter with
rough and passionate expressions, which agree not well with the Character he
bears, and which I suppose he has learned of the barbarous People he has so
long conversed with. Why would he have us believe, the change of Bread into the
Body is the Transubstantiation of the Latins, seeing we find on the contrary
that this is the (...) of the Greeks, of which expression we have so often
already manifested the sense; The Moscovites follow the Greek Religion we
grant, the Greeks say the Bread is changed, the Moscovites affirm the same, the
Question is only whether to change is the same as to transubstantiate. Now I
have plainly displayed the difference betwixt these two Terms in reference to
the Greeks; we must then conclude the same in respect of the Moscovites. It
appears from M. Olearius his own Relation what we are to conclude touching his
exactness. For in the same place where he tells us the Moscovites believe
Transubstantiation, he adds, that the rest of the consecrated Bread serves for
Panis Benedictus. Now this would be a great impiety to make this the proper
Substance of the body of Christ, but even in this he is mistaken, for what
serves amongst these People for Panis Benedictus is only the Remains of the
Bread from whence is taken the great Particle which is afterward consecrated
and called the Body of Jesus Christ, and not the Remains of the consecrated
Bread.

BUT to oppose against the private Judgment of M. Olearius something yet more
precise, I need only here relate what the Author of the Relation of the three
Ambassages of M. Carlisle wrote on this Subject. It Is the Testimony of an
Honorable Person, who lived a considerable time in those parts, and since M.
Olearius, who wanted neither Judgment, Sincerity, nor Curiosity to inform
himself and us touching the belief of these people, in reference to
Transubstantiation, without the least regard to the Dispute between Mr. Arnaud
and my self, as having no other design then that of Relat. of the Ambas. of M.
Carlisle.
discovering the Truth. Moreover, says he, I could not find by 'em what
Olearius mentions, namely, that they hold Transubstantiation: and there are
three Reasons inducing me to believe thty are not of this Opinion. For first,
when we discourse with them, touching the Consequences of this Doctrine, they
testify their dislike of it: and to maintain it, fly not to the Almighty power
of God as the Roman Catholics do. 2. It Is more then probable that if they
believed Transubstantiation, they would respect this Mystery more than they do,
and it would be very strange that in so superstitious a Religion as theirs is,
they should be behind hand in Zeal and Devotion, especially in a particular
wherein it ought chiefly to appear, as we see it does amongst those of the
Church of Rome. In fine, had they that Opinion which Olearius attributes to
them, they must have it from the Greeks from whom they have received their
Doctrines. But we do not find the Greeks were of this Opiwion. Let Mr. Arnaud
then himself judge whether he may reasonably expect to prevail by means of Mr.
Olearius his Explication.

WE come now to the Testimony of Paysius Ligaridius, but having already
considered it in the foregoing Book, we shall trouble our selves no farther
with him. It Is not to be doubted but the same thing may be done in Muscovia as
in Greece, that is to say there may be persons brought in and settled there who
finished their Studies in some of the Seminaries erected for this purpose. It Is
certain whosoever shall address himself to these Persons (who are not only bred
up in the Church of Rome, and sworn to observe it is Confession of Faith, but
sent on purpose to communicate it to others, prevailing by means of their
Ignorance) whether soever they be, whether in Muscovia or Greece, their
Testimony shall not be wanting. But every body knows the Value of them. Let us
pass on then to the Moscovite Priest, that accompanied, not long since the
great Dukes Ambassador to his Majesty of France, who after Dinner, as it is
said, at the Archbishop of Sens, was desired to declare what the Moscovites
held concerning the Eucharist. There may be several considerable Reflections
made on this Relation; but not to enter into particulars, I say the Testimony
of this Person is not sufficiently Authentic to decide our Question. We have
already seen by Mr. Olearius his Relation that the Moscovit Priests are so
ignorant in general that there is scarcely any amongst them can give an account
of their faith, or knows the Religion professed in other Countries. These are
two Characters that do not well agree with the use which Mr. Arnaud would make
of this Priest. For to determine whether Transubstantiation be an Article of
the Moscovite Religion, it ought to be known on one hand what it is the Latins
call Transubstantiation, what they say and believe of it, and on the other,
what the Moscovite Religion asserts touching the Eucharist. It Is no hard matter
to make an ignorant Priest that speaks of a change of Bread into the Body of
Christ believe tha^ he acknowledges a Transubstantiation. But not to wander
from the point in hand, there is all the likelihood in the World that that
which passed at the Archbishop of Sens is a mere Illusion. To judge of it we
need only attentively consider the Expressions of the Relation which Lib 12. P.
75.
Mr. Arnaud has produced. After Dinner they withdrew into the Archbishops
Chamber, where we began to Discourse them touching the different Customs of
their Church, touching their Patriarchs Communion with the other Grcek
Patriarchs, concerning Fastings, Caelibacy, Prayer, their Liturgy, etc. But in
fine the Archbishop desirous to come to the main Point of which he was most
desirous to be informed, prayed the Interpreter to tell him word for word what
he was going to demand; having laid this strict charge on the Interpreter, he
desired them to tell him their Opinion concerning the Sacrament of the
Eucharist. The Moscovite Priest answers without the least haesitation (which a
little surprised us, for he had hither to stood as it were upon his Guard, as
if he had feared the engaging too far in some point of Controversy, lest he
might thereby endanger his Reputation) That it was the real Body and Blood of
Christ, and that after the Priest had uttered these words of our Savior, this
is my Body; the Bread is changed into the Body of Christ, and having said the
same in respect of the Cup, the Wine is changed into his Blood. When the
Interpreter had said this, the Archbishop bad him tell him exactly word for
word what the Priest had told him. The Interpreter told the Moscovite Priest
what the Prelate desired, whereupon he repeated the same words the second time
by the Interpreter. And for as much as he expressed that the Bread and Wine
were transubstantiated into the Body and Blood of Christ, he was asked whether
the Moscovite Priest used a word which in his Language had the force of that of
Transubstantiated in ours. He replied, yes, and repeated the Moscovite word
which signifies this, in looking on the Priest and Secretary, who both of them
made Signs that this word was proper in their tongue and signified a change of
Substance.

THE result of this Discourse is 1. That the Priest said 'twas the real Body
and Blood of Christ, and that the Bread was changed into the Body of Jesus
Christ, and the Wine into his Blood. 2. That he repeated only the same words
the second time. 3. That the Interpreter added, that the Bread and Wine are
transubstantiated. 4. That it was the Interpreter that professed the Moscovite
word had the force of that of Transubstantiation. 5. That for a farther
Confirmation, touching the force of the Word, he required the Priest's and
Secretary's consent by a bare look, without speaking to them. 6. That the
Priest and Secretary answered him by a sign without speaking. 7. That this sign
signified this word was proper in their Tongue and signified a change of
Substance.

IT is to be observed that this Interpreter was a Monk, not of the Moscovite
Religion, but the Roman; and of the order of Jacobins, and that he explained in
French what the Moscovites said in his Language, and in Moscovit what M. the
Archbishop of Sens said in French, for the Moscovites understood no more the
French, than the French the Moscovit. Upon this remark which is beyond
control, for it is a matter of Fact well known throughout all Paris, I desire
Mr. Arnaud to tell me why this Interpreter having returned the Answer of the
Moscovite Priest, which he twice repeated in the same Terms without any
Alteration, when he had I say given it in these words, the Bread is changed
into the Body of Jesus Christ, and the Wine into his Blood, wherefore did he
add that the Bread and Wine were transubstantiated? Wherefore when he was asked
whether the Priest used a Word which in his Tongue had the force of
Transubstantiation, did he demand by a bare look the consent of the Priest and
Secretary to the Yes, which he answered, seeing the Priest and Secretary who
understood not French, neither understood the Transubstantiated which he added,
nor the Question put to the Interpreter, nor the Yes, he answered? Do they in
Muscovia speak by sings or were they agreed before hand that this look should
signify transubstantiated? How could the Priest and Secretary answer to that
which they did not understand, why by signs, and why must this sign which
answered a very obscure Question, signify Transubstantiation? Certainly we are
but sorry people here in the West in comparison of these Moscovites, that can
treat of one of the most important Articles of Religion by signs and nodds,
without knowing the point in question; had Mr. Arnaud and I learnt this Secret
our Dispute would not be so tedious. Now if this be not delusory I know not any
thing that I can call by that name.

IT IS certain the Moscovites profess to follow the Greek Religion although they
have in some sort altered it. Which I told the Author of the Perpetuity, and
this I did not assert upon light grounds, although Mr. Arnaud is pleased to say
I did; seeing I said no more than what he himself acknowledges. This is a
common Principle to us both, it is true, we draw hence different consequences,
but as matters are now stated and cleared, any man may easily judge which of us
two has best grounded his Sentiment.

I said likewise that Lasicius affirms the Armenians although they deny
Transubstantiation, yet do reverence the Sacrament more religiously than the
Russians; whence I drew this Conclusion, that 'twas not likely the Answer to
the P. 3. C. 8.
latter of these who are more cold in their Devotion should extend their Belief
farther than the others, and that the others should have more respect for a
Substance of Bread than these should have for what they esteemed the proper
Substance of the Son of God. I know not what could oblige Mr. Lib. 5. C. 4. P.
448s
Arnaud to say, That it is scarcely to be imagined how many Disguisements and
Falsities there are in this Argument. I designed no more by all this than the
drawing of a just Consequence from a True Principle. It Is certain that Lasicius
says two things, the one that the Armenians of Leopolis deny the Bread and
Wine lose their Nature, In Sacramento Eucharistae elementa Naturas suas
amittere negant. These are his words, the other Joan. Lazic. Relig. Arm.
that they reverence the Sarcament more religiously than the Russians,
Sacramentum religiosius Russis venerantur, these are also his words. Whence I
conclude it is not likely the Russians or Moscovites believe Transubstantiation,
the reason is sufficiently evident, to wit, that those that believe the
Sacrament to be the proper Substance of the Son of God, cannot but show it more
Respect than those that believe it to be a Substanee of Bread.

IT is to no purpose for Mr. Arnaud to say, that my Argument supposes Lib. 5.
C. 4. P. 448.
according to this Author, the Armenians do neither hold the real Presence, nor
Transubstantiation, and that if I do not suppose this, nothing can be less
reasonable than my Discourse. For if the Armenians, adds he, together with the
Substance of Bread do moreover admit the real presence of Christ, it is no wise
improbable but that they have a greater respect for the Eucharist than those
that do not admit this Substance of Bread. The respect of the Eucharist comes
only from the Presence of Christ: and the presence or absence of the Bread
contributes not any thing thereunto.

I hope Mr. Arnaud will not be offended if I tell him that his Authority is not
yet great enough in the Church of Rome to counter-ballance that of Thomas
Aquinas. Now Thomas his Doctrine is directly opposite to his, Contrariatur,
says this Author, venerationi hujus Sacramenti si aliqua Substantia creata
esset ibi quae non posset Adoratione latriae adorari. 'Twould be Thom. Sum. 3.
Part. Quaest. 75. Art. 2.
contrary to the Veneration due to this Sacrament, were there any created
Substance in it to which may not be given the adoration of Latria. Now let any
man if he can make this agree with what Mr. Arnaud says: Mr. Arnaud's
Proposition says that the respect due to the Eucharist proceeds only from the
presence of Christ, and that the presence or absence of the Bread does not at
all contribute thereunto, and Thomas assures us on the contrary that if the
Substance of bread were present, it would hinder the Adoration of this
Sacrament, whence it follows according to him, that those that hold the
Substance of Bread ceases to be, ought more to reverence the Sacrament than
those that believe it remains. So that whether the Armenians do or do not
believe the real presence this signifies nothing to my Argument. It Is clear
according to Lasicius that they do not believe Transubstantiation, and
consequently it is clear according to Thomas Aquinas that they hold an opinion
which is contrary to the veneration of the Sacrament, yet do they adore the
Sacrament more religiously than the Moscovites. How then can the belief of
Transubstantiation be attributed to the Moscovites, for if they held this
Doctrine they must have a greater veneration for the Sacrament than the others.
This Argument cannot be otherwise denied than by opposing the Doctrine of
Thomas Aquinas. So that with drawing my self out of the Lists I shall offer in
my stead either Saint Thomas to be handled by Mr. Arnaud, or Mr. Arnaud by
Saint Thomas, that is to say, the Master by the Disciple or the Disciple by the
Master.

MOREOVER our Question touching the Moscovites relating only to
Transubstantiation, it is evident it would be a Digression from the Point in
hand to discuss the entire passage of Lasicius to know whether he imputes to
the Armenians the belief of the real Presence. It will appear by what we shall
say in the following Chapters what we may judge of them touching this
particular. The Question now concerns only the Moscovites; and what Lasicius
says concerning their worshipping less religiously the Sacrament than the
Armenians is uncontrollable, considering the testimonies we have produced in
the second Book, of Sacranus a Chanon of Cracovia, John de Lasco Arch Bishop of
Gnesne, and Scarga the Jesuit; who expressly depose that the Russians of whom
the Moscovites are a part, do indeed adore the Bread before its consecration,
but afterward show it no respect nor veneration, scattering the Crumbs thereof
on the ground. It is to no purpose for Mr. Arnaud to say that that which
hinders them from giving the Eucharist after consecration an external honor
is, that the Consecration is performed in a place separate from the people, and
that it is out of respect to the Sacrament that the People are deprived for some
time of the sight of this Mystery It Is evident these are mere Subter fuges. Did
they worship the Sacrament with an internal adoration, they would declare as
much themselves, and ease Mr. Arnaud of the trouble of searching their Secret
thoughts. They would show it by some expression of external Reverence, and for
this effect expose the Sacrament to the Eyes of the People, the People would at
least make profession of adoring it before they received it, and the Priests
would adore it in the Sanctuary when they had consecrated it. Yet do these
Authors absolutely say that they give it no adoration. This, says Mr. Arnaud,
Lib. 5. C. 1. Page 432.
is not so, for Oderbornus tells us that the Priest comes from the Sanctuary
and walking leasurely shows the People that which he has consecrated in secret:
that then the People fall down on their Knees the Priest saying to 'em in the
Moscovit Language, Behold the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ whom the
Jews unjustly put to death. But we have showed in the third Book when we
treated of the Adoration of the Sacrament that Oderborn is apparently mistaken,
having taken a Ceremony which is used before the consecration of the Bread, as
if it were used after this Consecration. The Moscovites even as the Greeks do
but once show the People the Bread and Wine, taking one turn round the Church
before the Consecration, which they call the great Entrance. If Mr. Arnaud
knows not this he is ignorant of a Matter well known by others, and if he does
know it, he shows little sincerity, in designing to prevail over us by means of
Oderborn's mistake.

CHAP. II.
Of the ARMENIANS.

That the Armenians do not believe Transubstantiation: First Proof taken from
that the Armenians believe the Humane Nature of our Savior Christ was
swallowed up by the Divinity.

WE shall not here particularly treat of the Melchites or Syrians, Lib. 5. C.
5.
as well for that Mr. Arnaud acknowledges, they differ not at all from the
Greeks in their Religion; as that likewise what he alleges concerning them out
of the Notes of Abraham Echellensis Maronite on the Catalogue of Caldean Books
made by Abed-Jesu a Nestorian Bishop, deserves not our consideration. The
Testimony of Abraham Echellensis is of no credit, and I refer my self thereupon
to Gahriel Sionita his Country man who has set him forth as an ignorant and
impertinent Fellow, a Liar and Impostor. These two persons had both of them
their Education at Rome in the Seminary of the Maronites, both endeavoring to
advance the Roman Interest, but falling out about the Edition of the Bible in
Syriack, Gabriel thought himself obliged to tell Abraham his own and publish
his defects, he therefore puts forth a small Book which he calls, Commonitorium
Apologeticum, wherein he represents him in the aforementioned manner. He
reproaches him with his dividing the whole Seminary at Rome, for his treachery
to the Patriarch of the Maronites; imposing on Prince Fachraddin, for cheating
the Duke of Florence, and with his being banished his own Country, his
Imprisonment at Florence for his Crimes, and in fine threatens him for the
completing of his shame to Print those Letters he received from Mount Liban,
Rome, and Florence which give an Account of his Life. But besides there is not
any thing in these passages but may well agree with the Hypothesis of the
Greeks, such as we have showed it to be in the two foregoing Books as will
appear to him that shall take the pains to read them in Mr. Arnaud's Book, and
apply to them the Answers I made to several other such like passages, which are
needless here to be repeated.

WE must come then to the Armenians, I shall insist the longer upon them as
well for that Mr. Arnaud has discoursed much about them, as for that they are a
great people, and an entire Church by themselves. They are long since separated
from the Greek Church, and there is a deadly fewd betwixt them in reference to
Religion. Yet are they both extreme ignorant of the design of Christianity, and
the ignorance of the Armenians surpasses that of the Greeks as appears from the
Testimony cited in my second Book. I will add that of the Bishop of Heliopolis
in his relation printed at Paris 1668. I gave, says he, a Visit to the
Patriarch of the Relat. of Missionarys and Voyage of French Bishops by M.
Francis Pallu. Bish. of Heliopolis.
Armenians near the City of Hervian in a famous Monastery of Eutychian
Heretics who are no less obstinate than ignorant. I found there amongst others
a certain Person who having been in Poland had some smatterings of Latin, I
would have discoursed with him touching the Principal Heresy of Eutichus, but
he cunningly avoided it. I left this Monastery little satisfied with these
Religious, who show little Piety, although they profess much, and live
austerely. So Cyrillus Patriarch of Constantinople, describing in one of his
Letters to Wytenbogard the four Sects of Eastern Christians, with which Epist.
Viror. Eruditor. Epist. 2. Cyrill. ad Wytenbog.
the Greeks held no communion, to wit, the Armenians, Coptics, Maronites, and
Jacobites, says amongst other things, that they live like Beasts, and are so
prodigiously Ignorant that they scarce know what they believe themselves.

THE Latins have long since used their utmost power to bring over these
Armenians to 'um, and submit them to the Sea of Rome. They have for this
purpose sent Missions which they have renewed, or augmented as Occasion
required. They have taken the course of Seminaries, and from time to time
accordingly managed the Interests of Princes and Kings of Armenia, and that not
seldom with Success. So that as there are at present two sorts of Greeks, the
one called the reunited ones, and the other Schismatics; so there are likewise
two sorts of Armenians the one that acknowledges the Authority of the Pope
called Frank-Armenians, for in the East they call all the Latins of whatsoever
Nation they be Franks; the others those that acknowledge only their own
Patriarchs, or Catholics as they term them, and are called only Armenians.

OUR Question only then concerns these last, and to know whether they do, or do
not believe Transubstantiation. The first Argument I offer for the maintaining
the Negative which I affirm, is, that Transubstantiation is inconsistent with
the Heresy of Euthyches of which the Armenians make profession. They hold
there is but one single Nature in Jesus Christ, which is the Divine, that the
humane Nature was mixed or confused in the Essence of the Divinity. How then is
it possible that having this Opinion they can at the same time believe the
Substance of Bread to be changed into the Substance of the Body of Jesus
Christ? For if our Savior Christ has no longer a Body, if the humane Nature
does no longer subsist according to them, this would be to charge them with the
greatest Absurdity, that is to say, a manifest contradiction, to imagine they
believe the change in Question; seeing to believe it, it must be necessarily
supposed, not only that our Savior Christ has a Body, but likewise that his
Body is distinct from the Divinity.

MR. Arnaud who saw the Force of this Argument would prevent it Lib. 5. C. 6.
P. 454.
by two Answers, which we must distinctly examine one after another. The first
amounts to this, That supposing the Armenians were real Eutychiens, yet does it
not thence follow that their Opinion is inconsistent with Transubstantiation,
or that they do not admit it after their Fashion. For although they say there
was but one Nature in our Savior Christ after the Union, and that the Human
Nature was swallowed up by the Divine, yet do they assert that the Virgin Mary
brought forth a Son that appeared to have a Body like other men; that the
Apostles conversed with our Savior as a man, that the Jews took him for a man,
that they crucified him as a man. Whence he concludes that this swallowing up
of the Humane Nature consisted rather according to the Eutychiens, in the
change of all the Natural proprieties which they called Nature, than in the
annihilation of Nature it self taken for the Substance and internal being. That
this manifestly appears by all their Writings who have undertaken to refute the
Eutychiens, and by the Eutychiens themselves. For the Gajanites who are
Eutychiens at farthest distance from the Catholic, yet acknowledge they
receive in the holy Communion the very Body and Blood of Jesus Christ the Son
of God, and who was incarnate, and born of the Virgin Mary the Mother of God.

APPLYING this afterward to the Question of the Eucharist, he says, that they
believe with all other Christians, that this same Jesus Christ born of the
Virgin, seen in the World, crucified, and risen, is really present in the
Eucharist, that the Bread is really changed into this Jesus Christ. But denying
as they do, that the Body of Jesus Christ was a distinct Nature from the
Divinity, so they will not allow the Bread which is transubstantiated into
Jesus Christ to be any other Nature than the Divinity, that is to say, a
deified Body, a Body mixed and confused with the Divinity by the loss of it is
natural Proprieties rather than of its Substance. Mr. Arnaud does likewise
promise us that in the Examination of what Theodoret has written he will more
distinctly explain wherein consists this swallowing up of the Humane Nature
according to the Eutychiens.

I know not what elucidations he may one day give us, but if they be no better
then what he now tells us, they will be of no great use, for it is certain there
was never a more crude discourse than that which he now gives us: First, What
signifies the telling us that the Eutychiens acknowledged the Virgin Mary
brought forth a Son that appeared to have a Body like other men, that the
Apostles conversed with him, as with a man, and that the Jews took him for a
man? what signifies this to the proving that they did not deny the inward
substance of the Humanity remained in Jesus Christ, but said only that all the
natural Proprieties which they call Nature was changed? There would be more
likelihood in concluding from hence the contrary, viz. that according to the
Eutychiens the inward Substance was changed, and the natural Proprieties
remained; for if we really distinguish these Proprieties, from the Substance,
it is immediately on them and not on the inward Substance, whereon depends ones
being a man, and being taken for such. So that Mr. Arnaud in saying the
Apostles conversed with our Savior as a man, and that the Jews took him for a
man, establishes a principle which not only concludes nothing of what he
pretends but rather the contrary, which does show in my opinion that he was in
great perplexity when he wrote this Chapter. 2. Does he not know that the
Eutychiens, and especially the Armenians when they are urged by passages of
Scripture which attribute to our Savior Christ all the out-ward Characters of
a real Man, that he was born, conversed with his Apostles, eat and drank, was
dead and risen again, that his Soul was oppressed with sadness, etc. whence we
conclude he had a real humane Nature, answered, that all these things happened
only in appearance, and that it was the Divinity it self that assumed all these
External Forms, which yet had in themselves no reality. Pope John the second
speaking of the Doctrine of the Eutychiens, We Epist. John. 2. Episcop. Romans ad
Arien. etc. Bibl. Patr. Tom. 4. edit 4.
confess, says he, that the Holy Vigin is properly and truly the Mother of God
incarnate and born of her. I say properly and truly to the end it may not be
imagined that he took of the Virgin a Phantasme or not real Flesh according to
the Doctrine of the impious Eutychiens. The followers of Eutyches and Harmenop.
de Sect. Ar^ 5. Nicephor. Callist hist. Eccles. L^b. 18 C. 48. Raynald. ad an.
1341.
Dioscorus, says Harmenopulus, affirmed the Son of God was made man in
appearance, having only one Nature, Nicephorus Callistus confirms the same
thing. The wretched Eutyches, says he, did indeed acknowledge God to be born
of the Virgin Mary, and that the Virgin was the Mother of God, and so far his
Doctrine is sound and true. But he likewise held that the Flesh of Jesus Christ
was feigned, that the Word was changed and made Flesh after an immutable
manner, that he feigned in appearance the whole Economy of our Salvation, and
that whatsoever of corporeal appeared in him was only a Phantasme and Fiction.
The same thing appears in respect of the Armenians from the Information which
Pope Benedict the twelfth gives us of their Errors. For the twenty eighth
Article has these words. The Armenians knowing not what answer to give the
passages of the Gospel which assert our Savior had a real humane Body after
his Resurrection, forasmuch as they affirm that at the moment of the Union the
Humane Nature was converted into the Divinity, answer that the will of God as
it pleased wrought all these things, by which it seemed he had a Humane Body,
although in effect he had none. And in the following Article. Although the Armenians
hold that after the Union there was only in our Savior Christ the Divine
Nature into which the Humane Nature was converted, yet they say, and hold that
the Divine Nature so depended on the will of Christ, that he did with it what
he pleased. Cyrillus in his Letter to Witembogard relates he held a conference
with one of the chief of the Armenian Doctors named Barsabas, in the Temple of
Jerusalem, before all the people, and that the Subject of their Dispute was,
Whether our Savior Cyril. Epist. 2. ad Witem. in Epist. viror, eruditor.
Christ conversed with men, and died in appearance only (...), because adds he,
The Armenians believe he suffered death (...), in appearance and not really.
The Jacobites who are Eutychiens as well as the Armenians say likewise the same
thing on this Subject according to the Relation of John Cotovic. They affirm,
says he, that the Flesh which Itinerar. Hier. and Syria Auct. Joanne
Cottovico. Lib. 2. C. 6. P. 202.
Christ took was not of the same Nature as ours, and that the Word was not
changed into true Flesh but into I know not what seeming and fantastic Flesh,
and that he rather seemed to be a man, and born and dye than really to do so.
So that they teach that all the Mysteries of our Salvation, the Incarnation,
Passion, Resurrection of Jesus Christ, his Ascension into Heaven, and his
second coming are bare Semblances and Appearances, and by this means make all
these Mysteries mere Illusions. This is the true Opinion of the Eutychiens. So
far are they from giving Mr. Arnaud Reason to conclude that they conserve in
Jesus Christ the inward Substance of the Humanity, that on the contrary it
appears they have only recourse to these vain appearances to defend themselves
against the passages of Scripture by which is proved against them the Reality
of the Humane Substance in this Divine Savior.

III. WERE their Sentiment such as Mr. Arnaud supposes it to be, how comes it
to pass they have never declared as much? Whence is it they have ever said the
humane Nature was swallowed up by the Divine, that it was changed into the
Divinity, mixed and confused with the Divinity, without ever minding to clear up
this difficulty in saying that by Nature they understood not the inward
Substance, but only all the inward Proprieties, and that they confessed this
Substance remained entire? How comes it that those who disputed against them,
or that have related their Errors never made this pretended Distinction of Mr.
Arnaud, nor declared this new Sense in which the word Nature is to be taken, to
wit, for all the natural Proprieties, distinct and really separate from the
inward Substance? Whence is it that Mr. Arnaud having so sharply inveighed
heretofore against the Equivocations of the Greeks and Latins, now thinks fit
to admit a perpetual one between the Orthodox and Eutychiens, the one taking
the Term of Nature in one Sense, and the other in another, and disputing so
many Ages against one another without explaining themselves and understanding
one another? For it does not appear from Authors that wrote against the
Eutychiens, that they took in this occasion the term of Nature for the Natural
propriety in opposition to the inward Substance, as it pleases Mr. Arnaud to
suppose without proof. It appears on the contrary that they have taken it for
the Substance it self with it is Proprieties. Gelas. Episc. Romans advers. Eutych.
and Nest. ibid.
If the humane Substance, says Gelasius, has ceased to be, the Humanity having
been transfused or entirely changed into the Divinity as they imagine, it
follows that the humane form having no longer it is proper Subject has ceased to
be likewise. And in another place of the same Treatise. If they do not deny,
says he, that Jesus Christ was real man, it follows he remained naturally in
the Propriety of his Substance, for otherwise he would not be real man. Vigil.
Lib. 5. contra Eutych.
When you say, says Vigilius, that the Word and Flesh are but one only
Substance it seems that you insinuate there are two Persons in our Savior
Christ. And a little farther, If the Word and the Flesh are one and the same
Substance according to your Opinion, there would be two Persons, one of the
Word, and the other of the Flesh, who would have one and the same common
Nature. Theodoret disputes in the same manner against them by supposing they
affirmed that the Humane Substance was swallowed up by the Divinity, and he
concludes his Argument taken Theodoret Dial. 2.
from the Eucharist in these words, The Body then of Jesus Christ keeps it is
first Form, Figure, Circumscription, and, in a word, it has the Substance of a
Body. Euthym. Parop. Tit. 20.
Euthymius hereupon relates a passage of St. M^ximus which expressly asserts,
that Eutyches confessed the Unity of the two Natures, but denied they differed
Du Perron of the Euch. Lib. 2. C. 12.
in Essence, introducing a confusion of Natures. Even Cardinal Perron himself
although a great Zealot for Transubstantiation, acknowledged this truth, that the
Eutychiens held, the humane Substance ceased to be in our Lord Jesus Christ.
For he says that the Orthodox Christians maintained against the Heretics that
this Substance remained, because the Form, Figure and Circumscription of Body
which could not be in our Savior Christ without the natural Substance was to
be found in him. Whosoever believes Mr. Arnaud must acknowledge the World has
been grossly mistaken in imagining that the Eutychiens abolished the Humane
Substance in our Savior Christ when they said the created Nature was
swallowed up in the Abyss of the Divinity, whereas according to him by the term
of Nature they meant only the Natural Proprieties. And it must be moreover
acknowledged that the Eutychiens have been to this day very blind in not
discovering this mistake in the Orthodox Christians, and very uncharitable in
not endeavoring to undeceive them by a means which would cost them so little.
But to speak better, It must be acknowledged that Mr. Arnaud is no such great
enemy to Equivocations, for when he has need of them, he can well dispense with
them, how terrible and dreadful soever he has made them in other occasions,
wherein he believed it was his interest to establish there could not be any
such between the Latins and Greeks.

IV. AS to what he tells us concerning the Gayanites from the Relation Lib. 5.
C. 6. P. 455.
of Anastasius Sinaite, that they did howsoever acknowledge we receive in the
Communion, the very Body and Blood of Jesus Christ the Son of God incarnate and
born of the H. Virgin Mary the Mother of God, there is far greater reason to
say that by this Body they meant a Mystery which represented the Body swallowed
up by the Divinity, than to say they meant his very Substance. For if what Mr.
Arnaud says of them be true that they were Eutychiens farthest off from the
Catholics in their Opinions we now saw that the Eutychiens believed not that
this Substance subsisted distinct from the Divinity. Why then shall we not
expound what Anastasius Sinaite makes the Gayanites say, by what good and
considerable Authors relate of the Eutychiens, rather than to give the lie to
these Authors, and correct what they say by the Discourse of such an
impertinent Person as Anastasius, whom Mr. Arnaud himself has been forced to
despise in citing him, as appears by what we have seen in the preceding Book?

THUS have I refuted Mr. Arnaud's first Answer. Let us see whether there be any
more Strength in his second. It consists in maintaining Lib. 5. C. 6. P. 456.
that the greatest part of the Armenians were but half Eutychiens; that is to
say, they did not in any wise admit the confusion of Natures, that they
condemned Eutyches, and that their Error consisted only in their refusing to
use the Expression of the two Natures, asserting our Savior had but one.

THIS is a Question of fact which must be decided by the Testimony of Authors.
We shall see hereafter who are those that Mr. Arnaud alleges in his favor. We
must only here observe that he unjustly exclaims against Euthymius Zigabenius a
Greek Monk, and one Isaac a Catholic of Armenia who have attributed plainly
and harmlesly the Error of Eutyches to the Armenians; So that at present we
shall lay aside the Authority of these two Persons, seeing he is pleased to
except against them, and betake our selves to other Witnesses for the ending of
this difference. Here are others then which are not to be contemned, whether we
regard their number or quality. The first is a Greek Author named St. Nicon who
lived in the seventh Century. There is in the Bibliotheca Patrum a Letter or a
St. Nicon Epist. ad Euchistium. Bibl. Patr. Tom. 3. edit. 4.
Treatise of his under the Title, De pessimorum Armeniorum pessima Religione.
He exactly enough describes in it the Errors of this Nation, and amongst others
mentions this, that they hold the confusion of the two Natures of Jesus Christ,
in the Union. Itidem, says he, and in duarum Christi Naturarum Unione
confusionem decernunt. He says likewise they hold the Divine Nature is
passible, that being fallen into the Error of the Aphtartodocites they believe
the Trinity has suffered; and although they durst not openly explain themselves,
yet they do plainly intimate it by the things they do, for they take three
Crosses, and fastening them to a Stake call this the Holy Trinity. Now here is
(according to Mr. Arnaud) a third Impostor, that falsely accuses the Armenians
to believe the confusion of Natures. He must be excluded as well as Eutychus
and Isaac; but if Mr. Arnaud continues in this captious humor he will never
want exceptions against Authors.

TO Nicon we must add Nicephorus Callistus a famous Historian amongst the
Greeks; who speaking of these same Armenians refers the original of their
Heresy to one Jacob the Author of the Sect of the Jacobites; and adds,
sometimes they say the word assumed an incorruptible Body, uncreated, heavenly,
impassible, subtle, which is not of the same Substance with ours, yet has all
the Accidents of Flesh, in appearance and after Nicephor. Call. hist. Eccles.
Lib. 18. C. 53.
the manner of a spectrum. Sometimes likewise they affirm the Flesh of the Word
was converted into the Nature of the Divinity, and became consubstantial with
it. They do for the most part deny the Word assumed a humane Body of the
Virgin, and say that having been changed without a Change, and made Flesh he
has only passed through the Virgin, and fastened his Divinity to the Cross; and
although it be neither finite nor circumscribed yet he has deposited it in the
Sepulcher. They deny the Birth of Christ according to the Flesh, affirming it
happened in appearance only. In the Celebration of the Eucharist they use the
Azyme and not Bread. They put no Water in the Chalice, designing to represent
thereby that there is but one Nature in Jesus Christ; whereas we by the mixture
of Water with Wine, represent the Union of the two Natures. It cannot be more
clearly affirmed that the Armenians are real Eutychiens, seeing he not only
attributes to them the believing that the humane Nature was converted into the
Nature of the Divinity, but made consubstantial with it: But he is too a
terrible Calumniator, if we believe Mr. Arnaud. Howsoever let us proceed.

GUY Carmus who lived about the year 1340. and has exactly reckoned up the
Errors of the Armenians in his Book of Heresies; expressly tell us Guido Carmel
summam de haeres. de haer. Arm. C. 22.
they follow the Opinions of Dioscorus, denying with him the two Natures of
Jesus Christ, to wit the Divine and Humane, in the Unity of Person. That they
admit only one Nature in Jesus Christ, that is the Divine; one Will, and one
Operation. And in the twelfth Error he remarks They held that after the Union,
the Humane Nature was converted into the Divine; so that as there is but one
Person in Jesus Christ, so there is but one Nature in him, to wit the Divine,
and that they cruelly persecute those that hold there are two Natures in Jesus
Christ, the Divine and Humane.

IN the year 1341, the then Pope caused this Information to be drawn up,
touching the Errors of the Armenians which we have already mentioned, and shall
have farther occasion to discourse of hereafter. The second Article has these
words, That there was held heretofore a Council in Armenia, wherein assisted
the Catholic, that is to say, the Patriarch of the Armenians, with their
Bishops, Doctors, and the Patriarch of the Suriens. Raynald. ad an. 1341.
That in this Council was rejected the Council of Chalcedon, especially because
it had determined we must believe there are two Natures in Jesus Christ; to wit
the Humane and the Divine, and one only Person subsisting in two Natures. That
the Council of the Armenians had on their side determined, that as in our
Savior Christ there is but one only Person, so likewise is there in him but
one Nature, to wit the Divine, one only Will, and one Operation; that they
anathematised those that affirmed the contrary, and persecuted them not only by
imprisonments, and loading them with Chains, but even to the putting them to
death. That in this Council they had condemned Pope Leo and his Letters to the
Fathers of Chalcedon, and Flavian the Patriarch of Constantinople, because he
asserted therein two Natures and one Person, two Wills and two Operations in
our Savior Christ. That in fine they Canonized Dioscorus whom the Council of
Chalcedon had condemned, and the Armenians celebrated his Festival three times
in a year as a Saint; and cursed Leo and the Council of Chalcedon which had
condemned Dioscorus. The twentieth Article bears, That the Armenians believe
and hold, that the Eternal Son of God begotten of the Substance of the Father,
has united to himself the Humane Nature, and was made man, yet in such a manner
that, in the Union, the Humane Nature was converted into the Divine Nature; and
as there was after the Union but one Person in Jesus Christ, so is there but
one Nature in it, to wit the Divine and not the Humane, That they curse all
those who say the contrary; so greatly detesting those that hold the two
Natures in Jesus Christ after the Union, to wit, the Divine and humane, that if
any Baptized Armenian amongst them said this, they would not communicate with
him; but esteem him as a Heathen; and upon his Return to the faith of the
Armenians, rebaptise him neither more nor less then if he came from Paganism;
and after this second Baptism lay twenty years Penance on him. And in the
twenty first Article. The Armenians believe and hold that because after the
Union of Natures in Jesus Christ, the Humane Nature was converted into the
Divine, in such a manner that from that very moment there was only the Divine
Nature in him,) the Divinity has been passible and impassible, mortal and
immortal, according as our Savior himself pleased, and that thus he has
suffered and is dead in the Divine Nature because he would, having no humane
Nature when he suffered and dyed. Does Mr. Arnaud imagine we shall rest
contented when he shall tell us, that all these things are mere impostures?

EUGENUS IV. instructing the Armenians in Council of Florence Ad Calcem Council.
Florent.
sufficiently shows he takes them for real and perfect Eutychiens; for he
chiefly apply's himself to show them the decisions of the Council of Chalcedon,
and teach them that our Savior Christ is consubstantial with us, and having
took on him a real humane Nature, this Nature has subsisted, and does still
subsist, in the hypostatical Union, without confusion or conversion. We need
but read this Discourse to find that it is drift is to oppose against the Errors
of the Armenians, the contrary Doctrines which must be held to be conformable
with the Church of Rome; and that one of the principal points he designed to
insist on, was that of the two Natures in Jesus Christ, against the Heresy of
Eutyches. And this is the opinion of Spondan. annal. Eccles Tom. 2. ad Ann.
1434.
Mr. Sponde Bishop of Pamiez. He does not give them, says he, in his
Decretals, all the Articles of the Christian Faith, but contents himself (as I
take it) with those wherein they erred, or of which they doubted. And first he
gave them the Symbol of the Council of Constantinople, with the Addition of the
Filioque, to have it sung in Churches, then the Definition of the Council of
Chalcedon, touching the two Natures of Jesus Christ in Unity of Person.
Thirdly, the Definition of the sixth Council touching the two Wills, and two
Operations in our Savior Christ. Fourthly, because the Armenians had
acknowledged hitherto only the three first Councils that of Nice,
Constantinople, and Ephesus, rejecting those that were held afterward, he
shows them that the Council of Chalcedon which they believed favored the
Nestorian Heresy, did as well condemn Nestorius, as Eutyches, and that they
must receive it.

PRATEOLUS who made a Catalogue of all the Sects, says, Prateol. Elench.
Haeret. de Armen.
that it is easy to conjecture by reading of History why the Armenians have
separated themselves from the Church. That it is because of the Council of
Chalcedon, for this Council condemned Eutyches and Dioscorus whose Opinions
they followed.

JOHN Cottovic a Famous Traveller that relates what he learnt from
Cottovic-Itiner Hieros. et Syri. Lib. 2. de Armen.
the Armenians themselves, tells us, That the Armenians as well as the
Jacobites, acknowledge but one Nature in Jesus Christ, one Will and one
Operation, and say the Humanity was swallowed up in the Abyss of the Divinity,
in such a manner that the Divinity and Flesh became but one and the same thing.

IT is in the same Sense that Pietro Della Valle comparing the Armenians The
Voyages of Pietro Della Valle. Tom. 3. P. 107.
with the Georgians, says, That it is not to be doubted but the Georgians are
better Christians then the Armenians, who hold the Errors of Dioscorus whose
Opinions are far more Pernicious, gross and numerous, than those of all the
other Christian Nations in the East.

IT seems to me likewise that Person must be extreme obstinate that will Epist.
2. ad Wy. temb.
not acquiesce in the Testimony of Cyrillus the Patriarch of Alexandria,
(already mentioned) who lived in the midst of those people, who assures one of
their Doctrines is, that all these humane Accidents, which the Gospel denotes
in our Savior Christ, as for Instance, to be born, to have conversed with men,
to be dead, etc. did not happen to him really but only in appearance (...). How
great aversion soever Mr. Arnaud may have to Cyrillus his Person, I do not
believe he imagins, that this Patriarch had our Dispute in his mind, nor wrote
upon my Account his Conference with the Armenian Doctor Barsabas; we may
therefore gather from his Testimony, that the Armenians are perfect Eutychiens;
for if they believed there was in our Savior a real humane Nature, which is to
say, that he was real man, and the whole Difficulty consisted only in the Term
of Nature, which they would not receive, why should they affirm that his
Conversation here on Earth, his Death and Resurrection were only in appearance?
It Is evident they admit these false and deceitful Appearances, only because
they deny the reality of the Substance, or Humane Nature.

HOW willing soever Thomas a Jesu has been to mollify the extravagant Thom. a
Jesu. de procuranda salute omn. Gent. Lib. 7. part. 1. C. 17. Letters from
foreign Countries to the Procur. of the Missions.
Opinions of the Eastern Sects, yet he tells us of the Armenians, That they
believe but one Nature, one Will and one Operation of our Lord Jesus Christ.
And Barbereau the Jesuit, an Emissary of Constantinople writing to one of the
Society testifies the same thing. What shall I say, says he, of the Armenians
that are here (at Constantinople) to the Number of above sixty thousand in a
more deplorable condition than the Greeks? For besides that they are as
ignorant as them, they have a particular Heresy which distinguishes them from
others; for they hold there is but one Nature in our Savior Christ, and keep
so firm to this Opinion, that it is a crime amongst them, so much as to mention
the contrary. He does not say it is a bare Equivocation in the Word Nature, as
Mr. Arand would persuade us, but a Heresy, a false Opinion, and an Opinion of
which they are so greatly conceited, that they hold the contradicting of it a
Crime. But how can this be if they condemn Eutyches and Dioscorus, and affirm
not the Humane Nature was confounded and swallowed up in the Divine: if they
grant the Humane Nature as well as the Catholics, and their Error consists
only in refusing to use the expression of the two Natures, as Mr. Arnaud
assures us.

BUT after all these Testimonys I think I may re-stablish the Authority of
Euthymius Zigabenus the Greek Monk, and that of Isaac an Armenian Catholic,
who have both of 'em Written against the Schismatical Armenians, and say the
same thing as the rest. Mr Arnaud says, they prevaricate and impose on their
Readers, but what I now come from relating sufficiently justifies them from
this Accusation. After the Council of Chalcedon, says Euthymius, the Armenians
at the Instigation of one Hilarious Mandacanus, and other Profane Priests that
were with him, separated themselves Euthym. pan. tit. 20.
from the Catholic Church: and having embraced the impious Opinion of
Eutyches, Dioscorus and other Monophysical Heretics that hold only one Nature
in our Savior Christ, they added thereunto several other impious Doctrines, to
make their Heresy as it were more Complete and Famous. For they say our
Savior Christ took on him a Body which was not of the same substance as ours,
that his is Incorruptible, Impassible, Subtle, Uncreated, and Heavenly, which
seemed to exercise the Humane functions, as to See, Eat, and Drink, and yet did
none of all these things. They say moreover that the Flesh of Christ was
changed into the Divinity, and made of the same Essence with the Divinity it
self. That as a Drop of Honey or Vinegar cast into the Sea is not seen, does no
longer subsist; so the Body of Christ being ingulphed and swallowed up in the
Ocean of the Divinity, keeps no longer its own Nature and propriety; and thus
there are not two Natures in Christ, but one alone, which is wholly Divine. And
there fore they deny the Sacrifice of Bread, which is the flesh of Christ, to
be the Body of Christ, but call it the Body of the Divinity. That when they are
convinced and constrained by strength of Argument, to acknowledge our Savior
Christ to be both God and Man, they do it by dissimulation, for how can they
seriously acknowledge him to be Man, seeing as I already mentioned they affirm
his substance to be different from ours. They change, says Isaac, the
traditions of the Catholic Church, and the mysteries of Christ according to
their blasphemous fancy; they do not call the Communion, or the Sacrifice of
Bread which is the flesh of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Body of Christ as he
himself has called it, but the Divinity.

MR. Arnaud may say as long as he pleases that these two Authors misrepresent
the Armenians in charging them with believing the Humane Nature to Lib. 5. C.
6. P. 3. 455.
have been ingulphed by the Divine, and to be pure Eutychiens. What reason has
he to think the World will be satisfied with this answer, as if it were
sufficient for the rejecting of Authors to bring against them bold accusations,
without any ground or proof; and humorously maintain that what they affirm is
false?

BREEREWOOD, says he, and other modern Authors say as much. Ibid. P. 456.
Breerewoods. inquirys. C. 24.
As to Breerewood it is true he says, that it seems by their confession touching
the Trinity, sent by the Mandate of the Catholic of Armenia to the Patriarck
of Armenia about fifty years since, that they have wholly renounced this Fancy.
But this confession on which Breerewood grounds his supposal is at most only
the private sentiment of this Catholic of Armenia, and not that of this
Church. If Breerewood adds any thing of his own Head, without any Proof, his
bare word is not to be preferred before the Testimony of other Authors, whom we
have already alleged: that which we have seen of Cyril, and his dispute
against Barsabas in the presence of all the People, and in the very Temple of
Jerusalem is later than the confession he mentions. And so is that also which
Cottovic relates. The Letter of Barbereau the Jesuit bears Date 1667. The
Relation of the Bishop of Heliopolis which says (as we have already seen,) That
the Patriarch of the Armenians to whom he gave a visit resided near the City of
Herivan, in a famous Monastery of Eutychien Heretics who are no less obstinate
than ignorant, and being desirous to confer with one of these Monks on the
principal Point of the Heresy of Eutyches, he cunningly shunned the occasion.
This Relation I say is Dated 1668. All these Testimonys show us, that the
Armenians do still keep their Ancient error, and have in no wise changed their
belief.

BUT supposing they were changed within these fifty or sixty years as
Breerewood imagins, yet would what Euthymius, Isaac, and other Authors say be
no less true, on the contrary the change which Breerewood attributes to them
would only more Authorize their Testimony. For if it be true as Breerewood
says, that they have now renounced that Fancy, they had it then heretofore, for
People are not wont to renounce those Opinions which they never held: so that
the Argument drawn from their Doctrine touching the unity of the Nature of
Jesus Christ to show they do not believe Transubstantiation does still continue
in full force as to the time past; and all that Mr. Arnaud can conclude hence,
is, that it is possible for the Body of a Church to change an Opinion and pass
over to another which is quite Opposite, without any noise or disturbance;
whence it follows that the pretensions of the Author of the Perpetuity touching
the impossibility of a change are vain and groundless. As to those other late
Authors Mr. Arnaud speaks of, when he pleases to give us a particular Account
of them we will examine 'em, but there is no body but sees, after what I have
related, that he ought not to speak so generally as he has done, That other
Modern Authors are agreed therein, seeing, John Cottovic, Pietro Della Valle,
Cyrillus, Thomas a Jesu, Barbereau, the Bishop of Heliopolis, are late Authors,
and yet assert the contrary of what Mr. Arnaud affirms.

NEITHER can Mr. Arnaud meliorate his cause by the Letter which was written by
a Patriarch of Armenia, and sent to the Emperor Emanuel; nor by the conference
which Theorien this Emperor's Deputy had with this Patriarch; although it were
true that this Letter has these Expressions, we hold there is but one Nature in
Jesus Christ, not in confounding it, as Theorien. Dial. advers. Arm. Bibl.
Patr. Graeco. lat. tom. 1.
Eutyches does; nor in denying Christ's humane Nature like Apollinairus, but
according to Cyrillus Patriarch of Alexandria in the Books he wrote against
Nestorius, in saying there was but one Nature of the Word which is Incarnate.
But we must not immediately Imagine that this was the sentiment of the Armenian
Church. It was the Patriarchs in particular, as appears by the Dialogue of
Theorien. For after Theorien had for a long time disputed that, our Savior had
two Natures, two Wills, and two Operations; the Patriarch himself confessed
this had been ever his Opinion since he read the sacred Writings. Whereupon
Theorien having demanded of him why he inserted in his Letter to the Emperor,
that there was but one only Nature in Jesus Christ; The Patriarch answered,
that he had at that time in his thoughts the instance which is commonly made
use of touching man who is made up of Body and Soul, and yet is said to have
but one Nature, although the two Natures of which he consists remain without
confusion, and change; and that he believed St. Cyril meant the same. In fine
he told him he would show him a secret which had not yet been Divulged amongst
his People? That there was a Patriarch of Armenia named John, who was a bitter
Enemy to the Monophysits; which is to say, to those that believe only one
Nature in Jesus Christ; and that he had the writings of this John, together
with the approbation of another of his Predecessors named Gregory; who added
thereunto these words, I believe likewise what the holy Patriarch has here
written, and Anathematise those that do not believe it. It is evident by all
these circumstances that the belief of the two Natures in Jesus Christ thus
united to make thereof but one, was not the public sentiment of the Armenian
Church, but the private Opinion of the Patriarch, who disputed with Theorien,
and that he had taken this Opinion from the secret writings of this John and
Gregory.

BUT it will be perhaps here demanded, how this person could in conscience
continue a Patriarch in the Armenian Church being of a contrary judgment. To
answer this Objection, I need only give the Character of this person, such as
it appears to be in this same conference, and this will more confirm the truth
of what I now said. This, says he, do I intend to do, I will immediately write
to all the Armenian Bishops whithersoever they be to assemble in Council. And
when met, I will produce all the Arguments alleged by the Armenians, and which
in effect do seem to favor them. Then will I propose on the other hand all the
contrary proofs which you have now offered me, and at first will take the
Armenians part, and dispute against you. But insensibly and by degrees, and
with great caution, will begin to discover the Error of the Armenians, which
has hitherto so greatly obtained amongst them. I will convince them by John the
Patriarchs Book, and all the other Proofs you have furnished me with. In fine,
I will declare my self openly for the Greeks (or to speak better) I will
contend for the truth against the Armenians. I hope by Gods assistance my sheep
will hear my voice and follow me, so that there will be but one Flock and one
Shepherd. If all the Bishops shall be for me, nothing will be more welcome to
me: But if not, I will notwithstanding confirm the true Doctrine together with
those on my side; and send to the Emperor and your Patriarch a writing under
my Hand and Seal and signed by my Bishops, containing the Orthodox Faith. Now
this writing shall contain amongst other Articles this same, That we receive
the Holy, and universal Council of Chalcedon, and all the Holy Fathers which
that Council has received. That we Anathematise all those Anathematised by that
Council; espcially, Eutyches and Dioscorus, and Severus, and Timotheus Aylurus,
and in general all those that have opposed this Council. This Discourse plainly
shows that this good Patriarch was a little Jesuitical, and did not make it a
case of Conscience to Act a Deceitful part in his Council; much less in his
Church. But it is likewise Easy to gather hence that the sentiment which he in
the beginning proposed in his Letter to the Emperor, and which occasioned all
this intrigue was not that of his Church, but his own particular, for had the
difference between the Armenians and Greeks consisted only in the use of some
terms as Mr. Arnaud tells us it did, there would have been no need of Stratagem
to effect this design. It would have been sufficient to show plainly that it
was but an Equivocation, a misunderstanding, or at most but a question
concerning words, which must not hinder the effects of Christian Charity.
Neither was there any Necessity of promising the Emperors Deputy that there
should be inserted in this new confession of Faith an express Article
containing the Condemnation of Eutyches, and Dioscorus, if in effect the
Armenians followed not their Opinions.

IT appears then from what I have said, that Eutymius and Isaac were neither
Impostors, nor Calumniators when they attributed to the Armenians the Heresy
of Eutyches; and said their belief was that our Savior Christ had no real
Humane Nature; but that his Humanity was swallowed up or changed into the
Divine Nature. After the deposition of those Authors I mentioned, there can be
no reason for the calling in question a thing so certain: now it hence
manifestly follows that the Armenians cannot hold the Transubstantiation of the
Latins, that is to say, the conversion of Bread into the substance of the Body
of Christ, seeing they hold our Savior has no longer a Body; and all Mr.
Arnauds exceptions are vain and to no purpose.

CHAP. III.
The Testimony of some Authors who expressly say or suppose that the Armenians
hold not Transubstantiation.

ALTHOUGH the Proof I already Alleged in the preceding Chapter decides the
question, and needs not to be confirmed by others, yet will we here produce the
Testimony of several Authors of good credit that unanimously assert the
Armenians do not hold Transubstantiation nor the real presence.

THE First is Guy Carmus who assures us of it in express terms, The Guido
Carmel. suma de Here Is. de Her. Arm. Cap. 12.
Twenty second Error, says he, of the Armenians consists in their not believing
that after the consecration is performed by the words of our Savior Christ
pronounced on the Bread, and Wine, the Body of Jesus Christ is truly, and
really contained under the species of Bread and Wine, but they hold they are
only so by resemblance and figure, saying that our Savior Christ did not
Transubstantiate the Bread and Wine into his real Body and Blood, but
established them only as a resemblance and figure. And in another place Arguing
against their Opinion, The Armenians, says he, have no Salvo for the truth of
these words which they themselves utter in the Canon of their Mass, to wit, and
that they may be made the real Body and Blood of Jesus Christ. They thus
expound them, the true Body, that is to say, the true resemblance of the Body,
but this exposition will not pass, because the true resemblance of the Body of
Jesus Christ is not the true Body of Jesus Christ, as the Image of a Man is not
a real Man. Man is the true Image and resemblance of God, but he is not true
God by Nature; if then this be only the resemblance, and not the truth, or the
true Body of Christ as the Armenians falsely say, it cannot be called the true
Body. The Author of the Perpetuity and Mr. Arnaud reject this testimony, ask
them why, they can give you no other reason but this, That they believe Guy
Carmes was mistaken. It Is indeed my Opinion that we must not decide questions
of this importance by the Testimony of some particular Persons who may deceive
others or be deceived themselves. But as to Guy Carmes what likelihood is there
that a Religious, who was all his life time devoted to the interests of the
Roman Church, and often employed by the Pope upon several Occasions, as a most
trusty Servant, and moreover a Person of good parts and considerable Learning
in those Days, being Prior General also of his order, Inquisitor General of the
faith, and Bishop of Majorca in the Balearian Isles, and wrote of the Armenians
in a Book which he made concerning Heresies, what likelihood is there he should
write a thing so positively and clearly that the Armenians deny the real
presence, were he not well assured of it? What advantage could he expect by
imputing falsely to a whole Church an Opinion which he himself held to be a
Damnable Error, and that at the same time wherein the Romans that persecuted in
the West those who were in this point of the same judgment, and why would he
give this advantage against Truth to those deemed Heretics? It is moreover to
be observed that Guy Carmes flourished under the Popedom of John 22, that is to
say, in an Age wherein all the East was overspread with Emissarys, and
especially Armenia Raynald. ad ann. 13. 18.
whose King Ossinius, embraced the Roman Religion, received the Preachers which
the Pope sent him for the Instruction of his People, and set up Schools
thoughout all parts of Armenia to teach the Religion and Language of the
Latins. It was then no difficult matter for a Person in those circumstances
wherein Guy Carmes was who undertook to give an account of diverse Heresies to
inform himself exactly what were the Opinions of the Armenians.

THE Author of the Perpetuity to get clear from this Testimony bethought Perp.
of the faith part. 3. Chapter 8.
himself to say that Guy Carmes was the only Author that accused them of not
agreeing with the Roman Church in the subject of Transubstantiation. Despensus,
and Alphonsus de Castro said the same before him, and it is likely he grounded
himself on their testimony. But so confident an assertion deserved well perhaps
to be examined before it be taken up, and the Authority of two prejudiced
Persons ought not to be of so great weight with him but that he ought to have
considered whether what they say be true. Mr. Arnaud has bin a little more
circumspect than the Author of the Perpetuity. I will not dissemble, says he,
that several Authors as well Catholics as Heretics have accused the Armenians
for not believing the real presence, Guy Carmes expressly imputes to them this
Error. Prateolus says the same thing because he coppys Guy Carmes his Words. We
shall soon see that Prateolus is not the only Person that has followed Guy
Carmes. It is sufficient to Remark here that Mr. Arnaud has believed the Author
of the Perpetuitys Thesis was not justifyable, and therefore has chose rather
of his own accord to forsake it than to be forced to it by a considerable
number of Authoritys. I confess this acknowledgment of Mr. Arnauds is
praiseworthy, but this confident Assertion of the Author of the Perpetuity is
not so, for although a retractation is a virtuous effect, yet methinks a man ought
to be sparing in this particular. But to go on with our Proofs.

THE Second shall be taken from the Testimony of Pope John 22. The Historian
Raynaldus relates that in his time not only the Armenians which dwelt in
Cilicia and Armenia embraced the Doctrines of the Roman Church, but those also
that were driven out by the Saracens and were withdrawn into Chersonnesus
Taurique submitted themselves to the Bishop of Capha who was a Latin. That he
received them in the name of the Roman Church. That the Pope thereupon
congratulated them, and showed them that in the Divine Mysteries the substance
of Bread and Wine were changed into the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, and
that there ought to be mingled some Water with the Wine before it be
consecrated. He afterward produces this Popes Letter to the Archbishop and
Armenian Priests which were in the Diocese of Capha. We have received, says
Pope John, great satisfaction in Understanding how the Almighty Creator
displaying his virtue in you has enlightened your minds with the Knowledge of
his saving Grace, and in that you have vowed to keep the Catholic faith which
the Holy Roman Church truly holds, which she faithfully Teaches and Preaches,
and that you have promised Obedience to the Roman Prelate and his Church, in
the presence of our Reverend Brother Jerome Bishop of Capha. And therefore we
earnestly desire that holding the saving Doctrines of this Church you likewise
observe its Ceremonies, especially in what relates to the most excellent of the
Sacraments, which is the ineffable Sacrament of the Altar. For although all the
other Sacraments confer sanctifying Grace, yet in this is contained entirely
Jesus Christ Sacramentally under the species of Bread and Wine, which remain,
the Bread being Transubstantiated into the Body of Jesus Christ and the Wine
into his Blood. Then he tells them they must mingle water with the wine in the
Chalice, because this mixture is a Commemoration of our Lords Death, and of the
Blood and Water which gushed out from his side. It Is evident that this Pope
applies himself only to these two Articles, because the Armenians held neither
of them, and that in reference to them it was a new Doctrine and Ceremony in
which they had need to be instructed. For to what purpose should
Transubstantiation be recommended to them if they before held it for a
fundamental point of their Ancient Religion? Why must all the other points of
Controversy between the two Churches be laid aside, as that of the Procession
of the Holy Spirit, the two Natures of our Savior Christ, Purgatory,
Confirmation, and several others to stick wholly to Transubstantiation, and the
mixture of Water? The thing declares it self.

MR. Arnaud who is of all men in the World the most ready at proofs, makes one
of this. The Pope, says he, so little distrusted the Armenians believed not
Transubstantiation, that although he proposes it to them expressly, yet he Lib. 5.
Chapter 6. p. 469.
does it only occasionally, and by way of principle, to assert the Wine ought
to be mixed with Water. And this last particular is that to which he
particularly applys himself, and which is the Capital or Summary of his Letter;
whereas had he had the least thought that the Armenians believed not
Transubstantiation, he would without doubt have set about proving it, and that
with more care and earnestness than he does the mixture of Water in the Chalice.

MR. Arnaud must pardon me if I tell him, it is not true that the Pope does only
occasionally mention Transubstantiation and by way of principle to establish
the mixture of Water. Raynaldus who relates this affair gives a better account
of it than he, ipsos instruxit, says he, ut in divinis mysteriis substantia
panis et vini integris speciebus, cum Christi corpore et sanguine commutaretur,
et vino consecrando aqua modica affundenda esset. I believe I do not do ill in
opposing against Mr. Arnaud's Illusion, a truth attested by an Historian that
faithfully relates the matter, without the least regard to our dispute.
Moreover what can be more unreasonable than to say as Mr. Arnaud does that the
Pope proposes Transubstantiation only occasionally and by way of Principle to
establish thereby the putting of Water into the Cup? What Relation is there
between these two things, it does not follow from the believing of
Transubstantiation that Water must be put in the Chalice, nor that those which
do not do it oppose this Doctrine. These are two distinct points which have
their Proofs apart without any Coherence or mutual dependence, and there cannot
be perhaps any thing imputed to a Pope less beseeming the Dignity and
Infallibility of the Head of the Church than to make him argue after this
manner. The Bread and Wine are Transubstantiated, therefore you must put Water
into the Chalice. Mr. Arnaud ought to be more careful of the Honor of this
Prelate, and observe that Transubstantiation and the mixture of Water are not
in his Discourse a kind of Principle and Conclusion, (this would be Ridiculous)
but a Doctrine, and Practice which the Pope recommends to the Armenians, to the
end they may be henceforward conformable to the Roman Church in the subject of
the Sacrament of the Altar, and thus Raynaldus understood it, who has been more
sincere in this than Mr. Arnaud. As to that minute observation that the Pope
does more insist on the mixture of Water than on Transubstantiation it is not
worthconsidering for this proceeds not from the cause Mr. Arnaud imagins, but
only from the Popes declaring to the Armenians the mystical significations of
this mixture, which required some Discourse, and which Raynaldus has well
observed, whodistinguishesthesethree particulars in the Popes Letter,
Transubstantiation, the Mixture of Water, and the mystical significations.
Ipsos instruxit ut indivinis mysteriis substantia panis and vini integris
speciebus, cum Christi corpore and sanguine commutaretur, and vino consecrando
aqua modica affun denda esset, acdivina ea re adumbratra mysteria aperuit, that
is to say, he taught 'em the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, the mixture of
Water, and showed them the mysteries represented by this mixture.

MY third Proof is taken from the information which Benedict XII Successor to
John the XXII caused to be made touching the Errors of the Armenians, not at
Rome (as Mr. Arnaud has asserted through a mistake, of which inadvertency were
I guilty how severe would he be upon me?) but at Avignon, where he kept his
seat, and whence his Bull is dated. The 67 Article Raynauld. ad Ann. 1341.
is expressed in these Terms, The Armenians do not say that after the words of
Consecration, the Bread and Wine are Transubstantiated into the Body and Blood
of Jesus Christ Born of the Virgin who suffered and rose again. But they hold
that this Sacrament is a representation, a resemblance or a figure of the true
Body and Blood of our Lord. And this some of the Armenian Doctors have
particularly asserted, to wit, that the real Body and Blood of Jesus Christ are
not in the Eucharist, but that it is a representation, and a resemblance of
them. They say likewise that when our Savior instituted this Sacrament, he did
not Transubstantiate the Bread and Wine into his Body, but only instituted a
representation or a resemblance of his Body and Blood, and therefore they do
not call the Sacrament of the Altar, the Body and Blood of our Lord, but the
Host, the Sacrifice, or the Communion. One of their Doctors called Darces has
written that when the Priest says these words, this is my Body, then the Body
of Jesus Christ is Dead, but when he adds, by which Holy Spirit, etc. then the
Body of Jesus Christ is alive; yet has he not expressed whether it be the true
Body or the resemblance of it. The Armenians likewise say we must expound that
which is said in the Cannon of their Mass, by which Holy Spirit the Bread is
made the real Body of Jesus Christ in this sense, that by the real Body of
Jesus Christ, we must understand the real resemblance or representation of the
Body and Blood of Jesus Christ. And therefore Damascen censuring them for this
says that the Armenians have this Two Hundred years abolished all the
Sacraments, and that their Sacraments were not given them by the Apostles, nor
Greek or Latin Church, but that they had taken them up according to their own
Fancy.

MR Arnaud who in looking over his Raynaldus has met with this clear Testimony
yet (...) has not been perplexed with it, for his invention never fails of
finding out ways to shift the force of the most plain and positive truths, and
to turn them to his own advantage. He tells us that after an exact search into
the cause which might move Guy Carmes to impute this Error to the Armenians he
at length found it in this information which Pope Benedict the XII ordered to
be drawn up. He adds, that if this Original has been known to the Ministers,
yet they have found greater advantage in standing by the Testimony C 9. 348.
and 485.
of Guy Carmes then in ascending up to this Source.

BUT all this Discourse is but a mere Amusement. For when Mr. Arnauds
conjecture should be right, it would not thence follow Guy Carmes his Testimony
were void, and the Ministers had no right to allege him, nor that the
Information aforementioned does impute to the Armenians those Doctrines which
they have not. There is great likelihood that Guy Carmes made not this
information his rule, for besides that he says nothing of it, he reckons up
but Thirty Errors of the Armenians, whereas the information computes 'em to be
about One Hundred and Seventeen. But supposing it were so, all that can be
concluded thence is, that in the Fourteenth Century the truth of the things
contained in this act was not questioned, but past for such certainties that
the Writers of those times scrupled not to make them the Subject of their
Books. And this is all the use which can be made of Mr. Arnaud's Remark.

BUT howsoever, what can be said against an act so Authentic as that of
Benedict's, which was not grounded on uncertain Reports, but on the Testimonies
of several Persons worthy of credit, Armenians or Latins who had been in
Armenia, and whom the Pope would hear himself that he might be ascertained of
the Truth?

TO know of what weight or Authority this piece is, we need but read what the
Pope wrote on this Subject, to the Catholic or Patriarch of Armenia. Raynald.
Ibid.
We have long since, says he, been informed by several Persons of good credit,
that in both the Armenia's there are held several detestable and abominable
Errors, and that they are maintained contrary to the Catholic Faith which the
Holy Roman Church holds and teaches, which is the Mother and Mistress of all
the Faithful. And although at first we were unwilling to credit these reports, yet
were at length forced to yield to the certain Testimony of Persons who tell us
they perfectly understand the state of those Countries. Yet before we gave full
credit, we thought our selves Obliged to make exact search of the Truth by way
of judiciary and solemn information, both by hearing several witnesses who
likewise told us they knew the state of these Countries, and taking in Writing
these their Depositions, and by means of Books which we are informed the
Armenians do commonly use wherein are plainly taught these Errors. He says the
same in his Letter to the King of Armenia, and in his information it is expressly
said, that the Pope caused these Witnesses to appear personally before him, and
gave Ra^nald. Ibid.
them an Oath to speak the truth of what they knew concerning the Doctrines of
the Armenians, that these Witnesses were not only Latins that had been in
Armenia, but Armenians themselves, and that the Books produced were written in
the Armenian tongue, and some of those were such as were in use in both the
Armenia' s? I think here are as many formalities as can be desired, and all
these circumstances will not suffer a man to call in question the truth of
those matters of fact which are contained in this act.

YET will not Mr. Arnaud agree herein. He says, that in this monstrous heap of
Errors there are several senceless, extravagant and Socinian Opinions. Lib. 5.
C. 9. P. 4^4.
That therein Original Sin, the Immortality of the Soul, the Vision of God, the
Existence of Hell, and almost all the points of Religion are denied. That
therein are also contrary Errors, so that it is plain this is not the Religion
of a People, or Nation, but rather a Rapsody of Opinions of several Sects and
Nations. I confess there are in these Articles several absurd Opinions, and
some that differ little from Socinianism, but this hinders not but they may be
the Opinions of a particular People. The Pope expressly distinguishes in his
Bull three sorts of Errors contained in his information, some that are held in
both one and the other Armenia, others which are held only in one Armenia, and
the third which are only held and taught by some particular Persons. And this
distinction is exactly observed in the Articles themselves, in which the
Particular Opinions are Described in these terms, quidam, or aliqui tenent, as
in Article CVI. Quidam Catholicon Armenorum dixit and scripsit, quod in
generali Resurrectione omnes homines consurgent cum Corporibus suis, sed tamen
in Corporibus eorum non erit Sexuum discretio. And in the CVIII Article, Aliqui
magni Homines Armeni Laici dixerunt quod sicut bestiae in morte expirant, and
sic moriuntur, ita and Homines; and sicut bestiae cum semel morte fuerunt,
nunquam resurgent, ita nec homines. The Opinions held only in one Armenia are
likewise denoted exactly in these Words. In majori Armenia, In minori Armenia,
or, Catholicon majoris Armeniae, Catholicon minoris Armeniae. The common
Opinions are expressed in these Terms, Armeni dicunt, Armeni tenent. And although
in the Article which respects the real Presence and Transubstantiation we find
these words. Et hoc specialiter aliqui magistri Armenorum dixerunt, videlicet
quod non erat ibi Corpus Christi verum and Sanguis, sed exemplar, and
similitudo ejus; yet is this same sentiment imputed generally to all the
Armenians, for the Article begins thus, Item quod Armeni, non dicunt quod post
verba consecrationis Panis and Vini sit facta Transubstantiatio Panis and Vini
in verum Corpus Christi and Sanguinem. And toward the end of the same Article
there is, Quod etiam Armeni illud quod ponitur in eorum Canone Missae, per quem
panis Benedictus efficitur verum Corpus Christi, exponunt quia efficitur ibi
vera similitudo, and exemplar Corporis and Sanguinis Christi. Unde Damascenus
propter hoc reprehendens eos dixit, quod ducenti tunc anni erant quod Armeni
perdiderunt omnia Sacramenta, etc. It is then clear that this information
attributes this Opinion not to some particular Persons, but to the whole Body
of the Armenians, seeing that on one hand this Article bears the Character of
Errors, common to the Armenians; and on the other there is applied to 'em what
Damascene said of 'um so long before, that they had lost all the Sacraments.
Let Mr. Arnaud bestir himself as fiercely as he pleases, he cannot hinder us
from perceiving that if this Article related only to Particular Persons;
witnesses of the Fourteenth Century, that depose what it contains would never
have sought in the eight Century, that is to say, Six Hundred Years before the
Authority of Damascen to confirm what they deposed, and even to confirm it by a
passage which respects the Church of the Armenians in general, and which
accuses it for having no true Sacrament.

MR. Arnaud observes afterward that in this same Article there is accused
another Armenian Doctor named Narces, for saying when the Priest C. 9. P. 48.
pronounces these Words, Hoc est Corpus meum, the Body of Jesus Christ is then
in a state of Death, and when he adds, perquem, the Body of Jesus Christ is
then alive. It is true, says he, the information adds that this Doctor does not
express whether he speaks of the true Body of Jesus Christ, or of the Figure.
But the difference of these two states of Life and Death being to be found in a
figure which does not change, sufficiently shows that he spoke of the true Body
of Jesus Christ. If these two states of Life and Death cannot be found in a
figure, much less in the true Body of Jesus Christ, which is no more Subject to
Death, nor the Necessity of rising again. Is Mr. Arnaud so greatly prejudiced
that he cannot perceive the sense of this Doctor is, that the Eucharist is a
mystery which expresses the whole economy of Jesus Christ, especially his
Death, and Resurrection, according to the common Doctrine of the Greeks, from
which in this respect the Greeks do not vary?

IN the Seventyeth Error, says he moreover, the same Armenians are Ibid
charged with believing that when any one receives the Eucharist, the Body of
Jesus Christ Descends into his Body, and is converted therein as other
aliments, which is a contrary Heresy to that of Berengarius. But as
Berengarius would not have scrupled to call the Bread, which is the Sacrament
of the Body of Jesus Christ, the Body of Jesus Christ; so neither would he have
scrupled to express himself in the same manner, as this Article makes the
Armenians do, That the Body of Jesus Christ, that is to say, the Bread which is
the figure of it, Descends into our Bodies, and is changed into our Bodies. So
that this contrariety which Mr. Arnaud imagins, has no Ground. But there is a
real Opposition between this Discourse of the Armenians that the Body of Jesus
Christ is Changed into our Bodies as other food, and the Opinion of
Transubstantiation; for how can it be conceived that the proper substance of
the Body of Jesus Christ which is in Heaven should be changed into our Bodies,
that an incorruptible substance should be digested, and changed, that a
substance which exists after the manner of Spirits, should nourish us and
become food to us? It appears then from this very thing that by the Body of
Jesus Christ the Armenians mean only the Sacrament or Mystery of this Body,
which in respect of its substance is real Bread.

NEITHER is it to any purpose to Remark, as Mr. Arnaud does, Ibid.
that those to whom was attributed the believing the Eucharist to be only the
figure of Christ's Body were not wont to call the Eucharist the Body of Jesus
Christ, and yet commonly the Armenians do thus call it, as appears by their
Liturgies. For it is evident the sense of this Article is, not that absolutely
the Armenians rejected this expression, seeing it immediately afterward
attributes it to them; but that it was not usual amongst them, especially since
they saw the Latins abused it, and therefore they chose rather to use those of
Host, Sacrifice and Communion.

IT is also to no purpose to say the Liturgy of the Armenians is contrary Ibid.
to this Opinion, seeing it contained the Bread is made the real Body of Jesus
Christ; for they expounded it in this sense, that the Bread is made the true
resemblance, or the representation of the Body of Jesus Christ. This
explication, says Mr. Arnaud, is so absurd and ridiculous, that it could not be
very common, it being impossible the generality should entertain it. But does
Mr. Arnaud believe that Transubstantiation being fully and truly explained, as
it is in it self, and consequences and dependencies, can be more easily
entertained by a People than this sense which the Armenians give to the terms
of their Liturgy?

AS to what he adds, that it is said, in the Seventyeth Article, that Ibid.
according to the Armenians the Eucharist does not effect the remission of
Sins, nor confer Grace, and that this is contrary to the Words of the Liturgy
of the Armenians of Leopolis, and a passage of the Catholic of Armenia in the
conference of Theorien, which says they Sacrifice in the Church the son of God
for the Salvation of the whole World. All that Mr. Arnaud can conclude hence
is, That the Armenians residing in Armenia do not well agree in this point with
those of Leopolis in Poland, and that the Catholic which conferred with
Theorien was of no great consideration amongst them; but it cannot hence follow
that the things which these Articles contain are only the Opinions of some
particular Persons.

BUT, says moreover Mr. Arnaud, the Armenians justified themselves Ibid.
by acts, decrees, and formal declarations; the King of Armenia, caused a
Religious named Daniel to draw up a Memorial, in which he protested against
these Errors, and complains they were unjustly charged on his Nation. The
Patriarch and Bishops being assembled condemned them. The Patriarch of the
lesser Armenia declared to Clement the Sixth his faith touching the Eucharist
in these terms; That the Body of Jesus Christ born of the Virgin, Dead on the
Cross, and which is now alive in Heaven after the Words of the Consecration of
the Bread which are, This is my Body, is in the Sacrament of the Altar under
the species and appearances of Bread.

THERE is a strange Illusion in all this Discourse. It Is true the King of
Armenia who needed the Popes protection drew up this Memorial mentioned by Mr.
Arnaud. But seeing he had this Remark from Raynaldus he ought not to have
suppressed what the same Raynaldus adds, Caeterum non Raynald. ubi supra.
falso subornata erant haec crimina in Armenos, nec temere credita a Benedicto,
fassosenim Clementi VI. Armeniae Regis Oratoresplures errores in Armenia
pullulasse, and Clementem studia sua ut abolerentur applicuisse visurisumus.
Moreoverthe Armenians were not falsely accused of these crimes, nor did Benedict
believe them without sufficient grounds. For the Ambassadors of the King of
Armenia confessed to Clement the Sixth, that several Errors had sprung up in
Armenia, and Clement used his utmost endeavors to crush them, as we shall see
by what follows. This dis-acknowledgment then of the King, and complaint which
Daniel made concerning the imputation of Doctrines to the Armenians which they
never owned, was only a Politic intrigue, which yet does not hinder the
information of Benedict from being true. I do not doubt but the King in the
extremity of his affairs, threatened by the Saracens, and having no hope but in
the protection of the Latins, assembled his Bishops that they might satisfy
the Pope in what he desired, and condemn the Errors contained in his Bull. But
if Mr. Arnaud will conclude, that then they had them not before, Raynaldus will
draw a contrary Consequence, that then they had them. For after having said,
as I now recited, that these Errors were not falsely charged upon the Armenians,
he immediately adds as a reason which confirms his Proposition. Quin etiam
commoti pontificiis monitis Armeni praesules coacta solemni Synodo numeratos
superius Errores Ecclesiastica execratione damnaverunt, ac decreta insigni ad
sedem Apostolicam legatione imperiis se pontificiis adhaesuros professi sunt.
But moreover the Armenians moved by the Popes remonstrances called a Synod,
wherein they Condemned with an Anathema the Errors contained in this
information, and sent Ambassadors to the Pope to make profession of their
Obedience to his Commands. He proves that the Errors contained in the Popes
information were really the Armenians, because the Bishops met together to
Condemn them. What a great deal of difference there is between a Person that is
prejudiced and one that is not. Raynaldus is naturally no more favorable to us
than Mr. Arnaud, the one is a Priest of the Oratory, and the other a Doctor of
the Sorbonne, yet they draw from the same matter of fact contrary Conclusions;
one hence shows the Armenians were innocent of the things they were accused,
and the other from the same Principle proves they were Culpable. And this
because one has the dispute in his Eye, and the other not, the one Reasons
without passion and the other is in a heat.

AS to what Mr. Arnaud says touching the Patriarch of the lesser Armenia who
so Authentickly declared his faith concerning the Eucharist to Pope Clement VI.
I cannot but desire the Readers attention to this subject; for here he will
perceive one of Mr. Arnaud's notorious Sophisms. It is to be observed then that
after Benedict the XII. had sent into Armenia the Catalogue of this Peoples
Errors, the affairs of the Armenians growing every day worse, they resolved
(that they might render the Latins favorable to 'em) to make in a Synod a
pretended Decree wherein they feigned to renounce these Errors, and abjure
them; which made Pope Clement VI. (who was Benedict's Successor) to send them
Anthony Bishop of Gayette, and John Archbishop of Pisa, in quality of
Apostolical Legates to finish (if Possible) the Work of their reduction.
Raynaldus speaks of this act as of a Piece, not by which they cleared
themselves of a false accusation, but whereby they renounced their Opinions,
Post habitam, says he, Synodum at que in ea repudiatos Errores. And Clement
speaks after Raynald. ad ann. 1346. Number. 67. 68. etc.
the same manner in the Letter he sent them. Vestra Synodo prout per vos
commode fieri potuit convocata, Errores abjecistis et condemnastis praedictos,
sicut in libello quem nobis transmiststis continetur. Observe these terms
repudiatos Eerores, and Errores abjecistis, for they expressly signify a change
of Opinion, a renunciation of their former Errors, and not a bare Condemnation
of Errors for which they had been in reference to their Church in General
impertinently accused, as Mr. Arnaud would make us believe. But the King of
Armenia urged the Pope to assist him against the Sultan of Babylon, who fell
upon his Kingdom; and the Pope pressed him on the other hand, to assist his
Legates in the extirpating of those Errors which were so rife in Armenia. He
wrote also to the Legates to inform him of their Success, who gave him to
understand they lost their Labor, and that whatsoever declarations the
Armenians had made, they still persevered in their Opinions. Which appears by a
Letter of Clement to the Bishop of Nicosia, ab eorum Erroribus, says he, iidem
Raynald. ad ann. 1310. Number. 37.
Rex, Catholicus, et Populus minime resipuisse dicuntnr, sicut per quasdam
litter as missas and Scripturam exhibitam nobisluculenter apparet. They
persevered therein, they repented not of them, says the Pope, and Mr. Arnaud
would needs persuade us they were falsely accused.

THE Pope had charged his Legate with some opposite Articles to the Errors of
the Armenians to make 'um receive them, and that which respected the Eucharist
contained these words, That the same Numerical Body Raynaldus ad ann. 1351.
Number. 31
of Jesus Christ, idem numero, which was born of the Virgin and nailed to the
Cross is contained in the Eucharist. One of the Legates, Anthony by name, dyed
in the way, and John having performed his Voyage failed not to propose these
Articles to the Catholic of Armenia Minor and his Bishops. But the Catholic
refused to approve them; he absolutely rejected some of them, and made captious
and doubtful answers to others; he never would admit of the Article touching
the Eucharist which contained, That after Consecration it was the same
Numerical Body of Jesus Christ which was born of a Virgin and suffered on the
Cross. He wrote a Letter in which of fifty three Articles which were offered
him he rejected sixteen of them, amongst which was that of the Eucharist; and
in the Answers he made to the Popes instructions, he would never admit of
Transubstantiation, but barely says, he believed and held that the Body of
Jesus Christ born of the Virgin, dead on the Cross, and which is now alive in
Heaven, after the words of the Consecration of the Bread which are, this is my
Body, is in the Sacrament of the Altar under the species, and resemblance of
Bread, sub specie and similitudine panis. Now it is on this whereon Mr. Arnaud
grounds himself concealing all the rest of this History and producing only
these last words, and drawing from them his Conclusion after his usual Manner
in these terms, I see no Lib. 5: C. 9. page 488.
reason to doubt of the faith of this Patriarch considering this his
declaration, that is to say, it plainly appeared hence that he believed
Transubstantiation, and the Substantial presence of the Body of Jesus Christ in
the Eucharist.

BUT Mr. Arnaud is too quick at drawing of Consequences. For I. he ought not to
have dissembled that in all this affair the question is not whether the
Armenians held, or did not hold the things contained in the information of
Benedict, but whether they sincerely renounced them; and whether the act of
their renunciation sent to the Pope was feigned or real. II. He ought not to
have dissembled likewise that the whole conduct of the Amenians was in this
respect but a mere cheat, invented only to remedy the disorders of their State,
and procure assistance from the Western Princes. That the Pope laid hold on
this Occasion to make them receive the Roman Religion, and they on their side
endeavored to deceive the Pope and draw from him what they desired, in eluding
his pursuits. Which is justified by the Letter sent by Clement himself to the
Catholic of Armenia. Moreover, says he, we have bin several times informed by
diverse Raynaldus ibid. Numb 17.
Persons worthy of credit, and even by Armenians, that you and your
Predecessors the Catholics of Armenia, and the Armenians under your
jurisdiction do not in any manner observe, what you promised us and our
Predecessors the. Roman Prelates touching the Faith. And that which is yet
worse and more deplorable, is, that you have contemned and utterly rejected the
wholesome Instructions of our Apostolical Legates sent you in regard to your
Souls, but have after a Damnable manner despised the Faith of the Roman Church,
out of which there is neither Grace nor Salvation. The same thing appears by
Clement's Letter to the King of Armenia, in which having exhorted him earnestly
to endeavor to make his Patriarch receive the Roman Doctrine sincerely and
purely Raynald. ibid. Numb. 18.
without duplicity of heart, to the end his Clergy and People may be reunited
to the Latin Church, he adds, that by this means the mouths of several
Catholics and Armenians too will be stopped who stick not to affirm, That the
Patriarch and other Armenians proceeded not in this affair with faithfulness
and simplicity, but with dissimulation; and that which is yet worse and more
deplorable, they affirm the Armenians have turned into derision and contempt
the saving Doctrine which the Legates of the Holy See have communicated to them.

III. HE ought not to have concealed that the Patriarch of Armenia, who would
save himself by ambiguous Answers, rejected the Article of the Eucharist which
contained, that it was the same Numerical Body which Raynald. ibid. Numb. 15.
was Born of the Virgin and crucified; and that he neither would admit of the
Article of Transubstantiation, because both one and the other so manifestly
contradicted his faith, and left no room for his Equivocations. In fine, he
ought not to have concluded so briskly as he has done from the terms of his
Answer, that after this declaration, there could be no Reason to doubt whether
this Patriarch had the same faith as the Church of Rome. For notwithstanding
this declaration Clement VI. still doubted of it, as also the Cardinals,
Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, and Doctors with whom the Pope consulted
about it. Observe here the Contents of Raynaldus ibid. Numb. 2.
Clement's Letter to this Catholic of Armenia. We have kindly received your
answers, and those of the Church of Armenia minor, reduced to certain heads;
and having deliberately considered them, together with my Reverend Brethren the
Cardinals of the Roman Church, some Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, and
other Prelates, we could not, nor cannot now gather from these answers, till
such time as you give us a more clear Discovery, what you and the Church of
Armenia minor do truly and sincerely hold and believe. He afterward adds this
obliged him to make interrogations on Each Article, and desired plain and
direct answers. In effect he proposes 'em to him, and coming to the Article of
the Eucharist having set down the first answer of the Patriarch in the terms I
already recited, he adds, upon this we demand ibid. Numcr. 11.
first of all whether you believe the Bread is Transubstantiated into the Body
of Jesus Christ. Then coming to speak of a certain Letter which the Patriarch
wrote wherein he rejected sixteen Articles, of the fifty three which were
offered him, and amongst the sixteen this. Quod Corpus Christi post ibid. Number.
15.
verba Consecrationis sit idem numero, quod Corpus natum de virgin and
immolatum in cruce, he says to him, the terms of your Letter wherein you write
that you have taken away sixteen Articles of the fifty three which were given
you by our Archbishop and Bishops are confused and obscure, as also the
particular answers you returned by Writing. Therefore we desire to know of you
plainly, and truly, whether you have rejected these sixteen Articles because
you do not believe 'em to be true and sound, or for what other reason you have
retrenched them from the rest. But Mr. Arnaud being better informed than this
Pope with his Cardinals, Prelates and Doctors, and better instructed in the
intentions of the Armenian Patriarch than all the People then in the World,
comes and confidently tells us, that he sees no reason to doubt of the faith of
this Patriarch, and thinks Mr. Claude himself will acknowledge as much. And
suppressing all these matters of fact related by the very Historian he makes
use of, he proclaims his Victories; and confidently affirms, the Armenians have
ever believed the real Presence and Transubstantiation.

BUT Raynaldus is of a contrary Opinion, for having related the whole story of
what passed between Clement the VI. and the Armenian Patriarch which was only
the Sequel of Benedict's information, he adds, That we may thence plainly see
into how many filthy Errors thy fall who separate from the Raynaldus ibid
Numer. 18.
Church of Rome. That innovators howsoever have no reason to glory in the
Antiquity of their Heresies, nor bragg, (for the seducing of the weak) that the
Armenians and other Eastern People have the same sentiments with them. For
although they hold some of these Errors, yet do they not admit them all, but
differ from the Armenians in very considerable matters. That the Divine justice
is rather to be admired which has permitted the Armenians infected with these
Errors to fall under the power of the Barbarians. This is not a proper place to
Answer Raynaldus in, it is sufficient he acknowledges the Armenians did in
effect hold, all these Doctrines which are attributed to them in the act of
Benedict, in the instructions of Clement, and consequently that they denied
Transubstantiation and the real Presence.

WE may then reckon as a IV Proof, the testimony of Raynaldus together with
that of Pope Clement's, and the Catholic of Armenia's. The 5th. shall be taken
from Pope Eugenius IV. who in the instructions he gave to the Armenians, in the
Council of Florence, forgot not the Article of Transubstantiation, the form,
says he, of this Sacrament consists in our Saviors words by which he
completed this Sacrament. The Priest speaking in the Eugen. ad Calcem Council.
Flore^
Person of our Savior Christ does the same. For by the virtue of these words
the substance of Bread is changed into his Body, and the substance of Wine into
his Blood, so that Jesus Christ is entirely contained under the species of
Bread, and Wine, and is entire under each part whether of the Consecrated Host
or Consecrated Wine, even when the species are separate. Mr. Arnaud says, it is
not usual to propose Capital Points of Controversy in this manner. That they
are not tackt to the Tail of other Articles, nor are so lightly passed over,
but considered established and strengthened. But Mr. Arnaud forgets how the
Pope established and strengthened the addition of the Filioque to the Symbol;
which he enjoined them to receive, although a controverted Point. How did he
confirm the Article of the two Natures in Jesus Christ but by giving them the
definition of the Council of Chalcedon and the Letter of Pope Leo? Upon what
Reasons did he ground the Article of the Remission of Original sin in Baptism
when the Armenians were guilty in this Point of a Capital Error, as appears by
the information of Benedict XII? What Proofs did he bring to show 'em that the
Consecration of the Eucharist is made by the words of our Savior, when the
Armenians believed the contrary, as we may see in the same information? These
kind of Remarks which are usual with Mr. Arnaud have neither light nor Solidity
in them. Eugenius is excusable let Mr. Arnaud say what he will; he thought it
no wise necessary, to insert common Places in his Decretal, nor to be so
scrupulous in observing Heads or Tails, like such as view the Dragon in the
Firmament. He designed only to give the Armenians the form of Doctrine which
they ought henceforward to hold in reference to the Points wherein he believed
they erred according to the report of the Bishop of Pamiez in the Passage I
have related. Now the Article of Transubstantiation being expressly mentioned
therein, it is a sign the Armenians did not believe it.

CHAP. IV.
Testimony of several other Authors that affirm the Armenians deny
Transubstantiation, and the real Presence.

THE Sixth Proof which I bring to confirm the Truth of the Proposition I
defend, is taken out of Authors of the Roman Communion, who have bin so far
from questioning Guy Carmes's Testimony, that they have on the contrary
followed and confirmed it by their suffrages. We may reckon in this number
Thomas Waldensis a famous Author of the fifteenth Century, and a zealous
Defender of Transubstantiation, who writing against Wicliff, calls the
Armenians, Nepotes Berengarii, Berengarius his Children or Disciples. I mention
'em, says he, to the end we may have a care of 'em. And therefore also Guy
Carmes speaking of them, says, that the Twenty Second of their Errors is, that
after the Consecration, Thom. Vald. Tom. 2. Cap 30.
the Body of Jesus Christ is not really under the species of Bread, and Wine,
but only in Representation and Figure. That Jesus Christ did not really
Transubstantiate the Bread and Wine into his Body and Blood, but only in
Resemblance and Figure.

PRATEOLUS a Dr. of Divinity that lived about an Hundred Prateolus Elench.
haeret. page 63. in Armen. art. 12.
years since, testifies the same thing, They deny, says he, (speaking of the
Armenians) the true Body of Jesus Christ to be contained really in the
Sacrament of the Eucharist under the Species of Bread and Wine.

BZOVIUS an Historian of our time and a continuer of Baronius, has Bzoviusad.
an. 1318. Number 16.
not scrupled to follow Prateolus in this Point. He observes as well as he for
the Twelv'th of their Heresies, That the true Body of Jesus Christ is not under
the species of Bread and Wine in the Eucharist.

IODOCUS Coccius a Cannon of Juliers, in that confused heap of Coccius. These.
Cathol. tom. 2. page 601.
Collections he has made of passages out of the Fathers touching controverted
Points, follows Guy Carmes; and relying on his Testimony assures us, That the
Armenians deny the Eucharist to be the real Body and Blood of Christ, affirming
it to be only a sign thereof.

THOMAS a Jesu who has made strict inquiry into the Opinions of the
Schismatical Eastern Churches, has thought (as well as others) he Thomas a
Jesu. Lib. 7. part. 1. C. 17.
ought not to deviate from the sentiment of Guy Carmes, nor that any man has
Reason to doubt of the Truth of his Testimony. He relates and approves it, and
says, That the Armenians deny the true Body of Jesus Christ, to be really
contained in the Sacrament of the Eucharist under the species of Bread and
Wine. Dr. Avily Tom. 1. of Ancient and Modern Heresies p. 349.


DR. Avily in his computation of Heresies both Modern and Ancient, has likewise
followed Guy Carmes, and assured us from his Testimony That the Armenians teach
Christ's Body is not really under the Bread, nor his Blood under the Wine.

HOW comes it that these Authors who appear otherwise so zealous for the
Interests of the Roman Church have not found out this pretended mistake of Guy
Carmes? Why should they suffer themselves to be so grossly imposed on? or, to
speak better, whence has Mr. Arnaud this extraordinary Revelation? how comes he
to be better informed than other People?

WE shall in the following Chapter search into the Grounds of his Opinion, and
the Proofs he brings, only mentioning here several Protestants, whose Testimony
is the less to be suspected, in as much as, what they wrote was not all designed
for our controversy. We have already seen in the Discourse about the
Moscovites, that Lasicius a Polander writing of the Armenians of Leopolis
says, they believe the Bread and Wine retain their first Nature. They deny,
says he, that in the Sacrament of the Eucharist Joann Lazicius de Rel. Armeni.
the Elements lose their Nature. They administer the Sacrament with Wheaten
Bread dipped in the Cup. They mingle no water with the Wine. They show a greater
respect to the Sacrament than the Russians, believing our Savior Christ is
therein such as he was Born of the Virgin, and after the Incarnation there was
such a Conjunction, and affinity, between the Divine and Humane Nature, that
they were not separated in the Sufferings of Jesus Christ nor ever can be. They
have this Opinion from St. Chrysostom that Jesus Christ suffers something more
in the Eucharist than he suffered on the Cross, because in the Eucharist he
suffers the Sacramental fraction. And when I demanded of them how this could
be, seeing the Nature of Bread and Wine remains without being changed after the
Consecration, they answered me, This was effected by the Divine virtue, to
which we ought to give credit. And these are Lasicius his words, according to
the Original, but different from Mr. Arnaud's Version. It now concerns us to
inquire into the advantage or prejudice which hence accrue to the cause I
defend, for if on one hand I pretend to prove by what has bin abovesaid that
the Armenians belive not Transubstantiation; Mr. Arnaud undertakes to prove by
it also that they believe the real Presence. But as to my pretention I think
it is well grounded and beyond all Question, seeing this Author says expressly
they deny the Elements lose their Nature.

HE has had his informations, says Mr. Arnaud, only from some Ignorant Lib. 5.
C. 4. p. 449.
Persons in Leopolis. If this be a sufficient ground for rejecting the
Testimony of Lasicius in reference to Transubstantiation, why does Mr. Arnaud
cite the same Testimony to show the Armenians believe the real Presence? Has
this Author met with ignorant persons for the informing him in one Point, and
knowing ones for the other? perhaps, says he, he did not comprehend that by
the word Nature, they meant only the Mass of external Accidents. But he ought
to assert things more likely to be probable. Where will Ibid.
he find the Armenians ever took the term Nature, for the Mass of external
accidents separate from their substance? The existence of accidents without a
subject is one of those Difficulties of which (he himself tells us in another
place) the Greeks, the Armenians and Copticks of our times make no mention. Why
then would he have 'em to use in a familiar Discourse the Lib. 10. C. 8.
word Nature to signify a thing which is unknown to 'em, or of which at least
they make no mention? Mr. Arnaud makes and marrs these Principles according as
his occasions require, Diruit, aedificat, mutat quadrata rotundis. Which shows
his Answers mere Evasions, and in effect there is no Body that reads these words
of Lasicius, but will immediately comprehend they mean the Armenians deny
Transubstantiation. Now this is precisely the Point in question between the
Author of the Perpetuity and me. Hitherto our Disputes has not concerned the
real Presence.

BUT seeing he is desirous to treat of it, I must tell him there is a great
deal of difference between his pretension and mine, that mine is grounded on
clear expressions which are not capable of any other sense; whereas on the
contrary his are established on obscure and Ambiguous Terms, of which he has
not comprehended the sense. For these Persons say only That our Savior Christ
is in the Eucharist such as he was born of the Virgin Mary. Now we have already
seen that according to them, Mary only brought forth the Divine Nature, which
had only a Body in appearance, (...) and not really. Upon this Hypothesis their
sense will be, that the Divinity being every where, it must of Consequence be
in the Eucharist. And with this agrees what they add, that after the
Incarnation, there was such a conjunction and society between the Divine and
Humane Natures, that they were not separate even in the Sufferings of Christ.
For by this Conjunction they understood not a Union which leaves the two
Natures distinct, for in so saying they would not contradict the Orthodox
sense, but they meant a Confusion of the Humane Nature with the Divine, a
swallowing up of this Humane Nature into the Abyss of the Divinity, as we have
already seen they commonly held. So that all the real Presence which they
Understand in the Sacrament, is no other than the presence of the Divinity,
which is every where, but more especially in the Eucharist. It Is very probable
'twas under this Equivocation the Patriarch of Armenia Minor sheltred himself
in the answer he made to the Articles of Pope Clement VI. which we have related
in the preceding Chapter. The Body of Jesus Christ, says he, Born of the
Virgin, dead on the Cross, and which is now alive in Heaven, is in the
Sacrament of the Altar under the species and representation of Bread. The Body
Born of the Virgin and Dead on the Cross, which was to say, according to them,
the Divinity, which in being Born of the Virgin had the appearance of a Body
and Dyed in appearance on the Cross. But when he was urged to acknowledge 'twas
the same Numerical Body, he would not grant it, because he believed the term
Number reduced the Body of Christ into the same Rank with other Humane Bodies,
and consequently made it a real Body. Mr. Arnaud will reply, this is one of my
Conjectures which has no surer foundation than his may be so's. But he has no
other Grounds for his may be's than his own Imagination, whereas I lay my
Conjectures on the very Hypothesis of the Armenians, having first solidly shown
it is such as I describe it.

WE may add to the Testimony of Lasicius that of Breerewood, in his
Breerewood's Inquiries Chapter 24.
Treatise of Religions. For he says expressly, That the Armenians deny the true
Body of Jesus Christ to be really in the Sacrament of the Eucharist under the
species of Bread and Wine. I confess indeed he grounds himself on the Authority
of Guy Carmes, but this shows he takes it for an unquestionable truth.

MR. Alexander Ross in his view of Religions likewise tells us, that the
Armenians do not hold the Body of Christ is really present under the form View
of Religions Printed at Amsterdam Gallice 1666.
of Bread and Wine.

MR. De Vicqfort a Gentleman whose name is almost known through out all Europe,
for his skill in Languages and other exquisit qualifications, has obliged the
public with a Translation into French of Herbert's Voyages, in which are found
these words, The Armenians administer the Sacrament Herberts Voyages Lib. 2. q.
244
of our Lords Supper under the two Species of Bread and Wine, and deny the real
presence of the Body of Christ, acknowledging only the two Sacraments of
Baptism and the Lords Supper. There has happened upon the Account of this
Translation a very Remarkable circumstance. You must know then that Mr. Arnaud
in the first edition of his Book having made an Objection to himself concerning
this Passage of Herbert, and heightened it as much as he could to the saying, he
marvelled Mr. Claude never offered it, being so considerable as to startle most
People, that he thought there could Lib. 5. C. 8. p. 481. First Edition.
be nothing replied to such an express passage, and that this Author seemed to
speak no more than what he had learnt from the Armenians themselves. Having I
say proposed this Objection, he Answers, that this was a Remarkable forgery of
the Calvinistical Translator. That having desired some of his Friends to
Translate from the Original English, whatsoever related to the Armenians in
that Book, he found by their Translation that not only he does in no wise speak
of the real Presence, but that almost all the discourses contained in the
249th. and 250th. page were foysted in by the Translator, who made his Dreams
and Fancies pass for the Relations of a Traveller. That it is likely he has done
the same in several other places, so that this whole Book is rather the
Translators Romance than the true account of a Voyage. This Discourse being
very disingenuous and reflecting on the reputation of a worthy Gentleman, who
has ever manifested in his Writings and Conversation an exemplary sincerity, it
has happened that Mr. Vicqfort having seen this charge in Mr. Arnaud's Book has
publicly justified himself from it. And for this effect has produced before
Mr. Pompone the French Kings Ambassador into Holland Mr. Arnaud's Nephew,
Herbert's Book in English Printed at London. 1638. by Rich. Bishop, wherein is
precisely these words, They administer the Lords Supper in both kinds, Bread
and Wine, and deny a real Presence. They allow but our two Sacraments. Having
produced this Original, he caused a Letter to be Printed and directed to me, in
which he complains of the injustice Mr. Arnaud has done him, and protests, he
is not of that Temper to make use of Frauds to uphold the Truth of that
Religion heprofesses, as knowing it abhors them, and makes no difference
between the cheats which the Modern Divinity of some call pious, and the
falsehood that destroys the Soul of him that utters it. He then recites Mr.
Arnaud's Expressions, and refutes his Calumnies, and offers for his
justification the very words contained in Herbert in the man ner I related 'um.
Afterward he says he does not believe Mr. Arnaud dares now justify, that in
the Original English there is no mention of the real Presence, nor affirm it is
a mere imposture of the Calvinistical Translator. That he also affirms
whatsoever is to be met with in page 249 and 250, concerning the Baptism of the
Armenians, their Proselytes, Fasts, Images, Priests, their Belief touching
Purgatory, their Superstitions, and Efforts which the Jesuits have made to
subject them to the Sea of Rome, is really contained in the Original English,
there being nothing of his Invention in all this. And to justifye it relates at
length Herbert's own words in that Language.

THIS so well grounded defense, has obliged Mr. Arnaud to retract in the Second
Edition of his Book this accusation Printed in the First. He has retrenched all
those Injurious Discourses against the Reputation, and sincerity of Mr.
Vicqfort, and acknowledged his Translation to be faithful and exactly according
to the Original. He has at the same time discovered to us the cause of his
mistake, to wit, that there having bin two Editions of Herbert's Book one in
1634, the other in 1635. in which the Author contained himself within the
Relation of his Voyage; and the Second in 1638, wherein he had added several
particulars relating to Religion and History, those whom he consulted had seen
only the first Edition, but that Mr. Vicqfort Translated from the Second in
which was found the Passage in question.

I am far from being of that Humor to insult over Mr. Arnaud in this Occasion,
nor draw advantage from his precipitous way of falling foul on Authors, who
mean not the least hurt to him. I do not doubt but he is troubled at his own
rashness in grounding a charge of this importance on a supposition, he has
found to be false, without considering whether there might not be more Editions
of Herbert than one. But he must suffer me to tell him that what he has
inserted in his Marginal Notes is not a sufficient excuse for him, the French
Translation, says he, making no mention of two different Editions of this
English Book, we could not Divine it. Much less could Lib. 5. C. 8. 2. Edition.
the Translator Divine he would be accused for an Impostour, for not having
declared there were two Editions of this Book. These kind of Accusations
pronounced with such confidence do suppose a Man to have made an exact Inquiry
before he utters them, whereas had Mr. Arnaud taken the least pains in this
respect he might have easily discovered there was a Second Edition of Herbert's
Book, and found what he has bin since showed. He needed not divine but
certainly inform himself, for this Book being Printed at London in 1638, and
being moreover famous in that kind, he might have been soon satisfied
concerning it. But supposing he could not, he ought not presently to call a
Person a Deceiver: But rather to have proposed his doubts, and require a
solution of Mr. Vicqfort himself, and not thus rashly charge a Gentleman that
never offended him. I could willingly forbear mentioning this particular, Mr.
Vicqfort having no need of my Apology, did not the interest of my cause oblige
me to declare to the World how little confidence we ought to have in Mr.
Arnaud's Discourses, if they be not upheld by solid and convincing Proofs,
which they never are, as appears from this whole dispute.

BUT laying aside this contest see we what Mr. Arnaud offers against the
Authority of Herbert, who expressly affirms the Armenians deny the real
Presence. We matter not, says he, the advantage which the Calvinists C. 8. 2.
Edition.
would make of this Testimony of Herbert, who to enlarge the Second Edition of
his Book, has added what he pleased, touching the Religion of those People
through whose Countries he traveled, without telling us from whom he learnt
what he Relates of them, for he only says what he has taken out of Authors of
his own Sect, who have treated of them, as Breerewood has done. Those
Authentic Proofs which we have produced touching the faith of the Armenians do
fully solve this Point. And not to mention others, there is no comparison
between a Calvinist who speaks in his own cause, and according to his
interests, without Authority and proofs, and a Lutheran, such a one as Mr.
Olearius is, who speaks against himself and his own interest, and cites the
Persons from whom he learnt what he tells us.

MR. Arnaud has soon forgotten what he wrote on this same subject Chap. 8.
first Edition.
in his first Edition, We may well admire, says he, that Mr. Claude, who is
wont to propose slight Objections, should omit one, which is very considerable
in appearance, and enough to startle People, because the solution of it is so
hard to be found, that we cannot justly reproach him, if he be ignorant of it.
The Objection is, that we meet with this passage in a Translation of Herbert' s
Voyages, That the Armenians deny the real presence of the Body of Christ. It
seems there can be nothing replied to so clear a passage, and that this Author
who tells us what he learnt from the Inhabitants themselves of those Countries,
as well as Mr. Olearius, may at least weaken his Authority.

WHENCE I pray comes this so manifest a contrariety of judgment? As long as the
pretended Imposture of the Translator continues in Mr. Arnaud's thoughts,
Herbert's Authority is weighty and sufficient to startle People, the solution
of it is difficult, and it seems there can be nothing replied to so plain a
passage. But so soon as this pretended Imposture vanishes, then it is, we matter
not the Testimony of Herbert, and judicious Persons ought not to credit it.
Before he was an Author who speaks what he learnt from the Inhabitants
themselves through whose Countries he passed. Now he is a Person that to enlarge
his Book has in his Second Edition added what he pleases. Before he was an
Author, who may well weaken the Authority of Mr. Olearius, now he is a
Calvinist in no wise comparable with a Lutheran, such as Mr. Olearius. What is
this but a sporting with Authors, extolling 'um, depressing them, and making
'um good or bad according as Mr. Arnaud's Occasions require. It Is plain he
wants an object to exercise his w^ath on; if it be not the Translator, it must
then be the Author; and when the living escapes him, then the Dead must pay
for it. Who told Mr. Arnaud that what Mr. Herbert relates in his Second Edition
is not what he Learnt from the Inhabitants themselves through whose Countries he
traveled, but Excerptions from Breerewood? He dared not mention, says he,
from whom he learnt what he relates. If this be sufficient to invalidate the
Testimony of Travelers, we can be certain in nothing they tell us touching the
manners of People, and their Religions; for it seldom happens that Travelers
denote the Persons from whom they have bin informed, and if they be unfaithful
in respect of the things they tell us, they may be as well so in reference to
the naming of Persons.

MR. Herbert was a Person of Quality, deservedly Honorable both for his
Learning and Integrity. He has viewed whatsoever was worth his Observation both
in Asia and Africa, and carefully denoted the manners and Religions of People,
writing nothing till such time as he was well informed of the Truth of it. What
means Mr. Arnaud then thus to attack his Memory, and tells us that a Person
thus qualifyed has copyed out from Breerewood, that is to say, from a Scholar
who perhaps never traveled farther than his own Country?

CHAP. V.
Mr. Arnaud' s Proofs touching the Armenians examined.

BUT here are, says Mr. Arnaud, certain and positive Proofs which show that
the Armenians have ever effectually believed both one Lib. 5. C. 6. p. 457.
and the other Point, and that there is no reason to accuse them of denying the
real Presence or Transubstantiation. Which we shall now Examine in this Chapter.

HIS first Proof is taken from the Testimony of Lanfranc, who disputing against
Berengarius says, that the Greeks and Armenians, and generally all Christians
hold the same faith as the Roman Church. But Mr. Ibid.
Arnaud has not considered that Lanfranc does not directly impute
Transubstantiation either to the Armenians, or Greeks, he imputes it to 'um
only by a Consequence drawn from their glorying all of 'um that they receive in
the Sacrament, the real Body and real Blood of Jesus Christ taken from the
Virgin. Now we have seen as well by the Relation of Carmes, as from the
Information of Benedict, that the Armenians gave this expression a sense wholly
contrary to Lanfranc's Consequence, so that this Proof has bin already
invalidated by the Testimony of the Armenians themselves.

THE Second is taken from the Berengarians never alleging they were of the
sentiment of the Armenians, or any other Eastern Church. Yet was it impossible
but they must know what was their Opinion, seeing that Persons Voyaged from all
parts of Europe into the East, and this would have bin a specious pretense to
the Henricians and Albingenses to avoid the rigor of those punishments they
underwent. But to discover the weakness of this reasoning we need only remember
that in the 14 Century under John XXII. Benedict XII. and Clement VI. it was
held in the West for an undoubted truth that the Armenians denied
Transubstantiation, and the real Presence, as we have already seen in the
foregoing Chapter. That 'twas the unanimous Report of the Armenians themselves
who were in the Court of Rome, and of the Latins which had bin in Armenia. Yet
although the Disciples of Berengarius were rigorously persecuted in that age, we
do not find they ever justified themselves by the example of the Armenians, nor
that the Court of Rome handled them less severely upon the account of this
conformity. We find on the contrary, their adversaries have reproached them
with following the Heresy of these Eastern People, as appears by what I have
already related concerning the disputes of Thomas Waldensis against Wicliff, so
that that was objected against them as a Crime which Mr. Arnaud would have them
make use of for an Apology.

THE III. and IV. Proof are no more conclusive than the two first. Ibid. p. 459.
They contain that Gregory VII marking in particular the Errors which the
Armenians ought to condemn to the end they might be received into the Communion
of the Church, makes no mention of any Error against the real Presence and
Transubstantiation. That in the year 1145. The Patriarch and Bishops of Armenia
sent Ambassadors to Pope Eugenius II. to render him all kind of Submission, and
make him judge of the differences which they had with the Greeks. That if this
Pope had believed they were in the Error of Berengarius, he would not have bin
contented to instruct them in the Ceremonies of the Church and manner of
Celebrating the Sacrifice. That Othon of Frisinga who relate this History would
never have concealed so important a circumstance. I answer that Gregory VII.
Baron ad. con. 114.
particularizes only four Errors, for which he Censures the Armenians. I. That
they mix no water with their Wine in the Chalice. II. That they compound the
Chream with Butter, and not with Balm. III. That they reverence Dioscorus as a
Saint, although he was condemned. In fine, that they added the (sign) of the Cross
to the Triasagios after the manner of Heretics. How many other Doctrines and
Customs have the Armeuians besides these four Articles, which the Roman Church
does not approve of? They hold the Opinions of Eutyches. They do not hold the
Doctrine of the Propagation of Original sin. They deny Purgatory. They still
offer Sacrifices after the manner of the Jews. They condemn third Marriages,
for as bad as Fornication. They deny the Sacrament of Confirmation. They do not
hold the Consecration of the Bread is made by the only words of Jesus Christ.
They believe the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father alone, and several other
Points which separate 'um from the Latins, and of which neither Gregory VII.
Eugenius III. nor Othon of Trisinga make any mention. Which shows there can be
drawn no Conclusion from their silence, and that Mr. Arnaud may better employ
his time than in collecting these kind of Proofs.

THE V. is taken from some expressions of a Catholic of Armenia, Ibid. p. 460.
who says, in the conference of Theorien, that the Wine becomes by
Consecration the Blood of Jesus Christ, and that the Son of God is Sacrificed
within the Church for the Salvation of the World. But this Proof is too weak to
confirm what Mr. Arnaud pretends. For first we have already showed him that
this Catholic spoke of his own head, and not from his Church. And moreover,
what he says does neither conclude the real Presence, nor Transubstantiation.
The Wine becomes by its Consecration the Blood of Jesus Christ in
representation and mystery, according to the exposition which the Armenians
themselves give to these ways of speaking, as we have seen in the foregoing
Chapter, and the Son of God is Sacrificed in the Church in Commemortion,
inasmuch as the action of the Eucharist is a Mystery which represents his
death. Let Mr. Arnaud consult (if he pleases) the Marginal Note which is on the
side of this last passage, and he will find the solution of his Difficulty. The
Greek Text has (...), the Latin, Mactatur intus Theorien. Dial. adver. Armen.
Dei filius pro totius mundi salute, and the Marginal Note, hoc est,
representatur in sacra caena mactatio Christi.

THE VI. Proof is taken from that during the Croisado's the Popes Ibid. page
462.
held a lasting and strict Union with the Church of Armenia. That the Catholic
of Armenia, yielded obedience to Pope Eugenius III. That this Union was
confirmed under Innocent III. who sent a Crown to Leo King of Armenia, and that
as well this King, as Gregory the Patriarch of Armenia, sent an Ambassador to
Innocent to acknowledge the Primacy of the Roman Church. That there were
Alliances made between the Latin Princes and those of Armenia. That Pope
Innocent excommunicated the King of Armenia at the request of the Templars, and
some time after gave him Absolution. That this Union lasted during Gregory IX.
his time, and Clement VI.

BUT what is this but a telling of Stories, and copying out of Raynadus at any
rate. If the proof which Mr. Arnaud pretends to draw from this Union be
sufficient to conclude the Armenians were conformable to the Church of Rome in
the Doctrines of the real Presence and Transubstantiation, 'twill be sufficient
to conclude likewise that they were conformable to her in all the other Points
concerning which we do not find the Popes ever troubled themselves to correct
them, or make the least inquiries about them. They were satisfied in the Kings
and Patriachs of Armenia's acknowledging their Authority, hoping by this means
to introduce hereafter quietly amongst them the Religion and Ceremonies of the
Latins, and in the mean time made use of 'em in other occasions. The Kings of
Armenia on the other hand were very ready to give the Popes encouragement to
believe they would reduce their Kingdoms to the obeisance of the Roman See, and
in the mean time procured the assistance and protection of the Latins, whose
power was then Formidable throughout the whole East. But this did not hinder
the Armenians from keeping still their Doctrines and Customs, as appears by
what we have seen in the preceding Chapter of John XXII, Benedict XII and
Clement VI. The 79 Article of the information of Benedict expressly mentions,
That the Priests and Bishops of Armenia enjoined a penance during some years
to those that had bin Baptized by the Latins, and condemned them to undergo a 5
years penance who had received from them the other Sacrament. And the 86
Article. That the Armenians say, and hold, that since the Council of Chalcedon,
the Roman Prelate has no more Authority over them which are under him then the
Patriarch of the Nestorians over the Nestorians, or the Greek Patriarch over
the Greeks, that the Pope knows his own power and the Armenians likewise
theirs. And the 99th Article; that the Armenians persecute those amongst them
who have been Baptized according to the form of the Latins, and hold the Faith
of the Roman Church, and that they say the Roman Church Errs, and that they
Armenians keep the true and Catholic Faith. And the 117th. Article. That the
Armenians keep not the true Faith which the Roman Church holds, nor its
Sacraments, and Blasphemes against the Roman Church the Pope and his Cardinals,
saying they are Heretics. That the Catholic of Armenia minor said, the Pope
and Cardinals destroyed more Men every day than they had Hairs on their heads.
And although they preach against Simony, yet do they grant no favor without
committing it; that as to them Armenians they had all of 'um kept themselves
undefiled in Armenia minor, except the King and some Persons of Quality who
held the Roman Faith. It Is then to no purpose for Mr. Arnaud to tell us that
Innocent III. and the other Popes would not have held so strict a Union with
the Armenian Church had they believed the Armenians were Berengarians, seeing
they did at the same time stir up all France against the Albingenses, and
caused 'um to be exterminated with Fire and Sword. These excellent Reasons do
not hinder, but that the Armenians held still all their Opinions contrary to
the Doctrines of the Roman Church under the Popedom of Benedict XII. And II.
that amongst those Opinions, that which denis Transubstantiation and the real
Presence is plainly remarked. III. That although the Kings and some Persons of
Quality embraced the Roman Religion, yet the Body of the Armenian Church kept
to their Ancient Religion, even to the blaspheming the Roman Church, the Pope,
and his Cardinals, according to the Terms of the Article which I now mentioned.
IV. In fine it will not be found, that Innocent III. or any other Pope required
of the Armenians any particular Renunciation of their Errors, be they what they
will. It seems either these Popes supposed the Armenians had absolutely the
same Faith as the Roman Church, or dissembled these Errors, in hopes, as I
already said, that in establishing their Authority in Armenia, they might
introduce amongst them the Religion of the Latins, by means of their Emissaries
which the Kings favored, and to whom some Bishops gave liberty to preach, as
appears by the 78 Article of the Information of Benedict. The Catholic of
Armenia minor, says this Article, Consecrating Six Bishops has drawn from them
a Public Act, in which they solemnly promise, to suffer no longer their Youth
to learn the Latin Tongue, and to give no more liberty to the Latin Preachers,
who Preach the Faith of the Holy Roman Church in their Diocese, or Province.
Moreover he obliges every Bishop he Consecrates, to Anathematise the Armenians
that desire to become true Catholics, and obey the Roman Church. He forbids
them to Preach that the Pope of Rome is the Head of the Eastern Church, and
calls himself Pope, acting in this quality in the Eastern Countries from the Sea
to Tartaria.

AS to what Mr. Arnaud tells us concerning James de Vitry, and Brocard's Ibid.
p. 46^ 466.
silence who impute not to the Armenians the denying of Transubstantiation, we
may answer him that their silence ought not to come in competition with the
Testimony of so many Authors, who expressly affirm they deny it. Moreover
Brocard speaks not of their Opinions, and James de Vitry takes notice only of
the Ceremonies and Rites which appertain to the external part of their
Religion, without mentioning any thing of their Doctrines. But Mr. Arnaud who
comes and offers us as a Demonstrative Proof of the Union of the Armenians with
the Popes in the time of the Croisado's, ought not to conceal what James de
Vitry has written on this Subject; although the Armenians, says he, promised
obedience to the Sovereign Prelate Jacob a Vitriuco histor. Orient. cap. 79.
and Roman Church, when their King received the Kingdom from the Emperor
Henry, and the Regal Crown from the hands of the Archbishop of Mayence, yet
would they not part with any of their Ancient Ceremonies or Customs. And these
were their Reunions with the Roman Church.

IT IS true there was in those Times one of their Kings named Hayton, who
marvellously favored the Latins, and perhaps 'twas he of whom Mr. Arnaud
speaks, who took on him at last the Habit of St. Francis. But be it as it will,
this King did all he could to introduce the Roman Religion into Armenia, but in
vain. Observe here the words of the Information of Benedict Art. 116. A King of
Armenia called Hayton assembled all the Doctors and Bishops of his Kingdom
together with the Patriarch to unite 'um to the Roman Church, and dispute with
the Legate which the Roman Church had sent; But the dispute being ended the King
acknowledged the Truth was on the Romanists side, and that the Armenians were
in an Error, and therefore ever since, the Kings of Armenia minor have embraced
the faith of the Roman Church. Yet were not the Bishops Doctors and Princes
satisfied with this, and after the departure of the Legate a Doctor named Vartan
wrote a Book against the Pope and his Legate, and against the Roman Church, in
which he calls the Pope a Proud Pharaoh who with all his Subjects are drowned
in the Sea of Heresy. He says that Pharaoh' s Ambassador, meaning the Legate,
returned home with shame. etc. It Is to be observed that this Book of Dr.
Vartan's although full of passionate Invectives against the Pope and his Church,
yet was received in Armenia, as if it had bin the Canons of the Apostles.

WHICH considered, I see no reason to prize so much these feigned Submissions
which the Kings of Armenia have sometimes yielded to the Pope by their
Ambassadors, as for instance such as was that of King Osinius paid to John
XXII. by a Bishop who in the name of the King, and his Kingdom, made such a
profession of faith as they desired. To make this a proof, as Mr. Arnaud does,
is either to be ignorant, or dissemble the Genius of this Nation. The Armenians
in the exigency of their affairs, made no scruple to send to the Pope Persons,
that promised him whatsoever he desired, but as soon as ever the danger was
over, and they had obtained of the Latins what they desired, they made a mock
at their promises, as Clement VI. reproaches them in his Letters to the King,
and Catholic of Armenia, as we have already observed in the preceding Chapter.

WHICH has bin well observed by the Author of the Book called the Embassage of
Dr. Garcias de Sylva Figueroa. The Religion, says he, The Embassage of Dr.
Garcias de Sylva Figueroa Translated by Mr. de Vicqfort. p. 193.
of the Inhabitants of the new Zulpha, who are Armenians by birth, is the
Christian, together with the Opinions which the Pope suffers them to retain.
But to speak the truth there are very few that reverence, or acknowledge the
Pope; almost all of 'um obstinately retaining their own ancient Religion. For
although several of the Bishops and Priests of their Nation that have passed over
into Europe, (moved thereunto by their extreme poverty, their expenses in
traveling, and intolerable persecutions of the Turks, during the continual
Wars between them and the Persians,) have often offered to obey the Roman
Church, yet when this was to be concluded, they have still fallen off, and
refused to acknowledge any other Authority than that of their Patriarch,
obstinately retaining their ancient Ceremonies and Liturgys. This has bin the
perpetual complaint of the Latins. But Mr. Arnaud has imagined this a secret to
us.

THERE is perhaps more heed to be given to what he alleges touching a certain
Person named Gerlac, who belonged to the Ambassador sent from the Emperor to
Constantinople, about an hundred years since. This Gerlac relates in one of his
Letters a Discourse he had in matters of Religion with the Patriarch of the
Armenians at Constantinople, and amongst other things he tells us, They hold
that the real Body of Jesus Christ is present in the Sacrament in its proper
Substance (He means the same as they of the Ausbourg Confession) In caena
Domini verum and Substantiale Corpus and Sanguinem Christi adesse dicunt, sed
videntur Transubstantiationem probare. But upon the reading of this Letter, it
will soon appear that, this Patriarch with whom he discoursed, gave him his own
private sentiments, and not the Doctrines of the Armenian Religion. For he
tells him, that he believed and confessed that the Holy Spirit proceeds from
the Father and the Son, contrary to what the Greeks hold. Yet does it appear
from the constant testimony of Authors, who treated of the Opinions of the
Armenians, that they hold the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father alone, and
are in this particular at accord with the Greeks against the Latins. So says
Guy Carmes, the information of Benedict XII. Prateolus, Breerewood and several
others, and therefore the first thing Eugenius IV. did in the Council of
Florence, when he gave his instructions to the Armenians, was to oblige them to
receive the Symbol with the addition of the Filioque. Besides this Gerlac's
Patriarch expressly declares he holds the Doctrine of the Ubiquity, that is to
say, of the presence of the Humane Nature in Jesus Christ, wheresoever the
Divinity is, which is not the real belief of the Armenians, as we have already
sufficiently proved. Gerlac adds, That they acknowledge the Roman Prelate to be
the Head of the Universal Church, which is not true, as appears as well by the
information of Benedict, as by the Testimony of several other Authors. It Is
moreover apparent that his affirming them to believe the Substantial Presence
of the Body of Jesus Christ in the Sacrament is only grounded on this pretended
Doctrine of the Ubiquity, which grants this Body to be every where, and by
Consequence in the Sacrament. And as to Transubstantiation, he does not
absolutely impute it to 'em, but says they seem to admit of it, videntur,
says he, Transubstantiationem probare. Let the reader judge whether this
Translation be faithful. It appears, is an expression which gives the idea of a
thing clear and evident, whereas every one knows that the videtur of the Latins
which Answers our English word It seems, gives the Idea of a thing which has
the likelihood and color, but which is not absolutely out of doubt, of a thing
which we may think to be true, but of which we have no certainty. It Is likely
Gerlac grounded his videntur on the General Term to change, which the Armenian
Patriarch made use of, but in effect this Term does not signify a
Transubstantiation, and 'twas only Gerlac's prejudice which persuaded him it
did.

THE same prejudice may be observed in Mr. Olearius as appears from his own
words, I was informed, says he, by the Patriarch of Armenia who visited us at
Schamachia a City of Media, that the Armenians, held Transubstantiation. Now
believing Transubstantiation, that is to say, the change of Bread and Wine into
the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, it is not to be questioned but they hold the
true and real Presence. His Authority in reference to the Armenians is only
grounded on a that is to say, as it was in respect of the Moscovites: If you
deny his explanation, his Testimony signifies nothing.

AS to the attestations which Mr. Arnaud produces of Hacciadour the Patriarch
of the Armenians reunited to the Roman Church, and who is now at Rome where Mr.
Arnaud tells us he has taken care to have him consulted, and of Uscanus
Vardapet an Armenian Bishop who was not long since at Amsterdam, we know very
well there is little heed to be given to these sort of People testimony; who
never come into the Western parts but upon the Account of some Temporal
interest; and never fail to Answer as you would have them. The Latins and the
Popes themselves have bin often deceived, and if I may not be believed, let
Anthony de Goureau an Emissary of the Mission of Hispaham be consulted, who in
the History he wrote concerning the reduction of the Armenians of Persia tells
us, that although in the Union made in the Council of Florence, the Armenians
reunited themselves, and the greatest part of the Greek Church Anthony de
Goureau's Relation, Book 3. Chapter 3.
likewise, yet these People proceeded not with that fervor and diligence which
was requisite in a matter of that importance; on the contrary they were so
little mindful of it, through the malice or negligence of their Prelates, that I
do not find amongst them the least sign of this reduction, nor any thing which
this Council decreed, nor Obedience thereunto recommended. There is no mention
of it in their Books and Traditions. And I wonder that John Laurens of Anania
in his Universal Fabric should say, that the Armenians almost in General have
lately received the determinations of the Trent Council, seeing not so much as
the name of it was scarce ever heard by the Bishops or Patriarch, nor have they
altered any of their Customs either good or bad, for this many Ages. But
perhaps this Author was informed of this by some Armenians passing throughout
Europe, or that dwell therein upon the account of Trade, who for the most part
return answers according to the desires of those that ask 'um, and that they
may not fail therein, do very often speak contrary to truth, which the Bishops
and Prelates of these Schismatics who come to Rome often do to gratify the
Pope, promising their Flocks shall yield Obedience to him, but at their return
home, they soon forget their engagements. Let any one then judge of what weight
the attestations of these People are, and whether the Discourses of Hacciadour
and Vardapet, are to be preferred before so many other convincing Testimonies
which assert the contrary of what they affirm.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Nestorians, Maronites, Jacobites, Copticks, and Aethiopians. That they
hold not Transubstantiation.

WE shall treat in this Chapter of the other Eastern Sects that profess the
Christian Religion. Mr. Arnaud Lib. 5. C. 10. p. 491.
pretends they all of 'um hold the real Presence and Transubstantiation.

AS to the Nestorians he grounds his Opinion concerning them on the silence of
Ancient and Modern Authors, who never told us the Nestorians differ from the
Church of Rome in this particular. He adds that the Emissaries sent by the Pope
into these countries to endeavor their reduction to the Obedience of the Roman
See, never discovered any thing to make 'um suspect the Faith of the Nestorians
touching the Eucharist. He says in fine, that when the Nestorians reunited
themselves to the Church of Rome, they were never required to make any
particular declaration of their belief in reference to the Eucharist.

BUT as to what respects the silence of Authors, we have already answered in
the case of the Moscovits, that they do only chiefly observe those points which
are expressly controverted between the other Churches and the Roman, descending
not so far as to particularize all other matters, which these Churches do or do
not hold.

THE same may be said touching the silence of the Emissaries. The Emissaries
have contented themselves in mentioning those Errors from which they have freed
the Nestorians, without mentioning the new Doctrines which they have taught
'um; and this indeed concludes they have not bin obliged to introduce
Transubstantiation amongst these People by way of dispute, being a Point,
against which the Nestorians were prejudiced; but this does not hinder them
from being obliged to bring it in by way of instruction, as being a Doctrine
not comprised in their Ancient Religion, and which they ought now to receive,
to the end they may become conformable to the Roman Church.

WHICH justifies it self by the conduct of the Popes themselves, who have sent
the Emissaries, for they ever recommended to them this profession of Faith
which we have so often already mentioned, and which expressly contains the
Article of Transubstantiation in these terms, Sacramentum Eucharistiae ex azymo
conficit Romana Ecclesia, tenens et docens, quod in ipso Sacramento, Panis vere
Transubstantiatur in Corpus, and Vinum in Sanguinem Domini nostri Jesu Christi.
The Roman Church Celebrates the Sacrament with Unleavened Bread, holding and
teaching, that in this Sacrament the Bread is really Transubstantiated into the
Body, and the Wine into the Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ.

THE Popes have ever earnestly recommended to the Missionaries the instructing
of the Nestorians, and other Eastern Christians according to this Formulary.
They have sent it to the Nestorian Proselyte Bishops, enjoining 'um to have it
continually in their minds, and to teach it their People, as we may see in
Raynaldus. In the profession of Faith which Raynaldus ad ann. 1445.
Timotheus a Nestorian Archbishop of the Isle of Cyprus made in the year 1445.
not long after the Council of Florence, he was made to say that he confessed
and approved of the Seven Sacraments of the Roman Church, and Raynaldus ad ann.
1445.
of the manner after which she holds, teaches, and Preaches them. And in the
Reunion made in the year 1583. of certain Nestorian Christians of St. Thomas
whom the Portugaises found in the Kingdoms of Cochin, Coulan, and Cranganor, Du
Jarric observes their Archbishop was Du Jarric's History of the East Indias.
caused to profess what the Council of Florence had decreed touching the
Doctrine which must be held concerning the Sacraments. He means without doubt
that which was set down in the Instruction given to the Armenians, in which we
see the Article of Transubstantiation. All which shows us they well knew the
Necessity there was of introducing Transubstantiation into the Nestorian
Church, to make it conformable to the Roman; whence it is not difficult to
conclude that this Doctrine was not established in it before.

IN effect had the Emissaries and other travelers into these Countries found
the belief of the Substantial Conversion established in them, it is not to be
doubted but they would have proclaimed it to the World, and made this a Proof
of the Antiquity of that Article. Mr. Arnaud would not have bin reduced to the
Necessity of drawing a Proof from their silence, seeing they would have
positively declared they found these People imbued with this sentiment, that
the substance of Bread is changed into the proper Substance of the Body of
Jesus Christ. The Popes would have loudly Gloryed in it, and certainly there
would have bin some Body or other that would have taken Notice of the
contradictions of the Protestants in Europe: but instead of this neither the
Popes nor Emissaries make mention of this pretended conformity, and Mr. Arnaud
Philosophises upon their not charging the Nestorians with their being
Calvinists, and upon some passages of their Liturgies which are very uncertain,
and which at bottom are of no consideration in respect of our difference.

LEONTIUS of Byzanejus recites a Discourse concerning these Nestorians from
whence we may easily gather their Opinion touching the Bread of the Eucharist.
They were very earnest (according to his Relation) Leontius Biz. advers. Nest.
and Eutych. Lib. 3. Bibl. patr. tom. 4.
with an Orthodox Christian to communicate with them, and this Person telling
them he could not have Communion at the same time with the Catholic Church and
theirs, they answered him, that this need not trouble him because the Bread
which is proposed as a Type of the Body of Jesus Christ contains a greater
blessing than that sold in the market, or the Bread which the Philomarianites
offered in the name of Mary. It Is apparently seen these are not the expressions
of Persons that believe the real Presence which the Roman Church holds. This
shows they acknowledged no other effect from the Consecration than that of a
Virtue of Benediction, or Grace, and it is also very Remarkable that in this
Discourse they do not give any other title to the Bread of the Sacrament than
that of the Type of the Body of Jesus Christ, in which they follow the
expression of Apud. Cyrill. alex. contra Nest. Lib. 4. Cap. 6. See the Eight
Chapter wherein are several passages of the Liturgy of the Nestorians, and
Indians. Lib. 5. C. 12. p. 508.
Nestorius himself the Author of their Sect, who speaking of the Bread of the
Eucharist says, that the Body of Jesus Christ is the Original of it, which is
as much as to say that the Bread is a figure which represents this Body. And
thus far concerning the Nestorians.

AS to the Maronites their profession of Obedience, since so long a time, to
the Sea of Rome, receiving their Patriarchs from the Pope, does evidently
exclude them from this dispute. Yet we cannot but observe how little exact Mr.
Arnaud is, when designing to show that the Maronites believed
Transubstantiation and the real Presence even before their Reunion to the Roman
Church, says, that Thomas a Jesu mentions an extract made by the Popes Legates
of the bad Propositions they found in the Books of the Maronites, amongst which
they comprehend the different Ceremonys, such as Comunicating of both kinds,
giving the Communion to Children. Yet in this Catalogue of suspected
Propositions, there is not one relating to the Eucharist. It Is certain Mr.
Arnaud is mistaken, having perused this extract a little carelessly, for
otherwise he would have observed three Propositions which evidently show that
these People did not believe Transubstantiation, nor yet the Substantial
Presence. The first is, That our Savior Christ dipped the Bread he gave to
Judas, to 'the end he might thereby take off the Consecration. Christus
intinxit Panem quem erat Judae porrecturus ad Consecrationem tollendam. We have
already observed that this Error must be grounded on this Principle, that the
Bread is a Subject that receives Grace as a quality, which imprints its self in
its Substance, and which may be effaced in washing the Bread. For what
likelihood is there had they believed that the effect of the Consecration was
to change the Substance of Bread into that of the Body of Jesus Christ, that in
dipping the Bread the Substance of the Body of Jesus Christ would be washed off?

THE II. Proposition which the Legates expunged out of the Maronites Books was,
That when we receive the Eucharist, it Descends not into the Stomach, but
immediately disperses it self to every member of our Body. This Proposition was
deemed Heretical, and in effect, we cannot believe that the matter of the
Sacrament disperses its self to all the Members of our Body without supposing
it to be the Substance of Bread, there being too many absurdities to make the
proper Substance of Christ's Body pass into the Substance of our Flesh. Yet this
Sentiment is grounded on the Doctrine of Damascene who expressly asserts, That
the Sacrament passes Damascen. Lib. 4. de fide Orthodox. C. 14
into the Substance of our Souls and Bodies, that it is neither Consumed or
Corrupted, nor passes into excrements, but into our Substance and for our
Conservation. We made use of this Passage of Damascene to show he believed the
Eucharist to be a real Substance of Bread, seeing it passes into that of our
Bodies. Mr. Arnaud derides this Consequence. Does Mr. Claude, says he, pretend
that Damascene believed the Eucharistical Lib. 7. C. 4
Bread passed into our Souls to become a part of them? Surely he will not
proceed so far. How then will he conclude it enters into our Bodies to become a
part of their Substance? And why does he not conclude on the contrary, that as
these words, in Consistentiam animae vadit, do signify nothing else in respect
of the Soul, but that the Body of Jesus Christ unites its self to the Soul, to
conserve, fortify and operate in it his Graces; so this expression, in
Consistentiam Corporis vadit, does signify nothing else, but that the Body of
Jesus Christ unites it self to our Bodies to preserve and sow on them according
to the Fathers the seeds of a Glorious immortality.

BUT Mr. Arnaud deceives himself, not comprehending that according to Damascene
and the Greeks, there are two things in the Eucharist, the Substance, and the
Spiritual and divine virtue, which is imparted to it by means of the
Consecration, so that Damascene making a distribution of these two things,
attributes one of 'um to the Soul, to wit the Divine Virtue, and the other to
the Body, to wit the Substance, and it is in respect of this latter that he
says (...). Not consuming nor Corrupting it self, nor passing into Excrements,
God forbid, but passing into our Substance and preservation. He says expressly
it passes into our Substance. Why will not Mr. Arnaud suffer me to say it after
Damascene himself? Had he well examined the Doctrine of the Fathers, he would
have found in 'um this distinction of two things whereof the Sacrament
consists, one of which respects immediately the Body and the other immediately
the Soul. Under the new Law, says Cyrill of Jerusalem, the Heavenly Bread and
Cup of Salvation Sanctify the Soul and Body, for as the Bread respects the
Body, so the word (that Cyril Hie Call. mist. 4. Epiphan. in Anapc^hal.
is to say the Consecration performed by the word) relates to the Soul. The
Bread, says Epiphanius, is an aliment, but there is in it a quickening Virtue.
And Origin before 'um distinguished the Bread from the Eucharist, in respect of
what it has material, and in reference of the Prayer said over Origin. Comm.
in Matt. 1^.
it.

THE III. Proposition, censured in the Books of the Maronites is contained in
an Article of the extract, which has for its title, Nonnulla loca sacrae
Scripturae prave intellecta, some places of Scripture misunderstood, and is
thus described, Asserunt Legendum esse, hoc est Sacramentum Corporis, etc. They
affirm we must read, this is the Sacrament of my Body, etc. Would Mr. Arnaud
without Prejudice or Passion but consider a while the importance of this
Proposition. For whether these People pretended we must read the Text, not,
this is my Body, but, this is the Sacrament of my Body, or meant only that this
was the sense we must give to the words of Christ, as the title of the Article
insinuates. Is it possible that Persons who believed the substantial Presence
and Transubstantiation of the Roman Church, should either make this correction,
or seek this explication? Was there ever a one of the Latins that ever had such
a thought in his mind, that we must not read, this is my Body, but this is the
Sacrament of my Body? Do they not all on the contrary affirm that we must keep
strictly to the literal sense? Let Mr. Arnaud consult himself hereupon, and
tell us whether he could offer such a Proposition and whether he would not
esteem it Scandalous and Heretical should any other propose it.

YET must we observe that Thomas a Jesu who recites the Extract which the Popes
Legates made, says expressly that these Propositions which they found in proper
terms in the Books of the Maronites, or received by the Public Consent, and by
Tradition, and which they condemned as manifestly Heretical, or Erroneous, or
Superstitious, were Errors common to the other Eastern Nations, so that what we
now Rehearsed concerning the Maronites must be extended in general to all the
Schismatical Churches.

AS to the passages related by Abraham Echellensis a Maronite, who was of the
Seminary at Rome, Mr. Arnaud must bear with me if I tell him, (that considering
the Character which Gabriel Sionita gives us of this Person, whom he perfectly
knew, being both of the same Country, and having passed over a great part of
their Life's together) he ought to be ashamed to offer any thing grounded on
these kind of Testimonies, and to suppose us such Fools to give credit to the
Relation of a Man so cried down.

COME we now to the Jacobites, Copticks and Ethiopians, Mr. Arnaud brings again
upon the Subject of these three Churches the same Negative Arguments drawn from
the silence of Authors and Emissaries, which he used in reference to the
Moscovites, and Nestorians; so that we need do no more than to return the same
answers already made, and tell him that, if these People had the same belief as
the Roman Church touching the Substance of the Sacrament, several Authors and
Emissaries, would without doubt, have informed the World thereof; and make
advantage of this conformity which they discovered between the Latins and them.

I shall tell him here again what he has bin told elsewhere that, when the
Emissaries were sent to these People to instruct them, they ever carried along
with them the profession of faith of Clement VI. which contained expressly the
Article of Transubstantiation; that the Popes have sent it to their Patriarchs
and Proselyte Bishops; and that when Eugenius IV. Raynald. ad. ann. 1442.
reunited to the Latin Church John the Patriarch of the Jacobites, he made him
accept the decreee of the Reunion of the Armenians which contains in proper
Terms the Doctrine of Transubstantiation.

BUT after all we may tell him it cannot be supposed the Jacobites, Copticks or
Ethiopians were conformable to the Roman Church in the Doctrine of the
Eucharist, holding as they do, that there is but one Nature in our Savior
Christ which is the Divine, according to the Opinions of Eutiches and
Dioscorus. We cannot without charging them with the greatest Absurdity suppose
they believe the Substance of Bread is really converted into the Substance of
the Body of Jesus Christ, seeing they hold that Jesus Christ has not a Body,
there being only the Divine Nature in him. Now that they hold this last Error,
may be proved by infinite Testimonies.

NICEPHORUS a Greek Historian affirms the Jacobites assert, Nicephor Cali.
Eccles Hist. Lib. 18. Cap. 52. The wonderful H^^t. of the Great Cham of Tartar.
that after the Union there was only one Nature in Jesus Christ.

BROTHER Bieul, of the Order of Preachers, affirms the same in the Relation of
his Travels, The Jacobites, says he, are Heretics and Schismatics. They say
there is in Christ but one Substance, one Operation, and one Will, which is the
Divine. This is false and contrary to our Catholic Faith. For in Christ with
the Divinity is a true Substance, Operation and Humane Will. For the true Faith
is, that God was real God, and real Man. And a little further speaking of a
Dispute which he had with them. We showed them, says he, wherein they erred,
when they denied our Savior Christ to be real God and Man, and yet would still
retain and affirm that in Jesus Christ there was only one Substance, one
Operation, one Nature and one Will which according to them is the Divine.

POPE John XXII. writing to Raymund the Patriarch of Jerusalem Raynald ad ann.
1^26. number. 28.
complains to him of the Jacobites being tolerated in the Kingdom of Cyprus,
and grounds his complaint on that these Heretics dared maintain against the
truth of the Orthodox Faith that there was but one Nature in our Savior Christ.

GUY Carmes expressly observes this amongst the rest of their Errors, Guide. Car.
sum. de bae^^s tit. de Jacob. Barth. a Salignaico itiner. terrae Sanctae fol.
31. de Jacobitis. Pratcol. Elench. haret. Lib. 7. de Jacob. art. 3. Joann.
Cotov. Itiner Hieros. and Syriac. Lib. 2. Cap. 6.
that they affirm there is in Jesus Christ but one Nature, no more than one
Person, and therefore they make the sign of the Cross only with one finger.

THE same may be seen in Barthol. Salignac's Voyages into the Holy Land. They
hold, says he, (speaking of the Jacobites) that there is but only one Nature
in Jesus Christ which is the Divine.

THEY profess to believe but one Nature in Jesus Christ, says Prateolus.

THEY are corrupted by several Errors, says Cottovic, and especially in
reference to our Savior Christ. For they confound our Saviors Divine and
Humane Nature, and make thereof but one Will and one Operation. They deny there
was in Jesus Christ after the Union of the Word with the Flesh two Natures
entire and perfect without confusion of Person. Moreover they maintain that the
Flesh which our Savior Christ took was not of the same Nature as ours, and
that the Word was not changed into true Flesh, but into I know not what kind of
Fantastical and apparent Flesh, and that he rather seemed to be a Man, to be
born and dye than really to do and be so. Thus do they teach that all the
Mysteries of our Salvation, the Incarnation, Passion, Resurrection of our
Savior, his Ascension into Heaven, and his Second Coming, are only things
feigned and appearances, and by this means make invalid all these Mysteries.
And to confirm their Heresy by an external Testimony, Cottovic. Ibid. Voyages
and Observe. of the Sicur de la Boulay le Goux 3. part. chapter 12. page 371
they make the sign of the Cross only with one finger thereby representing that
there is but one Nature in Jesus Christ.

HE tells us the same thing of the Copticks. They follow, says he, the Heresy
of Dioscorus and Eutiches, which is common to them with the Jacobites.

THE Copticks are Schismatical Christians, says the Sieur Boulay le Goux, and
hold the same Errors as the Armenians, Jacobites, and Aethiopians following in
every thing the Opinion of Dioscorus and Eutyches.

THE Copticks, says Mr. Thevenot, are Christians but Jacobites, Thevenot's
Voyages part 2. Chapter 75. p. 501.
that is to say, followers of Eutyches and Dioscorus.

IT will be needless to produce any more Testimonies for the confirming a thing
so well known that Mr. Arnaud cannot but acknowledge it: neither need we say
much concerning the Ethiopians who are in all particulars like to the Copticks,
and receive from them their Abuna, that is to say, their Patriarch, as Mr.
Arnaud acknowledges. Yet will I here relate the Answers which an Abyssin Priest
named Thecla Maria returned to the questions offered him at Rome by some
Cardinals who Colloquy'd with him by order of Pope Sixtus V. in the year 1594.
as we find them set down by Thomas a Jesu. Being asked, says he, how many
natures, Thomas a Jesu. Lib. 7. p. 1. C. 13.
wills and operations the Aethiopians held to be in our Lord Jesus Christ, He
answered that the Aethiopians professed to believe only one Nature in Jesus
Christ after the Union, one Will, and one Operation, yet without confusion, and
he added he knew well that the Aethiopians, Copticks and other Eastern
Christians that hold this Opinion deviated greatly from the truth. Being asked
whether the Aethiopians believe one Nature in Jesus Christ resulting from two.
He answered that the Aethiopians do not say so, but profess to believe that
there is only one Nature in our Savior without mixture or confusion, which
they affirm to be the Divine. Being moreover demanded whether the Aethiopians
received the Decrees of the Council of Chalcedon. He answered they condemned
this Council, because therein was confirmed the two Natures in Jesus Christ,
and that therein was Condemned Dioscorus the Patriarch of Alexandria. The
Relations of Ethiopia confirm the same thing.

IT now concerns us to know whether all these Nations, to wit, the Jacobits,
Copticks, and Ethiopians can hold Transubstantiation, that is to say, the
question is whether they be People endued with common sense. For what can be
more contradictory than to maintain on one hand that our Savior Christ has no
real Body, that there is nothing in him but the Divine Nature, that his whole
converse in the World, his Birth, Death and Resurrection, were only bare
Appearances without any Reality. And to believe on the other, that the
Substance of Bread is really changed into the proper Substance of his Body,
into the same Substance he took of the Virgin, and which he retains still in
Heaven. Mr. Arnaud will tell us they hold Transubstantiation after their
manner. But let him show us then what this manner is. Will he have 'um believe
the Substance of Bread is inwardly changed into the Substance of these
Appearances with which they say the Divinity heretofore clothed it self?
Besides that it would be ridiculous to attribute a Substance to simple
Appearances which are nothing, and that according to them these appearances are
no longer in being having ceased with the Economy; will not this be excellent
sense to say that the Substance of Bread changes it self into the Appearances
which do not appear? for they will be concealed under the Vail of the Accidents
of Bread, that is to say, they will be invisible Appearances lying hid under
other Appearances.

WILL Mr. Arnaud, say they, hold the Transubstantiation of Bread into the
Nature of the Divinity, which is to say that the Substance of Bread becomes it
self the Divine Essence? But if it be true that these People hold so monstrous
an Opinion, whence comes it that both Ancient and Modern Authors make no
mention of it; never examined the Consequences of such a Conversion; have
vehemently argued against the conversion of the Humane Nature into the Divine
to show that it is impossible, and not mentioned a word of this conversion of
Bread into the Divinity? How happens it the Emissaries never discovered to the
World so important a secret, never disputed against them on this point, nor the
Popes ever made them abjure such an absurd Opinion in the reunions made between
these People and the Church of Rome? Whence comes it the Greeks who have bin
mixtwith them, since so many ages never reproached 'um with this kind of
Transubstantiation about which there may be great Volumes written? Mr. Arnaud
who is so ready at arguing from the silence of all these People, Authors,
Travelers, Emissaries, Popes, Greeks, etc. ought to inform us of the reason
why not one of 'um has mentioned a word of this pretended change of Bread into
the nature of the Divinity.

ALL this I think should oblige Mr. Arnaud to suspend a while his judgment
touching Mr. Picquet's Letter which says, that all the Levantine Christians,
who are Heretics, and consequently such as have entered into a Confederacy
against the Roman Church, yet hold as an Article of Faith, the real Presence of
Jesus Christ, and Transubstantiation of the Bread and Wine into the Body and
Blood of our Lord. He ought at least to desire him The Contents of this Letter
are thus elated by Mr. Arnaud in his 12 Book.
to consult what they mean in saying there is but one Nature in Jesus Christ,
and that the Divine one, and yet the Substance of Bread to be really changed
into the Substance of Christ's Body.

BUT this ought to oblige him likewise not to draw so lightly his Consequences
from several Passages of the Liturgies which are attributed to these People,
wherein the Eucharist is called the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, and said to
be truly this Body and this Blood. For besides that these Expressions import
not Transubstantiation, as I have often proved, and shall farther prove in what
follows, it is to be considered that we have no certainty that these pieces are
real or faithfully Translated, seeing that in those few Passages which Mr.
Arnaud produces, there may be observed a Remarkable difference. The Liturgy
which is in the Biblictheca Patrum under the Title of Canon generalis
Aethiopum, mentions that the People say after the Priest has Consecrated, Amen,
Amen, Amen, credimus and confidimus, and laudamus te Deus noster, hoc vere
Corpus tuum est, We believe it, We trust in thee and praise thee O Lord our
God, this is really thy Body; but Athanasius Kircher otherwise relates these
words, Amen, Amen, Amen, credimus, and confidimus, and laudamus te, Mr. Arnaud
Lib. 5. C. 13. p. 518.
O Domine Deus noster, hoc est in veritate credimus caro tua. We believe thee,
we trust in thee, we praise thee O our God, this, we believe is thy Flesh in
truth. In one place the People are made to say they believe, that it is truly
the Body of Jesus Christ, and here, that they believe it is the Body of Jesus
Christ in truth. Now there is a difference between these two Propositions, for
in one the Adverb truly, refers to the Body, and in the other to the Faith of
the People. This alteration is not so inconsiderable but that we may see by
this Example that those who have given us this Liturgy which is in the
Bibliotheca Patrum have not scrupled to accommodate their Translation as much
as in them lay to the sense of the Roman Church, and to wrest for this effect
the Terms of the Original. I never said this whole Piece was absolutely
fictitious as Mr. Arnaud would make the World believe. But only that that
passage which speaks of the Elevation of the Host is Answer to the Perp. part.
2. C. 8. Lib 5. C. 13. p. 516.
a mere Forgery, and this we have proved by the Testimony of Alvarez and Zaga
Zabo, one of which positively denies the Ethiopians elevate the Sacrament, and
the other declares they do not expose it. It Is to no purpose for Mr. Arnaud to
endeavor to justify this alteration in saying perhaps there be different
Ceremonies in Ethiopia, that they elevate the Sacrament in some places, and not
in others, that they elevate it in a manner so little Remarkable that it has
given Occasion to Alvarez and Zaga Zabo in comparing it with the elevation of
the Roman Church to say they elevated it not at all, that is, they do not
elevate it so high as to make it be seen, as is usual amongst the Latins. It Is
plainly seen these are mere Subterfuges and vain Conjectures: Had Alvarez and
Zaga thus meant they would have so explained themselves, and distinguished the
Places, or the manner of the Elevation, whereas they speak absolutely. Mr.
Arnand does not know more than these two Authors, and were he to correct or
expound them he ought at least to offer something that might justify his
Correction or Exposition. We may confirm the Testimony of Alvarez and Zaga Zabo
by that of Montconies a Traveller into those parts, who describing the Mass of
the Copticks, who, as every Body knows are of the same Religion, and observe
the same Ceremonies as the Abyssins, says expressly that they use no Elevation.

IT is then certain that this Liturgy such as it is in the Bibliotheca Patrum
is an altered Piece, and therefore it is inserted in it without any mention
whence 'twas taken, or who Translated it, as I already observed in my answer to
the Perpetuity. Yet forasmuch as the Almighty takes the crafty in their own
Nets, there are several things left untouched which do not well agree with the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation, such as for Instance is this Prayer which the
Priest makes after the Consecration, commemorating, says he, thy Death, and
Resurrection, we offer thee this Bread and Missa sive Canon univers. Aethiop.
Bibl. patr. tom 6.
Cup, and give thee thanks inasmuch as that by this Sacrifice thou have made us
worthy to appear in thy Presence, and exercise this office of Priesthood before
thee. We most earnestly beseech thee O Lord to send thy Holy Spirit on this
Bread and Cup, which are the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ our Lord and
Savior for ever. Did they understand the Bread and Wine were the Body and
Blood of the Son of God in proper Substance, would they say to him himself that
they offer to him the Bread and Cup in Commemoration of his Death and
Resurrection, and would it not likewise be impious to desire him to send on
this Bread and Cup his Holy Spirit? It Is not to Jesus Christ himself that the
Latins do offer his Body and Blood; those that believe the Roman reality do not
express themselves in such a manner, much less can they desire of him to send
down his Holy Spirit on them; for as soon as ever it is conceived to be the
proper Body and Blood of our Lord in the sense wherein the Latins understand
it, it is believed there is a fullness of the Holy Spirit in them.

I cannot but here relate what Mr. Faucheur has observed touching the Egyptian
Liturgy commonly called St. Gregory's, by which will appear that the complaints
we make concerning these pieces are not without cause. The Egyptian Liturgy,
says he, attributed to St. Gregory imports, I offer to thee O Lord the SYMBOLS
OF MY RANSOM. For Faucheur on the Lords Supper. Book 3. C. 6.
there is in the Egyptian NICYMBOLON, that is to say (...) as I have bin
informed by Mr. Saumaise, who has an ancient Manuscript of it, and not as
Victor Scialach a Maronite of Mount Libanus has Translated it, (who being of
the Seminary at Rome, designed by a Notorions falsity to favor the cause of
our Adversaries,) praecepta liberationis meae.

BUT besides this way of corrupting the Liturgies by false Translations, it is
moreover true that, when these Levantine Christians were Reunited as they often
have bin with the Latins, the Latins never failed to examine their Books, and
take out of 'um whatsoever they found therein contrary to the Doctrine of the
Church of Rome; for example, there has bin inserted in the Bibliotheca Patrum
the Liturgy of the Nestorian Christians of Mallabar, but under this title
corrected and cleansed from the Errors and Blasphemies of the Nestorians, by
the Illustrious and Reverend My Lord Alexius Menenses Archbishop of Missa
Christian apud. Indos Bibl. patr. tom. 6. ed. 4. Ibid bibl. patr. tom. 6.
Goa. Victor Scialach in his Letter to Velserus on the Egyptian Liturgies
called St. Basil's, Gregorie's, and Cyril's, says, that the new Manuscripts
have bin corrected by the order of the Holy Roman Church, into whose Bosom, as
into that of a real Mother, the Church of Alexandria has lately returned under
the Popedom of Clement VIII.

There Is all the likelihood in the World that this Clause which appears in the
Egyptian Liturgies of St. Basil, and Gregory, of Victor Schialch's Translation,
and from which Mr. Arnaud pretends to make advantage, is an Addition made
thereunto by the Latins, in some one of these Reunions; for if we examine it
well we shall easily find that it is a confession of the reality of the Humane
Nature in Jesus Christ, which is a confession directly opposite to the Error of
the Copticks who only acknowledge the Divine Nature.

OBSERVE here the terms, It is the sacred and everlasting Body, and the real
Blood of Jesus Christ the Son of God. Amen, it is really the Body of the
Emmanuel Ibid.
our God. Amen. I Believe, I Believe, I Believe, and will confess till the last
breath of my Life that this is the living Body which thy only Son our Lord God
and Savior Jesus Christ took from the most holy and most pure Mary the Mother
of God, our common Lady, and which he joined to his Divinity without
conversion, mixture or confusion. I make the pure confession which he made
before Pontius Pilate, he gave his Body for us on the Cross by his own will. He
has really assumed this Body for us. I believe that the Humanity was never
separate from the Divinity, no not a Moment, and that he gave his Body to
purchase Salvation, Remission of Sins and eternal life for all those that shall
believe in him. There needs no great study to find that the design of this
whole Prayer is to confess the Truth of the Mystery of the Incarnation, and the
reality of the Humane Nature in Jesus Christ, and that these words, without
conversion, mixture or confusion, are precisely those which have bin ever
opposed against the Heresy of the Eutichiens with which the Copticks are
tainted. Whereupon we cannot doubt but that this is an addition of the Latins,
who in reuniting these People to themselves have inserted in their very
Liturgy, several Clauses expressly contrary to their old Error, that they might
the more absolutely bring them off from it.

LET not Mr. Arnaud then any longer glory in these Eastern Liturgies, for if we
had 'um pure and sincere, I do not question but we should find several things
in 'um that do not well agree with the Belief of the Substantial Presence, nor
with that of Transubstantiation. Neither has he reason to brag of the general
Consent of all the Churches called Schismatical, with which pretense he would
dazzle the Eyes of the World. Upon a through consideration of what we have so
farrepresented to him whether in respect of the Greeks, or other Christian
Churches, he must acknowledge he has overshot himself, and bin too rash in his
Affirmations on this Subject. Which I believe I have evidently discovered, and
in such a manner as nothing can be alleged against it. I dare assure him he
will find in this dispute no Sophisms on my part. Having proceeded faithfully
and sincerely in it. I have taken things as they lie in their Natural order. I
have offered nothing but upon good grounds, from Testimonies for the most part
taken out of Authors that are Roman Catholics. I have never taken Mr. Arnaud's
words (as I know of) in any other sense than in that wherein he meant them. I
have followed him step by step as far as good order would permit me. I have
exactly answered him without weakening his Arguments, or Proofs, or passing by
any thing considerable. In fine, I have not offered any thing but what I my
self before was convinced and persuaded to be true, and I am much mistaken if I
have not reduced matters to that clearness that others will be no less
persuaded of what I say than my self.

CHAP. VII.
Mr. Arnaud's 8th. Book touching the Sentiment of the Latins on the Mystery of
the Eucharist since the year 700. till Paschasius's time, examined.

THE order of the dispute requires, that having refuted as I have done the
pretended Consent of all the Eastern Churches with the Latin in the Doctrines
of the Substantial Presence and Transubstantiation, I should now apply my self
to the examination of what Mr. Arnaud alleges touching the Latins themselves
from the 7th. Century till Paschasius's time exclusively, that is to say, till
toward the beginning of the Ninth. And this is the design of the greatest part
of his 8th. Book; and which shall be the greatest part of this of mine.

BUT not to amuse the Reader with fruitless matters, it is necessary to lay
aside the first of his Proofs, which is only a Consequence drawn from the
belief of the Greek Church with which the Latin remained United during those
Centuries, whence Mr. Arnaud would infer that the Latin Church has believed
Transubstantiation and the real Presence seeing the Greek Church has held these
Doctrines as he pretends to have proved. We may reply in general that there can
be nothing of solidity or certainty concluded from either of these Churches,
whether we consider them since their separation, or during their Reunion. The
Latins believed the procession of the Holy Spirit from the Father and the Son,
and they added the filioque to the Symbol long before the Separation of
Photius, and yet the Churches continued United without disputing on these
Articles, as they did afterward. It Is the same in reference to several other
points, and had not the interest as well of the Popes as of Photius bin
concerned in this affair, it is likely both of 'um had continued a long time in
the same state of communion together notwithstanding all these differences.
It Is then a mere abuse to establish the Doctrine of the Latin Church by that of
the Greek one, or that of the Greek one by that of the Latin, whatsoever Union
there might have bin betwixt them. He that would be certain of their sentiments
must consider each of 'um apart, and search for the belief of the Western
Church in the West, and that of the Eastern in the East. Not but that I believe
the Latins as well as the Greeks knew nothing of these admirable Doctrines of
Transubstantiation or the Substantial Presence in the Ages now in question; but
because I cannot see how there can be reasonably drawn a Consequence from the
one to the other. And yet supposing the Consequence were good, it cannot but be
in my favor, having showed so clearly as I have done that the Greeks have not
the same belief touching the Sacrament as the Roman Church has at this Day.

LET us lay aside for this time the Greeks, seeing we have discoursed
sufficiently on them, and come we to the Latins themselves. I will undertake,
Lib. 8. Chapter 1. page, 736.
says Mr. Arnaud, positively to show from Authors of these Centuries, that the
Body of the Latin Church has had no other Faith touching this Mystery than that
of the real Presence, and Transubstantiation. I confess the undertaking is
considerable and worth Mr. Arnaud's pains, but we must see how he acquits
himself therein. For this purpose he has a long Chapter of preparatives whose
title is, supposing the real Presence and Transubstantiation were constantly
and universally believed during the seventh, eigth and ninth Century, how men
ought to speak of the Mystery of the Eucharist according to Reason and Nature,
and the ordinary way of their expressing themselves. This Chapter is full of
long discourses, whose drift is to persuade us that provided we suppose the
Latin Church firmly believed Transubstantiation, there being then no dispute
about this Article we shall not be offended at several expressions arsing from
Sense which caused the Eucharist to be called Bread and Wine, the Substance of
Bread and Wine, that it would be even contrary to Nature not to find in the
Writings of these Ages any Traces of this Language of sense, and that a too
great care to avoid it, would not at all agree with the state of those times.
Moreover all which can be expected is that the Writers of those times have
explained themselves in terms which plainly and naturally denote the Faith of
this Mystery, and imprint the idea of it in the minds of all those which hear
them literally. That the firm belief which they had of the Reality should only
have hindered them from ever proposing any of the Opinions of the
Sacramentaries. That as to the doubts which arise from this Mystery they have
not wholly dissembled them, but endeavored to satisfy 'um after a prudent
manner, in saying the Eucharist is truly and properly the Body of Jesus
Christ. That this expression explains and determines the simple expressions
which affirm the Eucharist to be the Body of Jesus Christ. That they abridged
their words and left something to be supplied by the minds of those they spoke
to. That the Mystery of the Eucharist being composed of two parts, the one
visible and the other invisible, the one sensible, and the other intelligible,
that is to say, of the outward vail which is the Sacrament, and of the Body of
Jesus Christ covered with this vail, it may be considered in three manners. The
first is to respect it directly, and the Body of Jesus Christ indirectly. The
second is to respect directly the Body of Jesus Christ, and the Sacrament
indirectly. And the third is to consider equally the Sacrament and the Body of
Jesus Christ. That from these three ways of considering this Mystery there
arise several different expressions; for according to the first it may be
called the Sacrament of the Body of Jesus Christ, the Mystery of the Body of
Jesus Christ, the Figure of the Body; and according to the second be said that
the Body of Jesus Christ is contained in the Mystery, in the Sacrament, under
the Figure of Bread and Wine, and according to the third that the Eucharist is
both the Reality and the Figure. That it is Natural for a man's mind to apply it
self to one of these particulars without denying the other. In fine, that as
this Mystery comprehends several Relations, Customs, Benefits, and Senses which
are ingraved and represented in the Symbols, it must needs be very common with
Authors of those times to apply themselves to the showing the faithful these
mysterious Significations, without concerning themselves about the explanation
of the essential part of the mystery seeing 'twas known of all the World.

AND this is the sum of this confused heap of Arguments with which Mr. Arnaud
has stuffed the Second Chapter of his 8th Book. It Is evident he designed by these
Circuits propofed with such a prodigious Perplexity of Words, to throw himself
into a Labyrinth, and draw insensibly his Readers after him. For to what end is
this heap of Suppositions, Propositions, Reflections, Distinctions, different
Respects, Ways of Expression etc. with which this Chapter is crammed? Is
Transubstantiation so deep sunk into the 7th and following Centuries, that we
cannot get at it unless we pass through as many Turnings and Windings, as there
were Porches and Doors in the Ancient Temple of Jerusalem before a man could
come to the Sanctuary? Methinks this alone is sufficient to prejudice ones Mind
against Mr. Arnaud's Cause; for had the Latin Church then believed the
Conversion of the Substances, would she not have clearly explained her self?
should we not have seen it appear in the Expressions of its Doctors, without
giving a man's self all this trouble to find it?

MOREOVER how can Mr. Arnaud desire a man, before he judges of his Reasonings,
and the Expressions of Authors in question, to suppose the Church then believed
constantly and universally the real Presence and Transubstantiation, although she
never had seen any Controversy to arise touching these Articles? Is it fitting
for those who are to decide a Question to prepossess themselves with Prejudices
by Suppositions which do in themselves determine the Difference, or which at
least must bias a man's Judgment toward those things which are afterward
offered? If I for my share desired a man to suppose a Church which never heard
any mention of the Substantial Presence, nor Conversion of Substances; that
never believed these Doctrines, and were ignorant of all the Subtilties of the
Schools on that point, my request would be more reasonable than that of Mr.
Arnaud's: for till we are showed Transubstantiation has bin received in a
Church, we may suppose this Church in a state of Nature in this respect. Now we
know it is contrary to Nature to believe it. I know Mr. Arnaud would not fail to
tell me we must not thus fill men's Minds with Prejudices, but leave 'um at
liberty to judge of things alleged on both sides. This Supposition then which
Mr. Arnaud would have us make is captious, far from being sincere, and tending
to surprise men's minds, by making 'um take a part beforehand, without any
ground or reason, that being thus prejudiced, they may see what is not, and not
see what is. For it is certain according to these two different Suppositions,
the one, that a Church believed Transubstantiation, but never disputed about
it. The Other that a Church did not believe Transubstantiation, nor ever heard
it, a man shall differently judge of the same Expressions. Upon one of these
Prejudices a man will say, here is one of these defective Expressions mentioned
by Mr. Arnaud, which leaves something to be supplied by the Hearer; and on the
other, a man will say, here is an Expression which comprehends the whole Faith
of the Mystery. In effect, hence proceed the different Judgments which the
Catholics and Protestants make on several Passages of the ancient Fathers, the
one, believe they see Transubstantiation in 'um, because they read the Passages
with this Prejudice, that the ancient Church held it, and the places considered
in this respect confirm them in the thoughts which they have already
entertained; the others do not find it in 'um, because they consider the same
Passages with this contrary Prejudice, that the ancient Church did not believe
it, and these Passages considered in this regard make no Impression upon them.
On the other hand there are Passages which appear very considerable for the
Protestants against the Conversion of Substances, and which yet appear but weak
and inconsiderable to the Roman Catholics.

TO deal fairly in a matter of this Importance, it seems to me a man ought to
compare these two Prejudices one with the other, and examine solidly which of
the two is most just and reasonable. For this effect we must consider the
Church, either as a Society of men, or as a Society of Christians. In the first
respect it will be the greatest Absurdity imaginable to attribute to it the
belief of Transubstantiation. If she held it, it would be in the second
respect, I would say inasmuch as she is a Christian Society that has such
Articles of Divine Faith, and particular Sentiments touching Religion which
Nature does not give. Now in this quality a man cannot reasonably prejudicate
that the Church of the 7th. and following Centuries believed the Substantial
Presence and Transubstantiation but by one of these two motives, either because
he sees these Doctrines contained in the first and fundamental Rule of
Christian Religion, which is the Word of God, or sees 'um already established
in the preceding Centuries. If then Mr. Arnaud would establish his Supposition,
he must begin by Inquiries into the Scriptures, and Tradition of the first Six
Centuries, and show therein the Doctrines in question; which done, he should
descend to the Seventh and Eighth Ages, and make his Discussion on this
Principle, that the Church at that time was in Possession of believing the real
Presence and Transubstantiation. But he does neither the one nor the other of
these things. He begins his Discussion from the Seventh Century, and would have
his Reader Judge beforehand from thence that the Church at that time held the
Doctrines now in dispute. This is a plain Deviation and Illusion. For till such
time as the contrary appears to us, we must always predetermine on Natures
side. Now the order of Nature is neither to believe the Substantial Presence,
nor the Conversion of the Substance of Bread, so that unless the establishment
of these Doctrines in the Church appears elsewhere, we cannot but suppose the
Church, in what time and place soever we consider it, in a State purely Natural
in this respect.

WE can never, reasonably predetermine, without some considerable motive,
contrary to that common Light which regulates the judgments of men, nor
contrary to Universal Notions, and general Customs. Now it is certain that these
three things oppose the Doctrines in question. For our Senses give in their
Testimony against them, and Reason carry us rather away from 'um than to 'um.
Universal Notions give us quite different idea's than those which these
Doctrines constrain us to have, and the common Custom is to judge of sensible
things according to their Natural Characters.

WE ought never to prejudicate, without exceeding great reason, against an
example, I mean against the usual manner of proceeding, acting, thinking, or
speaking, in such like matters as is this in question. Now the Example of all
People and especially of Christians shows, they conceive the Mysteries or
Sacraments, without imagining any Conversion of Substance in 'um, that they
give to signs the names of the things which they represent, to distinguish
Mysteries from Miracles properly so called, not to offer Miracles wrought on
sensible things, and which are yet not only imperceptible to the Senses, but
also contrary to their Deposition.

WHEN the Question concerns a particular Doctrine which goes to the making up
of a part of the Body of a Religion, a man ought never to prejudicate lightly
against that which we call the Analogy, that is to say, the Relation, Coherence
and just Proportion which ought to be Naturally between the Doctrines, Maxims,
and Customs of the same Religion. For it is with Religion as with the several
Parts of a Building, or Aedifices of the same City, or Members of the same
Body, or if you will, as with Children of the same Family. They are known by
one another, because they all do in some sort resemble each other; now if we
consider the Christian Religion in the State wherein it was in the Seventh and
Eighth Centuries, we shall find it full of Explications and Mystical
Expressions; for this is the true Character of the Divinity of those Days. We
shall find perpetual Discourses of that Spiritual Communion which we have with
Jesus Christ, and immediate Manducation of his flesh as an Act of the Soul, and
of a thing that belongs only to the Faithful. We shall not find they considered
any more than two States in our Savior Christ, to wit, that of his Abasement,
and that of his Exaltation, without ever mentioning this third State called
Sacramental.

WE shall not find 'um applying to the Sacrament of the Eucharist, several
Passages of the Old Testament, which might be easily made to point at it, and
which several Doctors of the Roman Church at this day do in effect make to
relate unto Transubstantiation. It will not be found they have taken several
Terms in the Sense wherein they must be taken upon the Supposition of Species;
for Accidents without a Subject, of Spiritually to denote an Existence after
the manner of a Spirit, of the Vail of the Sacrament or Figure of Bread to
signify a bare Appearance of Bread that covers the Substance of the Body of
Jesus Christ, of Corporeal Presence, for a Presence after the manner of a Body,
by Opposition to the Presence of this same Body after the manner of a Spirit.
It is plainly seen they have forced and exaggerated the Expressions of the
Scripture on the Subject of Baptism, the Church, the Poor, the Gospel, at least
as vehem ently as those that are to be met with in the Scripture touching the
Eucharist. We shall not find they have made on the Subject of the Sacrament
either the Distinctions, Observations or Questions, which Persons prepossessed
with the belief of the Conversion of Substances ought necessarily to have made,
without being obliged thereunto by Disputes. Nor, in a word, the proper and
inseparable Consequences of this Doctrine, but on the contrary several things
exactly contrary to it. Now this is what I call Analogy or Relation which the
parts of a Religion have with one another, and against which I say it is not
Rational to prejudicate.

IT IS certain we ought not only not to prejudicate against all these things,
but on the contrary predetermine in their favor, seeing the prejudice which
all these things form is so strong that we must have on the other side a very
great Evidence to surmount it. Especially if we examine the Centuries that
preceded the seventh, whereunto likewise may be applied the same Observations
which I now made, whence arise the like Prejudices in respect of those Ages,
and this Pejudice joining it self to that which we have established touching
the Seventh and Eighth Centuries do only fortify it yet more.

TO all which we may add that there is, to speak morally, a kind of
Contradiction between the parts of Mr. Arnaud's Supposition. He would have us
imagine the Church of the Seventh and following Ages firmly believed the real
Presence and Conversion of Substances, although these Doctrines were never
disputed of therein, nor so much as questioned. But it is very improbable the
Church remained Seven or Eight hundred years without any Contest touching this
Article, supposing she held it. There have bin in this Interval of time several
Controversies touching the principal Points of the Christian Religion, on
Articles against which Nature does less rise than against that of which we
speak, and which moreover are found clearly established in the Word of God. How
comes it to pass there has bin none on this? There have bin even several
Disputes in which there has bin occasion of mentioning the Doctrines of the
real Presence and Transubstantiation, which could not be without some Contest
on this Subject. Such were the Controversies of the Valentinians, Marcionites,
Manichees, Millenaries, Encratites, Arians, Originists, Eutychiens,
Ascodrupites, and of I know not how many others, which must unavoidably produce
Debates on the Eucharist had the Belief which the Roman Church has at this day
bin then introduced into Christianity. It being then certain as it is, that the
Church was in peace in this respect during all these Centuries, it is a token
that the Doctrines in question were therein unknown, and this very
Consideration overthrows Mr. Arnaud's Prejudice, and confirms ours.

MR. Arnaud will say, without doubt, we must suppose the Church of the seventh
and eighth Centuries to be in the same Condition wherein lay that of the
eleventh, which condemned the Doctrine of Berenger. But besides, that there are
several things which may be alleged concerning this Condemnation, it not being
true then men believed constantly and universally Transubstantiation, nor the
real Presence, as may be justified by several Inductions, there being no
likelihood in the first Condemnations of Berenger, Transubstantiation was
established, seeing 'twas established in the Council of Rome held under Nicolas
II. wherein he was condemned for the fifth time, according to the Authors of
the Office of the Holy Sacrament, as we have already observed; it is an apparent
Illusion to design the grounding of any Prejudication on this, seeing we find
in the ninth Century a formal Contest which arose on this Subject; and that
even this makes the principal Point of ou^ Difference, to wit, whether there
has happened any change therein. Before then the Condition of the eleventh
Century can be made to serve for a Principle to conclude from thence the
Condition of the seventh and eigth, the Question concerning the Change must be
first decided, for whilst we be in this Contest, there can be no Consequence
drawn hence. It would be a very pleasant thing for a man to prejudicate against
the Change which we pretend, by the seventh and eighth Century as believing
Transubstantiation, and at the same time to prejudicate for Transubstantiation
in the seventh and eighth Centuries, because 'twas believed in the eleventh,
which is to say, to draw the Principle from the Conclusion, and then the
Conclusion from the Principle, in saying on one hand that Transubstantiation
was believed in the eleventh Century, because 'twas believed in the Seventh and
in the Eigth, and on the other that 'twas believed in the seventh and in the
eighth, because 'twas believed in the Eleventh.

LET Mr. Arnaud then if he pleases make another System, for all this great
preparation of Observations and Propositious falls to the ground as soon as ever
we deny him the Supposition he made, and showed him the injustice and
unreasonableness of it. As to this pretended contrariety of the Language of
Sense with that of Faith, it is a thing we have already confuted. Should our
Senses take upon 'um to tell us the Eucharist was only Bread and Wine, or mere
Bread and Wine, our Faith would not bear this Language. This is not the
Language of the Church. But when our Senses only tell us it is Bread and Wine,
this Language is in truth different from that of Faith, which tells us it is the
Body of Jesus Christ, but it is not contrary to it; for Faith receives and
approves it in the manner wherein the Senses conceive it, which is to say, it is
real Bread and real Wine in a litteral sense, and without a figure. That which
you have seen on the Altar, says St. Augustine, and after him Bid an Author of
the eighth Contury is Bread and Augus. sermon. ad Infunt.
Wine, and this your Eyes tell you, but the instruction which your Faith
requires is, that the Bread is the Body of Jesus Christ and the Cup his Blood.
So that here, we have the two Languages both of Sense and of Faith, but that of
Faith does not contradict that of Sense, on the contrary Faith receives the
Language of Sense without Explication and Figure. For whosoever says the
Eucharist is Bread and Wine, which our Eyes likewise show us, means it is real
Bread and Wine in Substance, for this our Eyes show us in a most proper and
litteral sense. If St. Augustine and Bid find some Appearance of contrariety
between the Language of Sense, which bears it is Bread, and that of Faith which
will have this Bread to be the Body of Jesus Christ, the difficulty lies not in
the Testimony of Sense, as if we need call its truth in question, but in the
Body of Jesus Christ, which being Flesh assumed of the Virgin, which suffered
the Death of the Cross, and was exalted up into Heaven, that Bread should be
said to be this Body. This thought may arise, says St. Augustine, and Bid
after him, in the mind of some Persons, we know whence our Lord Jesus Christ
has taken his Flesh, to wit, of the Virgin Mary, we know he was suckled in his
Infancy, educated, grew up in years, suffered the Persecution of the Jews, was
nayl'd to the Cross, put to Death, Buried, rose the third Day, and Ascended
into Heaven when he pleased, whence he is to Descend to judge both the living
and dead, and that he is now sat down at the right hand of the Father. How then
is the Bread his Body, and the Cup his Blood? They do not say, how shall we not
believe what our Senses assure us? Shall we doubt of the truth of their
Testimony? On the contrary they suppose this Testimony to be certain, and
ground the difficulty on the Body of Jesus Christ which cannot be Bread. The
Explication of the difficulty and the reconciliation of the two Propositions
are not built on the Error of the senses, nor the Interpretation which ought be
given to their Language, in saying the Eucharist is called Bread because it
appears to be so, or because 'twas Bread before its Consecration. But from the
Nature of the Sacraments, wherein there are two Ideas both of 'um true, the one
of our Senses, and the other of our Understanding. My Brethren, say they, these
things are called Sacraments because we see therein one thing, and understand
another. That which we see, has a Corporeal Species, that which we understand,
has a Spiritual Fruit. As if they had said, as to what concerns our Eyesight
it is really Bread and Wine, but in respect of our Understanding it is the Body
of Jesus Christ. So that if there must be any thing figurative in either of the
two Propositions, it must be in the Language of Faith, and not in that of
Sense, which bears neither Difficulty nor Exposition.

ALL that we can expect from them, says Mr. Arnaud (that is to say, from
Authors of the seventh and eighth Century,) is that, when they speak of this
Mystery according to Faith and Truth, they should explain themselves Book 8.
Chapter 2. p. 739.
according to those Terms which plainly and naturally express it, and which
imprint the Idea of it in all those which hear them literally. That which may
be expected from Persons believing and teaching the Conversion of the Substance
of Bread, whether it has bin disputed on or no, is, that they declare it in
precise and formal Terms. Which I have already showed on the Subject of the
Greeks by this reason, that the Doctrine of the Conversion of Substances
determins the general Sense of these Expressions, the Bread is made the Body of
Jesus Christ, the Bread is changed into the Body of Jesus Christ, that it gives
them a particular Sense, and forms of it self a distinct, and precise Idea;
whence it follows that when the question is about teaching of it, and a man has
directly this Intention, he cannot but express it in clear and plain Terms,
which answer the Idea he has of it, and makes thence the same to spring up in
the Minds of the Hearers. It cannot be denied but this Conversion, and
Substantial Presence are of themselves very difficult to be conceived and hard
to be believed, because all the lights of Nature are contrary to 'um, and there
is nothing convictive in Holy Scripture to establish 'um. How then can a man
conceive that a Church which holds 'um, or designs to Preach 'um to its People,
does not explain it self about 'um at least in precise and formal Expressions?
Reason forces us to say she ought to endeavor to establish them by the
strongest Proofs she was able; for supposing the Schools had never disputed
concerning 'um, and no Person had ever declared against 'um, yet Nature itself
which is common to all men, does sufficiently enough oppose them to oblige the
Church, he speaks of, to defend them from their Attacks, and fortify them
against their Oppositions. But granting Mr. Arnaud the Authors of the seventh
and eighth Centuries were in this respect extremely negligent; who can imagine
they really intended to teach the Substance of Bread was really converted into
the Substance of the Body of Jesus Christ, when they express themselves only by
general and ambiguous Terms which need so many Commentaries and Supplements?

BUT, says Mr. Arnaud, we have reason to believe that being Men and endued
with Humane Inclinations, they had that also of abridging their Chapter 2. p. 742.
Words, and leaving something to be supplied by them to whom they spoke. I know
several People of a contrary Humor, and yet are men, as appears by other
Humors they have. But this Proposition has no other foundation but Mr.
Arnaud's Imagination. He offers it without any Proof, and I may reject it
without farther examining it. Yet let me tell him that in the Explication of
Mysteries of Religion, Men are not wont to use these half Sentences, unless
when they treat of a Point indirectly and occasionally, and not when they
expressly and designedly fall upon the explaining of what we must know and
believe. What strange kind of ways then had they in those Times, to express
themselves only in half Sentences, when they designed to explain the Mystery of
the Eucharist? This Custom lasted a great while, seeing it was so for near two
hundred years; and who told Mr. Arnaud the Ministers were not now and then
tempted to assert things clearly and speak what they thought, or at least that
the People were not wearyed with continual supplying what was wanting in the
Expressions of their Ministers, or in fine that none of these Customs were
lost? Mr. Arnaud complains we make use of Raillery sometimes to refute him, but
why does he not then tell us things less ridiculous? For to speak soberly, to
undertake to prove Transubstantiation and the real Presence by the silence of
him that teaches on one side, and by the Suppliment of him that hearkens on the
other is not very rational. Yet to this pass may be reduced his manner of
arguing should his Maxim take place, the Fathers of the seventh and eigth
Centuries have said such and such a thing with Reticency. Now the People have
understood them in such and such a manner by a supplement. Therefore they
taught and believed the real Presence and Transubstantiation. How can a man
consider this seriously? Mr. Arnaud will tell us there is nothing more common in
Humane Speech than to use half Sentences; nor any thing more usual than to
supply what is wanting to 'um. We are wont to say, a Man, a House, a City, the
Air, the Earth, the Sun, and not the Substance of a Man, the Substance of a
House, etc. But here is a great deal of difference. For here we use these
Expressions because we suppose those to whom we speak have eyes and the use of
their reason, and that these easily supply what is wanting in words. Nay when
we use these terms even in a figurative sense, we do not explain them, because
we know that sense and reason which are common lights to those that speak, and
hear, will sufficiently explain them. But it is not the same in reference to the
Eucharist, for supposing there is made in it a real Conversion of the inward
Substance of the Bread into the inward Substance of the Body of Jesus Christ,
Sense and Reason lead us not to understand this Change, seeing it is
imperceptible, and contrary to the order of Nature; and we cannot supply by
their means what is imperfect in the Words. Neither can this Suppliment come
from the Word of God, for it is pretended these terms which our Savior used in
the institution of the Sacrament have themselves need of being explained and
determined by that which is called the sense of the Church. Neither can it come
from the Tradition of the preceding Ages, for besides that the People have
little knowledge of this Tradition, we shall not find any thing more precise in
the instructions of the first Six Ages, than in those of the seventh and
eighth. Whence then must this Suppliment come? Must we here suppose secret and
immediate Inspirations, or imagine there were certain short forms of speech
then in use, and which served as a key for the understanding of the Public
teachings? Unless 'twere so I cannot see how Mr. Arnaud's System can hold. For
to say that by a Prophetic Spirit they of the seventh and eighth Centuries
knew what would be determined in the eleventh, and supplied what was wanting by
means of this Prescience, this is something hard to be believed, and I know not
whether Mr. Arnaud is willing to go so far; it is then clear that this pretended
Suppliment is a mere Whimsy, and as ill contrived and maintained as ever any
thing was.

AS to those two parts which compose the Mystery of the Eucharist, the one the
external Vail which is the Sacrament, and the other the Body of Jesus Christ
which is covered with this Vail, this is not a place for a thro-examination of
this Hypothesis. Yet methinks Mr. Arnaud advances something singular enough
when he adds, that it is fruitless to enquire into the Chap. 2. page 743.
Nature of this vail, it being sufficient to know that it is Bread and Wine
according to Appearance, which is to say, if I be not mistaken, that it is
needless to enquire whether this Appearance of Bread which covers the Body of
Jesus Christ is a mere Phantasm, a pure Illusion which our Senses suffer, or
whether they be really the Accidents of Bread which subsist separate from their
Substance. Let the Gentlemen of the Roman Church determine whether this
Doctrine be according to their Councils, especially that of Constance. As to my
part I shall only tell Mr. Arnaud he will not find this Appearance of Bread and
Wine, in what sort p. 743.
soever he Understands it, in the Fathers of the seventh and eighth Centuries,
nor that the Body of Jesus Christ is hid under the Vail of this Appearance. The
instance he gives us of a Man that is composed of Body and Soul, is vastly
different; the Soul is not an invisible and impalpable Body, it is a real
Spirit; and the Body is not an appearance of a Body, that has nothing of
reality in it; it is a Body in Propriety of Nature and Substance. When then we
say of a Man that he is an immortal and spiritual Being in respect of his Soul,
or that he is a mortal and corporeal Being, in respect of his Body; or that he
is mortal and immortal, considering him as a Body and Soul joined together,
this Language is Natural and easy to be understood without any Explication;
because the Principles on which it is established, are obvious to Reason; and
we may well suppose that those to whom we direct our Discourse are not Ignorant
of them. But if Mr. Arnaud will have the Expressions of the Fathers of the
seventh or eighth Centuries to be grounded on these Principles of the Apperance
of Bread, which in truth is not Bread and the Body of Jesus Christ concealed
invisibly under this Vail, he must without any more ado show us that these
Principles were known to the People; for it cannot be supposed they knew 'um
Naturally. And thus his Instance is not at all to the purpose.

CHAP. VIII.
An Examination of these Expressions of the Fathers, That the Eucharist is the
Body of Jesus Christ, the proper Body of Jesus Christ, properly the Body of
Jesus Christ, the very Body of Jesus Christ, the true Body, or truly the Body
of Jesus Christ.

IT is now easy to perceive that all these preparations, with which Mr. Arnaud
would clog his Readers mind, is only a handsome excuse for the weakness of his
proofs; and an authentic declaration that he could not find the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, and the Real Presence in Authors of the 7th. and 8th.
Centuries: for had he any thing to alledg that was considerable, it is evident
he would never have taken so many circuits; and this is a certain sign, that
these Doctrines were neither established nor known in the Church, during those
ages; and this will appear more clearly if we cast our eyes on the passages he
has produced, there being never a one of 'em that precisely contains the
Conversion of the substance of Bread, or substantial Presence of the Body of
Jesus Christ in the Eucharist, nor from whence they can be necessarily inferred.

FIRST, They cannot be inferred from all those clauses of the Liturgies which
term the Eucharist, the Body of Jesus Christ; and Mr. Arnaud could Lib. 8. Chapter
3.
not busy himself to less purpose than to collect, as he has done, all these
passages drawn from the Roman Order, the Liturgy called The Mass of Illyricus,
The Book of the Sacraments, which Menard a Benedictin Monk published. Not to
say the Book of the Roman Order, as we have it at this day is a Treatise made
by an Author of the 11th. Century, as appears by the Testimony of Honorius D'
Autun, who attributes it to Bernoldus, or Bertoldus Honor. August. de Script
Eccl. Joan. Morin. Exercit. 9. de Diacon. cap. 1. page 169. col. 2. s. 5.
a Priest of Constance that lived in the time of Henry IV. which was toward
the end of the 11th. Century. This Bernoldus is he that continued the Chronicle
of Hermannus Contractus to the Year 1100. and wrote several Tracts in defense
of Pope Gregory VII. which shows us that his Book cannot be alleged in this
Dispute. So likewise Morin acknowledges 'twas written after the Year 1000. And
Menard who will not have Bernoldus to be the Author, yet grants he was the
Corrector of it; and that he put in and Menard Praef. in lib. Sacram. Gregor.
out, what he thought good, to make it more according to the relish of the
Church in his time. Neither shall I insist upon the Liturgy published by
Illyricus, being a very uncertain piece, either as to its antiquity, or purity,
as Menard has observed.

BUT not to enter into this discussion, it suffices me to say that the name of
the Body of Jesus Christ attributed to the Eucharist, does no wise conclude
what Mr. Arnaud pretends, which is, that it is the Body of Jesus Christ in
proper substance. Does he think we have forgot so many illustrations which the
Fathers, even those of the 7th. and 8th. Century have given us Isid. hisp.
Orig. lib. 6. cap. 19. De Officii Eccl. lib. 1. cap. 18. Beda Comment. in Marc.
14. and in Luc. 22. Id. in cap. 6. ad Romans
touching this way of speaking: as for instance what S. Isidor says, That by
the command of Christ himself, we call Body and Blood that, which being the
Fruits of the Earth, are sanctified and become a Sacrament. And elsewhere, The
Bread is called the Body of Jesus Christ, because it strengthens the Body; and
that the Wine refers to the Blood of Jesus Christ, because it makes the Blood
in the Veins. Bid holds the same language, The Bread and Wine do mystically
represent the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, because the Bread strengthens the
Body, and the Wine produces Blood in the Flesh. The same Author, on the 6th. of
the Romans, teaches after S. Augustine, That if the Sacraments had no
resemblance with the things of which they be Sacraments, they would not be
Sacraments; that it is by reason of this resemblance we give them the names of
those very things which they signify; and that as the Sacrament of the Body of
Jesus Christ, is the Body of Jesus Christ, and the Sacarment of his Blood, his
Blood, so the Sacrament of Faith is Faith. One of these passages is a thousand
times more considerable and decisive of our Question, than whatsoever Mr.
Arnaud can produce from the Liturgies; because these passages are formal
explications of these other expressions which attribute to the Eucharist the
name of the Body of Jesus Christ; and any man of sense will never be prevailed
on by this confused heap of Citations wherein the name of the Body of Jesus
Christ, or of the Body of our Lord is given to the Sacrament, as soon as he
shall hear Isidor, Bid, or some other famous Author of those Ages in question,
who explains to him these ways of speaking. We must rather believe those
Authors when they expound themselves, than Mr. Arnaud who heats himself to
little purpose, and would prepossess the world with his own notions and fancies.

MOREOVER, Can Mr. Arnaud imagine the world takes no notice of so many other
expressions so frequent in the Liturgies, and Authors of these same Centuries,
mentioned by us, which call the Eucharist, the Sacrament of the Body of Jesus
Christ, the mystery of our Lords Body, the Sacrament of his Incarnation, the
Sacrament of his Humanity, the mystery of his Humiliation, the Sacrament of his
Passion, the image of his Sacrifice, which the Church Celebrates in remembrance
of his Sufferings. It is certain that these passages wherein we find these
expressions, are as so many Commentaries that help us to a right understanding
of the others, whence Mr. Arnaud would draw advantage; because it is very
ordinary and natural to give to a Sacrament, which is a sign, a memorial, and
an image, the name of the thing which it represents, according to the
observation of S. Isidor himself, We are wont, says he, to give to Images the
names of those things which they Isidor Com. in lib. 1 Reg. cap. 20.
represent. Thus are Pictures called by the name of the things themselves; and
we stick not to attribute to them the proper name. As for instance, We say this
is Cicero, that Salust, that Achilles, this Hector, this the River Simois, this
Rome; although these are only the Effigies or Pictures of them: The Cherubins are
heavenly powers, and yet these Figures which God commanded to be made on the
Ark of the Testament to represent such great things were not otherwise called
than Cherubins. If a man sees in a dream a person, he does not say I saw the
Image of Augustine, but I saw Augustine, although Augustine in this moment, knows
nothing of this Vision; and Pharaoh said he saw ears of Corn, and Kine, and not
the images of these things.

IT IS easy to comprehend the meaning of the terms of Sacrament, and Bela hom.
estiu. de temp. Dom. 13. and Dom. 17. and Dom. 24. and alibi passim id Expos.
Alleg. in Cantic. Cantic. cap. 3. and de tab. lib. 2. cap. 3. Aug. in Psalm. 3.
Mystery of the Body of Jesus Christ, for they signify, that the Bread and
Wine are signs or figures that represent the Body and Blood which Jesus Christ
assumed for our sakes; abasing himself so far as to be our Brother, and
suffering the Death of the Cross to Redeem us. Thus must we understand the
title which Bid gives very often to the Sacrament, calling it the mystery or
the Sacrament of our Lords Incarnation; for he means it is an action wherein by
mystical Symbols men represent his Incarnation. We cannot give another sense to
that which he calls several times, the Sacrament, or mystery of his Passion;
for his passion is only therein figured or represented. We must then understand
by the Sacrament or the mystery of his Body, the figure or representation of
his Body. And in effect what S. Austin said on the third Psalm, That Jesus
Christ gave to his Disciples the Figure of his Body. Isidor expresses in this
sort, That Jesus Christ gave to Isidor. in lib 2. Rog. cap. 3. Bed. quest in 2
Reg and in Ps. 3.
his Disciples the mystery of his Body. And Bid in two places of his works
expresses himself in the same manner as S. Austin, that he gave the figure of
his Body, which shows they took these terms, the Mystery of the Body, the
Sacrament of the Body, the Figure of the Body for one and the same thing. Now
these expressions give us easily to understand what the Church of those Ages
pretended, when she applied to the Eucharist the term of the Body of Jesus
Christ; for she designed only to attribute the name of the thing it self to the
sacred sign it represents: and there is no likelihood, that Authors of those
times that made so scrupulous a profession to follow S. Austin, even to the
copying out his Writings to insert them in their own in proper terms, as
appears from Isidor's Books, Bede's, Alcuinus; I say there is no likelihood they
would forget what their Master had said touching this Mystery, the Lord
scrupled not to say, This is my Body, when he gave the Aug. contr. Adimant. c.
12.
sign of his Body.

IT IS to no purpose for Mr. Arnaud to urge the words of the Liturgy of
Illyricus, Proesta Domine Jesu Christ fili Dei vivi, ut qui corpus and
sanguinem Chapter 3. p. 749, 750.
proprium pro nobis datum edimus and bibimus fiat nobis ad salutem, and ad
redemptionis remedium sempiternum omnium criminum nostrorum. Which he thus
translates, O Lord Jesus Christ grant to us, that having eaten thy proper Body,
and drank thy proper Blood which have been given for us howsoever unworthy,
that this Communion may be to us a spring of Salvation, an eternal remedy for
the redemption of us from all our crimes. Corpus and sanguinem proprium do only
signify Corpus and sanguinem tuum, thy Body and Blood, not the Body and Blood
of another, as the ancient Priests caused to be caten the Body of a Sacrifice
different from their own Body. For the Son of God who gave his own Body and
Blood for us, gives us them to eat and drink in this Sacrament; nor that our
mouths receive their proper substance, the Liturgy does not say so, but because
they receive the signs and tokens of 'um, whilst our souls receive this Body it
self and Blood spiritually.

IT IS moreover in vain that Mr. Arnaud would persuade us these passages of the
Liturgies which term the Eucharist the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, do
naturally imprint the Idea of a Real Presence. To prevent, says he, Chapter 3. p.
751, 752.
the peoples mistakes by all these terms of the Body of Jesus Christ, the
Priests must have continually warned them to take notice that by the words of
the Body of Jesus Christ, the proper Body of Jesus Christ, they meant only its
figure. This sense must have been expressly explained in all the Liturgies, and
an Officer appointed to make it thus understood by the people; for otherwise
it is impossible but they must fall into the opinion of the Real Presence. And
this effect being necessary and inevitable, it ought to have been the chiefest
care and business of the Fathers to hinder it, had they not themselves been of
this opinion.

ALL this discourse has nothing in it but what may be easily answered. We have
already sufficiently replied to it. It Is true this term of the Body of Jesus
Christ taken separately imprints immediately the Idea of the natural Body of
Jesus Christ, but this same term applied to the Eucharist, (which both sense
and reason show us to be Bread, which Religion makes us comprehend as a mystery
that represents the Incarnation and Passion of our Savior) does not naturally
from any other I dea than that of the Sacrament of the Body of Jesus Christ.
There needs no Officer appointed on purpose to give notice of this to the
people, nor sound of Trumpet to publish it, (as Mr. Arnaud speaks in another
place.) Sense, Reason and the common notions of Religion were Officers
sufficient to give this Idea, and publish this to be the sense of this term
when applied to the Eucharist. When the Scripture in an hundred places has
called our Savior the Sun, the day Star from on High, the light of the World,
the true light that enlightneth every man that comes into the world, I do not
find that it settled Officers on purpose to give notice, that it meant not a
corporal Light, or Sun, but a Mystical one. I do not find the Jews employed an
Officer to give notice to the people, that that Lamb commonly called the
Passover, that is to say, the passage, was not really a passage but only the
commemoration of a passage. S. Paul did not make use of one when he wrote, that
we are buried with Christ by Baptism, that we are made the same plant with him
by the conformity of his Death and Resurrection, that we are new Creatures,
that there is a new man formed in us; and I know not how many other expressions
which are easily understood by the bare consideration of the matter to which
they are applied. The Fathers have not employed an Officer when they called the
poor, Jesus Christ, Jesus Christ himself, the same Jesus Christ that shed his
Blood for us, who was delivered and put to death for us, not his Prophets but
he himself. Neither have they employed one when they called the Church, the
Body of Jesus Christ, the very Body of Jesus Christ, the real Body of Jesus
Christ, properly the Body of Jesus Christ, the undoubted Body of Jesus Christ,
the Flesh of Jesus Christ, Jesus Christ himself, not his Vestment, but himself;
nor when they said, that we are one and the same person with him, the same
Body, the same substance by Faith, that we are transformed into him, changed
into his Flesh, changed into his Body. Should Mr. Arnaud's Principle take place
the world must have a great many Officers; for there is nothing more common than
not only the metaphorical use of these terms, but even the exaggeration of them.

IT IS moreover in vain that Mr. Arnaud has painfully collected into a Chapter
for that purpose whatsoever passages he could find here and there not only
amongst the Latins now in question, but likewise from amongst the Greeks,
Copticks, Ethiopians, Armenians, Nestorians, which bear that the Eucharist is
the very Body of Jesus Christ, his proper Body, or properly his Body, his real
Body, his true Body. I shall reply to this heap of passages in two manners,
first in general, and secondly in particular.

IN general, I say, there is not one of these expressions which is sufficient
from whence solidly to conclude that those which have made use of them believed
the substantial Presence which the Roman Church teaches, either because there
is not one of 'um but is used on other subjects wherein evidently there is
neither Transubstantiation nor the Real Presence, because they are all capable
of another sense, and that they may have been employed in other respects than
that which Mr. Arnaud attributes to them.

To begin by that of the Body it self of Jesus Christ, we now see the Fathers
have used this term on occasion of the poor, God, says Chrysostom, Hom. 15. in
Romans
has given his Son, and you refuse to give bread to HIM HIMSELF who was given
for you, who was slain for you; the Father has not spared him for your sakes,
although he was his only Son, and you neglect him although he dies with hunger. And
in another place, When we give Alms let us give it as to Hom. 89. in Matt.
Jesus Christ himself, for his Word is more sure than our sight. When then you
see a poor body, remember what he has said, that it is HIMSELF whom you feed.
For although that which appears be not Christ, yet is it HE HIMSELF that receives
and asks under this shape. And moreover in another place, Somebody perhaps will
say to me, bring me a Prophet and I will willingly entertain him; promise me
then this and I will bring you a Prophet: what say I a Prophet? I will bring
you the Master HIMSELF Hom. in Eli. and vid. Valerian. Hom. 7.
of the Prophets Jesus Christ our God, our common Lord. Know, says Valerian,
that he whom you see naked, blind, and crooked is Jesus Christ HIMSELF. We have
already likewise showed that this expression is used by the Fathers in the
subject of the Church. We are not enjoined, says De Sacerd. l. 4.
Chrysostom, to distribute our Corn, or Oats, nor to take care of Sheep or
Oxen, or such like things, but to take care of the Body IT SELF of Jesus
Christ; for the Church of Jesus Christ, according to the words of S. Paul, is
the Body of Jesus Christ. S. Austin speaks often to the same effect, The Body
IT Augustine in Ps. 87. Sermon. 49. De verb. Dom.
SELF of Jesus Christ, says he, cries out in a Psalm, They have assaulted me
even from my youth. And in another place, Behold the charity of our Lord, He is
now in Heaven, and yet is in labor here below when the Church is in
affliction. Jesus Christ is an hungered and a thirst, he is naked, a stranger,
sick, a prisoner; for he has said, he suffers whatsoever his Body suffers, and
at the end of the world when he shall gather together his Body IT SELF at his
right hand, etc. And again in another place, You hold an eminent Sermon. 53. De
verb. Dom.
rank in the Body IT SELF of Jesus Christ, not by your Merits, but by his
Grace. Jesus Christ HIMSELF, says he in another place, that is Sedul. lib. 5.
oper. Pas. 6. 13.
to say, his Body dispersed through the whole world preaches Christ. They cease
not, says Sedulius, to rend by their Schisms the Lord Jesus Christ HIMSELF. Let
us worship, says Damascen, the sign of the Cross, for HE HIMSELF Damas. l. 4.
de fid. Orthod. c. 12. Alcuin. lib. 2. in Joan. Either. and Beat. lib. 1.
is there where the sign is. His Body IT SELF, says Alcuinus, in the midst of
the afflictions of this world glories and says, now my head is exalted above
mine enemies. The Son is man, says Etherius and Beatus, he is the Head of his
Church which is joined to this Head, and so becomes whole Christ, that is to
say, the Head and the Body one only person.

AS to the terms of proper and properly, we shall find them likewise applied to
several subjects wherein we cannot literally understand them. Origin expounding
those words of our Savior concerning the Eucharist, This is my Body, Jesus
Christ, says he, receiving always of his Father this Bread, Orig. in Mat. hom.
35.
and breaking it gives it to his Disciples, according to what every one of them
is able to receive, saying to 'um, Take, eat; and when he fed them with this
Bread, he showed that 'twas his PROPER BODY. SO Hesychius expounding these
words of Moses, If any one has vowed and consecrated to Hesych. in Lev. lib. 7.
God the Field of his possession, it shall be valued according to the measure
of the seed: No body doubts, says he, but the Field is the holy Scripture.
Jesus Christ is PROPERLY the Vine of this Field, and the Father is the Vine
dresser. Despise not the poor whom you behold on the ground, says Greg. Nyss.
Or. 1. (...)r. am.
Gregory of Nysse, as if they were vile and abject persons; consider rather who
they are to know their worth. They are clothed with the person of Jesus
Christ. For this gracious Lord has given them his PROPER person. Good people,
says S, Austin, are properly the Body of Jesus Christ. We might produce Aug.
con. Faust. lib. 13. cap. 16.
a thousand such like instances, for there is nothing more common in the Fathers
than the use of these expressions in passages wherein there is no literal sense.

THE term proper has several significations. It Is true that sometimes it is
opposed against metaphorical or figurative, an improper or abusive sense; as
when we say of an expression that it must be understood, in a proper sense,
that is to say, in a literal; but it is opposed sometimes to that which is
foreign to us, which is not ours, which belongs not to us; as when we say,
every man takes care of his proper business, proper house, proper family,
proper person, in opposition to the affairs, house, and family of others. And
then we scruple not to join this term to other metaphorical ones. We say for
example of a man that misuses his Children, that he tears his own Clemens Alex.
Strom. lib. 3. Greg. Nyss. Orat. 2. in illud faciamus hominem, etc. Isidor.
Pelus. Epist. lib. 1. Epist. 397.
proper bowels; of a Husband that hates his Wife, that he hates his own proper
flesh. It is in this sense Clement Alexander said, The Church was the proper
Spouse of Jesus Christ. And Gregory of Nysse, That God formed our bodies with
his proper hand. And S. Isidor, That the Law baptized with simple water, but
our Savior Christ iniates or consecrates us by his proper Blood. Sometimes
this term is opposed to that of common; as when we say to a man that it is of
him we properly speak, that it is properly to him to do such a thing: or when we
say that 'twas properly in such a place, or in such a time wherein such a thing
happened. And then moreover we do not scruple to join this term to other
figurative terms, as when Origin said, That God Origin Hom. 1. in Mat. Greg.
Nyss. hom. 7. in Cant.
the Father is called properly the fountain of life. And Gregory of Nysse, That
those who at this day take upon 'um the office of Prophets in the body of the
Church are properly called the eyes. It is certain then Mr. Arnaud can conclude
nothing from these expressions, unless he shows that these two last
significations cannot take place in the passages which he alleges, and that we
must unavoidably take them in the first sense; that is to say, for that which
is literal and not figurative.

THE terms of true and truly are likewise often used in occasions wherein they
cannot signify either a literal verity, or a reality of substance; and Mr.
Arnaud does himself acknowledge that we find in the Fathers, That Jesus Chapter 5.
p. 781.
Christ is truly the gate and house of Refuge, that he is truly the Rock and
the Fire, that he is truly Bread, truly a Shepherd, truly an Altar; that his
Incarnation is truly a flame, that he which imitates the works of Abraham, is
truly the Son of Abraham, that the knowledge of God is truly a fountain; that he
that meditates on the Law of God is truly a tree planted by the waters side,
that Jesus Christ is properly and truly the light, that he is Noah in truth.

TO hinder us from making advantage of these examples, Mr, Arnaud says, That
when of two things, the one stands for a figurative truth, and the p. 780.
other serves only for a figure, men commonly use the word true and proper when
even the term to which it is joined is metaphorical. Thus, adds he, We say the
Christians be the true Israelites, that Jesus Christ is the true Melchisedec,
that the Church is the true Spouse of Jesus Christ, that Jesus Christ is the
true Sun, the true light, the true Vine, because that the carnal Israelites
were but the figure in respect of the Christians, that Melchisedec was the
figure of Jesus Christ, that the visible Sun is only the image of the invisible
Sun, which is Jesus Christ, that the terrestial Vines represent to us the
celestial one, that humane Marriages are the figure of the union of Jesus
Christ with the Church. And the reason of these expressions is moreover the
same as that of others. For it is clear the thing figured contains more truly
the quality denoted by the figure, which has it only in representation. Let a
man but read, says he moreover, the other examples, and he will find that it is
always the figure which is affirmed of the thing figured, and that the word
vere, which is thereunto added, signifies that this thing figurated does really
contain the quality which the figure possesses only in representation: and
therefore it is that these expressions cannot be changed. It Is said that Jesus
Christ is truly a stone, that he is truly a door, truly the light, the true
Noah. But we do not say the stones, the doors, the light, etc. are truly Jesus
Christ. We say the Apostles are the true Israelites, but we do not say the
Israelites are truly Apostles. It Is said that a good man is truly a Tree
planted by the Rivers side; but not that a Tree planted by the River side is a
good man. We may say then according to this sense, that Jesus Christ is truly
Bread, truly Wine, because he possesses by way of exeellency the qualities
figured by the Bread and Wine; but we cannot say in this sense that the Bread
and Wine of the Eucharist are truly the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ; because
the Bread and Wine do not stand here for a thing figured, nor the Body of Jesus
Christ for a figure.

THE first reflection to be made on this discourse is, that he refutes and
overthrows the Argument which the Doctors of the Roman Church do commonly draw
from our Saviors words in the 6th. of S. John, My flesh is truly meat, and my
blood is truly drink: For if the term of truly may be applied to the thing
figured, to signify that it contains by way of excellency the qualities of the
figure, the meat and drink standing for a figure, and the Flesh and Blood of
Jesus Christ standing for the thing figured, there is no longer any reason to
conclude from these words that the Flesh and Blood of Jesus Christ are meat and
drink properly in a literal sense, than there would be to conclude from thence
that Jesus Christ is literally a Door and a Sun, Noah, and Melchisedec; that a
good man is really a Tree, and that the Christians are literally Israelites
under pretense there is used in 'um the term of truly. When then we shall be
offered this expression of our Savior, My flesh is truly meat, and my blood is
truly drink, we need only desire that Mr. Arnaud may be the judge of this
difference; for what he now said decides clearly the question in our favor.

IN the second place, supposing what he offers were absolutely true, yet the
consequence which we draw from these examples would for all that be good and
solid; for it is sufficient for us to show that the terms of true and truly
comprehend not always a reality of substance, and that very often they only
signify a reality of virtue or quality. Now this is what apears clearly by
these examples. It Is said of Jesus Christ that he is truly a Sun, a Stone, a
Door, because the qualities of the Sun, of a Stone and a Door are in Jesus
Christ, and that he has in our respect the vittue of all these things. Mr.
Arnaud confesses it, why may we not then as well say, that the Bread of the
Eucharist is truly the Body of Jesus Christ, by supposing that this Bread has
the virtue and efficacy of it? I grant it cannot be said of a figure that it is
truly the original; this cannot be unless when we consider it as a mere figure
under the respect of a representation only; but what hinders us from applying
this term to a thing which has all the virtue of another, and which will make
us feel all the effects of it, whether it be otherwise the figure of it or not?
The Gospel does not contain the substance of the Body of Jesus Christ, but only
its virtue; and yet Etherius and Beatus assert, that it is truly the Body of
Jesus Christ. What is this Either. and Beat. lib. 1.
Bread, say they, which we every day pray for, which is ours, and which yet we
do not receive, unless we ask it? It Is truly the Body, know ye, it is he himself
that is our daily bread. Ask it, receive it, eat it every day. Read we the holy
Scriptures, and we shall find therein this Bread. I believe that the Gospel,
the Scriptures, the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, are the Body of Jesus Christ. For
when our Lord says, He that eats not my Flesh, nor drinks my Blood, etc.
Although these words may be understood spiritually and mystically, yet the daily
bread which we ask corporally, and which is TRULY the Body of Jesus Christ, and
his Blood, is the word of the Scriptures, the Divine Doctrine; and when we read
it, we eat the Flesh of Jesus Christ and drink his Blood. The Author of the
Commentary on the Psalms attributed to S. Jerome, has so little believed that,
the term of truly applied to the Eucharist, when it is said that it is truly the
Body of Jesus Christ, ought to be understood of a truth of substance, that he
has not scrupled, comparing the Eucharist with the words of the Gospel, to
affirm that its words are more truly this Body. I believe, says he, that the
Gospel is the Body of Com. in Psalm. 147.
Jesus Christ, his holy Scriptures I say and his Doctrine. And when he says, he
that eats not my Flesh, nor driuketh my Blood; although this may be understood
of the mystery, yet the Scriptures, the Divine Doctrine is MORE TRULY the Body
of Jesus Christ.

THIS term of truly applies it self not only to a thing which has the virtue
of another, and which communicates it to us spiritually such as is the word of
the Gospel in respect of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, it applies it self
likewise to a thing which is not another, but only by imputation. Chrysostom
speaking of a poor body, and calling him a man, corrects Chrysostom. hom. 11. in
Romans
immediately his expression, as if it were not just. A man, says he, or to
speak better Jesus Christ, (...), which his interpreter Brixius has thus
rendered, Hominem autem, seu verius dicam Christum ipsum. In effect this
correction (...), denotes the sense of Chrysostom is, that a poor body is more
truly Jesus Christ than a man, and yet it cannot be said he is truly Jesus
Christ in verity of substance. He is only so by imputation; inasmuch as Christ
our Savior accepts whatsoever is done to the poor as done to himself. S.
Hierom in his Commentary on the Epistle to the Galatians uses the same term of
truly on the subject of the Church, although it be not the Body of Jesus Christ
but mystically and morally. The Church, says he, is taken in two respects,
either for that which has neither spot nor wrinkle, and which is TRVLY the Body
of Jesus Christ, or that which is assembled in the name of Christ without the
fullness or perfection of virtues, which Claud Bishop of Auxerrus, or rather of
Turin, who was an Author of the 8th. Century, has inserted word for word in his
exposition of the same Epistle, The Church, says he, which has neither spot nor
Com. in Gal. c. 1. Beda expl. all^gor. in Tobiam.
wrinkle, and which is TRVLY the Body of Jesus Christ. The same expression may
be met with in Bid, As our Lord, says he, is the Head of his Church, and the
Church is TRVLY his Body, so the Devil is the head of all the wicked, and the
wicked are his body and members.

IN all these examples I now alleged, concerning the Gospel, the Poor, and the
Church, Mr. Arnaud cannot say that Jesus Christ, or his Body stand for a
figure; nor that these things, stand for figured truths. For the Body of Jesus
Christ is not the figure of the Gospel, nor our Savior the figure of a poor
man; and the Church, to speak properly, is not the truth figured by the Body of
our Lord. Yet do the Fathers assure us that this Gospel, and this Church are
truly the Body of Jesus Christ, and the Poor are truly Jesus Christ. Whence it
follows, there is nothing more vain than Mr. Arnauds remark, That we cannot say
the Bread and Wine of the Eucharist are truly the Body and Blood of Jesus
Christ, because the Bread and Wine stand not for a thing figured, nor the Body
of Jesus Christ for a figure. On this Maxim the Fathers could not say the
Church is truly the Body of Jesus Christ, and the Gospel truly this Body; nor
that the Poor are truly the Lord himself; and yet they have said it as well as
that the Eucharist is truly the Body. Granting Mr. Arnaud one cannot say a
figure, as a figure, is really the thing it self which it represents, he can
hence conclude no more but this, that what the Fathers have said of the Bread
of the Eucharist, viz. that it is truly the Body of Jesus Christ, they did not
say this in respect of the Bread being a figure; but this does not hinder 'um
from saying it on other accounts, either inasmuch as that the Bread is
accompanied with the whole virtue of the Body, or inasmuch as it communicates
this virtue spiritually to our souls.

THERE are so many several respects wherein we may say the Sacrament is the
true Body, or truly the Body of Jesus Christ, without any regard to its
substance, that it is matter of real wonder to me Mr. Arnaud should so
vehemently urge those terms, and pretend 'um to be such a great argument. For
example, those that consider the Heresy of the Marcionites, and Manichees who
denied our Savior Christ assumed a true Body, and allowed only a phantasm,
might not they say of the Eucharist that it is our Lords true Body, to signify
it to be the mystery of a true Body, and not the mystery of a false and
imaginary one, such as these Heretics attributed to him, in the same sense as
a Roman Catholic who has regard to the false Idea which the Jews form to
themselves of a temporal Messiah may well say of a Crucifix, or another image
of our Savior, that this is the true Messiah who was to come into the world,
in opposition to the fantastical Messiah of the Unbelievers.

THOSE that respect the truth of the words of our Savior, who called the Bread
his Body, might not they likewise say, it is truly his Body, not to determine
the sense of these words, but to establish only the certainty of them, and
represent 'um true beyond all question, in the same sense in reference to
profane persons who scoff at the words of S. Paul, who tells us that we are
buried with Christ in Baptism, and made one and the same plant with him through
the conformity of his Death and Resurrection, I would not scruple to say that
Baptism is truby our death, our Burial and Resurrection with Jesus Christ, to
signify only that the words of the Apostle are very true, being rightly
understood.

SUCH as consider the figures and legal shadows which represented the Body of
Christ very imperfectly, which gave only a confused and obscure Idea of it, and
communicated only faintly the virtue of it, might not they say, in comparing
them with our Eucharist, that this here is the true Body of Jesus Christ, to
signify that it gives us a true, lively, distinct and perfect Idea of it, that
it fully communicates it to the hearts of the faithful, and makes it fell all
the virtues of it, in the same sense as Cyril of Jerusalem comparing the
ancient figures with our Baptism, did not stick to call this here the truth in
opposition to the figure. Pass we, says he, from Cyril. Hieros. Catech. mist. 1.
old things to new, and from the figure to the TRVTH. There Moses was sent from
God into Egypt, here Jesus Christ who was sent from the Father, is come into
the world. There Moses was sent to deliver the people from the oppression of
Egypt; here Jesus Christ was sent to deliver us from the bondage of sin. There
the Blood of a Lamb stopped the destroying Angel, here the Blood of Jesus Christ,
the Lamb without spot or wrinkle, protects us against the Devils. There the
tyrant pursued the people to the Red Sea, here the Devil pursues us as far as
the salutiferous waters. There the Tyrant was drowned in the Sea, here the
Devil is suffocated in the water of Salvation.

THOSE that considered the effect of the consecration of the Bread which makes
it to be really, and not by a simple imagination, the mystery of our Lord's
Body, might they not say that it is truly the Body of Jesus Christ, the Body of
Jesus Christ in truth, not to insinuate it to be so in proper substance, but to
signify its being the mystical Body of Jesus Christ, is not a thing which has
no other foundation than our own imagination, but that which is grounded on the
things themselves, either because our Savior Christ has thus ordained it in
instituting his Holy Sacrament in the Church, or forasmuch as the Eternal
Father has ratified this Institution, or that the Holy Spirit really descends
on the Bread to consecrate it. An adopted Son considering his adoption was
real, and not illusory or conceited, may rightly say that he is truly the Son
of such a one; and in this sense every faithful person may say with assurance,
he is truly the Son of God. It Is in this same sense that S. Basil tells us,
That if our flesh be worthy of God, it becomes Basil. in Ps. 14. Theophyl. in
Joan. 10. Cyril Hieroscal. mist. 3. Hierom in Epist. ad Gal. c. 4.
truly his Tabernacle. And Theophylact, That the Jews were truly blind in
respect of the Soul. And Cyril of Jerusalem. That we have been truly anointed
by the Holy Spirit, and that Jesus Christ is truly the Primitiae, and we the
mass or lump, And S. Hierom, That we be all truly one Bread in Jesus Christ.
For they would say, not that these titles of Tabernacle, and Blind, this
Unction, these Primitioe, this Mass, and this Bread, ought to be understood in
a literal sense; but that their metaphorical signification was grounded on the
things themselves, and may be found entirely true.

THOSE in fine who consider the opinion of the Greeks, that the Bread is made
the Body of Jesus Christ by an union with the natural body; and by way of
growth and augmentation, may not they likewise say that it is truly this body,
and yet not establish it is the same numerical substance which our Savior has
in Heaven; but to signify that this substance here, and that there, are not
two different Bodies, but one and the same Body; as we have already more than
once explained; in the same sense as the augmentations which are made to a
House or Ground become truly this House, or this ground, or the Kings Conquests
added to his Kingdom become truly his Kingdom, by virtue of their union.

ALL which clearly shows that Mr. Arnaud has much misreckoned himself when he
believed there were but two occasions wherein men used these terms of true and
truly, the one when they affirm the figure of the Original; as when we say that
our Savior Christ is the true Melchisedec, the true Son, the true Vine; and
the other when we would prevent any kind Chapter 5. p. 780.
of doubt or contest; as when we say of a suspicious piece of Gold that it is
true Gold, or a Pope that has an Antipope for his rival, that he is the true
Pope. This enumeration is defective, and the conclusion which he pretends to
draw hence is void, and refuted by what I now offered. The Fathers might say
that the Bread of the Eucharist is truly the Body of Jesus Christ without
intending the prevention of any doubt.

BUT supposing they designed to prevent a doubt; can there arise no other from
the subject of the Eucharist, but what relates to Transubstantiation, or the
substantial Presence? May not a man doubt of the truth of the Body of Jesus
Christ considered in it self, and in reference to the Incarnation? All those
ancient Heretics, Marcionites, Manichees, have not only doubted of it, but
boldly affirmed that 'twas only a Phantasm. The Eutychiens have affirmed, and
do still affirm, that this Body was swallowed up in the abyss of the Divinity.
Cannot a man doubt of the truth of Jesus Christ his words? The Jews and Pagans
do not only doubt of them, their impudence proceeds so far as to make a mock at
'um; and how many impious and profane wretches are there amongst such as
profess Christianity that mock at 'um in their hearts? Cannot a man doubt of
the efficacy and spiritual virtue of this Bread? We have already observed from
Palladius that this was precisely the doubt that possessed the mind of a
Religious. And how many weak persons are there, who seeing only Bread and Wine,
cannot imagine we ought to attribute to them so great an efficacy. There is
nothing, says Tertullian, that more perplexes men's minds, Tertul. de Baptismo.
Chapter 5. p. 783.
than to see the simplicity of the Divine operations when they are celebrated,
and to hear the magnificent effects issuing from them.

THIS doubt, says Mr. Arnaud, must have two qualities. For first, As this
expression has been generally received by all people; this must therefore be a
general doubt, and must naurally arise in the minds of all men. Secondly, As no
body ever made use of this expression, but only on the subject of the
Eucharist, this must be a particular doubt belonging to the Eucharist, and
which cannot be extended to all the other Sacraments. How excellent is Mr.
Arnaud at engrossing of objects. He has gathered here and there, from several
Authors that lived in sundry Churches, and at diverse times some thirty passages
taken in a counter sense that speak differently, one in one manner, others in
another, in different significations, and this he makes to be the language P.
774.
of all people, In another place, he assures us this is the language of all
Nations and all Ages. A man cannot say an expression has been generally
received by all people, and in all ages, unless he has run over the Authors of
all Ages, and showed that this expression was received by the greatest part
amongst 'um; for which purpose thirty passages gathered at random are not
sufficient. Moreover the expression in question should appear in all the
passages, and not one in some of 'em, and another in others. Besides the
expression must be used every where in the same sense. But we find no such
thing here. We have only about some thirty passages, in one of which there is
the term of same, in another that of proper, or properly, in another that of
true, or truly, and they are used in different senses too, as will appear from
the particular examination we shall make of them. How can this then be called
an expression generally received by all people, the language of all Nations,
and that of all ages? For my part I call it an illusion.

BUT supposing the expression of true, or truly to have been generally received
by all people, as Mr. Arnaud supposes it was, why must it needs proceed from a
general doubt that naturally arises in the minds of all men? May it not happen
that the same expression has been used in diverse ages and amongst diverse people
under different respects, and yet have been used for different ends, and on
different occasions. It Is not good reasoning to conclude there has been an
universal and uniform reason in all Ages and amongst all people that has
obliged them to make use of a term under pretense that it has been every where
and at all times used. For how many ancient terms are there which are at this
day in use, although the reason of their being at first used no longer subsists?
The use of terms is a thing unaccountable enough, and sufficiently subject to
change, either in regard of diverse People, or Ages, and the occasions, the
reasons or principles of this use are no less unaccountable too.

SUPPOSING this expression has been generally received by a general reason, why
must this reason be a general doubt that naturally arises in the minds of all
men? Is it not sufficient that it was a general interest which all Christians
had to establish the truth of the Nature and Humane Substance in the Person of
Jesus Christ, and to make thereof a common confession in the Sacrament it self
of his Incarnation, I mean in the Eucharist, for so the Fathers have called it?
Is it not sufficient 'twas a general interest which they had in all places and
in all Ages to receive with a profound respect the words of Jesus Christ, who
has said of the Bread, This is my Body, and to acknowledge publicly the truth
of them? These two interests are general, belong to all times, and all Nations,
and are a sufficient reason of this expression in question, were it as general
as Mr. Arnaud says it was.

BUT in fine, supposing it was a general doubt that occasioned these terms of
true and truly, I say it is sufficient 'twas a doubt likely to happen in the
minds of weak persons, and not necessarily in those of all men. For there have
been weak Christians at all times, and in all places, the Church having never
been without 'um, and of whom there ought always to be a particular care taken.
Now this doubt touching the virtue of the Eucharist, that it can spiritually
communicate to us the Body of Jesus Christ, that it procures us the remission
of our Sins, the Grace of Sanctification, the hope of Everlasting life, that by
it we obtain the Communion of our Savior; this doubt, I say, easily arises in
the minds of weak persons, who, as I have already said, are sufficiently puzzled
at the simplicity of this Sacrament, wherein there only appears Bread and Wine.
Supposing then one should say that the terms of the true Body of Jesus Christ,
or of truly the Body of Jesus Christ, were only used to prevent this doubt, to
strengthen the weak in this regard, and conciliate more respect to the
Sacrament, what can Mr. Arnaud find in this which is not reasonable, and
conformable to the sense of the Church.

WERE there any body now, says he, tempted with this doubt, and Page 783.
needed to be strengthened against it, does not common sense show that he would
express it in proper terms to make himself understood, and disacknowledg it by
expressions which are directly contrary to it. He will say for example that he
doubts whether God works on our souls by means of the Bread of the Eucharist,
and whether he fills it with his efficacy. He will say that he does not doubt
but the Eucharist is endowed with the virtue of the Body of Jesus Christ; but
he will never think of expressing this doubt in these terms, I doubt whether
the Eucharist be the Body of Jesus Christ, nor of rejecting it in these here, I
believe the Eucharist to be the true and proper Body of Jesus Christ.

LET Mr. Arnaud tell us if he pleases why these pretended doubters (whom he
introduces without any occasion, or reason) would not consult common sense
whereby to express their doubt in intelligible terms, supposing they doubted of
Transubstantiation, or the substantial presence. Why should they not say, We
doubt whether the substance of Bread be changed into the substance of the Body
of Jesus Christ, or we doubt whether the substance of the Body of Jesus Christ
be contained under the vail of the appearances of Bread. Those that have now
their minds possessed with these doubts, do they think of proposing them in
these equivocal terms which need a Commentary to explain them, We doubt whether
the Eucharist be the Body of Jesus Christ? Clear and proper terms are not so
hard to be found, had the Church then believed the substance of Bread to be
converted into the substance of Jesus Christ, and the common opinion it self
against which they would form their doubts would have furnished them with
requisite expressions. Let Mr. Arnaud likewise tell us why this doubt was not
repelled in formal terms, by saying, We must believe that the substance of
Bread is changed into that of the Body of Jesus Christ, and that under the
accidents of Bread is contained the proper substance of this Body. Let him show
us from Antiquity his pretended doubt explained in requisite terms according to
the sense he gives it, and I will show him that which he finds so ridiculous
stated according to my sense in Palladius, How are the gifts, said a Religious
Pallad. Hist. Laus. cap. 75.
person, able to sanctify me? I will show him that this is in effect the doubt
which was heretofore designed to be prevented, as appears by Cyril of
Alexandria; God, says he, changes the things offered into the efficacy of his
Flesh, Apud, Vict. Ant. Miss.
AND WE NEED NOT DOUBT BUT THIS IS TRUE: and by Elias of Crete, God changes the
things offered into the efficacy of his Flesh, Elias Cret. in Greg.
AND DOUBT NOT BUT THIS IS TRUE. Let him show us the Fathers have said that the
Eucharist is the true Body, or truly the Body of Jesus Christ, in reference to
the question of the Conversion, and the substantial Presence, and I will show
him they have said it in reference to the question touching the virtue. For
Walafridus Strabo, an Author of the 9th. Century, having given this Title to
one of the Chapters of his Book, De Virtute Sacramentorum, says afterward in
the Text of the same Chapter, Valafridus Strabo, de rec. Eccles. cap. 17.
Rupert in Mat. cap. 10.
by way of confirmation, That the Mysteries are truly the Body and Blood of our
Lord. And Rupert, although he lived in the 12th. Century, that is to say, in a
time wherein Transubstantiation had introduced it self into the Latin Church,
yet said, That the Bread is rightly called and is TRVLY the Flesh of Jesus
Christ, because in reference to us it effects the same thing as the Flesh of
Jesus Christ, Crucified, Dead and Buried. Moreover Mr. Arnaud has no reason to
be so positive in affirming that the doubt was rejected in these terms, I
believe the Eucharist to be the true and proper Body of Jesus Christ, nor to
make the world believe that all Nations and Ages spoke in this sort. The term
of true may be met with in some passages which Mr. Arnaud alleges, and that of
proper in others, and both of these are therein used in senses far different
from that which he gives them; but he must not under this pretense form this
proposition, That the Eucharist is the true and proper Body of Jesus Christ,
for there is a great deal of difference between these terms being separate,
(which offer themselves in diverse passages, and in diverse Authors) and these
same terms joined together by way of exageration. I confess that Nicephorus
according to Allatius's relation joins together the two terms of properly and
truly; but besides that Nicephorus is not all Ages, nor all Nations; we have
already showed that he speaks only thus upon an Hypothesis far different from
that of Transubstantiation, or the substantial Presence; and therefore Mr.
Arnaud cannot make any advantage of what he says.

AND these are my general answers to Mr. Arnaud's passages. Should we descend
at present to the particular examination of these passages, we must first lay
aside those of Anastasius Sinait, of Damascen, of the second Council of Nice,
of Nicephorus the Patriarch of Constantinople, the profession of Faith made by
the Saracens that were Converts of the 12th. Century, and that of the
Horologium of the Greeks; for they have been all of 'em already sufficiently
answered: it is only needful to remember what I have already established
touching the real Belief of the Greek Church. There must likewise be retrenched
those that be taken from the Liturgies of the Copticks and Ethiopians, seeing
we have already answered them. We have also answered that taken out of the
common Liturgy of the Armenians, or to speak better, the Armenians themselves
have answered it.

IF those of Leopolis call the Bread and Wine the true Body and the true Blood
of Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior, there is no likelihood for all this that
they have another Belief than that of the rest of the Armenians, who formally
declare, as we have already seen, that they mean nothing else by these terms,
than a true mystery of this Body and Blood, and in effect it is said in the
same Liturgy whence Mr. Arnaud has taken his Quotation, that the Priest says in
Communicating, I eat by Faith, O Lord Jesus Apud Cassand. i^ Liturgicis.
Christ thy holy living and saving Body. I drink by Faith thy holy and pure
Blood.

THE passage of Adam the Archdeacon of the Nestorians, mentioned by Strozza,
is impertinently alleged, for two reasons: First, That these are the words of
a man that reconciled himself with the Church of Rome, who in embracing its
Religion, wrote in Rome it self under the inspection of Pope Paul V. and from
whose words by consequence there can be nothing concluded touching the
Nestorian Church. Secondly, That what he says concerning our eating the true
Body of God, but of God Incarnate; that we drink truly the Blood of a Man, but
of a Man that is God, relates not to our question, nor is not said in this
respect, but in regard of the Error of the Nestorians, who will have the Body
of Jesus Christ to be the Body of a mere man, and not the true Body of God
Incarnate. What Is this to the question, to wit, Whether that which we receive
with the mouths of our bodies be the substance it self of the Body of Jesus
Christ?

WHAT he alleges touching the Liturgy of the Indian Christians that added to
the saying of our Savior these words, In veritate, saying, Hoc est in veritate
corpus, hic est in veritate sanguis meus is a thing very doubtful. It Is not
likely Alexis Menesez the Archbishop of Goa who labored to reduce these
Indians to the Faith of the Roman Church would have retrenched from their
Liturgy these words in veritate, had he in truth found them in it. Those that
wrote the actions of this Arch bishop, say, this addition was made by a Bishop
that came from Babylon. Mr. Arnaud tells us we must not much heed what they
relate. This is a mere Chaos wherein a Book 5. Chapter 10. p. 500.
man can comprehend nothing. The Deacon, says he, sings still in their Mass,
Fratres mei suscipite corpus ipsius filii Dei dicit Ecclesia. But what
consequence can be drawn from these words. It Is certain that this corpus ipsius
filii Dei, is a clause added by Menesez against the Error of the Nestorians,
who would have it to be no more than the Body of a mere man; for every one
knows this was the Heresy of the Nestorians. There remains still in this
Liturgy (as correct as it is) several passages that do not well agree with the
Doctrine of the Roman Church, as what the Priest says, Jesus Missae Christ.
apud Indos Bibl. patr. tom. 6.
Christ our Lord the Son of God that was offered for our salvation, and who
commanded us to Sacrifice in remembrance of his Passion, Death, Burial, and
Resurrection, receive this Sacrifice from our hands. Were the Sacrifice Jesus
Christ in his proper substance, there is no likelihood they would offer it to
Jesus Christ himself. Having read the passage of S. Paul, That whilst we are in
this Body we are absent from the Lord, that we desire to be out of the body, to
have his presence, that we desire to please him whether present or absent, etc.
rehearsed the Creed, the Priest says, This Sacrifice is in remembrance of the
Passion, Death, Burial, and Resurrection of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
Then praying for the Consecration, O Lord God, says he, look not upon the
multitude of my sins', and be not angry with us for the number of our Crimes,
but by thy ineffable Grace Consecrate this Sacrifice, AND INDUE IT WITH THAT
VIRTUE AND EFFICACY THAT IT MAY ABOLISH THE MULTITUDE OF OUR SINS, to the end
that when thou shall at last appear in that humane form which thou have been
pleased to take on thee, we may find acceptance with thee. On one hand he
restrains the Consecration to the virtue or efficacy which God gives to the
Sacrament for the abolishing of our sins; and on the other formally
distinguishes the Sacrament from the Humane Nature of Jesus Christ, in which he
will appear ar the last day. Immediately after he calls the gifts, the Holy
Sacraments of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ. And then beseeches God, they
may be made worthy to obtain the remission of their sins by means of the Holy
Body which they shall receive by Faith. Again, he says, That he Sacrifices the
Mystery of the Passion, Death, Burial and Resurrection of Jesus Christ; and
prays to God, That his Holy Spirit may come down, and rest on this Oblation,
and sanctify it, to the end it may procure them the remission of their sins.
He says not to the end it may change the substance of it, and convert it into
that of the Body of Jesus Christ, which yet must have been said, or something
equivalent thereunto, were this the formal effect of the Consecration. Having
recited our Lords words, This is my Body, this is my Blood, he adds, This shall
be a pledge to us to the end of the world. And a little further, Esaias touched a
live coal, his lips were not burnt with it, but his iniquity pardoned. Mortal
men receive a fire IN THE BREAD IT self; and this fire preserves their bodies,
and consumes only their sins. It Is easy to perceive that by this fire which is
in the Bread it self, he means the Holy Spirit which he had already prayed for
to come down and rest on the Oblation. Explaining afterward what this Mystery
is, Approach we all of us, says he, with fear and respect to the Mystery of the
precious Body and Blood of our Savior, and with a pure heart, and a true Faith
call we to remembrance his Passion and Resurrection; and let us clearly
comprehend them. For, for our sakes the only Son of God has assumed a mortal
Body, a spiritual reasonable and immortal Soul, and by his holy Law has reduced
us from error to the knowledge of the truth, and at the end of his Economy,
offered on the Cross the first fruits of our nature, he is risen from the Dead,
ascended up into Heaven, and has left us his Holy Sacraments as pledges to put
us in mind of all the favors which he has bestowed on us. Was not here a
fitting place to make some mention of his corporeal Presence in the Eucharist;
and having said that he is ascended up into Heaven, does it not seem, that
instead of adding, he has left us his Holy Sacraments, he should have said, he
yet presents himself on the Altars, in the substance of his Body. Let Mr.
Arnaud himself judge whether this Liturgy favors him.

AS to the ancient Liturgy of France, which bears that Jesus Christ gives us
his proper Body, I have already answered that these terms of proper Body,
signify only his Body; and I apply the same answer to the passages which Mr.
Arnaud alleges of S. Ireneus, Juvencus, Gaudencius, and of S. Chrysostom, who
likewise use the same term of proper (...) proprium corpus, signifies suum
corpus, his Body, not that of another, but his own; for this is often the sense
of this term, as we have already showed.

S. Hilary says, There Is no reason to doubt of the truth of the Flesh, and
Blood of our Lord. I acknowledge he speaks of this Flesh inasmuch as it is
communicated to us in the Sacrament; but I say also he means the spiritual
Communication which Jesus Christ has given us in the act it self of the
Sacramental Communion: and that Hilary's sense is, we must not doubt but this
Flesh is really communicated to us, inasmuch as our Souls are made really
partakers of it.

EPHRAM of Edesse speaks likewise of the Spiritual Communion which we have with
Jesus Christ God and Man, when he says, that we eat the Lamb himself entire.

WE may return the same answer to the passages of Gelazius of Cizique,
Hesychius, and the History of the Martyrdom of S. Andrew.

GELAZIVS of Cizique says very well, That we truly receive the precious Body
and the precious Blood of Jesus Christ; not only because the Spiritual
Communion is a real reception of this Body and Blood, but likewise because this
Communion considered in opposition to the Sacramental Communion, is the only
true one.

HESTCHIVS says, That the Mysteries are the Body and Blood of Jesus Chhist,
secundum veritatem, according to truth, because that in effect the mystical
object represented, and communicated to our Souls, in this holy action is the
Body and Blood of our Lord; and this is what he understands by the truth or
virtue of the Mystery, as we have already observed elsewhere.

The Author of the relation of the Martyrdom of S. Andrew, makes this Saint
say, not what Mr. Arnaud imputes to him, That he Sacrificed every See Ethe. and
Beatus, who relate this passage, Bibl. patr. tom. 4.
day to God the immaculate Lamb, but, that he Sacrificed every day to God ON
THE ALTAR OF THE CROSS, the Immaculate Lamb. Where I pray is Mr. Arnaud's
fidelity thus to eclipse these words, on the Altar of the Cross, to make the
world believe this Author means the Sacrifice which is offered every day in the
Eucharist; whereas he means only that every day he Immolates Jesus Christ on
the Cross, to wit, in meditating on this Cross, and preaching it to the people.
He adds, That all the people who are Believers eat the Flesh of this Lamb, and
drink his Blood, and yet the Lamb which was sacrificed remains whole and alive;
and although he be truly sacrificed, and his Flesh truly eaten and drank, yet he
remains whole and alive. This is an allusion to the ancient Lamb of the Jews,
which was first sacrificed, and afterward eaten by the people, which was a
figure of our Savior, the true Lamb of God that was sacrificed on the Cross;
and whose Flesh was eaten, and Blood spiritually drank by those that believe in
him by Faith. The Lamb being divided, and not rising again after he was slain,
our Savior Christ has this advantage over him that he is alive after his being
sacrificed and eaten, without suffering any division. But whether we consider
this manducation absolutely in it self, or by comparing it to that of the
ancient Lamb, it is true. For on one hand it is neither false nor illusory, and
on the other it is the truth figured by the manducation of the Lamb of the Jews.

THE passage of S. Leo, which says, We must in such a manner draw near to the
Divine Table, as not to doubt, in any wise, of the truth of the Body and Blood
of Jesus Christ, is very impertinently alleged. Mr. Arnaud is not to learn
that Leo discourses against the Eutychiens, who denied our Savior had a real
Body; and his sense to be, that when we partake in the Sacrament of the Body
and Blood of our Lord, we must not doubt but our Savior has in himself, in his
proper person, a real Body and Blood, and is real man.

IT IS now plainly seen, that this heap of passages which Mr. Arnaud has
pretended to make of the consent of all Nations and Ages, is but a mere
illusion, and that his design in wandering thus ftom his subject, was only to
color over the weakness of his proofs touching the 7th. and 8th. Centuries now
in debate. He had so little to say concerning these Centuries, that he thought
it necessary to take the field, and circuit about to amuse his Readers, and
fill up his Chapters. But his subject matter is so little favorable to him on
what side soever he turns himself, and howsoever he uses it, that we may well
say he loses both his time and his pains.

WOULD we really know what has been the sentiment of the ancients, the way to
be informed, is not to take passages in a counter sense, and captiously heapt
up one upon another: but to apply our selves to the testimony of the Ancients
themselves, produced sincerely, and faithfully, some of which are these.

TERTULLIAN. Those of Capernaum having found our Saviors Tertull. de resur.
car. c. 37.
discourse hard and insupportable, as if he designed to give them TRVLY his
Flesh to eat. To manifest to 'em the means he uses for the procuring us
salvation were spiritual, he tells them, it is the Spirit that quickens.

ORIGIN. There is in the New Testament, a letter which kills him that Origin.
hom. 7. in Levit.
does not understand spiritually the meaning of it: For if we take these words
in a literal sense, if you eat not my Flesh, and drink not my Blood, THIS
LETTER KILLS.

S. ATHANASIUS. The words of our Savior Christ were not carnal, Athanas. in
illud si quis dixerit, etc.
but spiritual. For to how few persons would his Body have been sufficient, and
how could he be the food of the whole world? Therefore he mentions his
Ascension into Heaven, to take them off from all carnal thoughts, and to show
them he gave his Flesh as meat from above, heavenly food, a spiritual
nourishment.

EUSEBIUS of Cesarea. Our Savior taught his Disciples that they must
understand SPIRITVALLY what he told them concerning his Flesh Eusebius. lib. 3. de
Theol. Eccles. cap. 12.
and Blood. Think not, says he to 'em, that I speak of this Flesh which I now
have on, as if ye were to eat it, nor imagine that I enjoin you to drink this
sensible and corporeal Blood, know that the words I speak to you are spirit and
life.

THE Author of an imperfect Book on S. Matthew, under the name of Author. oper.
imperf. in Mat. hom. 11.
S. Chrysostom, If it be a dangerous thing to transfer to common uses the
sacred Vessels wherein THE TRUE BODY OF JESUS CHRIST is not contained, but the
MYSTERY of his Body, how much more the vessels of our body, which God has
prepared as an habitation for himself?

S. AMBROSE. The shadow was in the Law, the IMAGE is in the Ambros. lib. 1. de
officiis, c. 48.
Gospel, THE TRUTH IS IN HEAVEN. The Jews offered anciently a Lamb, an Heifer;
now Jesus Christ is offered, he is offered as a man, as capable of suffering,
and he offers himself as a Priest. HERE IS THIS DONE IN A FIGURE; but at the
Fathers right hand where he intercedes for us as our advocate, THIS IS
PERFORMED IN TRUTH.

S. AUSTIN. Before the coming of Christ, the Flesh of this Sacrifice Aug.
contr. Faust. lib. 20. cap. 21.
was promised by Victims of Resemblance. In the Passion of Jesus Christ this
Flesh was given BY THE TRUTH IT SELF. After his Ascension it is celebrated BY A
SACRAMENT OF COMMEMORATION.

IN another place, You shall not eat THIS BODY WHICH YOU Aug. in Ps. 98.
SEE, nor drink this Blood which those that are to crucify me will shed. I
have recommended to you A SACRAMENT, if ye receive it spiritually it will
quicken you.

AGAIN elsewhere, The Body and Blood will be the life of every one Aug. Sermon.
2. de ver. Apost.
of us if we eat and drink SPIRITUALLY IN THE TRUTH IT SELF that which we take
VISIBLY IN THE SACRAMENT, si quod in Sacramento visibiliter sumitur, in ipsa
veritate spiritualiter manducetur, Spiritualiter bibatur.

THE Author of the Commentary on the Psalms attributed to S. Jerome. Hieronym.
Com. in Psalm. 147.
Although what Jesus Christ says, (He that eats not my Flesh nor drinks my
Blood) may be understood in reference to the Mystery, yet the word of the
Scriptures, the Divine Doctrine IS MORE TRULY the Body of Jesus Christ.

FACUNDUS. The Bread is not PROPERLY the Body of Jesus Facundus def. trium
capit. l. 9.
Christ, nor the Cup his Blood; but they are so called because they contain the
mystery of them.

RABAN. Of late some (that HAVE NOT A RIGHT SENTIMENT) Raban in paenitent.
have said of the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our Lord, that IT IS THE
BODY it self and Blood of our Savior born of the Virgin Mary.

OECUMENIUS. The servants of the Christians had heard their Oecumen. in 1 Pet.
cap. 2.
Masters say that the Divine Communion was the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ,
and they imagined that 'twas INDEED flesh and blood.

CHAP. IX.
That the Fathers of the Seventh and Eighth Centuries held not
Transubstantiation, nor the Substantial Presence.

WE may judge by these passages which I now alleged, as from a sampler, what
has been the Doctrine of the ancient Church in General. That of the 7th. and
8th. Centuries in particular will soon discover it self upon the least
observation.

WE shall not find therein either substantial Presence, or conversion of
substance, nor existence of a Body in several places at once, nor accidents
without a subject, nor presence of a Body after the manner of a Spirit, nor
concomitancy, nor adoration of the Eucharist, nor any of those things by which
we may comprehend that the Church in those times believed what the Roman Church
believes in these.

WE shall find, on the contrary, as I have already observed, that the Greg.
Mag. Isidorus. Beda Haymo and alii passim. Beda in Ep. ad Heb. c. 7. Idem in
Ps. 3. and in quest. in 2 Reg. cap. 3. and in Marc. 14. Carol. Mag. ad alcuin.
de Septuagint. Isidor. in alleg. Vet. Test. Idem Orig. lib. 7. Idem Comment. in
Genes. cap. 12. Idem Comment. in Genes. c. 23.
Authors of those Ages commonly called the Eucharist, The mystery of the Body
of Jesus Christ, the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, the
figure of Christ's Body, which Bid calls the image of his Oblation which the
Church celebrates in remembrance of his Passion. Who in another place assures
us, That the Lord gave and recommended to his Disciples, the figure of his Body
and Blood. And Charlemain to the same effect, That he broke the Bread, and
delivered the Cup, as a figure of his Body and Blood.

WE shall therein find that this Sacrament, or figure, is Bread and Wine
properly so called, without any equivocation. The Sacrament, says Isidor, of
the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, that is to say, the Oblation of Bread and
Wine which is offered throughout the whole world. Elsewhere, Melchisedeck made
a difference between the Sacraments of the Law and the Gospel; inasmuch as he
offered in sacrifice the Oblation of Bread and Wine. Again in another place,
Jesus Christ is a Priest according to the order of Melchisedeck, by reason of
the Sacrament which he has enjoined Christians to celebrate; to wit, the
Oblation of Bread and Wine: that is to say the Sacrament of his Body and Blood.
The multitude of Corn and Wine, says he in another place, is the multitude
which Jesus Christ gathered to the Sacrament of his Body and Blood.

BID explaining how the Church has every day our Savior with Beda Expos.
alleg. in Sam. c. 5. Idem Expos. alleg. in Prove. lib. 3. c. 31. Idem de Taber.
lib. 2. c. 2. Idem Hom. est in Vigil. S. Jo. Bapt.
her, says, It Is because she has the Mysteries of his Flesh and Blood in the
Wine and Bread: elsewhere applying to the Church what Solomon says of the
virtuous woman, that she eats not her bread in idleness. She eats not, says he,
her bread in idleness, because receiving the Sacrifice of our Lords Body, she
carefully imitates in her actions what she celebrates in his Ministry; taking
care lest she eat our Lords Bread, and drink of his Cup unworthily. The
ancients, says he moreover, celebrated our Lords Passion, by which, both they
and we have been redeemed by the blood and flesh of Sacrifices; and we
celebrate it by an Oblation of Bread and Wine. Elsewhere he assures us, That
our Savior has established under the New Testament the same kind of Sacrifice,
idem sacrificii genus; as that of Melchisedeck, to be the Mystery of his Body
and Blood. In his Homily on the Epiphany, he says, that our Savior Idem hom.
de sanctis in Epiphan.
having abolished the Paschal Lamb, has changed the Mystery of his Passion into
the creatures of Bread and Wine. In his Commentary on the 33d. Psalm he applies
what is said of David, that he changed his countenance, Idem Comm. in Psalm. 33.
and he expresses himself in this sort, He changed his countenance before the
Jews, because he converted the Sacrifices of the Law, which were according to
the Order of Aaron, into the Sacrifice of Bread and Wine, according to the
Order of Melchisedeck. In the same place he says, That our Savior carried
himself (in some sort) in his own hands, at his last Supper, when he gave to
his Disciples the Bread, which he blessed, and which his mouth recommended to
them. In his Commentary on S. Luke, explaining the words of Idem Comm. in Luc.
22.
our Savior, This is my Body, this my Blood. Instead of the flesh and blood of
the Lamb, says he, he has substituted the Sacrament of his Flesh and Blood, IN
THE FIGURE OF BREAD AND WINE. And to show wherein consists this mystical
figuration, he adds, That our Savior did himself break the Bread, to signify
the fraction he was voluntarily to make of his own Body. And a little further,
The Bread strengthens the Flesh, and the Wine creates Blood in our Bodies; and
therefore the Bread mystically alludes to the Body, and the Wine to the Blood.

WE find in truth, says Mr. Arnaud, the language of sense in the Authors Book
8. Chapter 4. p. 75 5.
of these Ages, as well as in those of the following. They could not exempt
themselves from using it, whatsoever their opinion was otherwise. But to judge
of that which they had in effect, we must consider what they tell us of the
Eucharist, when they explain to us what they believe of its nature and essence,
when they do not design it, but teach what it is, when they do not only denote
to us the matter which God has chosen, but tell us what God does in this
matter, when they do not speak of it according to the impressions of sense, but
according to the sentiments of Faith.

To make in the sense of the Authors in question a solid opposition between the
language of sense, and that of Faith, it ought to be made appear, that
according to them, these two languages justle one another; that they cannot be
both of 'em true in the main, and that that of sense is deceitful and illusory,
if taken according to the letter. But this is that which Mr. Arnaud does not
demonstrate. We know our senses tell us, that it is bread, we know their
deposition is literal, for it is literally and without a figure that our senses
tell us that the Eucharist is Bread and Wine. As often then as we find the
Fathers of the 7th. and 8th. Centuries speaking according to sense, reason will
guide us to the understanding of their language according to the letter, unless
we are showed that according to these same Fathers, our Faith must correct this
language; that she declares it to be false, being taken according to the
letter, and does not allow of it unless under the favor of an interpretation
and a figure. Were this showed us, I confess then we ought to lay aside this
language of sense, as being very improper for the discovering to us the true
opinion of Authors. But till then, we have liberty to take it according to the
purport of the senses themselves, which is to declare to us that the Eucharist
is real Bread and Wine. For unless it be showed us that those who have used it,
had an intention contrary to that of their senses, we ought to suppose they
have had even no other than that, for we must ever suppose in favor of nature
and the general rule. That if afterward there be met with in the expressions
of Faith something that seems contrary to those of sense, it is more reasonable
to attribute a figure to the language of Faith which can well bear it, than to
that of sense which naturally cannot suffer it. So that comparing these two
kinds of expressions, Bread, and Wine, Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, one with
the other, we must ever take the first in a literal sense, and the second in a
figurative one, unless as I said, we are showed the contrary by some express
declaration.

TO make likewise an exact opposition, between the matter of the Eucharist, and
its essence or nature, it must first be showed that this matter does no longer
subsist, but ceases to be in the very moment wherein the Eucharist is made. For
if it subsists, it makes one part of the essence, or nature of the Sacrament;
to wit, the material part, and we shall always have right to use for our
advantage the passages which call the Sacrament Bread and Wine, although they
design the marter of it, seeing this matter subsists. Now of these two
suppositions, either that the matter subsists, or does not subsist, that which
affirms it subsits, is natural, in favor of which by consequence we must
always prejudicate, till such time as the contrary is established by good
proofs. I say, that the supposition that the matter subsists is the natural
one. First, Because that in all the changes which happen in the world, there is
ever a common subject which subsists, it being never heard of that there was
ever made a change of one thing into another, where the whole substance of this
first thing has absolutely ceased to be. Philosophy can give us no instance of
this, and even miracles wrought by the Almighty Power of God furnish us not
with any. Secondly, All the changes wrought by Grace leave the matter still
subsisting. There Is made according to the Scriptures and Fathers, a new Heaven,
and a new Earth, a new Creature, and a new Man. A Temple is made of a House, an
ordinary Man is made a Bishop, a Stone an Altar, Wood or Metal a Cross, Water,
and common Oil Sacraments, without the matters ceasing to be.

IT subsists on the contrary in all these instances. If then we may not draw
advantage from the expressions of the Fathers which call the Eucharist Bread
and Wine, under pretense they design thereby the matter of it, we must be
showed that according to these Fathers themselves this matter subsists not
after the Consecration; for otherwise we shall still naturally suppose that the
Fathers delivering themselves with an honest plainness, and far from the
prospect of our Controversy have regarded this matter as subsisting.

BUT supposing what I now said signifies nothing, it is certain the passages
which I produced which design the matter of the Sacrament, do of themselves
establish the subsistence of it, for they all consider it after the
Consecration, and speak of it as being still the same as it was before, to wit,
Bread and Wine. They say that it is an Oblation of Bread and Wine, an Oblation
of the same kind as that of Melchisedeck, Bread and Wine, which are the
Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, Bread which the Church eats,
Bread with which is celebrated our Lords Passion, as the Ancients Celebrated it
by the flesh of Victims, Bread that came in the room of the Paschal Lamb to be
the mystery of Christ's Passion, Bread which has succeeded Aarons Sacrifices,
Bread which our Lord held in his hands after he had blessed it, and by means of
which he did in some sort carry himself; to wit, inasmuch as he held in his
hands his own Sacrament. Mr. Arnaud's Remark might take place, did they only
say that the Body of Jesus Christ is made of Bread, or that the Bread becomes,
and is made this Body; for then one might dispute whether the Bread be made
this Body, either in ceasing to be Bread, or in remaining so. But speaking in
the manner I now mentioned, calling it Bread after the Consecration, according
to the language of sense, which naturally admits not a figure, and without
correcting or explaining themselves, is a sufficient evidence they meant 'twas
real Bread in substance.

YET let us see what they say of the Eucharist, when according to Mr. Arnaud
they design not the matter, but expound the nature and essence of it. Besides
what I already said, that they commonly call it the Mystery of the Body of
Jesus Christ, the Sacrament of this Body, the Figure of this Body, the Image of
his Sacrifice, the Sacrament of his Incarnation, the Sacrament of his Humanity,
the Mystery of his Humanity, the Mystery of his Humiliation. Besides this I
say, it is certain they often explain themselves in such a manner that they
establish a formal distinction between the Sacrament, and Jesus Christ himself
represented by it, and leave it to be plainly concluded they held not this
substantial Presence which the Church of Rome teaches.

IT is in this sense that Gregory the first Bishop of Rome, who lived toward
the end of the 6th. Century, and about the beginning of the 7th. wrote, That
this Mystery reiterates the Death of Christ, and although since his Gregor. Mag.
Dialog. lib. 4. cap. 58.
Resurrection he dies no more, Death having no more dominion over him, yet
being IN HIMSELF alive, immortal, and incorruptible, he is still Sacrificed for
us in the MYSTERY of the Sacred Oblation.

ISIDOR recites a prayer inserted in the Liturgy of his time, which desires of
God, That the OBLATION being sanctified, may be made CONFORMABLE Isidor. de
Offici. Eccles. l. 1. c. 15.
to the Body and Blood of Christ. Brevil's Edition has these words, Vt oblatio
quae Domino offertur sanctificata per spiritum sanctum corpori Christi and
sanguini confirmetur; but this has no sense: and it is evident we must read
conformetur, as Cassander rightly observes, who thus recites it, Vt oblatio
quae Domino offertur sanctificata per spiritum sanctum corpori Christi and
sanguini conformetur.

NOW howsoever we understand this conformity, it is certain it supposes a formal
distinction between the Body and Blood of Christ, and the Oblation of the
Eucharist; whence it appears, that the sense of the then Church was, not to
desire of God that the substance of Bread might become the proper substance of
the Body; for this would be, not a conformity, but an entire and perfect
identity.

IT is in the same sense that Bid expounding these words of the 21th. Psalm,
The poor shall eat and be satisfied, makes a difference between the Beda Comm.
in Psalm. 21.
Bread and Wine of the Sacrament, and the true Body or Blood of Christ; for he
introduces our Savior Christ speaking thus, The poor, that is to say, those
who despise the world shall eat of my Vows. They shall really eat of them, in
reference to the SACRAMENT; and shall be eternally satisfied: for by this BREAD
AND WINE which are visibly offered to 'em, they will understand ANOTHER
INVISIBLE THING, to wit the TRUE BODY AND BLOOD of our Lord, which are really
meat and drink, not such as fill the belly, but which nourishes the mind. And
in his allegorical expressions on Esdras, speaking of the Passover which the
Israelites celebrated In Esdr. lib. 2. cap. 8.
after their return from the Babylonish Captivity, The immolation, says he, of
this Passover represents the glory of our Resurrection, when we shall eat
altogether the Flesh of the immaculate Lamb, I mean of him who is our God and
our Lord, no more IN A SACRAMENT, as Believers, but IN THE THING IT SELF AND IN
THE TRUTH, as Spectators.

SHOULD we proceed further, we shall find, that these same Authors acknowledge
but one true manducation of the Body of Jesus Christ; to wit, that which is
particular to the Faithful, and which necessarily and only communicates Life
and Salvation: whence it follows they knew not of this oral manducation of the
substance of this Body, which is common as well to the wicked as the good, and
will not be necessarily attended with Salvation. It is on this ground Isidor
says, That the Flesh of Jesus Christ is the food of the Saints, of which if any
one eats he shall never die. And in another place, It is the Living and
Celestial Bread, the food of Angels with which the Word nourishes corruptible
men after an incorruptible manner. He was made flesh and dwelt amongst us, to
the end men might eat him, Isidor. in Genesis cap. 1. Idem in Exodus c. 23. Beda in
Genes. and Exodus Exposit. in Exodus c. 12.
and that such as do it may live spiritually.

WE read the same words in Bid, who has without doubt taken 'em from Isidor;
for 'twas the common custom of the Authors of those days to copy out one from
another. He says moreover in another place expressly, That no Infidel can eat
the Flesh of Jesus Christ, and that all those whom he has redeemed by his Blood
must be his slaves circumcised in reference to Vice, and so eat the Flesh of
Jesus Christ. And as Bede and Alcuinus made a particular profession to be S.
Austin's Disciples, so they have not scrupled to transcribe into their Books
several passages taken word for word out of the Writings of this great man,
which confirm the same thing. Bid amongst others has taken this out of the
Book of Sentences, collected by Prosper, He that is not of the same mind as
Jesus Christ, neither eats his Flesh, nor drinks his Blood; although for the
condemnation of his presumption he receives every day the Sacrament of so great
a thing. And he and Alcuinus Beda in Cor. 11. Beda and Alcu. in Joan. 6.
have borrowed from his Treatise on S. John these words, Jesus said to them,
this is the work of God that you believe in him whom he has sent. This is then
what is meant by eating the meat which perishes not, but remains to life
everlasting. Why prepare ye your teeth and belly, believe, and ye have eaten
it: this is the Bread which came down from Heaven, to the end that he which
eats of it may not die. This is meant of the virtue of the visible Sacrament.
He that eats internally, not externally, that eats with the heart, not with
the teeth. And a little further, our Savior explains what it is to eat his Body
and drink his Blood; He that eats my Flesh and drinks my Blood dwells in me
and I in him. To eat then this meat and drink this drink is to dwell in Jesus
Christ, and to have Jesus Christ dwelling in us. So that he that dwells not in
Jesus Christ and Jesus Christ in him, does not eat spiritually his Flesh, although
he sensibly bites with the teeth the Sacrament of his Body and Blood; but
rather eats and drinks to his condemnation the Sacrament of so great a thing.
And again, The mark by which a man may know he has eaten and drank, is, that he
dwells in Jesus Christ, and has Jesus Christ dwelling in him. We dwell in him
when we are the Members of his Body, and he dwells in us when we are his
Temple. And a little lower, The words which I tell ye are spirit and life. What
is the meaning of that, They are spirit and life? That is, they must be
understood spiritually. If ye understand them spiritually, they are spirit and
life, if carnally this hinders not but they are spirit and life, but not to you.

IN short, we find these Authors of the 7th. and 8th. Centuries acknowledge no
other Presence of Jesus Christ on Earth than that of his Divinity, of his
Grace, or Providence, and in no wise that of the substance of his Body. Jesus
Christ ascending up into Heaven, says Isidor, has absented himself Isidor. lib.
1. sentent. cap. 14.
as to the flesh, but is ever present in respect of his Majesty, according to
what he has said, I am with you to the end of the world.

THE passages of Bid on this subject, are too many to be mentioned Beda Expos.
allegor. ipsam, lib. 1. cap. 12.
here. I shall only relate some of 'em. The Lord, says he, having performed the
duties of his Economy, returned into Heaven, where he is ascended in respect
of his Body, but visits us every day by his Divine Presence, by which he is
always every where, and quietly governs all things. There is his Flesh, which
he has assumed, and glorified for our sakes. Because he is God and man, says he
again, he was raised up into Heaven, where he sits (as to his Humanity which he
assumed on Earth.) Yet does he remain with the Saints on Earth in his Divinity,
by which he fills both Heaven and Earth. Elsewhere he says that the man
mentioned in the Parable of the Gospel, who leaving his house went a journey
into a far Country, is our Savior Christ, who after his Resurrection Idem
Comm. in Mare. c. 13.
ascended up to his Father, having left (as to his bodily Presence) his Church,
although he never suffered it to want the assistance of his Divine Presence.
Interpreting mystically in another place the words concerning Ann the Daughter
of Phanuel, who was a Widow and aged 84. years. This Ann, Idem in Luc. lib. 1.
cap. 2.
says he, signifies the Church which is (as it were) a Widow, since the Death
of her Lord and Spouse. The years of her widowhood represent the time in which
the Church, which is still burdened with this body, is absent from the Lord,
expecting every day with the greatest impatience that coming concerning which
it is said, We will come to him, and make our abode with him. 'Twas to the same
effect that expounding these words of Job, I have comforted the heart Idem
Exposit. alleg. in Job, lib. 2. c. 14.
of the Widow, he says, that this Widow is the Church our Mother, which our
Savior comforts, and that she is called a Widow, because her Spouse has
absented himself from her; as to his corporeal Presence, according to what
himself tells his Disciples, The poor ye have always with you, but me ye have
not always.

IN one of his Homilies he acknowledges no other presence of Jesus Christ in
the Eucharist than a Presence of Divinity, and Grace. For having exactly
denoted how many times the Lord appeared to his Disciples after his
Resurrection. He designed, says he, to show by these frequent appearances Idem
Hom. ast. de temp. feria 6 Paschal.
that he would be spiritually present in all places at the desire of the
faithful. He appeared to the women that wept at the Sepulcher, he will be
likewise present with us when we grieve at the remembrance of his absence. He
appeared (whilst they broke bread) to those who taking him for a stranger gave
him entertainment, he will be likewise with us, when we liberally relieve the
poor and strangers. He will be likewise with us in the fraction of Bread, when
we receive the Sacraments of his Body, (which is the living Bread) with a pure
and chaste heart. We find here no mention of any other presence in the
Sacrament, but that of the Divinity.

ALCVINVS teaches the same Doctrine, for expounding these words of our Savior,
The poor ye have ever with you, but me not always. He shows, says he, we must
not blame those that communicated to him their good Alcuin. in Joan. lib. 5.
cap. 28.
things, whilst he conversed amongst 'em, seeing he was to remain so short a a
time with the Church bodily. He introduces our Savior elsewhere thus, saying
to his Church, If I go away in respect of the absence of my Flesh, I will Idem
in Joan. lib. 6. cap. 34.
come by the presence of my Divinity, by which I shall be with you to the end
of the world, He retired from them, says he again, as to his manhood: Ibid.
cap. 35.
but as God, he did not leave them. For the same Christ who is man, is likewise
God. He left them then as to his manhood, but remained with 'em as to his
Godhead. He went away in reference to that by which he is but in one place, yet
tarried with 'em by his Divinity which is every where.

LET Mr. Arnaud reflect, if he pleases, on these passages, and, on I know not
how many others like 'em with which his reading will furnish him, and tell us
faithfully (seeing on one hand there is not to be found in Authors of the 7th.
and 8th. Centuries, either Transubstantiation, or a presence of substance, or
any natural consequences of these Doctrines; and seeing on the other so many
things to be met with in them contrary thereunto, as those I now mentioned)
whether he believes it is likely we shall by the force of his preparations,
suppositions, reticencies, and supplements, acquiesce in his Assertion, that
the then Church held constantly and universally, as he speaks, the Real
Presence and Transubstantiation. It Is certain we must offer great violence to
our minds, and after all when we have endeavored to imagine what Mr. Arnaud
would have us, we shall never be able to accomplish it. We must imagine, says
he, Christians persuaded that by the Lib. 8. cap. 2. p. 737.
words of the Consecration the Bread and Wine were effectually changed into the
Body and Blood of Jesus Christ. This Doctrine was known distinctly by all the
faithful. I know not where Mr. Arnaud has found any of these fanciful people,
that are able to persuade themselves what they list. As to our parts, we are
not such masters of our imaginations; and in an affair of this nature he must
pardon us if we tell him that we cannot fancy a thing to be true, when it
appears so plainly to us to be false.

BUT lest he should again accuse us as indocible, we will see what he has to offer
us from these Authors of the 7th. and 8th. Centuries, when they expound the
nature and essence of the Eucharist. S. Isidor, says he, calls Lib. 8. cap. 4.
p. 755, 756.
the Eucharist the Sacrament of Christ's Body, and if we desire to know in what
manner it is the Sacrament of it, he will tell us, That the Bread we break is the
Body of him who says, I am the living Bread. He further adds, That the Wine is
his Blood, and is the same meant by these words, I am the true Vine. But he
should not suppress what he likewise immediately adds, But the Isid: lib. 1. de
Offic. Eccles. cap. 18.
Bread is called the Body of Jesus Christ, because it strengthens the body, and
the Wine alludes to the Blood of Christ, because it produces blood in our
flesh. These two things are visible, yet being sanctified by the Holy Spirit
they become the Sacrament of this Divine Body. Is this the language of a man
that believes a real conversion of substance.

HE expressly asserts, says moreover M. Arnaud, that this Body of Christ Ibid.
which we receive in the Eucharist, and of which we are deprived when it is
taken from us is the Flesh of Christ, concerning which it is said, If ye eat not
the Flesh of the Son of man, nor drink his Blood, ye have no life in you; and
that this is the Body, the truth, the original represented by the shadows and
types in the Old Testament. I answer, that S. Isidor supposes we eat the Flesh
of Christ in the Eucharist, which is true. He likewise supposes that if we eat
not this Flesh we remain deprived of Salvation, and this is moreover true. From
whence he concludes men ought not to abstain long from the use of the
Sacrament, because a total neglect of this means which Christ has ordained for
the eating of his Flesh and drinking his Blood, will put us in danger of being
wholly deprived of them, for without eating and drinking this Flesh and Blood,
there is no hope of salvation. This is Isidor's sense, whence there can be
nothing concluded in favor of the Thesis which Mr. Arnaud defends. For we
spiritually eat our Lord's Flesh in the due use of the Sacrament; and it is this
manducation which S. Isidor speaks of, as appears from what he there says.
Manifestrum est eos vivere qui corpus ejus attingunt. And as to what he
asserts, that this is the Body, the Truth, the Original, represented by the
ancient Figures, we grant it; but deny it ought to be hence concluded, that the
Sacrament is the Body it self of Jesus Christ in substance. I have sufficiently
elsewhere discoursed in what manner the ancient types related to our
Sacraments, and those that please to take the pains to read the first Chapter
of the third part of my Answer to Father Nouet, will find there, if I be not
mistaken, enough to satisfy 'em in that particular.

BID, adds Mr. Arnaud, says, that the creatures of Bread and Wine Ibid.
are changed through an ineffable virtue, into the Sacrament of his Flesh and
Blood. This is one of the expressions which arises from the nature of the
Sacrament. But what does it signify in this Author? He tells us in these
following words. And thus, says he, the Blood of Christ is no more shed, by the
hands of Infidels for their ruin, but received into the mouths of the faithful
for their salvation. But this is a very weak objection. The sense of Bid is,
that the Blood of Jesus Christ is received by the mouths of the Faithful,
because they receive the Wine which is the Sacrament of it. Which is the
meaning of this term. And thus sicque, for he shows in what manner the mouths
of the Faithful receive the Blood, to wit, inasmuch as they receive the
Sacrament of it. Gregory the Great said before Bid in the same sense, That we
drink the Blood of the Lamb, not only with the mouths of our bodies, but with
the mouths of our hearts. Quando sacramentum passionis Greg. Mag. Hom. 22. in
Evangel.
illius cum ore ad redemptionem sumitur, ad imitationem quoque interna mente
cogitatur, When we receive with our mouths the Sacrament of his Passion, and
inwardly apply our selves to imitate his great Savior.

I shall elsewhere in its due place examine what Mr. Arnaud alleges touching
Amalarius, Florus, Drutmar, and some other Authors of the 9th. Century,
Contemporaries with Paschasus. It only remains for the finishing of the
discussion of the 7th. and 8th. to answer some slight Observations which he has
made on a passage in the Book of Images, which goes under the name of
Charlemain's, The Author of this Book will not have the Eucharist be called an
Image, but the Mystery or Sacrament of the Body of Jesus Christ. Mr. Arnaud
pretends that by this Mystery or Sacrament, we must understand the Body it self
in substance: his reasons are, First, That it is the Body of Jesus Christ which
is represented by the types in the Old Testament. Now this Sacrament is
according to the Author of the Book in question, that which was represented by
these ancient figures. Secondly, That it is the Body of Jesus Christ which is
the truth opposed to Images. Now according to this Author this Sacrament is not
the image of it, but the truth in opposition to the image. Thirdly, That the
reason why he will not have it to be an image is, that our Savior did not say,
This is the image of my Body, but this is my Body. Fourthly, That it is of the
Eucharist we must understand what he says, That our Savior did not offer for
us an image but himself.

BUT it is no hard matter to answer these objections. The Sacrament of the
Eucharist may be considered in two respects, either in opposition to the thing
it self, of which it is the Sacrament, or in conjunction with this same thing.
In the first respect, it is a sign or a figure of the Body and Blood of Jesus
Christ. Charlemain himself calls it so in one of his Epistles to Alcuinus, as
we have already seen, and Bid gives it several times this title. But in the
second respect Charlemain denies we ought to give it the name of image or
figure, because he would distinguish it from the legal figures which were only
bare representations and shadows which did communicate the Body, or reality of
that which they represented; whereas our Eucharist communicates the Body and
Blood it self of Jesus Christ sacrificed for us on the Cross, and represented
by the ancient figures. He would have us call it then the Mystery or Sacrament
of this Body, and the reason which he alleges for it is, that it is not a bare
representation of a thing to come, as were those of the ancient Law, it is the
Mystery of the Death of Jesus Christ, of a Death I say that was really
consummated; and moreover, it is not a bare representation of this Death, but a
Mystery which communicates it to us. This is the sense of the Author of the
Book of Images, from whence it does not follow that the Eucharist is the Body
of Jesus Christ in substance, as Mr. Arnaud would hence conclude. For, for to
consider the Sacrament, in conjunction with the thing of which it is the
Sacrament, it is not necessary that the thing be locally and substantially
therein contained. It is sufficient that it be really and truly communicated
therein to us in a mystical and moral manner. Now it is certain that this
communication is made therein to the Faithful; and although the manner of it be
spiritual and mystical, yet is it real and true. This is sufficient for a man
to say as the Author of that Book does, That the mystery of the Body and Blood
of our Lord is called now, not an image, but the truth, not a shadow but a
body, not a figure of things to come, but the thing represented by the figures.
Because that in effect we receive therein the body and truth of the legal
shadows. For this reason a man may say that this mystery is the truth in
opposition to the images of the ancient Testament; because that in effect God
gives us actually in it that which the Law contained only in types. This is
sufficient whereon to ground this remark, That our Savior did not say, this is
the image of my Body, but this is my Body that is given for you. Because that
in instituting this Sacrament he never designed to communicate to us only a
prefiguration, but his Body. In fine, this is sufficient for a man to say with
reason and good sense, and with respect too to the Eucharist, That our Savior
did not offer for us an image, but himself in sacrifice; because that which he
offered once for us to God his Father on the Cross, he offers, and gives it us
in the Eucharist. In a word, Mr. Arnaud's perpetual error is, in imagining that
our Savior Christ and his Body and Blood cannot be communicated to us, unless
we receive corporeally in our hands and mouths the proper substance of them. I
say, this is a mistake exceedingly distant from the Doctrine of the Fathers,
who tell us we receive Jesus Christ himself, eat his Body and drink his Blood
in the word of the Gospel, in Baptism, as well as in the Eucharist.

CHAP. X.
An Examination of the Consequences which Mr. Arnaud draws, from the pretended
Consent of all the Christian Churches, in the Doctrines of Transubstantiation,
and the Real Presence.

Reflections on the 1. 2. 3. and 4. Consequences.
WE may justly lay aside Mr. Arnaud's tenth Book, seeing it consists only of
Consequences, which he draws from the consent of all Churches, in the Doctrines
of the Real Presence and Transubstantiation, by supposing he has proved this
consent since the 7th. Century to this present. For having overthrown as we
have done his Principle, we need not much trouble our selves about its
consequences. Yet that we may not neglect any thing, I shall make some
Reflections on the principal things contained in this Book, and that as briefly
as I am able.

The first Consequence.
THE first Consequence bears, That the consent of all Churches in the Book 10.
chapter 1.
Faith of the Real Presence, explains and determines the sense of our Saviors
words. To establish this Proposition, he says that the Ministers endeavor to
stretch these words, This is my Body, to their sense, by an infinite number of
metaphysical Arguments, which have only obscure and abstracted principles. That
they use long discourses to expound separately each word as the term this, the
word is, and the word Body. That by this means that which yields no trouble
(when a man follows simply the course of nature and common sense) becomes
obscure, and unintelligible. That supposing in like manner a man should
philosophise on these words, Lazarus come forth, it is no hard matter for a man
to entangle himself with 'em; for this Lazarus will be neither the Soul nor the
Body separately, nor the Soul and Body together, but a mere nothing. Now a mere
nothing cannot come out of the Grave. That our Savior did not speak to be only
understood by Philosophers and Metaphysicians, seeing he intended his Religion
should be followed by an infinite number of simple people, women and children,
persons ignorant of humane learning. That we must then judge of the sense of
these words by the general and common impression which all these persons
received without so many reflections. That to find this simple and natural
impression we must consult the sense wherein they have been effectually taken
for the space of a thousand years, by all Christians in the world which never
had any part in our Disputes. That our Saviors intention was rather to express
by these words the sense in which they have been effectually taken by all
Christians in the world, which was not unknown to him; than that in which they
have been understood in these latter days by a few Berengarian and
Calvinistical Philosophers. That he has right to suppose as a thing certain,
that since the 7th. Century, all Christians throughout the whole earth have
held the Doctrine of the Real Presence and Transubstantiation, and that this
consent of all people for a thousand years is sufficient to show what the
simple impression is, and consequently the real sense of Christ's words. This is
the summary of his first Chapter.

The first Reflection.
THE design of this whole discourse tends to cast men into horrible confusions.
I grant our Savior intended not to speak so as to be understood only by
Philosophers, but on the contrary, that his Religion should be embraced by
infinite numbers of ignorant people, women, and children, and persons incapable
of deep reasoning. But if the sense of these words must be sought in the
consent of all Churches, these women and children, and ignorant people will be
hard put to it to find it. How few persons are there capable of themselves to
make this inquisition, for which they must have skill in Languages, read two
hundred Volumes, or more, attentively examine 'em, distinguish the times,
places and occasions, consider the circumstances of passages and drift of
Authors, compare the various interpretations, and do in a word a thousand
things necessary to prevent their taking one thing for another? And as for
those that shall take this task upon 'em under the guidance of another, how
many cheats are they to beware of? How shall they be certain that they shall
have no false Authors imposed upon 'em for true ones, forged Writings
attributed to Authors, or false Passages, corrupt Translations, and false
Explications to give them another sense than the natural one, that they shall
not be imposed on by captious Arguings or frivolous Answers, yet well colored;
that they shall not be tired with fruitless discourses to wear out their
patience, and attention, and by this means make 'em fall into the Net. All this
has been hitherto done, and I do not find such as be guilty of this do amend
whatsoever complaints have been made. I grant one may find the true sense of
our Savior's words in the consent of all Churches: But is it not a more short,
sure, and easy way to seek it by considering the words themselves, by
comparing them with other Sacramental Expressions, by the nature of the
Ordinance which our Savior instituted, by the circumstances that accompanied
it, the design he proposed in it, by his ordinary ways of expressing himself,
by the other words he added, by the sense wherein, according to all probability
his Disciples understood him, by the explanations which S. Paul gives of it,
and in short by the genius and universal Spirit of the Christian Religion.
Whether a man makes this inquisition by himself, or under the direction of
another, it is certain that the way which we offer is far less troublesome and
dangerous, easier and better accommodated to the capacity of the common people,
than that of the consent of all Churches. Mr. Arnaud supposes this consent from
the 7th. Century to this present, because he believes he has proved it. But
were this supposition as certain and true in the main, as it is false and
imaginary, it can reside no where but in the imagination of those that have
read his Book. And how many are there in the rank of the simple people that
never read it? Of those amongst 'em that have read it, how few have been
capable to understand and Judge of it? Are they able to discern whether his
citations be true or no, whether his Passages be faithfully translated, his
Arguments conclusive, his Attestations allowable; and whether he has not
concealed several things which ought to be known on this subject, for a man to
be thoroughly informed in it? After all, reason requires 'em to suspend their
judgments till such time as they have seen my Answer. And supposing my Answer
does not satisfy 'em, how know they but that my weakness or ignorance has
prejudiced the Cause I defend? In the mean time what will become of the Faith
of these simple persons, if they will make it depend on the consent of all
Churches, touching the sense of our Saviors words. Mr. Arnaud under pretense
of searching short ways, throws men into such labyrinths out of which it is
impossible to get out.

Second Reflection.
I grant that the true sense of our Saviors words must be the simple and
natural one. We dispute touching this simple and natural sense. Mr. Arnaud will
needs have it to be that of Transubstantiation, and the Real Presence, we
affirm it is the Sacramental or figurative one. Supposing we could not on either
side find out this simple and natural impression which these words do of
themselves make in the minds of men, by reason of our Dispute, and that we must
go search it amongst those that be free from these prejudices, it is not
reasonable we should stop at those that lived since the 7th. Century till now,
to the prejudice of the first six ages. We must on the contrary begin from the
six first. Tradition, said one, not long since, In the Remarks on the request
of M. D' Ambrun, 9th. Remark.
whose word ought to be regarded, must begin from the Apostles, and pass on
till this present by an uninterrupted succession. The first then that are to be
consulted, for the finding this simple impression, must be the Apostles that
heard immediately these words from our Lords own mouth. We must search the
History of the Gospel to see whether there be any thing that discovers they
took 'em in the sense of Transubstantiation, whether they have been surpised
by any astonishment, or ravished with admiration, or troubled with some doubt,
whether it is likely they were imbued with principles on which this sense is
established; as that a body should be in several places at once, and accidents
subsist without their substance, etc. And whether they were not on the contrary
imbued with some maxims very opposite to this sense: as for instance, that to
drink Blood was a crime strictly forbidden by Moses's Law, that the signs were
called after the name of the things which they signified, and whether it
appears from any of their words or actions, that they adored the Eucharist. And
it is here I think we ought to begin, and afterward come to S. Paul, and
examine whether in what he has said on this subject, or any others, there be
any thing that shows he believed Transubstantiation. We must afterward discuss
age after age, what the Fathers of the six first Centuries have written on it,
consult the Commentaries which they have expressly made on these words, and in
short endeavor by an attentive meditation thoroughly to discover their sense.
But to lay aside the Apostles, and the first six Centuries, to begin this
enquiry after the simple and natural impression which these words have made in
men's minds by the 7th. and 8th. following ones. It Is as if a man should go out
of Paris to learn the news of France, in the furthermost parts of that Kingdom.
But 'twill be replied, these Centuries were not prepossessed by our Disputes: I
grant it. But they may have had other prejudices which have disturbed this
simple and natural impression which we seek. What likelihood is there of
finding it pure, according as we desire it, in Greece, since the fancies of
Damascen have been in vogue, whom the Greeks esteem as another S. Thomas,
according to Mr. Arnaud; but whom Mr. Arnaud durst not follow himself no more
than we, whether Damascen believed the assumption of the Bread, or only the
union of it to the Body of Christ in the manner I have proved and explained?
How can it be expected to be found pure amongst the Copticks, Armenians,
Jacobites, Nestorians, Egyptians, since these people have fallen into
ignorance, gross Errors and Superstitions wherein they still remain. A man that
is acquainted with the History of the Emissaries sent from the Latins into all
these Countries since the 11th. Century till this time without intermission,
may not he justly suspect that the Emissaries have troubled the purity of this
Impression? Howsoever it cannot be denied but it was more pure in the six first
Ages than in the following ones, and consequently that we ought not to begin
our inquiries since that time.

The third Reflection.
Mr. ARNAVD unjustly accuses the Ministers for embroiling the sense of these
words, This is my Body: But we may with greater reason charge the Scholasticks
and Controvertists of the Roman Church with it, who have made I know not how
many glosses, and formed I know not how many opinions on the word This. We know
what Ambrose Catarin has written of it, Let the Reader consider, says he, the
labor and anguish which Ambros. Cat^^r, Tract. de verb. quibus conficitur, etc.
almost all Writers have undergone, when we demand of 'em the signification of
this Pronoun, This; for they write such a multitude of things, and those so
contrary to one another, that they are enough to make a man at his wits end
that too closely considers 'em. The Ministers give these words a sense very
plain and natural, which neither depends on obscure and abstracted Principles,
nor metaphysical notions. If they argue either to establish their sense, or
show that these words can suffer no other, their arguings lie in observations
which are clear and intelligible: as for instance, the word this cannot
signify any thing else but this Bread, and that the whole proposition must be
taken as if our Savior had said, this Bread is my Body; and to make this
proposition intelligible, we must necessarily give it a figurative sense, for
one and the same subject cannot be literally both Bread and Body. I grant we
must not Philosophise on these words, Lazarus come forth. Neither is there ever
a one of us that sets himself to Philosophise on 'em; we understand simply by
Lazarus a person whom our Savior raised from the dead in the very moment he
called him, as God made light at that very instant wherein he said, Let there
be light. The difficulties which Mr. Arnaud finds in our Saviors expressions
are affected difficulties. But those which arise from the sense of
Transubstantiation attributed to our Savior's words are real ones, not by
abstracted and metaphysical arguments, but because never man said, this is such
a thing, to signify that the substance of the thing which he held was
imperceptibly changed into the substance of another, humane language will not
suffer it.

The fourth Reflection.
Mr. ARNAVD in vain opposes the sense of Philosophers and Doctors to that of
simple persons, and such as are not capable of any deep reasoning, to find out
the true natural impression which our Saviors words make on the minds of men,
without study and reflection. This natural impression since a thousand years to
judge thereof only by History is a thing absolutely unknown and undiscernable to
us for two reasons; the first, that the simple are not guided by the most
natural impression, they are led by that which their Doctors and Philosophers
give them, for we know very well that in matters of Religion the people usually
believe what their guides teach 'em, and not what their first sense dictates to
'em. The other reason is, that whatsoever we can know of the belief of Churches
since a thousand years depends on the Writings which are come to our hands. Now
these Books were wrote by Doctors and Philosophers, who may have given us their
Speculations, and those of the same opinion with them, what they have learned
in the Schools, or what they themselves have imagined, rather than the simple
and natural impression of people.

The fifth Reflection.
IT IS ill reasoning to say that the sense which seems to have prevailed since
the 7th. Century, be it what it will, (for I examine not at present what that
is) must necessarily be the true sense of our Savior, under pretense that he
was not ignorant of the manner in which they would take his words, in this
Century, and in the following ones. The mysteries of his prescience, and those
of his providence touching the errors wherein he suffers men to fall are
unknown to us. Neither is it permitted us to pry into them. He has suffered men
to understand in the three first Centuries what is said in the Revelations
touching his reign of a thousand years, in the sense of a terrestial Kingdom.
He has permitted men in the 4th. and 5th. Centuries to understand commonly
these words, If ye eat not the Flesh of the Son of man, nor drink his Blood, ye
will have no life in you, of the necessity there is of receiving the Eucharist
to be saved. The ways of God are beyond our reach, and we must never judge of
the true sense of his word, by the opinions which are prevalent amongst men.

Second Consequence.
Mr. ARNAVD's second Consequence is, That the consent of all the Book 10. Chapter 2.
Churches in the Doctrine of the Real Presence during the eleven last Ages
being proved, determines the sense of the words of the Fathers of the six first
Ages. His Arguments are the same which the Author of the perpetuity already
offered. That It Is against nature, sense, and reason to suppose the same
expressions were used for six hundred years space in a certain sense by all the
Christian Churches, and that in all the other ensuing Centuries, they have been
used in another sense, without any bodies perceiving this equivocation. That
it is contrary to nature to suppose all the masters of one opinion, and all the
Disciples to be of another, and yet still to suppose they followed the
sentiments of their Masters.

The first Reflection.
THE Author of the Perpetuity will have the state of the Latin Church in the
11th. Century (when the contests of Berengarius happened) to determine that of
the whole Church since the Apostles time. Here Mr. Arnaud pretends that the
Churches consent since the 7th. Century determines the sense of the Fathers of
the six first. We have likewise seen in the 7th. Chapter of his Book that he
asserts that to judge rightly of the expressions of the Fathers of the 7th. and
8th. Centuries, we must suppose they constantly and universally believed
Transubstantiation and the Real Presence, and that this supposition must
determine the sense of their words. What can we think of all these circuits,
but that they are illusions, which plainly enough show that these Gentlemen
find but small satisfaction in their inquiries into the first six ages. Were
Transubstantiation and the Real Presence apparently taught in them, what
occasion would they have of making them enter by machins, and mount up to them
from the later Ages. It is then certain that these ways of reasoning, these
suppositions and arguments from the bottom to the top, are so far from
persuading us what Mr. Arnaud desires, that on the contrary they do but more
confirm us in our opinion, which is, that these Doctrines were unknown to the
ancient Church.

The second Reflection.
IT IS consonant to reason to imagine, that in the last Ages the question whether
the Eucharist be the substance it self of our Savior's Body, or not, having
been agitated with great heat, those who held the affirmative have abused the
general expressions of the ancient Fathers, and endeavored to turn them to
their sense. This is a thing that happens every day in the smallest contests,
in which every one desires to set off his sentiments and confirm them by
passages taken out of the Fathers to shelter himself thereby from the reproach
of innovation. It is likewise easy to imagine that those who but slightly
apply themselves to the study of Theological Points are soon cheated by false
appearances. We see but too many examples of this. It is in short easy to
conceive that Disciples may deviate from the Doctrine and sense of their
Masters under diverse pretenses. The Divisions of Christians in points of
Religion have almost all of 'em happened in this manner, the Disciples were not
content to keep pace with their Masters but have went beyond 'em, and often
overrhrown their real sentiments under pretense of explaining and illustrating
what they said with less perspicuity. When Scholars are become Masters, they no
longer look upon themselves as Scholars, but Doctors, and in this quality it is
no hard matter to comprehend they may have new notions, which they endeavor to
establish on the testimony of those that preeeded them; and for this effect
take their words in a contrary sense: The people easily receive what their
Doctors teach 'em; and as to the Doctors, there needs no great number of them
in an ignorant age to introduce a novelty. One single person may sometimes
impose on a whole assembly, and engage them into his opinions, which afterward
shall pass for the true Doctrine of the Church.

The third Consequence.
Mr. ARNAVD's third proposition is conceived in these terms, Lib. 10. cap. 3.
That all the several instances of expressions produced by Aubertin to show
that a man may take in a metaphorical sense the passages by which the
Catholics establish the Real Presence and Transubstantiation are in no wise
alike. To establish this proposition, he says, there are two ways by which we
may know whether the expressions which appear at first alike are in effect
different. The first is to mark precisely by reasoning the difference of these
expressions, and to show they are not alike. The second is to discern them by
opinion, by a simple view of the mind, and by an impression which makes it self
felt although it cannot be expressed. Applying afterward this remark to his
subject, he says, that the expressions of the Fathers touching the Eucharist
having been taken in the ten last Centuries in a sense of Transubstantiation
and reality, and the others having never been taken but in a metaphorical
sense, there must of necessity be a great difference between them seeing they
have made such different impressions, and that opinion has so well
distinguished them. This is the summary of his third Chapter.

The first Reflection.
WE are agreed concerning this manner of discerning the expressions, and the
things themselves, by opinion, as well as by an exact remark of the differences
which distinguish them. But if Mr. Arnaud will make a maxim of this which may
serve as a principle to draw thence certain conclusions, he must suppose that
this sentiment or opinion can never be corrupted by false prejudices, nor ever
be deceived by establishing imaginary differences, where there are no real
ones. I grant that in the last Ages the expressions of the Fathers have been
taken in a sense of Transubstantiation, whereas never any man understood those
which we say are alike but in a metaphorical sense; this is a sign they were
regarded in those Ages as different expressions; but it does not follow that
they be different in effect, unless it be said that the sentiment of those
Centuries is infallible. It is no hard matter to believe that men may judge
rightly in respect of one thing, and at the same time fall into error in
respect of another whatsoever conformity there may be between them. A man may
be sometimes mistaken by confounding, as if they were alike such expressions as
are not so, and then again take for different expressions such as be alike. As
we never pretended that the men of these later ages are mistaken in all things,
so Mr. Arnaud must not pretend they are right in every thing.

The second Reflection.
THE method which Mr. Arnaud proposes for the discerning the different
expressions of the Fathers from those which are alike, is deceitful. For if we
must for this end rather follow the way of sentiment than that of reason,
'twill be then at least just to consult the sentiment of those Ages wherein the
Fathers lived, and that of persons to whom they spoke, and not the sentiment of
later Ages which might perhaps have been disturbed by new notions. Let Mr.
Arnaud then show us if he pleases that in the first six Ages the expressions of
the Fathers touching the Eucharist were taken in a sense of reality and
Transubstantiation, and the others which we produce as being alike, in a
metaphorical sense, and we will see what use we must make of his Rule. But to
seek this difference of impression or sentiment in Ages wherein we believe this
Doctrine was changed, will be an apparent deceiving of our selves, seeing it is
not possible but what he calls the sentiment or impression has been altered by
the change of Doctrine.

The fourth Consequence.
THESE three first consequences are attended by a fourth, which is, Book 10.
Chapter 4.
That most of the expressions which the Ministers pervert against the Real
Presence and Transubstantiation are naturally of kin to this Doctrine. The
equity, says Mr. Arnaud, of this Consequence is apparently visible. For why
must these terms subsisting, in Authors that lived since the seventh Century,
with the persuasion of the Real Presence, be inconsistent with this Doctrine in
the six preceding Ages? And why must not nature which has put later Authors
upon making use of them without prejudice to their sentiment produce the same
effect in the first Ages? And in fine, what difficulty is there in
understanding these terms of the Fathers of the first Ages, in a sense that
contradicts not the Catholic Doctrine, provided this sense be found authorized
by the consent and practice of the ten following Ages.

Reflection.
Mr. ARNAVD seeming to forget the distinction which the Author of the
Perpetuity made, and which he himself has sometimes used, concerning a natural
language, and one that is forced, will not I suppose take it ill if I remember
him of it, and use it against his pretended Consequence. There is a difference
between the expressions which the Fathers use on the subject of the Eucharist,
and the same expressions in Authors of later Ages. The last borrowing sometimes
the expressions of the Fathers have at the same time declared themselves in
favor of Transubstantiation, or the Real Presence; the former have done
nothing like this. The first have left their expressions in the full extent of
their natural sense without any mistrust of their being abused. The last have
commonly restrained and mollified them by violent expositions, and such as are
contrary to their natural sense, as well knowing they may be used against
themselves. The first have used them indifferently in all occasions, because
they contained their real opinion, but the last have used 'em only accidentally
as the necessity of their discourse required. The first have likewise used
without any difficulty other emphatical expressions which the last dared not
use, for, dare they say for example what Theodoret and Gelasius have said, that
the Bread loses not its nature or substance: dared they say what Facundus said,
that, the Bread is not properly the Body of Jesus Christ, but is so called
because it contains the mystery of it? whence it appears that when they use any
of the Fathers expressions, it is by constraint, because they must endeavor to
accommodate, as much as in them lies, their style to the style of the Ancients,
whereas the Ancients delivered themselves in a natural manner. We must then
make another judgment of these expressions when we find them in the Fathers,
than when we meet with 'em in Authors of later Ages since Transubstantiation
has been established. There they explain the real Belief of the Church, here
they are expressions which are endeavored to be linked with another Belief,
which is expounded in another manner. There they must be taken in their natural
signification, here in a forced and foreign one.

THE natural sense of these words of Justin, Ireneus, Cyril of Jerusalem and
some others, that the Eucharist, is not mere Bread, common Bread, is, that it
is in truth Bread, but Bread that is Consecrated. The strained sense of these
words is, that it is only Bread in appearance, and in respect of its accidents.

THE natural sense of these words which are frequently used by the Fathers,
that our Lord called the Bread his Body, that he gave to the Bread the name of
his Body, that he honored the Bread with the name of his Body. That our Savior
made an exchange of names, giving to the Bread the name of his Body, and to his
Body that of the Bread. Their natural sense is, I say, that the Bread without
ceasing to be Bread, has assumed the name of Christ's Body; the forced sense
is, that the Bread takes the name of it, because the substance is really
changed into the substance of this Body.

THE natural sense of the passages of the Fathers which assert the Bread and
Wine are symbols, signs, figures, images of our Lords Body and Blood, is, that
by the consecration the Bread and Wine are exalted to the glory of being the
mystical signs of the Body and Blood of Christ, without losing their own
nature. The forced sense is either that the Body of Jesus Christ is the sign of
it self, or that the accidents, that is to say, the appearances of Bread and
Wine, are signs.

IT is the same in respect of other expressions of the Fathers which the modern
Doctors have endeavored to accommodate to their style, in giving 'em strained
senses and forced explanations which were unknown to the Ancients. To take from
us the liberty of making use of them, we must first be showed that the Fathers
themselves have taken them in this extraordinary and distorted sense. Otherwise
we shall still have reason to use them according to their natural and ordinary
one.

CHAP. XI.
Other Reflections on Mr. Arnaud's Consequences.
The fifth Consequence.
HITHERTO we have not found Mr. Arnaud's pretensions very equitable, but we may
truly say that that which we are now about examining, and which is contained in
his fifth Consequence, is less reasonable than the rest. He proposes it in
these terms, That the Catholics have right to suppose without any other proofs
that the passages of the Fathers are to be understood in the sense wherein they
take 'em, and that all the Answers of the Calvinists in which they establish
not theirs by evident demonstrations are ridiculous and unreasonable.

THIS proposition being very surprising and contrary to the true rules of
Disputation which do not allow any other right or liberty than what reason and
truth afford; Mr. Arnaud therefore endeavors to confirm it by a long train of
big words and censures full of Authority, and with which he has enriched his
5th. and 6th. Chapters. The result of all which amounts only to this, That the
Dispute being reduced to the expounding of certain terms which the Catholics
take in one sense, and the Ministers endeavor to turn into another, the
Catholics stopping at the literal signification of these expressions, that
they take the Body of Jesus Christ, for the Body of Jesus Christ, and the
change of the Bread into the Body of Jesus Christ, for the change of the Bread
into the Body of Jesus Christ. But that the Ministers hereto apply one of their
two general solutions, or famous keys of virtue and figure so often used by
them. That in this contest it is evident that the right of the supposition
belongs to the Catholics. The other thing is, that the expressions which the
Catholics alledg for themselves have been taken in the sense wherein they use
them this thousand years by all Christians in the world. That these two
qualities reduce this sense into such a point of evidence, that nothing but
demonstrations can counterpoise them, and hinder our reason from acquiescing in
them.

The first Reflection.
THE first of these two reasons whereon Mr. Arnaud grounds his pretension is
invalid, and the second resides only in his own imagination. I say the first is
invalid; for if the Doctors of the Roman Church do propose several passages
wherein they stop at the literal signification of the terms, as be those which
call the Eucharist the Body of Jesus Christ, and some few others that say the
Bread is changed: we also on our parts alledg an infinite of others, wherein we
likewise stop at the literal signification of the terms, such as be all those
that call the Eucharist after the Consecration, Bread and Wine, and which say
that this Bread and Wine are made the signs, the symbols, the figures of the
Body and Blood of Jesus Christ. So far matters are equal, and the prejudice
cannot favor either side.

MOREOVER, who told Mr. Arnaud, we must ever prejudicate in favor of the
literal signification of terms? We often prejudicate on the contrary in behalf of
the metaphorical signification by considering the matter to which the terms are
applied when it is likely they are used figuratively; as when in matter of Books
we speak of Plato and Aristotle, or in reference to Images we speak of S.
Stephen and S. Christopher. It is not enough to say the Catholics stop at the
literal signification of terms. This is not enough to establish a prejudice,
nor for the obtaining a right to suppose without proof; it must be moreover
showed that the subject or matter in question does not oppose it self against
this prejudice. Mr. Arnaud must proceed farther, and show that there is not any
thing absolutely that is able to form a contrary prejudice. But Mr. Arnaud was
unwilling to enter into this discussion, because of its difficulty; and
difficulties are not proper for a man to meddle withal that writes in a
domineering style.

THE second reason has less strength than the first. For first it is not true
that the expressions which those of the Roman Church alledg in their own favor
have been taken in the sense wherein they employ 'em for near a thousand years
by all the Christians in the world. Mr. Arnaud must not be so hasty to make us
receive this proposition till he has heard what I have to say. Now that things
are cleared up in this respect, every man may judge of 'em, and I hope they will
make a just judgment of them. Secondly, there is a great deal of difference
betwixt the Fathers of the first six Centuries, and those of the later Ages,
who take these expressions we are speaking of in a sense of the Real Presence
and Transubstantiation. We find in these last other expressions which clearly
manifest their thoughts. They plainly say that the substance of Bread is
changed into the substance of Christ's Body, and that this Body is
substantially present under the vail of accidents; but we do not find any thing
like this in the Fathers. Now this difference overthrows Mr. Arnauds prejudice,
for had the Fathers meant by their general expressions the same thing which
these last do, they would have spoke like them, but this they have not done.
It Is not then likely they had the same sense; and it will signify nothing to
say that that which has hindered them from doing so was because there was no
contest in the Church all that time touching this point; for the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation does of it self form, without the help of any contest, the
distinct idea of a real conversion of the substance of Bread and Wine into the
substance of our Lords Body and Blood. This Doctrine naturally makes a
particular and determinate sense, where the term of substance enters. There Is
no need of a disputation for this. Whence it follows that had the Fathers thus
meant it, they would have explained themselves in the same manner as these
last. It does not appear to us they have done it. It is not then reasonable to
prejudicate they held this Doctrine.

THE better to acknowledge the unreasonableness of Mr. Arnaud's pretensions, who
will suppose at any rate; oppose we against him a contrary pretension, which
is, that we have right to suppose without any other proof, that the passages of
the Fathers which are offered us, must not be understood in a sense of
Transubstantiation nor Real Presence; and that if Mr. Arnaud will establish the
affirmative, he is obliged to do it by evident demonstrations sufficient to
vanquish this prejudication. This here is our pretension; it remains only now
to be observed how we prove it: and having seeen how Mr. Arnaud has proved his,
it will be easy to compare proof with proof, and judge which of the two
propositions is the most just and reasonable.

FIRST, there ought to be remembered here what I said in the 7th. Chapter of
this Book touching the 7th. and 8th. Centuries, that we must ever prejudicate
in favor of nature and common sense, which regulate the judgments of men, till
the contrary does evidently appear. Now the state of nature is, not to believe
the Doctrines we speak of, and it must be granted me that common sense does not
teach 'em. We have then right to suppose without proof, that the Fathers did
not believe them, and consequently that their expressions must not be taken in
this sense: And it is Mr. Arnaud's part to show so clearly the contrary, that
his proof may surmount the prejudication. Which if he does not do, reason
obliges us to let the Fathers alone in the state of nature and common sense.

SECONDLY, The matter in debate does of it self form our prejudice. The point
in hand is touching a Sacrament, and in Sacramental expressions we commonly
give to the signs the names of the things which they represent; as may be
verified by numberless instances. We then have right to suppose without any
other proof, that those of the Fathers concerning the Eucharist being of this
number must be taken in the same sense as the others, till it be showed us ftom
the Fathers themselves that they otherwise understood them.

IN the third place, our right is grounded on the nature of the Doctrine it
self, about which we dispute. For the substantial conversion makes of it self a
particular sense, it answers to a very distinct question, which is, whether the
change which happens in the Eucharist be a change of substance or not; it says,
that it is a change of substance. It is impossible but those that have this
Doctrine in their thoughts must conceive it in this determination, that is to
say, in applying their conceptions precisely to the substance; and it is not
likely they have thus conceived it without explaining themselves sometimes in a
manner that answers exactly to their opinion. It is then reasonable to suppose
without any other proof, that they have not thus conceived it till such time as
it shall please Mr. Arnaud to convince us of the contrary from their own
declarations, not from general expressions, but by expressions which are formal
and particular, or such equivalent ones as may prevent a man's being mistaken in
them.

MOREOVER, It cannot be denied that Transubstantiation of it self is a hard
matter to be believed, and that humane nature is naturally averse to the belief
of it. What likelihood is there then if the Fathers designed to teach it they
should be content with these general expressions which six not the mind being
as they are, capable of several senses? Had they no reason to fear lest humane
inclinations would be apt to turn peoples minds on the other side, and carry
'em off from the true sense of their words.

IN fine, we need only consider the greatest part of those expressions
themselves which are proposed, to prejudicate according to appearance that they
signify nothing less than Transubstantiation or the Real Presence. For they
can no sooner have this sense given 'em but they become immediately difficult
and perplexed, whereas in taking them otherwise they become easy and
intelligible. What can there be for example more perplexing than this usual
proposition of the Fathers, That the Bread and Wine are the Body and Blood of
Jesus Christ, if a man takes it in a sense of Transubstantiation? For what must
we conceive by this Bread and Wine? Is it real Bread, and real Wine? They are
not the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ. Are they the appearances of Bread and
Wine? How can these appearances be this Body and Blood? Is it that which
appears to be Bread and yet is not so? But why must not that be Bread which
appears to be Bread? Why if it be not Bread is it called Bread? Is it that
which was before Bread and Wine? But how is that which was before Bread and
Wine now the Body and Blood, seeing there is no common subject of which we can
rationally say, that it was before Bread and Wine, but now Body and Blood.
After this rate a man knows not on which side to turn himself, whereas if you
understand that the Bread and Wine are the Sacrament of Christ's Body, you will
meet with no difficulty; for the Sacraments usually assume the names of the
things of which they are Sacraments: and these ways of speaking create no
trouble to amans mind. Now when we contend about two senses, our reason will
lead us to prejudicate in favor of that which is the most easy, and less
intricate, and make us suppose it without proof, till such time as it evidently
appears that the other, (although more difficult) yet is the truest.

COMPARE now (I pray) our pretension with that of Mr. Arnaud, and judge which of
the two is the most just and natural. He grounds his on two reasons whose
strength and truth we question, and have already overthrown; and I ground mine
on Principles which must be granted by both parties, and which are apparently
conclusive. For it cannot be denied but we must prejudicate in behalf of
nature, of common lights which regulate the judgments of men, the manner of the
Sacramental expressions, and the most easy and least perplexed sense. Neither
can it be denied that the nature of the Doctrine in question guiding men of it
self to explain themselves about it in precise terms, and indeed necessarily
obliging them by reason of the natural repugnancies of men's minds, does not
entirely favor this prejudication. It is then a thousand times more rational
than the other.

Mr. ARNAVD grounds his pretension on an advantage which we are in possession
of as well as he. For he says he understands the expressions of the Fathers
which are alleged, in a literal sense; we say the same in respect of those
which we alledg: but I ground mine on particular advantages to which he cannot
pretend. Now it is far more reasonable to establish a particular right on
particular advantages, than to establish it on a common thing. For from that
which is common to both parties, there can arise no particular privilege.

The third Reflection.
ALTHOUGH we have this right to suppose without any other proof that the
expressions of the Fathers which the Roman Church alleges in her own favor
must be taken in a Sacramental sense, and not in a sense of Transubstantiation
or Real Presence; yet in the answers we make, we do not absolutely make use of
this right. For before we return our answers we establish the real sentiment of
the Fathers by authentic passages taken out of their Books, so that our
Answers be only an application of that which the Fathers themselves have taught
us. Thus has Mr. Aubertin used them, and thus have I used them against the
Author of the Perpetuity. There is then a great deal of injustice in Mr.
Arnaud's proceeding, when he produces some of my Answers, and offers 'em to be
considered dislocated from my proofs; whereas they ought only be considered in
their reference to these proofs, from which they draw their light and strength.

FOR example, when I answered the passage of S. Ignatius taken from Theodoret's
Collections, which bears, That Heretics receive not the Eucharist Answer to
the Perpetuity. part 2. chapter 2.
and the Oblations, because they do not acknowledge the Eucharist to be the
Flesh of our Lord that suffered for our sins, I said that Ignatius's sense was,
That our Savior did not adopt the Bread to be his Body, as if he had no real
Body, which was the foolish imagination of those Heretics; as appears by
Tertullian' s Disputes against Marcion, but that the Bread is the Sacrament of
this true Body, which died and rose again. This Answer is grounded on the
express Declarations of the Fathers, which I had already produced, and which
show they meant by the term of Flesh, or Body of Jesus Christ applied to the
Eucharist, not the substance of this Flesh, but the Sacrament or Symbol of it,
which is in it self Bread. To take this Answer alone separate from the proof
which authorizes it to declaim afterward, that I return Answers without
grounding them on proofs, is a thing that is neither honest nor ingenuous.
Moreover, what I said touching these Heretics believing our Savior Christ
adopted the Bread for to be his Body, as having no true Body of his own, is
grounded on Tertullian's attributing this opinion to Marcion, who (as every one
knows) followed in this the ancient Heretics; and it is to no purpose to say,
That those that taught this ridiculous adoption of the Bread received the
Eucharist, and that S. Ignatius speaks on the contrary of Heretics that did
not receive it. For it is certain that these ancient Heretics still retained
some use of the Eucharist, celebrating it in their manner, but did not receive
it according to the just and true design of its institution, which is to
represent and communicate to us the true Flesh of Jesus Christ, who suffered
death and is risen again, because they denied our Savior assumed real Flesh,
affirming he appeared in the world only in a phantasm. If Mr. Arnaud will
contest hereupon, besides that I can tell him my Answer will be no less good,
in the main, when he shall show that the Heretics mentioned by Ignatius did
absolutely reject the Eucharist, I may moreover oppose against him Cardinal
Bellarmin, who expressly says touching this passage, That these ancient
Heretics combated not so much the Bell. de Sacram. Euchar. l. 1. c. 1.
Sacrament of the Eucharist, as the mystery of the Incarnation; for as Ignatius
himself insinuates the reason of their denial of the Eucharist to be our Lords
Flesh, was, because they disowned our Lord assumed true Flesh; Mr. Arnaud will
not I hope pretend to understand more of this matter than Bellarmin.

THE same thing may be said touching the Answer I returned to a passage Answer
to the Perpetuity, p. 2. chapter 2.
of Justin, which says, That we take not these things as mere Bread and Drink,
but that this meat being made the Eucharist, with which our flesh and blood are
nourished, by means of the change becomes the Flesh and Blood of Jesus Christ
incarnate. I answered not barely what Mr. Arnaud makes me answer, That this
food is made the Body of Christ by a Sacramental union to the Body of Christ,
but that in effect the Eucharist is not common Bread and Drink, but a great
Sacrament of our Lords Body and Blood, which is celebrated in remembrance of
his taking on him our nature, it being honored with the name of Body and Blood
of Jesus Christ according to the very form of our Lords own expressions. I at
the same time grounded this Answer on Justin's very words, and it is moreover
established on the proofs which I had already alleged touching the sense of
the Fathers, when they call the Eucharist the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ.
Yet has Mr. Arnaud been pleased to say, That my sense is without proof and
Authority, contrary to the Letter and Experience, Lib. 10. cap. 5. p. 34.
and consequently not worth considering. And this is Mr. Arnaud's way of
solving matters.

HE does the same in reference to the answers I returned to the passages of
Gelazus, Cyzique, and Cyril of Jerusalem; for whereas I have backed them with
arguments drawn from the passages themselves, and that they have moreover their
foundation on the proofs I offered in the beginning of my Book. Mr. Arnaud
recites of 'em what he pleases, and separates that which he relates of 'em from
their true Principle. Whosoever shall take the pains to read only what I wrote
touching these two passages in the second Chapter of my Answer to the second
Treatise, and the second Part, and especially touching that of Cyril in the
sixth Chapter of the aforesaid second Part, and compare it with all these
Discourses which Mr. Arnaud here gives us, that is to say in the fifth Chapter
of his tenth Book, I am certain, will not like his proceedings, finding so much
passion and so little solidity in his Discourses.

The fourth Reflection.
Mr. ARNAVD's passion does yet more discover it self in his sixth Chapter.
Wherein he makes a very bad use of his Maxim. He would extend it so far as to
hinder us from supposing there is no express declaration of the Doctrines of
Transubstantiation and the Real Presence in the Scripture, and that they are
not distinctly asserted therein. He says every Book 10. chapter 5. page 34. Chapter 6.
page 38, 39.
body knows that the first notion of the Evangelists words concerning the
institution of the Eucharist is most favorable to the Catholics, that the
evidence of it ever appeared so considerable to Luther, that notwithstanding
his great desire to vex the Pope, he could never resist the perspicuity of
them. That Zuinglius could not immediately find the solution of these words of
our Savior, and needed to be instructed in them by the revelation which a
Spirit made to him of them, of whom he himself writes, that he knew not whether
he was a black or a white one, which has, says he, all the lineaments of a
diabolical Revelation, whatsoever passages out of Cicero and Catullus are
alleged to justify this expression. He adds, That these words, This is my
Body, do far more naturally signify that the Eucharist is effectually the Body
of Jesus Christ, than that it is the figure of it; and this the consent of all
Nations, who have taken them in this sense, shows us in a convincing manner. He
adds to this the sixth Chapter of S. John, wherein there is mention of eating
the Flesh and drinking the Blood, and what S. Paul says in the 11th. Chapter of
the Epistle to the Corinthians, that those that eat and drink thereof
unworthily are guilty of our Lords Body and Blood. Whence he concludes, That if
it be lawful to make suppositions without any proof the right thereof belongs
to the Catholics, that it appertains to them to say their Doctrine is clearly
apparent in the Scripture, in the sixth Chapter of S. John' s Gospel, in the
three Evangelists, and in S. Paul' s Epistles. But that equity and reason
oblige the Calvinists to be very scrupulous and modest on this point.

SEEING Mr. Arnaud is so kind to people as to prescribe 'em after what manner
they shall present themselves before him, without doubt he expects they will
henceforward obey him in this particular. Yet must I tell him, I have reason to
suppose without any other proof, that there is not in the Holy Scripture any
formal declaration touching the Doctrines of Transubstantiation, and the Real
Presence; nor are they distinctly asserted in them. Every body knows in what
terms formal declarations must be conceived, and in what manner Doctrines must
be clearly and distinctly expressed. If Mr. Arnaud has discovered in the
Scripture any particular matter in relation to this subject, let him
communicate it to us. But if he knows no more than we have seen hitherto, we
shall still have reason to say that the Doctrines in question are not formally
declared in them.

IT cannot be denied but these words, This is my Body are capable of the sense
which we give them. Whether it be the true one or no I will not here dispute;
it is sufficient the words will bear it, to conclude they are not a formal
distinct declaration of Transubstantiation nor the Real Presence, seeing what
we call a formal declaration cannot be capable of a sense contrary to that
which we pretend it formally establishes. It Is to no purpose for Mr. Arnaud to
say that Luther found them evident; for besides that he found no evidence in
them for Transubstantiation, but only for the Real Presence, with which he was
much prepossessed. One may oppose against Luther's prejudice, the judgment
which Cardinal Cajetan made of them who has found no Cajetan. in 3. Thoma
quest. 75. art. 1. Lugduni apud Stephanum Machaelem, 1588.
evidence in them, neither for the one nor the other of these Doctrines, but
only by adding to 'em the declaration of the Church. Neither I suppose is Mr.
Arnaud ignorant that the most able Divines of his own Communion as well ancient
as modern do freely acknowledge that Transubstantiation cannot be inferred
thence, and that there is nothing which obliges 'em to believe it but the
Churches determination.

AS to the words of the 6th. Chapter of S. John, so far are they from being
formal declarations touching Transubstantiation and the Real Presence, that a
great many of the Doctors in the Roman Church have not stuck to affirm that
these words do not at all relate to the Sacrament of the Eucharist. Bellarmin
reckons up six besides others, namely, Biel, Cusanus, Cajetan, Bellarm. de
Euch. l. 1. c. 5. Albertin de Sac. Euch. l. 1. c. 30.
Tapper, Hesselius, and Jansemius, but Mr. Aubertin has computed 'em to be
about thirty three, which is in my mind sufficient to make Mr. Arnaud
comprehend, that this Chapter is not so formal, nor evident for these Doctrines
as he imagines. I shall not here take notice of what he alleges concerning
those words of S. Paul, That such as eat of this Bread and drink of this Cup
unworthily, are guilty of our Lords Body and Blood. If he takes these words for
an evident declaration, it is yet more evident that he is mistaken. To be
guilty of our Lords Body and Blood signifies according to the Fathers to be a
murderer of our Savior, to be of consent with the Jews, that crucified him.
This is not very formal for Transubstantiation.

WHAT he says touching Zuinglius is not at all to the purpose, Zuinglius was
not ignorant of the sense of our Saviors words, but he was ignorant of the
examples of like phrases which are in Scripture. Mr. Arnaud mentions this only
that he might bring in again this black or white Spirit, of which we have
already discoursed, not only from passages out of Cicero and Catullus, but also
out of Apuleus, and S. Jerome himself; so that this must be looked upon as
impertinent and tiresome. Mr. Arnaud's passion herein appears in that Zuinglius
having only said that some body appeared to him in a dream to advertise him,
visus est monitor adesse, he will needs have this monitor to be a Spirit.
Neither is there less ignorance in raising from a proverbial way of speaking in
the Latin tongue, ater fuerit an albus nihil memini, which signifies that we
know not a man, we never saw his face, rhis proposition, That he knew not
whether 'twas a white Spirit or a black one. Cannot Mr. Arnaud better spend his
time than in hunting after these trifles?

BUT says he, The first idea of our Saviors words touching the Eucharist is
very favorable to the Catholics. It is favorable by an effect of prejudice,
I grant. But let a man take off this vail from his mind, and represent to
himself our Savior in his natural Body on one side, and the Eucharistical
Bread on the other, two visible objects really distinct and locally separate
from one another, and judge in this case whether the first idea of these words
rather refers to a Transubstantiation of one of these objects into the other,
or to a Sacramental sense. The first idea from words does not always arise from
the literal signification of them, but from the matter in question, and
circumstances of a discourse. And this is that which forms the first idea, as
may be justified by infinite instances, should Mr. Arnaud question it. Now it is
certain that in respect of our Saviors words all these things do jointly
concur to give them naturally a mystical or figurative sense.

ALL Nations, says he, have taken them in this sense. All Nations, that is to
say, the Latins since Gregory VII. and Innocent III. and yet not all of them
neither. This is a supposition which Mr. Arnaud will have right to make when he
can better prove it. But supposing it were true as he would make the world
believe, that since a thousand years all Nations took them in this sense, it
will not hence follow that this was the first idea of these words, nor that the
Roman Church has right to suppose without any other proof, that her Doctrine is
clearly contained in the Scripture. For it is possible for all Nations to fall
into an error touching the sense of certain words, be engaged in it through
surprizal, and afterward remain therein by prejudice and interest. And in this
case every man sees that this pretended clearness which Mr. Arnaud boasts of
cannot be justly supposed.

IN fine, supposing 'twere true the first idea of these words was very
favorable to the Church of Rome, and that all Nations since a thousand years
followed this first idea, Mr. Arnaud could not hinder me from saying there is
not in the Scripture any formal declaration touching Transubstantiation and the
Real Presence. And this he well knew himself. But that he might take his full
carier, he imagined 'twas his best way in reciting the passage of my Answer, on
which he grounds his invective to eclipse these expressions from it, by some
formal declaration of his word, because 'twould appear that my sense in 'em is
that the Doctrines of the conversion and substantial Presence are not taught in
express terms in the Holy Scripture, nor are to be drawn thence by necessary
consequences, which is most true. Who Answer to the second Treatise of the
Perpituity, part 1. chapter 3.
will believe, said I, if they be of God, that he would leave them as a prey to
the contradictions of reason and sense, which he himself has armed against
them, without strengthening them with his protection by some formal declaration
of his word. Who will believe that the Divine Wisdom, etc. And here observe how
Mr. Arnaud cites them, Who will believe that if they be of God, he would leave
them as a prey to the contradictions of reason and sense, which he himself has
armed against them, without strengthening them with his protection? Who will
believe that the Divine Wisdom, etc. Mr. Arnaud has not only the right of
supposing without proof what he pleases, but that of maiming such passages as
seems good to him, to alledg that which precedes, and that which follows, and
suppress betwixt both, whole clauses, because they take from him all pretense
of declaiming. It Is by virtue of the same right that he thought he might lay
aside that which I added toward the end of this passage. Say what you will of
it, I cannot believe but this silence disquiets you, especially if you consider
that there is in the New Testament four different occasions wherein according
to all appearances Transubstantiation and the Real Presence were to be found
DISTINCTLY ASSERTED. This distinctly asserted not well relishing with Mr.
Arnaud, he has ended his citation in these words, Say what you will of it, I
cannot believe but this silence sufficiently perplexes you. This privilege of
curtailing and suppressing is insupportable in another. But what ought we not
to yield to Mr. Arnaud, especially considering how well he has copied out from
Allatius and Raynaldus, and proved that the Greeks believe Transubstantiation?
Had he not maimed and suppressed that which perplexed him in my Book, I never
should have had the pleasure of seeing my self brought into his Chapter by an
excellent figure of Rheotorick, speaking in this manner. All Christians in the
world are persuaded that Transubstantiation is contained Lib. 10. cap. 6. page
43.
in the words of the Evangelists, and those of S. Paul. But I Claud declare
it is not contained in them, and confirm my assertion by my own authority. This
deserves the name of eloquence and ingenuity.

The fifth Reflection.
Mr. ARNAVD is not content to gather for himself alone the fruits of his
victories, he is willing to bring in the Sociniens for a share with him, and
his conceptions on this subject are remarkable. I brought some proofs drawn
from Scripture touching the Trinity to show in what manner this mystery is
asserted in the word of God. These, says he, are only suppositions without
proof. This is certainly absurd enough to call proofs, and such Ch 6. p. 44, 45.
proofs too as are drawn from Scripture suppositions without proof. They would
be, says he again, very rational in the mouth of a Catholic, because be
accompanies these proofs, with the public sense of the whole Church and all
Tradition; but these same proofs are extremely weak in the mouth of a
Calvinist, without authority and possession, and who renounces Tradition and
the Churches Authority. This proposition surprises me. The proofs of Scripture
touching the mystery of the Trinity will be of no validity, but weak proofs in
their own nature without the benefit of Tradition, and all their evidence and
strength must depend on the public sense of the Church; Hoc magno mercentur
Atridae. The Arians and Sociniens are much obliged to Mr. Arnaud. But this was
not S. Austins sentiment, when disputing against Maximus an Arian Bishop, he
told him, I must not alledg to you the Council Aug. lib. 3. cont. Maxim. cap.
14.
of Nice, nor you to me that of Ariminis. For as I am not obliged to acquiesce
in the authority of this last, so neither are you bound to be guided by the
authority of the first. But proceed we on the authority of Holy Scripture which
is a common witness for us both, oppose we Cause to Cause, and Reason to
Reason. Should Mr. Arnaud's Principle take place, S. Austin would have been
guilty of a great imprudence thus to lay aside the public sense and Tradition,
and wholly betake himself to the Holy Scripture, seeing the proofs taken thence
concerning the Trinity, are weak, yea even infinitely weak, separated from
Tradition and the Churches Authority. What answer will Mr. Arnaud make a
Socinien when he shall say we must not value this public sense, and Tradition,
which is in it self grounded on weak proofs. For after all, why has the public
intelligence taken the passages of Scripture in this sense, if the proofs of
this sense are so slight in themselves. It Is neither rashly nor
enthusiastically, nor without just grounds that Tradition is to be found on
this side. But what are the reasons of it, if the proofs drawn from Holy
Scripture, to ground this sense on, are in themselves extreme weak? Mr. Arnaud
does not consider that he not only gives the Sociniens an unjust advantage, but
likewise ruins himself his own Principle, as fast as he thinks he establishes
it.

HE says, that I suppose my passages concerning the Trinity are unanswerable.
When a Socinien shall reply thereunto, we shall have enough to show that his
answers are vain, and yet I shall have right to suppose the solidity of my
proofs till these pretended replies come. He adds, That I suppose the Sociniens
object not any contrary passage. Which is what I do not suppose, but I suppose
they cannot object any, that can prevail over those I offered. I have reason to
suppose it without being obliged to discuss either their answers or objections.
If Mr. Arnaud's observations must be a rule, why has he contrary thereunto
wrote this 10th. Book, which is only grounded on a supposition. He supposes the
consent of all Christian Churches in the Doctrines of Transubstantiation and
the Real Presence, imagining he has well proved them. But I need only mind him
of his own remarks, and tell him he supposes. 1. That his proofs are
unanswerable. 2. That we will not offer contrary ones against them, and
consequently his supposition is faulty. If he answers it belongs to me to make
my replies, and produce my objections, and that till then his supposition holds
good, let him take the same answer from me on the subject here in question.

HE says in fine, That I suppose reason remains neuter, contenting it self
without teaching the Trinity, and approving on the contrary certain truths
which have a natural coheherence with that particular one, that I suppress this
infinite crowd of difficulties, wherewith reason furnishes those against this
Article, who take this dangerous way whereby to judge of the mysteries of Faith.
A man that so confidently blames suppositions ought not to make such a terrible
one as this is, without grounding it at least on some proofs, That reason
furnishes us with an infinite crowd of difficulties against the Article of the
Trinity. The objections made against this mystery proceed either from the
weakness or corruption of reason, rather than from reason it self; and I
confess there are of this kind, not a crowd of difficulties as Mr. Arnaud
exaggerates it, but some, that may perplex a man's mind. So likewise did I never
suppose this Article was wholly exempt from 'em; I have on the contrary
formally acknowledged them. But to say no more, there needs only be read what I
wrote on this subject to find, that Mr. Arnaud could not worse disengage
himself from this part of my answer, having left it untoucht in its full
strength. Especially let any one read the places wherein I establish by
Scripture the Divinity of the three persons, and especially that of our Lord
and Savior, and judge whether it is wisely said, That I ruin the Sociniens
without redemption, but it is by such a way, as will rather make them laugh,
than change their minds. This discourse is not very edifying, and is perhaps
capable of a sense which will not be to Mr. Arnaud's advantage. But it is better
to pass on to his sixth Consequence.

The sixth Consequence.
THAT the consent of all the Christian Churches in the Doctrine of the Real
Presence and Transubstantiation, helps us to distinguish the necessary
consequences of these Doctrines from those which are not so, and by this means
shows the falsity of several of the Ministers Arguments.

The first Reflection.
WE grant there is a difference between the necessary consequences of a
Doctrine and that which we call the consequences of congruity, which are not of
absolute necessity. But to make a good use of this distinction, it must be
attended by these following observations. 1. That the arguments drawn from the
consequences of congruity, have more or less force, according as the
consequences themselves have more or less natural coherence with the Doctrine
in question. 2. That when a consequence seems to be natural, and is confirmed
moreover by experience, it is not enough for the refuting the Argument drawn
thence barely to say that it is only a consequence of congruity, which has not
an absolute necessity. We must either oppose against it contrary proofs that
are stronger, and which cannot be confuted by these sort of Arguments taken
from consequences, how natural soever they may appear to be, or oppose against
them a contrary experience, or give a reason why these consequences cannot take
place, and by this means discover the obstacles which have impeded them. 3.
That the Argument becomes very strong when it is drawn from a great number of
these consequences, it being very unlikely but nature has produced her effect
in respect of some of 'em. 4. That when the natural consequences of a Doctrine
do not appear at certain times, or in certain places, there must therein at
least appear other equivalent ones which are instead of those, it being
scarcely possible for nature to remain absolutely without effect.

TO apply now these observations to the Ministers way of arguing, I I say that
it is a natural consequence of the Doctrine of Transubstantiation to find
contradictions in men's minds, and produce Disputes and Controversies amongst
them, experience confirms it since the 11th. Century to this present. We may
then draw a great proof that the ancient Church held not this Doctrine, in that
she remained in peace concerning this subject, till Paschasius's time, although
there were otherwise, Controversies touching almost all the Articles of the
Creed. It Is not sufficient for the relating of this Argument to answer as Mr.
Arnaud does, that this is only a consequence of congruity, and that it is
natural enough for people not to rise up against this Doctrine when the custom
of Faith has suppled men's minds into docility toward this mystery. I will
answer him that it is not at all natural to suppose this docility in all men's
minds for eight hundred years together in relation to this Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, that it is on the contrary very natural not to suppose it to
be in all, and that that which he calls the custom of Faith, does not usually
incline men's minds to this docility till after several contradictions and
repugnancies, as appears by the example of all the Articles of the Christian
Religion which have this difficulty. He must then offer against this Argument
strong and convincing proofs, by which it may appear that the ancient Church
held this Doctrine, or instance in some Doctrines as difficult as
Transubstantiation, that were never controverted; or in fine give a reason why
this consequence which seems to be such a natural one, yet has had no place
during eight hundred years.

IT IS also a consequence natural enough of Transubstantiation, that it is
endeavored to be established by sensible Miracles; for Miracles are one of of
the chief instruments by which men's minds may be mollified toward this
docility of Faith which Mr. Arnaud mentions. Experience confirms this since
Paschasius his time to this present. We may then very well argue in this
manner, and conclude that these Miracles appearing only since the 9th. Century,
it is most probable that was the time wherein Transubstantiation came into the
world. And it is not sufficient for the confuting of this Argument to say this
is not a consequence absolutely necessary; for although this be true, yet that is
a consequence natural enough, being grounded on experience.

IT is moreover a consequence natural enough of Transubstantiation, and
confirmed by experience not to expose the proper substance of Christ's Blood to
the inconveniences which attend the custom of communicating of both kinds, and
consequently not to admit people indifferently to the participation of the Cup.
As we find not this consequence in the first Centuries, and it appearing in the
latter, we may make hence a probable conjecture concerning the change that has
been introduced in respect of this Doctrine. For it is not likely that during so
long a time men were not troubled with these inconveniences which are so
ordinary, and resolved at length to remedy them. To say, hereupon, that they
communicated of both kinds to imprint more deeply the Death of Christ in the
minds of the Communicants by the representation of the separation of the Body
and Blood, is as much as amounts to nothing; for the reason of the
inconveniences is far stronger than this other contrary reason: as appears by
the example of the Roman Church since the Council of Constance.

A MAN may likewise strongly argue from the common practices of the Roman
Church, by which she shows that she adores the Sacrament with an adoration of
latria, hereby to declare that the Greek Church does not adore it, seeing she
has none of these customs. For although each of these practices had only a link of
simple congruity with the Doctrine of the Adoration, yet is it no ways likely
but the Greek Church would practice some of 'em, or at least others equivalent
to 'em, that are as significant to testify openly the acts of Adoration. This
then is no satisfactory answer, but a mere evasion to say that these are only
consequences of congruity.

The second Reflection.
AS fast as we establish the solidity of these Arguments drawn from
consequences, it will not be amiss to observe Mr. Arnaud's illusion. We make
use of these proofs on the question, Whether the ancient Church believed
Transubstantiation, to show she did not believe it; or on the question which
respects the Schismatical Churches, to show that they hold not
Transubstantiation neither, nor adore the Sacrament. Mr. Arnaud has shunned to
touch on these proofs whilst he treated on these questions, he has reserved
himself to refute them by way of consequence in his 10th. Book, wherein he
supposes the consent of all Nations since the 7th. Century to this present.
Whereas we say for instance, That the Greeks do not believe Transubstantiation,
because we find not among them the consequences of this Doctrine. Mr. Arnaud
perverts this order, and says, That our Arguments drawn from these consequences
are invalid, because the Greeks who believe Transubstantiation according to the
supposition which he makes of 'em admit not these consequences. I confess this
circuit is a very dexterous one, but by how much the greater art there is in
it, by so much the more plainly does he discover the strength of our Arguments,
seeing Mr. Arnaud is forced to elude them in this manner.

The seventh Consequence.
Mr. ARNAVD's seventh Consequence is, That the Doctrine of the Chap. 8.
Real Presence and Transubstantiation does not of it self lead a man to the
discoursing of Philosophical Consequences, nor upon explaining the difficulties
of this Mystery; and therefore it is no marvel that the Fathers never took
notice of 'em.

Reflection.
WE have already refuted this opposition, and it only remains that we observe
here again Mr. Arnaud's illusion, who to answer the proof drawn from the
Consequences which he calls Philosophical ones, such as are the existence of
accidents without a subject, the existence of a body in diverse places at once,
the concomitance, etc. which were unknown to the ancient Church, as well as to
the Schismatical Churches, supposes first that these Churches do firmly believe
Transubstantiation, and concludes afterward that our proof mus^ needs be
invalid, seeing here are the Greeks, Armenians and Copticks, etc. who make no
mention of these difficulties. So that by this means there are no Arguments
which Mr. Arnaud cannot easily answer.

WE have likewise refuted particularly what he offers touching the adoration of
the Eucharist in his 9th. Chapter. And as to what he alleges in the 10th.
touching the impossibility of the change which we maintain, we will treat
thereof in this following Book.

BOOK VI.
Concerning the Change which has happened in the Doctrine of the Latin Church in
respect of the Eucharist. That this Change was not impossible, and that it has
effectually happened.

CHAP. I.
The state of the Question touching the distinct knowledge of the Presence, or
Real Absence.

DESIGNING particularly to treat in this 6th. and last Book of the Change which
has happened (according to us) in the Latin Church, I could not better begin it
than by the question, Whether men ever had a distinct knowledge of the Presence
or Real Absence. This distinct knowledge being one of the principal means which
the Author of the Perpetuity has made use of to show that the change which we
suppose is impossible, it is necessary then to consider it first. It Is likewise
for this reason that I reserved the discussion of Mr. Arnaud's 6th. Book for
this place; for having treated of the Author of the Perpetuity's method, I
believed 'twas necessary to discuss without interruption whatsoever concerned
the Greeks and other Eastern Christians, to examine at the same time the state
of the Latins in the 7th. and 8th. Centuries, and afterward pass on to the
Consequences which Mr. Arnaud draws from the pretended consent of all Churches
in the Doctrines of Transubstantiation. Which done, due order requiring us to
proceed to the question of the change which happened in the 9th. 10th. and 11th.
Centuries; and this other Question of the distinct knowledge which Mr. Arnaud
handles in his 6th. Book, being a dependence of that of the change, or to speak
better, a preamble to it, I believed this was the most fitting place to examine
it.

BUT before we enter into this matter, it is necessary to state the question
clearly, and for this effect I shall propose some remarks which will plainly
discover wherein consists the point of our difference. First, I grant Mr.
Arnaud that the Author of the Perpetuity has not offered his Argument drawn
from the distinct knowledge, but only in respect of the Real Presence, and not
in reference to Transubstantiation. But Mr. Arnaud likewise must grant that
this proof does not fully answer the design which the Author of the Perpetuity
proposed to himself at the entrance of his Treatise, To make Perp. Faith, page
14.
us confess from the evidence of truth it self, that the Belief of the Roman
Church touching the Mystery of the Eucharist is the same with that of all
antiquity. For the Roman Church does not simply stop at the Real Presence, she
believes likewise Transubstantiation. Now in this respect that Author's proof
concludes nothing. Yet seeing he himself has restrained his Argument only to
the Real Presence, it will not be just to give it a greater extent in this
respect.

IN the second place it must be granted that the question here concerns nor
persons that have no knowledge of Christianity, and consequently perhaps never
heard of the Eucharist nor Body of Jesus Christ. The point in hand concerns
persons that made open profession to be Christians, who Communicated, and knew
that our Savior Christ is in Heaven, so that they had some kind of notion as
well of the Eucharist as of the Body of Jesus Christ. So far Mr. Arnaud and I
agree well enough.

BUT our difference begins from the complaint I make against the Author of the
Perpetuity, in that he would establish the state of this question in an
illusory manner. It concerns us, says he, to know whether the faithful
Refutation, Part. 2. Chapter 2.
could remain for the space of a thousand years in the Church without forming a
distinct and determinate notion, whether what they saw was or was not the true
Body of Jesus Christ. Mr. Arnaud maintains this state of the question, Lib. 6.
cap. 3.
and I affirm it is wholly captious, and that the question does not at all
concern this matter. Which we shall illustrate by a third remark. I say then
the question is properly to know whether during a thousand years the people
that were in the Church ever formed a distinct and determinate notion, whether
what they saw was or was not the Body of Jesus Christ in proper substance,
without ever ceasing during all this time to have this same notion thus
distinct and determinate. The Author of the Perpetuity and Mr. Arnaud are
obliged to prove the affirmative, because in their respect it is a necessary
proposition which they offer in form of a Principle, wirhout which their
Argument touching the impossibility of the change concludes nothing. I must
defend the negative, but this negative consists not in affirming that during a
thousand years the faithful could remain without forming this distinct and
determinate notion here in question, it consists in affirming only that during
a certain time comprehended within the extent of these thousand years the
people have not formed this distinct notion. These Gentlemen's affirmation must
be general for the thousand years, and if there be wanting but one, or less
than one Age, their supposition will be ineffectual, seeing it is only by this
they can prove that the change we dispute about was impossible during these
thousand years. But as to my own part, it is sufficient I affirm their
supposition to be false during a certain time wherein the change will be made.
It will do these Gentlemen no harm, perhaps, who scoff at that Philosophy which
they call Schoolboys Exercise, to consult it sometimes; for it will teach them
to distinguish between a contrary opposition, and a contradictory one. Two
contrary propositions may be both of 'em false, and are never very proper to
form a just state of a question between rational persons who dispute to find a
Verity, and not to discover two falsities. For example these two propositions,
Men are liars. Men are always liars, are opposite by an opposition called
contrary. They are both false and cannot form a just question. To form it there
must be made this contradictory opposition. Men are not always liars, men are
sometimes liars; or, men are always liars, men are not always liars, they are
sometimes true. That man will justly render himself ridiculous, who having
offered this proposition, That during a thousand years men always spoke the
truth; and attempting to maintain it, shall afterward give an exchange, and
say the question is, Whether men could remain a thousand years without speaking
any truth. He may be well told this is impertinently stated, and that this is
not the point in hand, but only to know whether they always said the truth
during a thousand years without ceasing ever to speak it, or whether they have
been sometimes liars. This instance alone exactly discovers the Author of the
Perpetuity's illusion, who having offered this proposition, That the faithful
ever had a distinct knowledge whether the Eucharist was or was not the Body of
Jesus Christ, that is to say, the proper substance of the Body of Jesus Christ;
for it is thus he understands it, has afterward proposed the state of the
question in these terms, It concerns us to know whether the faithful could
remain a thousand years in the Church without forming a distinct and
determinate notion^* whether that which they saw was or was not the true Body
of Jesus Christ. We have just cause to tell him that this is not the point, but
whether they always were in a condition to form this distinct notion, or
whether sometimes they were not.

Mr. ARNAVD endeavors in vain to excuse the Author of the Perpetuity, that he
only established this state of the question on the very terms of my answer. For
supposing it were true that the terms of my Answer furnished him with an
occasion or pretense for this, yet must he not thus establish it to the
prejudice of the public interests which require a man to proceed right on in a
Dispute, to find the truth, and not to amuse ones self in deceitful and
fruitless contests, and prove things which will signify nothing. Now this is
what the Author of the Perpetuity has done, and Mr. Arnaud likewise by means of
this false state of the question, as will appear if we consider that when they
have proved most strongly and solidly, and in the most convincing manner
imaginable, That the faithful could not remain a thousand years in the Church
without forming a distinct and determinate notion, whether that which they saw
was, or was not the true Body of Jesus Christ, which is a proposition
contradictorily opposite to that which they express in their state of the
question, they will do nothing in order to the clearing up of our difference.
We dispute whether the change which the Protestants suppose be possible or not.
Now to prove that it is impossible by the Argument of the distinct knowledge, it
signifies nothing to show that the faithful could not remain a thousand years
in the Church without forming this distinct notion now in question. For they
might remain only a hundred years in it, fifty years, thirty years, without
forming it; this is sufficient to invalidate their proof, and give way to the
change which we pretend. To show it is impossible that a man has entered into a
house, it is not enough to prove that the door of this house could not remain
open for ten years together; it must be showed that it was always kept shut.
For if it has been left open only one day, the proof concludes nothing. It is
then evident that these Gentlemen beat the air, and that whatsoever they built
on their state of the question, is only an amusement to deceive silly people.
Whence it follows that persons of sense may justly complain of them, in that
they have made my words, be they what they will, a pretense whereby to
entertain the world with fruitless discourses.

BUT moreover it is certain that the Author of the Perpetuity has perverted my
words and sense. It Is true that in the fifth Observation of my first Answer I
established this general Principle, That error and truth have equally two
degrees, the one of a confused knowledge, and the other of a distinct one, and
that it is hard to discover any difference betwixt them, whilst they are in this
first degree of confused knowledge, unless a man comes to the other, termed a
distinct knowledge: that the ideas are so like one another that a man cannot
easily discern them. It is true that from this Principle I generally concluded,
That before an Error becomes famous by its being opposed, the greatest part of
the Church content themselves with holding the truth in this indistinct degree
I now mentioned, and so it is easy for a new Error to insinuate and settle it
self in men's minds under the title of an illustration of the ancient truth. It
is moreover true that in applying this Principle I added these terms. To apply
this to the matter which we treat of, I say that before Transubstantiation came
into the world, every one believed our Savior to be present in the Sacrament,
and that his Body and Blood are really therein received by the faithful
Communicant, and that the Bread and Wine, are the signs and memorials of his
Death and Passion on the Cross; this was the Faith of the whole Earth; but I
shall not be mistaken when I say, there were few that extended their thoughts
so far as to observe exactly the difference of the two Opinions, which do at
this day separate the Reformists, and Romanists, there were also some who knew
the truth only in general. When then error came in thereupon, and building ill
on a foundation, declared we must understand our Savior is present in the
Eucharist stubstantially and locally, that his Body and Blood are received in
it by the mouth of our bodies, and that the sign of his Body is his Body it
self, this was without doubt in effect an extraordinary novelty, and of which
there was never heard any mention; but yet I do not find it strange that
several people were deceived by it, and took this not for a novelty, but as an
illustration of the common Faith. So far extends my fifth Observation.

BUT he ought not to stop here to raise a state of a question, he ought to see
likewise what I add immediately after in the sixth Observation. Had the Author
of the Perpetuity and Mr. Arnaud consulted it, they would have acknowledged
that I gave therein a formal explication, and as it were a limitation to this
general Principle which I laid down, that this does not wholly take place in
enlightened Ages wherein there are eminent Pastors for knowledge that take care
to instruct clearly their Flocks in the truths of Faith. For then their good
instructions hinder the growth of Error, and render people capable of knowing
and rejecting it. But it is wholly applicable to the Ages of darkness wherein
Ignorance and Superstition have corrupted the Church. Which I express in these
words, Which will without doubt better appear if for a sixth remark we cast our
eyes a little on the time wherein this change has most advanced it self. It was
not in Hilaries nor Athanasius's times, nor in that of Ambrose and S. Austin,
but in the 10th. and 11th. Centuries, that is to say in the most dark Ages,
etc. It Is no marvel then that Error made such conquests in those times, rather
will it be a greater wonder if she did not. And this distinction (methinks)
does sufficiently limit my Principle. To establish sincerely the state of our
question these two remarks must not be separated, but joined together to draw
from them my whole sense, for the state of the question in my respect depends
on my entire sense. Now my whole sense does not consist only in a general
Principle which I lay down, nor in the general application I make of it, but in
the exception and limitation I give them, But neither has Mr. Arnaud nor the
Author of the Perpetuity dealt thus, choosing rather to run after their own
chimerical notions than to follow the truth.

MOREOVER, Mr. Arnaud shows he has but little to say, when he sets himself on
reproaching me, that I suppressed some words of my fifth Observation; it is not
likely I would on purpose suppress words contained in my Book, which might be
easily found in turning over some leafs. If I passed over 'em 'twas because
they made no more to the subject than those which I recite, which contain the
whole substance of my discourse, and which are no less significant than the
others. But I know not whether he can so well justify the Author of the
Perpetuity in his making me say, That the Church remained in this ignorance
till Berenger's time, although there is no such Lib. 6. cap. 3. p. 577.
thing in my Book. Mr. Arnaud's answer is, that the Author of the Perpetuity
represents my sense, and not my words; and because that this proposition which
this Author imputes to me is set down in Italick letters, which are those which
are used for Quotations in proper terms. Mr. Arnaud says that it is the Printers
fault who ought to Print them in a Roman letter. I will believe it because he
says so, but yet my sense ought to be faithfully related, and for this effect
plain dealing requires it to be drawn from my express declarations, contained
in several passages of my first and second Answer, rather than from a discourse
that is maimed and which cannot represent in this condition but half of that
which I would say. Whatsoever pains the Author of the Perpetuity and Mr. Arnaud
have taken to disguise my sense, Father Maimbourg the Jesuit, who wrote since
Mr. Arnaud, ingenuously perceived and related it as it is in truth. Mr. Claude,
says he, asserts A Peaceable Method by Father Mainbourg, chapter 3. page 108.
there was A CERTAIN TIME wherein through the neglect of the Pastors,
Christians had no more than a confused knowledge of this mystery, without
positively believing or rejecting either the Real Presence, or absence, because
they studied not the point. This is in effect my meaning, and not that which
the Author of the Perpetuity imputes to me, that the Faithful could remain a
thousand years in the Church without forming a distinct notion, whether what
they saw was or was not the true Body of Jesus Christ.

THE first of these three Remarks I now made, considers the point in respect of
the Doctrine now in question, and determines it to the Real Presence alone,
excluding Transubstantiation. The second considers it in respect of the
persons, and determines it to the Christians only, excluding those that have no
knowledge of our Mysteries; and the third considers it in respect of the time,
and determines it to the Ages of Ignorance and Darkness: that is to say, to
those wherein, according to us, the change was introduced, which are the 9th.
and 10th. and part of the 11th. For although, according to the exact rigor of the
Dispute the Author of the Perpetuity be obliged to prove his Thesis from the
time of the Apostles to that of Berenger; yet there being only to speak
properly these three Ages in question in this Dispute, we shall neither
complain of him, nor Mr. Arnaud when they shall restrain their Argument to
these.

IT remains only now to know in what dispositions of mind we must suppose the
Christians were; when we imagine the Doctrine of the Real Presence was declared
to 'em; for on this depends the question, Whether the change which we pretend
was possible or impossible?

BUT before we enter upon this enquiry, it is necessary to make two farther
Observations. The first is, that the question is not whether the Christians of
that time had knowledge enough to discover in some sort, when the Doctrine of
the Real Presence was proposed to them, that it agreed not with the Principles
of nature; but whether in supposing they believed not this Doctrine, they had
knowledge enough to discover 'twas an innovation, contrary to the Churches Faith
and to reject it under this consideration. For for to conclude that people
would have actually opposed the Real Presence had they not before believed it,
it is not enough to show, that it would have opposed their senses and notices
of reason. I confess that if men did always what they ought to do, this alone
were sufficient to put them upon rejecting this Real Presence, as we have
elsewhere proved it. But people are liable to be deceived, and receive
notwithstanding the contradictions of sense and common reason, that which they
are persuaded is a mystery of Faith, and generally as soon as ever they begin
to consider it as a mystery, they hearken no longer to sense nor reason. We
should then proceed, and show that they were in a disposition to reject this
Doctrine as a novelty, which the Church never held, and which consequently was
not a true mystery of Faith.

THE other observation which we must make, is, that we ought to distinguish the
belief of the Real Absence in the sense in question, from the belief of the
corporeal Absence. To believe the corporeal absence, is to form to a man's self
the idea of the ordinary and natural presence of a humane body, such as is that
of our Savior's, and to reject it as false and extravagant. But to believe the
Real Absence in the terms of our Dispute, is to conceive the idea of an
invisible Presence, such as the Roman Church conceives and rejects as an error.
A man may reject the substantial Presence of the Body of Jesus Christ in the
Eucharist under the notion of the ordinary existence of a body in a place, and
yet not reject it, either generally under every notion, be it what it will, nor
in particular under the notion of an invisible existence, after the manner of a
Spirit; as appears from the example of the Roman Church, which does not believe
this ordinary and natural Presence, but yet admits the invisible one. It would
have been well if the Author of the Perpetuity had not used in this Dispute
these equivocal terms of the Real Presence, and real Absence, which give way to
sophisms, as will appear in what follows; but seeing he has used them, it is at
least necessary to distinguish them, as I have now done.

LET us see then upon these illustrations what are the pretensions on either
side. The Author of the Perpetuity maintains that these Christians must have a
distinct knowledge either of the Presence or Real Absence, that is to say, they
must have known distinctly whether that which they received in the Communion
was or was not the Body of Jesus Christ in substance; for thus he understands
it, there being no medium says he. I affirm on the contrary that they had not
for the most part of 'em any distinct knowledge either of the invisible Real
Presence, or the Real invisible Absence; and that they were not come as then to
this distinct question. Whether the Body of Jesus Christ was invisibly present
by its proper substance, and after the manner of a Spirit in the Eucharist or
not.

SO far it seems that the method and state of this Dispute is clear, for it is
likely by the Real Presence the Author of the Perpetuity means not the visible
Presence, of which we do not dispute, and which the Church of Rome it self
rejects, but the invisible Presence of which we dispute, and which the Roman
Church holds; so that we need only propose the proofs of both parties for the
Readers edification. But Mr. Arnaud who can make clouds when he has occasion
for 'em, has so greatly obscured this matter by distinctions, and crafty
pretenses, that we must still spend more time to clear the difficulties he has
cast in our way.

TO believe, says he, the Real Absence is to believe that the Eucharist is not
Lib. 6. cap. 2.
the Body of Jesus Christ, or that the Body of Jesus Christ is not really
present in the Eucharist. Now a man may distinctly believe or know that one
thing is not another, or that it is not in another in three different manners.
The first by an express and formal reflection, but general when a man generally
denies one thing to be another, or affirms that it is absent but without
specifying any particular manner. Thus in denying the King to be at Paris, we
say he is not there in any real manner, although we specify not any one. The
second by a distinct reflection on all the different manners of being a thing,
or being really present in a place. Which is as if a man should say that the
King is not at Paris neither visibly nor invisibly; and it is in this manner the
Sacramentaries deny the presence of Christ's Body in the Eucharist. And the
third without any reflection, and by a simple view of the nature of things
which does so comprehend the exclusion of whatsoever belongs not to their
being, that the mind knows as well what they are not, as if it had made an
hundred positive judgments on 'em. Applying afterward this distinction he
assures us first, That the Author of the Perpetuity never pretended to prove
that if the Faithful believed not the Real Presence, they then believed the
Real Absence in the second manner, which is to say, that they positively
excluded, by a formal reflection, all the several kinds of presence, 2. That
the greatest part of his Arguments conclude, that if the Faithful believed not
the Real Presence they would have rejected it in the first manner, and by a
general reflection which denies the thing without considering the different
species. 3. That although a man may draw this consequence from several of his
Arguments, yet it is sufficient for his design to show that these Faithful would
have rejected the Real Presence in the third manner, that is to say, without
reflection, and by a distinct knowledge of certain verities which include it
according to the ordinary manner of conceiving things.

WE must then examine these three manners, and see in what sense the Author of
the Perpetuity is obliged to maintain that if the Christians of whom we speak
believed not the Real Presence, they then believed the Real Absence.

THE first is chimerical and impossible. For it is not possible for a man
naturally to consider the Real Presence of the Body of Jesus Christ in the
Eucharist to reject it; without conceiving at the same time in particular, some
kind or manner of presence. Either these persons, to whom Mr. Arnaud attributes
his first manner of believing the Real Absence, knew the invisible Presence, or
did not know it. Supposing they knew it, what necessity was there of making
them reject it in general, without specifying it in particular? Why not say,
they rejected it in making a formal reflection on it? If they knew it not, as
it seems Mr. Arnaud supposes, it is not at least possible but they had formally
in their minds the particular idea of the corporeal and visible Presence. For
as soon as ever we conceive a humane Body to be substantially present in a
place, the first notion that offers it self naturally to the mind is that of
the ordinary and corporeal Presence. It is possible we may conceive a humane
body without thinking of the place wherein it is, we every day make such kind
of abstractions as these, yet it is not possible according to nature for a man
to conceive it to be present by its proper substance in a place without
conceiving at the same time the idea of its corporeal Presence. Nature
furnishing us with no other idea of the substantial Presence than that, it
cannot be, but this idea will show it self to the mind, as soon as ever we
imagine a body in a place. To be present in a place, and that corporeally, are
naturally one and the same idea in respect of a humane body. The Philosophy of
later Ages has made two ideas of this, whether with reason, or not, I do not
now dispute; but howsoever, nature makes but one of it, and whilst we do not
distinguish them, nor know the secret of making two ideas of them, the one
general, and the other particular, we shall never make this abstraction, for
nature puts not men upon making it. Now we speak here of persons that think
according to nature, and suppose they never heard the least mention of
invisible and incorporeal Presence, it is not then possible but they must
immediately form the idea of the visible or corporeal Presence, in the same
manner as it is not possible for a man naturally to conceive the Sun to be
present over our Hemisphere, but he must conceive the idea of his visible and
ordinary Presence. It is then certain that a man considered in the state of
nature, void of the fancies of this new Philosophy cannot believe the Real
Absence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament, without thinking on the corporeal
Presence. In this condition he can understand no other than that, and it is it
which he rejects, because it is on it whereon falls the first conception of his
mind. This will yet farther appear if we consider that the eyes of a
Communicant will determine his thoughts to the corporeal Presence, when of it
self it were not therein determined; for it is not possible for a man who never
heard of the spiritual and invisible Presence to raise in his mind, at the same
moment wherein he communicates this question, Is the Body of Jesus Christ
substantially present in this Eucharist which I receive? but that he must at
the same time use his eyesight, to inform himself. This inclination is so
natural that if he does not follow it, it must necessarily be said that he has
in his mind the idea of an invisible Presence, of which his eyes cannot be
witnesses, and that it is this idea which diverts him from having recourse to
his sight; and if he does follow it, his eyes which tell him that it is not
therein derermin his thoughts to the idea of the corporeal Presence to make him
reject it.

BUT is it impossible that a man in conceiving the idea of the corporeal
Presence, and in rejecting it, should conceive at the same time that there may
be invented other manners of a substantial Presence, but must reject them all,
be they what they will, without specifying or considering them. I answer, that
in this case he will conceive these other manners of presence in opposition to
the corporeal and visible one, and consequently will specify them at least as
incorporeals and invisibles, and conceive them under this quality, In a word,
when nature offers us but the idea of one single species, there arises not up
immediately a general consideration in our minds, our fancy leads us to that
particular species, and if afterward we conceive any other, it is always in
opposition to that which nature it self offers to our knowledge. Whence it
follows that this first manner of believing the Real Absence by a general
rejection of every kind of presence, yet without specifying so much as any one
in particular neither visible nor invisible, is a mere chimera which resides
only in Mr. Arnaud's brain.

AS to the third it is moreover invalid and illusory, seeing it answers not the
design of the Author of the Perpetuity. For as we have already said, he is
obliged to show, that if people had not believed the Real invisible Presence,
they would have had in their minds, dispositions, and prejudices, which would
have made them respect it not barely as a Doctrine that appears contrary to
natural reason, (this is not sufficient to produce actually an entire rejection
and opposition when the matter concerns a point of Faith) but as an innovation
in the Churches Belief. Now this third manner of believing the Real Absence
without any reflection by a bare view of the nature of things, in the same
manner as we know Paris is not Rome, nor France Holland, that the Sun is not
the Moon, nor an House an Elephant, thar the Kings Picture is not the King
himself, to use Mr. Arnaud's examples, without having made this express and
formal reflection; this manner I say, may make men capable of knowing that the
Real Presence is contrary to the order of nature, that it agrees not with
common sense, but not make 'em discern whether it be a mystery of the Churches
Faith (as it is said to be) or whether it is a new humane invention. This simple
view of the nature of things which consists in knowing, that the Eucharist is
Bread, that the Eucharist is an image of the Body of Jesus Christ, that this
Body is a humane Body, and that it is in Heaven, does not hinder a man from
being surprised with the matter of novelty, by being persuaded that it is the
true Doctrine of the Church (as it is assured to be) and on this persuasion
Reason must yield to Faith.

It Is in vain, Mr. Arnaud tells us, that supposing the Faithful had no other
Lib. 6. cap. 2. page 564, 565.
than these simple notions, that the Sacrament of the Eucharist is Bread and
Wine, which represent to us the Body of Jesus Christ, supposing they conceived
the Body of Jesus Christ to be in no wise therein, that they imagined this Body
to be only present in Heaven, and that all the usual expressions formed only in
their minds the idea of a figurative Presence, they would immediately have
judged that the belief of the Real Presence was false and impertinent; as we
would immediately judge that man who would persuade us that Paris is Rome, or
that the Popes Picture is the Pope himself, or that the seven stalks of Corn
which Pharaoh dreamed of were really seven years, or the Paschal Lamb a real
passage, and Sacrifices for Sins real Sins, to be mad and senseless. When a man
judges of these things he simply judges of them according to the light of
nature, and it is certain the light of nature will render that man impertinent
who shall say what Mr. Arnaud makes him say. It would be the same concerning
the real invisible Presence, should a man judge of it on this ground. But those
that offer it in any age oppose against the light of Nature the splendid name
of the Churches Faith. They endeavor to insinuate it under the pretense of its
being a mystery of the Christian Religion, which has been always believed, and
for this purpose they spare no colors. By which means they stop the course of
nature, and hinder men from judging according to its Principles, reducing the
question to know whether it be true that this be the Faith and perpetual sense
of the Church, by which means it is no hard matter to impose on the ignorant.

IT IS moreover in vain that Mr. Arnaud brings in the Statute of Henry IV. for
an instance, which all the Parisians know to be only Brass, and that his body
is only at S. Dennis. He says, perhaps they never thought of formally rejecting
the opinion that this Statue is really the Body of Henry IV. and yet be ready
to oppose this opinion, should any extravagant person offer to make them
believe it. But howsoever the Parisians stand affected toward the Statue of
Henry IV. there is a great deal of difference between this example and that of
the Eucharist here in question. The Statue of Henry IV. is a work of humane
institution, wherein men suppose there is nothing supernatural; whereas the
Eucharist is a Divine mystery, in which there has been always believed to be
something above nature. The Statue of Henry IV. is a thing absolutely popular,
concerning which every man believes he has liberty of judging according to the
principles of Sense and Reason. The Eucharist is a mystery which has been
endeavored to be made long since in some manner inaccessible to men's
curiosity, by concealing it under a cloud of Ceremonies. Henry the Fourth was
indeed a great Prince, whose memory will never die; but how great soever he
deservedly was, yet is he considered only as a man whose body lies interred at
S. Dennis in the same manner as others do. Jesus Christ is the Son of God,
whose Body is living, and glorious, and hypostatically united to the Divinity.
Should any man then imagine that the Statue of Henry IV. is really Henry IV. I
doubt not but people would look upon him as a mad man, because 'twould be
considered according to the light of nature as a thing touching which there can
be nothing that is extraordinary and miraculous conceived, which is exposed to
the knowledge of all the world, and wherein there is nothing at all that is
Divine. Neither do I doubt but such a dotage would be rejected as a novelty
unknown to our Forefathers, because 'twould be supposed that our Forefathers
had their senses made as ours, and that in respect of natural and sensible
things their judgments have been the same as ours, nature ever remaining in a
uniform state. But neither this example nor the others which are like it do
signify any thing in respect of the Eucharist which is a mystery of Faith,
wherein all Christians agree that there is something supernatural, although they
agree not in the manner. A mystery concerning which every man does not think he
can safely judge, much less from the principles of Sense and Reason: in fine, a
mystery of the Son of God, the knowledge of which depends on a light which is
not always equal. It is then manifest that neither this example nor the rest of
the same rank proposed by Mr. Arnaud are pertinent.

NEITHER is it less clear from what I now represented, that of these three
manners of believing the Real Absence, which Mr. Arnaud proposes, there is only
the second which can be admitted into this Dispute, to regulate the state of
the question, because the first, as I have showed, is impossible, and the last
can yield no advantage to the Author of the Perpeuitty's design.

Mr. ARNAVD may here again call to mind the solidity of the distinction which I
made touching the two expressions which are very like one another, as to terms,
but very different in sense, not to believe, or not to know that a thing is,
and to believe, or know that a thing is not. The first denotes a bare negation
of Knowledge, and the second a positive act of Knowledge and Faith, which
formally denies the existence of a thing. Not to believe the Real Presence,
barely signifies that this presence is not held for an Article of Faith; but to
believe that the Real Presence is not, signifies something more, which is, that
a man reckons it among the Articles which he rejects. The Author of the
Perpetuity having said that there is no medium The first Treatise of the
Perpetuity.
between having a distinct knowledge of the Real Presence, and having a distinct
knowledge of the Real Absence, I had reason to tell him, that to make in this
matter an immediate opposition, he must make it contradictory, and not
contrary, that is to say, he ought to bring in an affirmation, or the negation
of the same thing, and not the affirmation, or positive rejection, that he must
say the Christians have had a distinct belief of the Real Absence, or that they
have not had it; and not say they have had a distinct belief of the Presence,
or Real Absence.

Mr. ARNAVD calls this Schoolboys Philosophy. But this Schoolboys Lib. 6.
cap. 2. page 5.
Philosophy, seeing he pleases to give it this name, is grounded on common
sense. For common sense shows us that to make an immediate opposition we must
set the negative on one side, and the affirmative on the other. We grant, says
he, to Mr. Claude, that to speak logically we ought to oppose believing the
Real Presence, and not believing the Real Presence, and not believing the Real
Absence. But I affirm, that to speak rationally we may well oppose believing
the Real Presence, and believing the Real Absence; which is to say, that not to
believe the Real Absence, and to believe the Real Absence, may and ought to
pass for the same thing in the point in question, because these two
dispositions of mind have all the same effects.

I HAVE been ignorant till now of the distinction between speaking logically,
and speaking rationally; for I always thought that true Logic, which tends
only to cultivate our reason, and which explains it self clearly and
intelligibly, had not any other language than what was rational. But not to
stray from our subject, if in the matter in question, these two expressions,
not to believe the Real Presence, and to believe the Real Absence, must pass
for one and the same thing, it follows they are both of 'em equally rational at
bottom. Seeing then they are both of 'em equally intelligible, and equally
popular, why did not the Author of the Perpetuity make use of the first, rather
than the second. For the first being as it is rational, intelligible, and
popular as well as the other, it has moreover this advantage that Logic
approves of it, whereas she rejects the other. The first expression does of it
self explain justly and naturally what a man would say, neither more nor less;
whereas the other, according to Mr. Arnaud's own acknowledgment is equivocal,
and does not explain what is meant, but only because of the matter in question.
The first is liable to no contest. The second is disputable. Wherefore then has
not Mr. Arnaud knowing them to be equivalent, left the second to make use of
the first. He had lost nothing, if it be true, they both signify one and the
same thing, and he had spared the pains of a new dispute. For I maintain
against him, that neither rationally speaking, nor logically, these two
expressions ought to pass for the same thing. The first cannot produce the
effect which the second produces, seeing the second will make men oppose the
Real Presence as an innovation which Faith rejects, whereof the first cannot
of it self work such en effect. A man that is persuaded the Real Presence is a
Doctrine which he ought to reject, will oppose himself against it, as soon as
ever it shall be offered him. A person that never heard it mentioned will
easily suffer himself to be surprised when told this has been ever the Faith of
the Church.

WHEREIN consists then you will say the point of our difference, and what is the
state of this question? It may be easily gathered from what I have now said,
which is to know whether the people of the 9th. 10th. and 11th. Ages, in
supposing the Real Presence which was taught them, that is to say, the
invisible substantial Presence, such as the Church of Rome holds at this day;
for it is on that we dispute, was a novelty, which yet was taught them as the
ancient Faith of the Church. I say, the question is, whether these people had
notions and prejudices in their minds, which must of necessity make them reject
this Doctrine as a novelty contrary to the ancient Faith, even so far as to
oblige 'em plainly and openly to oppose it. And because these prejudices can be
no other than this distinct belief, That the Body of Jesus Christ is not
substantially present in the Eucharist, neither in a visible nor invisible
manner, it concerns us to know whether one may rationally say in the terms of
our supposition that they had this distinct belief. It lies upon Mr. Arnaud to
prove the affirmative, and I the negative. This is the true state of this
question, as appears from what we have seen in this Chapter. But because Mr.
Arnaud has so openly and plainly renounced this manner of believing the Real
Absence by a formal reflection on the several kinds of presence, whether
visible or invisible, it may be reasonably said this is no longer a matter of
contest between us. I grant him (if he will) that people have positively
rejected the corporeal and visible Presence of the Body of Jesus Christ in the
Eucharist, and that in this sense they have believed a Real Absence. I grant
likewise if he will that these same people were in a capacity to know, that the
light of nature opposes the Doctrine of the substantial and invisible Presence.
He grants me for his part, that it does not appear they were for positively
rejecting, and by a formal reflection this incorporeal and invisible Presence.
Wherein then do we disagree? It Is clear that that which I grant him is not a
sufficient disposition, whence to conclude that the people would have opposed
the Doctrine of the invisible Presence as a novelty unknown to the Church. For,
for to believe that Jesus Christ is not visibly and corporally present in the
Eucharist, this does not hinder but that a man may embrace the opinion of the
incorporeal Presence, and so likewise to know that the light of nature does not
well agree with this invisible Presence, this does not hinder men from being
deceived by imagining it is a mystery of Faith, which the Church has always
believed, and touching which a man must not consult his sense or reason. It is
no less clear that what Mr. Arnaud grants me is sufficient to conclude that the
people here mentioned had no distinct knowledge of the Real Presence, in the
sense in which the Roman Church believes it, neither to admit it, nor reject
it; and consequently they had no necessary disposition to oppose it when 'twas
first taught them. For as to this general rejection, we have showed it to be
chimerical and impossible: The question is then decided, but in my favor,
seeing the result of all these illustrations is, that the change which we
suppose has been possible. Yet if Mr. Arnaud will obstinately maintain this
general manner of believing the Real Absence, which denies every kind of
substantial Presence without particularising any one of them, although we have
showed him it is fantastical, and contrary to nature; yet I say we will consent
that the question be this, Whether the people beforementioned ought, according
to our supposition formally and generally to deny all the several sorts of
substantial presences of the Body of Jesus Christ in the Eucharist whatsoever
they be, without specifying any one of them. But this is what he has still to
prove.

CHAP. II.
Mr. Arnaud's Proceedings Considered. His unjust Reproaches also Examined.

SAINT Austin describing the humor and carriage of some persons in his time
with whom he was concerned, observes they were very copious and eloquentin
censuring the sentiments of others, but flat and dull in establishing their own
opinions. Ipsos, says he, animadvertebam plus Aug. de Utilit. Cred. c. 1.
in refellendis aliis disertos and copiosos esse, quam in suis probandis certos
and firmos manner. Methinks the same may be said of Mr, Arnaud. For he troubles
not himself with proving either the propositions he advances, nor those of the
Author of the Perpetuity, and is never more busied than in censuring the
opinions of others. So greatly is he in love with this kind of proceeding, that
he scruples not many times to quit his principal subject, and fall upon any
accidental one, provided 'twill but furnish him with a pretense to make
objections; nay, sometimes he shall start fancies of his own on purpose to give
himself this divertisement. Yet we must needs confess he has some reason to do
thus, having a peculiar tallent of ridiculing the most solid mattters; for
sometimes he tells me of having private Dictionaries to my self, other times of
Keys, and Machines, rhetorical Enthusiasms, and a thousand other pretty
fancies, which take with his Readers, and give him, together with the benefit
of some slight objections and declamations thereupon, the liberty of breaking
loose through the strongest Arguments.

AN example whereof may be seen in this Dispute of the distinct knowledge of the
Real Presence, or Real Absence. For after the illustrations which we have given
in the preceding Chapter, it is easy to find that Mr. Arnaud ought to establish
this Proposition: that if the people of the 9th. and 10th. Centuries had not
found themselves imbued with the distinct belief of the Real invisible
Presence, they would have distinctly believed the Real invisible Absence, at
least in a general manner, that is to say, they would have formally rejected
every kind of substantial Presence of Jesus Christ in the Eucharist; yet
without specifying ever a one of them in particular. He himself acknowledges
that the Author of the Perpetuity would be understood to speak of this general
manner of believing distinctly the Real Absence; so that it cannot be but the
Readers must be in expectation of what he alleges for the confirming this
Hypothesis. But they will find themselves much mistaken, for instead of
applying himself to strengthen it, by new Arguments, or to maintain the
Arguments of the Author of the Perpetuity in restraining them to the time in
question, he has rather chosen to employ the rest of his sixth Book in
examining the state of the people of the first six Centuries, not that 'twas
necessary to enter upon this examination, seeing these Ages are out of the
bounds of our Dispute touching the change. But seeing he would only refute the
five ranks of persons whom I supposed to be in the Church before the opinion of
the Real Presence appeared, refute them I say in reference to the eight first
Centuries to have thence occasion to multiply his objections. I may with good
reason be dispensed withal from following him; for to speak properly, it is mere
running into fruitless debates. Yet to omit nothing, I will still patiently
hearken to what he has to say on this subject. Before I enter upon the
discussion of his particular objections against my five ranks of persons,
'twill not be amiss to examine some of his general ones, for we must endeavor
to satisfy him in all things.

FIRST then Mr. Arnaud makes me contradict my self. He says, That Lib. 6. cap.
4. page 550.
if it be not true I admitted the confused Belief during ten Ages, if I
included it in the 9th. and 10th. it follows that I knew that during eight
Centuries the Faithful had a distinct knowledge of the mystery of the Eucharist.
I acknowledge this Consequence to be just enough. But, adds he, Mr. Claud
bethinks himself and finds it is more for his advantage to grant nothing to the
Author of the Perpetuity, and even to affirm that during these eight Centuries
the Faithful had no distinct knowledge of the Presence, or Real Absence. Why
does Mr. Arnaud call this recollecting a man's self? What contrariety is there
between these two things? Not, says he, but that there is an equivocation in all
this. If there be any equivocation, Mr. Arnaud ought not to make a
contradiction of it, nor say I am at discord with my self. But the truth is,
there is neither equivocation nor contradiction in it; for we have already told
him, that to know distinctly the mystery of the Eucharist, is neither to know
distinctly the Real Presence, nor Real Absence, and that there is a difference
in these things. To know distinctly the Real Absence in the sense wherein we
take this term in this Dispute, is to reject formally, and by a positive act
this invisible Presence as an error. But to know distinctly the mystery of the
Eucharist, is according to us, to know clearly that the Eucharist is Bread and
Wine, as to the substance of it, that by Consecration this Bread and Wine are
made signs or mystical figures of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, that this
signification is grounded on several relations which are between the Bread and
Wine, and the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, that those who receive these
Symbols with Faith and Devotion toward Jesus Christ who died for us, and rose
again, and is reigning in Heaven, they spiritually eat of his Body and drink of
his Blood, that these Symbols are called the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ by
a Sacramental way of speech, because they do both represent them to our Faith,
or because there is a great conformity between them, and the things which they
represent, or because they communicate them to us, and several other like
Articles. In a word, to understand the mystery of the Eucharist is to know
positively wherein consists the nature and essence of a Sacrament, which does
not include any distinct knowledge either of the Real invisible Presence, or
Real invisible Absence. I acknowledge it is not easy to surprise people that are
in this capacity, nor persuade them that this Real Presence has been ever
believed in the Church, especially if they have Pastors that are learned and
honest, who acquit themselves of their Duty, and watch diligently over their
Flocks. But howsoever this is not to understand distinctly the Real Absence in
question.

IN the mean time to the end Mr. Arnaud may no longer equivocate on this
subject, let me tell him, that when we attribute this distinct knowledge of the
mystery of the Eucharist to the eight first Centuries, we would not be
understood either that they had it in a degree always equal and uniform, or
that all persons who lived in each of those Ages have been equally enlightened.
We know the light of those Ages was diminished by degrees, so that the 7th. and
8th. had much less of it than the first six. We know likewise there has been
always in the Church, I mean even then when 'twas most flourishing, a great
number of pious Christians in truth, but little advanced in knowledge, and with
them multitudes of profane worldly wretches who little concerned themselves
touching what they believed of the mysteries of Christian Religion.

IN the second place Mr. Arnaud reproaches me with having done two things,
which would be strange enough were they true: the one, that I ill explained the
Author of the Perpetuity's sentiment, and the other that I granted him in effect
whatsoever he pretended to. He grounds these two reproaches on that I said
somewhere to the Author of the Perpetuity, That if Answer to the second
Treatise, part 2. chap 3.
he meant that the Faithful who took the instructions of the Fathers in a
metaphorical sense, believed Jesus Christ present corporeally in Heaven without
thinking on what has been said since, that he is at the same time in Heaven and
on Earth, there after the manner of a Body, here after the manner of a Spirit,
I acknowledged that the Faithful had in this sense a most distinct idea of the
Real Absence, which is to say, they did not at all believe that he was
substantially present in the Sacrament, applying their whole mind to the
presence of his Grace and Merit, setting themselves to meditate on his infinite
love, etc. without exerting their thoughts to this presence of substance,
invented of late by the Roman Church. But if by having an idea and distinct
belief of the Real Absence, that Author meant they knew and rejected distinctly
this means of existence of the Body of Jesus Christ on the Altar, in
multiplying his Presence in several places, I affirmed they had it not at all.

BUT these two reproaches are without grounds, for in respect of the first it
appears from what we have seen in the preceding Chapter, that the Author of the
Perpetuity must have pretended to that which I charge him with; to wit, that
the Faithful have had the distinct idea of the substantial invisible Presence,
such as the Church of Rome believes, and that they formally rejected it as an
Error. For there is only this manner of believing the Real Absence which can
have place in this Dispute, seeing that of the three which Mr. Arnaud has
proposed the first as we have seen, is impossible, and the third useless for
the design of the Author of the Perpetuity; so that necessarily his sense must
fall upon the second, which is precisely that which I have attributed to him.
And as to the second reproach it is clear, that if the Author of the Perpetuity
pretended to no more than what I granted him, his Argument will fall to the
ground; for it does not follow from persons not fixing their minds on the
presence of an invisible substance, such as the Church of Rome teaches, and
their applying themselves only to meditate on a presence of Grace, which is
precisely what I grant him, it does not hence follow, I say, that they are led
by this alone to reject the Real Invisible Presence, as a novelty contrary to
the Faith of the Church. There needs something more than this, I mean there
needs greater lights to inevitably effect this rejection. For a man must have
for this not only the idea of this substantial invisible Presence, such as is
fancied in the Church of Rome, but likewise distinctly know that such a
Presence was never taught in the Church. For otherwise it is very possible that
people will suffer themselves to be deceived, when told the Church has ever
believed such a Presence, especially when they shall hear several passages out
of the Fathers on this subject alleged in a counter sense. Moreover, if Mr.
Arnaud imagins I meant to acknowledge of my own head, that one may call the
disposition of these persons who believe Jesus Christ corporally present in
Heaven, (without considering what has been said since of his Presence in Heaven
and on Earth at the same time, there visibly, here invisibly) believing the
Real Absence, he is grossly mistaken. For what I said was out of condescension,
and supposition, and not absolutely, which is to say, that in case the Author
of the Perpetuity pretended only this, I would not dispute with him about an
expression. In effect if we are agreed touching the thing, I Will never make war
with him upon the account of terms.

Mr. ARNAVD is no less mistaken when he accused me for making an illusory
answer to the Author of the Perpetuity. The business is, that this Author said,
that if the change which we pretend were true, There First Treatise of the
Perpetuity, page 37.
must have been of necessity a time wherein the belief of the Real Presence has
been so mixed with that of the Real Absence, that there were half of the
Bishops, Priests, and People, who held the one, and the other half that held
the other. To this I answered, That in the times of the greatest ignorance,
even Answer to the first Treatise, page 12.
in the 11th. Century, I doubted not but there were four or five ranks of
persons in the Body of the visible Church, the one profane and worldly persons
who kept themselves at a distance from these Disputes; others ignorant ones,
who contented themselves with knowing in general, the Eucharist to be the
memorial of Christ's Passion, and that they receive therein his Body and Blood,
these holding the true Faith in a degree of confused knowledge. The third, of
those that held the true Faith in a degree of distinct knowledge, and rejected
the substantial Presence. And the fourth, of those that had embraced the
Opinion of this Presence. And this is what Mr. Arnaud calls an illusion.
Whereas I affirm this answer is pertinent; for if there have been four ranks of
men in the Church, it is ill done of the Author of the Perpetuity to reduce them
to two. But, says Mr. Arnaud, the Author of the Perpetuity speaks of the time
before Berenger, and you speak of the time that followed him. I answer that the
Author of the Perpetuity speaks of the time of the chimerical Lib. 6. chapter 5.
page 560.
growth through which the belief of the Real Presence has necessarily passed
according to the imagination of the Calvinists: And thus does he formally
explain himself. And I speak of the time wherein Error made its greatest
progress, in the greatest progress of error. These are my words. So far there is
nothing mis-understood, we speak both of us concerning the same time. But this
time according to us is that in which Berenger began to oppose the Real
Presence. But, says moreover Mr. Arnaud, the whole Church Page 562.
had already passed over into the belief of the Real Presence before Berenger'
s time, and Aubertin himself acknowledges as much. Which is what I deny, and
Mr. Arnaud ought not to affirm it without proof. The greatest progress of the
Real Presence was then when Berenger declaring himself against it, Paschasius
his Disciples maintained it by Disputes; so that this is precisely the time
about which the Author of the Perpetuity and I debated.

THESE are the first objections of Mr. Arnaud, after which he divides what he
calls my System into three parts or times. The first, says he, comprehends Page
563.
the first eight Ages, and the five ranks whereof it consists. The second
contains two Centuries and an half, which a man cannot better name than the
unaccountable time of the Ministers, And the third contains the time which
followed Berenger. It Is certain that of these three times there was only the
second (as I already said to speak properly) necessary to be examined touching
the question, Whether the change which we pretend was possible or impossible.
For although I do not grant that all the Faithful of the eight first Centuries
have had a distinct knowledge either of the Real Presence, or Real Absence in
the sense wherein the Church of Rome takes these terms, yet did I acknowledge
there was then light enough in the Church whereby to reject the Opinion of this
sort of Presence, had it appeared, so that it does not seem 'twas greatly
necessary to dispute concerning these Ages, wherein we do not say the change
was made, and which we suppose to have been different from those which
followed. Yet seeing Mr. Arnaud will needs have 'em brought into the Dispute, I
am willing to treat of them.

I THEN reckoned in the Church five sorts of persons, who had no distinct
Answer to the second Treatise, part 2. chap. 3.
knowledge of the Real Presence, neither to reject nor admit it, without
comprehending therein the profane or worldly minded persons, and grounded my
division on this reason. That it is not possible in this great diversity of
conditions and humors of men, to reduce them all either to one and the same
measure of knowledge, or to the same form of action.

THE first rank is of those who conceived these two terms the Sacrament, and
the Body of Jesus Christ, the Sacrament under the notion which their senses
gave them; for whether 'twas called Bread, or by any other name, the idea they
formed thereof was such as their eyes represented them with. They conceived the
Body of Jesus Christ after the manner which the Gospel speaks of it, as a body,
and flesh like unto that which we have, born of a Virgin, united to the Eternal
Word, hanging on the Cross, risen and taken up into Glory, and in a word under
the idea which Religion gives us of it. The idea of the Sacrament served to
make them pass on to that of the Body, but they stopped there, and made not a
particular reflection thereon, how the Sacrament was the Body of Jesus Christ.
Their devotion being content with the use which they made of the Sacrament,
unto which they were assisted by this formulary of Communion, Corpus Christi,
they proceeded not so far as that question.

THE second rank is of those who proceeded to the question, How this visible
Bread, this subject called Sacrament, is the Body of Jesus Christ? but finding
a great deal of inconsistency in the terms, their minds stopped at the single
difficulty without undertaking to solve it.

THE third is of those who going as far as the question, proceeded as far as
the solution, but their minds stopped at general terms, as that Jesus Christ is
present to us in the Sacrament, and that we receive his Body and Blood therein
without searching after greater satisfaction.

THE fourth is of those who having been disgusted at the inconsistency of these
terms, the Bread and the Body of Jesus Christ, found at length the real knot of
the question, I mean, that the Bread is the Sacrament, the memorial, and pledge
of the Sacred Body of our Redeemer.

THE fifth in fine is of those who at the hearing of these propositions, The
Bread is the Body of Jesus Christ, The Bread is changed into the Body of Jesus
Christ, the Bread is made the Body of Jesus Christ, went immediately to their
true and natural sense, without perplexity or difficulty, and without so much
as thinking on the inconsistency of the terms, well understanding that the
Bread remaining Bread is consecrated to be a Sacrament, which represents and
communicates to us the Lords Body; and these had a more clear and distinct
knowledge of the truth, and a greater disposition to understand the style and
usual expressions of the Church.

HERE IS, says Mr. Arnaud, what Mr. Claude calls the happy days of the Lib. 6.
chapter 5. page 560.
Church, and the time of the distinct knowledge. And yet of these five ranks
there are three who knew not what the Eucharist was, and understood not the
sense of the expressions which form this Doctrine. The fourth sought and happily
found it, says he, after a long search, and the fifth found it without
searching it.

I ACKNOWLEDGE that what has been said of these five ranks, may be understood of
all the time which preceded the change, but yet we may divide this time into
two, and distinguish that wherein the Pastors took a more particular care to
instruct the people, and that of ignorance wherein the mysteries of the Gospel
were neglected, and the people ill instructed. For as ignorance was never so
great, nor universal, but that there were ever some persons knowing enough to
understand distinctly, that the Bread is called the Body of Jesus Christ,
because it is the Sacrament of it, so knowledge never so generally overspread the
Church, but there were always some weak and ignorant persons in it. When we
distinguish a time of knowledge, from a time of ignorance, we do not mean there
were no ignorant people, during the time of knowledge, nor enlightened persons
during the time of ignorance. We do not thus understand it. But we take the
denomination from the party that most prevailed, and call a time of light, and
knowledge, that wherein we see appear more learning and clearness; a time of
darkness, and ignorance that wherein we find on the contrary appear much more
thickness and stupidity. When then I said that I reckoned these five ranks of
persons in the Church, I understood that this was true in both the two times,
that is to say, both in that which I called the Churches happy days, the time
of a distinct knowledge, and in that of ignorance and confusion; but I likewise
meant that this was true in these two times diversely according to the
difference which distinguishes them, so that when the sense of my proposition
is distributed, reason requires that the proportion of each time be kept. We
must not doubt but that in the first six Centuries there were persons to be
found of these three first ranks which I denoted, but far fewer than in the
following Ages.

AFTER this first remark Mr. Arnaud makes another, which is, that I do not
prove what I offer touching these five orders, This is, says he, an Lib. 6. chapter
6. page 563.
History no where extant. These are news which he alone knows, and for which he
can bring no more proof than for worlds in the Moon. But this is Mr. Arnaud's
usual course, when he cannot answer an Argument he requires proofs for it, and
so when he cannot invalidate an Answer he bethinks himself of saying, prove it.
The Author of the Perpetuity affirms that the change which we pretend is
impossible, I affirm it is possible, and to show that it is so, I suppose by way
of explication and illustration five ranks of persons in the Church during the
time which preceded the change. If I suppose a thing impossible or absurd, it
lies upon Mr. Arnaud to show the impossibility or absurdity thereof, and not to
require proofs of me. I suppose nothing but what lies within the terms of
probability, and is conformable to the manner of men's thoughts, which appears
by their every days actions in like occasions as this, although not recorded in
History. Howsoever if Mr. Arnaud will have the Authors Argument of the
Perpetuity to remain in force, he should solidly attack my Answer and lay aside
those fooleries of worlds in the Moon, which do not well agree with the
importance of our subject.

AND this he seems to be sensible of, for he does not much insist on this
demand of proofs, but comes to a particular examination of these diverse ranks,
and to make it the more pleasant, he gives each of 'em a nickname and title;
the first he calls the rank of Contemplative Ignoramus's, the next that of Lazy
Ignoramus's, the third that of Catholics, the fourth of Considerate
Calvinists, the fifth that of Inconsiderate ones. In discoursing on the first
rank he gives us a touch about Mental Prayer, of being snatched up immediately
into Heaven, concerning our meditation on the Body of Jesus Christ in
abstracto, and standing upon our guard against the terms which express the
essence of the Mystery; and he uses the same pleasant method about the rest,
which shows he can be frolicksome sometimes, and has his hours of creation, as
well as other folks.

BUT laying aside these fine words, let us come to things. The Author of the
Perpetuity intending to prove that the Faithful ever had a distinct knowledge of
the Presence or Real Absence, offered the formulary of Communion Refutat. part
2. chap. 2.
Corpus Christi, which was used in the ancient Church, saying that these terms
represented the Body of Jesus Christ present on the Altar; and thence he
concluded they had a distinct belief that it was thereon, if they followed the
sense of these words, or if they rejected them, they had a distinct belief of
the Real Absence.

TO this I answered, that the first impression which things make on our minds,
and words designed to any use, is that of their use, that it is thus every
morning that we conceive of the light, not as being under the notion Answer to
the second Treat. part 2. chapter 2.
of a body or accident, or motion of air, but under the notion of a thing which
is useful to us, and serves to lead us to our labors, which I farther
illustrated by several other examples. Then applying this remark to my subject,
I said that this formulary Corpus Christi, was a formulary of use, designed
according to the intention of the Church to raise up the minds of Communicants
to the meditating on the Body of Jesus Christ dead and risen for them. Whence I
concluded there were several persons who contented themselves with doing that
to which these words excited them, without proceeding any farther, their minds
being sufficiently taken up with that. And this is that which Mr. Arnaud calls
extravagant and fantastical, and wherein he meets with such ridiculous
Hypothesises, senseless suppositions, and absurdities. It Is impossible, says he,
for a discourse to be more faulty than this, although it be the foundation of the
first order of this system. First, 'twill not serve the end whereunto it is
designed. Secondly, it is laid on a false foundation. Thirdly, it concludes
nothing this false foundation being supposed. These three remarks are
essential, and need only proving.

AS to the first, he says, That supposing this ridiculous Hypothesis were
granted me, yet there must be made several others to draw thence the conclusion
which I draw. First, It must be supposed that the Pastors who instructed the
Communicants when they first received the Eucharist, taught 'em only to make a
Mental Prayer over the Body of Jesus Christ, without mentioning to 'em a word
of the essence of the mystery, and sense of the words which express it, and
satisfying the doubts which might spring up in their minds about it. And yet
the form of these instructions appearing in the Writings of S. Cyril of
Jerusalem, S. Ambrose, Gaudencius, and Eucherus, are very apt to imprint on
their minds the distinct idea of the Faith of the Mystery, according to the
Doctrine of the Catholics. Secondly, We must suppose that when these people met
with this expression either in Sermons, or particular Discourses, or Books,
that the Eucharist is the Body of Jesus Christ, they cautioned themselves
against admitting into their minds any idea of these words, but were
immediately ravished with abstracted Meditations. Thirdly, It Is to be supposed
that this lasted'em all their lives. Fourthly, We must suppose they used the
same caution against these expressions, The Bread is changed into the Body of
Jesus Christ, the Body of Jesus Christ is made of Bread, we are nourished with
the Body of Jesus Christ, that the Body of Jesus Christ enters into us, that it
is our strength and our life.

I ANSWER, that supposing the Proposition I stated touching the things, and
usual expressions, were fruitless in respect of the instructions given to the
Catechumenists, and those other expressions mentioned by Mr. Arnaud, yet does
it not hence follow but 'twould be useful in respect of these terms Corpus
Christi which were spoken before to the Communicants at the time wherein the
Eucharist is delivered to 'em. Now it is precisely upon this account I made use
of it, that is to say, to answer the Argument which the Author of the
Perpetuity raised from these words Corpus Christi, which he said represented
the Body of Jesus Christ present on the Altar. I showed then that these words
were not only words of instruction, but likewise of use; the drift of which
were to represent to the Communicants the Body of Christ dead and risen for us.
Mr. Arnaud ought to consider my proposition in reference to the particular end
for which I used it, and not take it loose (as he has done) from the sequel of
my discourse. But it is his custom when he proposes any thing which I mention,
to represent it indirectly, and it is on such kind of proceedings as these
whereon are grounded the greatest part of his objections.

TO confirm the truth of my Proposition, it is not necessary to change any thing
in the Catechisms of the Fathers; there needs only one thing be supposed, which
is not hard to believe, which is, that neither the Catechisms of S. Cyril, nor
those attributed to S. Ambrose, and S. Eucherus, were used as forms of
instructions which were given to persons the first time they Communicated,
seeing the greatest part amongst 'em received their first Communion,
immediately after they were Baptized in their tender years, yea sometimes
whilst at their Mothers Breasts. I confess indeed they were not then taught to
make Mental Prayers, as Mr. Arnaud speaks; and it is also likely they had
neither the Catechisms of S. Ambrose, nor S. Cyril expounded to 'em, as he
pleasantly supposes. And thus Mr. Arnaud's first Observation is absurd.

AS to the Books they read, it is not necessary to say, they cautioned
themselves against the words which they met in 'em, we need only suppose one
thing which is not unlikely. That there were at that time, and are at this day
in the Church several people who could not read, and that amongst such as
could, there were some that read little in the Treatises of the Fathers
concerning the Eucharist, Books not being then so common as they have been
since Printing has been invented, and in fine, that amongst those who did,
there might be some who applied not themselves attentively enough to form in
their minds the question how the Sacrament is our Savior's Body.

AS to private Discourses, if Mr. Arnaud by revelation knows any thing of 'em
we will hear him willingly, in the mean time he will let us suppose, that there have
been always people in the Church, who never set themselves to treat of abstruse
questions of Theology in familiar Colloquies.

AND as to Sermons, seeing Mr. Arnaud pretends they must inspire all persons
with curiosity that hear them, 'twould be just he should tell us, first whether
he believes the Preachers handled always the Eucharist in difficult terms,
sufficient to excite the curiosity of their hearers touching the question how
the Bread is the Body of Jesus Christ. Whether they explained not themselves in
terms clear and easy, which gave no occasion for this question. Secondly,
'Twould be just for him to tell us, whether when they made these difficult
discourses they caused all the Faithful in general to come to 'em, and charged
'em not to fail of forming in their minds the question, How the Bread is the
Body of Jesus Christ. Thirdly, In short it might be expected he should tell us
whether he believes that all the Auditors were of equal capacities to make
reflections on the difficult expressions of the Fathers. For if he does not
suppose these three things, there is little likelihood these expressions he
mentions must have produced the effect in men's minds which he pretends. Perhaps
persons of mean capacities, who yet may be good men (although they have but little
knowledge) in hearing their Preachers would have turned their minds sooner on
the side of easy terms, than that of difficult ones. Perhaps also some of 'em
did let these difficult ways of speaking pass without considering 'em with much
attention, and troubling themselves with questions beyond their reach: and thus
may I suppose the expressions of the Fathers seldom made any deep impression on
them.

Mr. CLAVDE, says Mr. Arnaud, who thinks that the putting of an extravagancy
into mood and figure, is sufficient to make it conclusive and decisive,
proposes us this in an insulting manner. What likelihood, says he, is there
people should proceed to reflections on this mystery to inform themselves
whether it be really Jesus Christ or not? I answer, the question here concerns
the eight first Ages, and what he alleges I said, was meant of the time of the
most gross ignorance, as 'twill appear to him that shall take the pains to see
my words in the proper place whence he has taken them. He has not done fairly
in this matter. For although it be acknowledged that in the time wherein the
Pastors took care to instruct their Flock, there might be some persons who
proceeded not to the question, how the Sacrament was the Body of Jesus Christ?
yet would we not be understood to speak generally of the people of that time,
as if there were no difference between them and those that lived in the time
when ignorance most prevailed.

BUT, says Mr. Arnaud further, There Is nothing more wonderful than the alliance
which Mr. Claude makes in this imaginary order, of two qualities the most
irreconcilable in the world. Every body knows that an high Contemplation does
ordinarily suppose a higher knowledge of Mysteries than is to be expected in the
common sort of the Faithful. Yet it seems the persons of which this rank
consists were on one hand so stupid that they comprehended nothing in the most
ordinary expressions amongst the Christians, although their ears were struck with
'em in a thousand manners; and yet so spiritual on the other, that at the sight
of the Sacrament, or upon the least mention of it, they had immediately their
whole hearts so fixed on the Body of their Savior, that they could not reflect
on the words used in the celebration of the mystery, or popular instructions.

EVERY body knows that to raise up one's devotion to our Savior Christ who
died and rose again for us, it is not necessary to have a very high knowledge of
Mysteries. As the Death of Jesus Christ, and his Resurrection are the most
necessary notions of Christianity, so are they likewise the first; and if a man
be not spiritual enough to send up his Devotions to our Savior, it is certain
he is no Christian. Neither need a man be very knowing to comprehend that the
Sacrament is designed for this use. The whole action of the Eucharist leads the
most simple to this, and the sursum corda which they understood put them in
mind of it. But to make reflections on the expressions of the Fatherr, when
they call the Eucharist the Body of Jesus Christ, or said the Bread was the
Body of Jesus Christ, this requires greater ability and curiosity. As to the
first, which is the lifting up our hearts to our Savior Christ dead and risen,
it needs only be supposed that the persons of this first rank now before us,
had learned their Creed, that they were not ignorant our Savior died and rose
again for us, and knew the Eucharist was intended to make us remember him. Now
there are few Christians but know this. But as to the second, which is to make
reflections on the expressions of the Fathers, it is to be supposed they had
retained the common expressions which their Pastors used in their Sermons or
Books, and because they were many, and very different from one another, some
having no difficulty, and others on the contrary being hard to be understood,
we may imagine they precisely applied themselves to the difficult ones, without
contenting 'emselves with the others: it is likewise to be supposed they had
compared together these two ideas, that of the Sacrament, and that of the Body
of Jesus Christ, and remarkt the differences by a formal act of Meditation. Now
all this requires some application of mind, without which it is very possible
that simple people may remain in the Christian profession. Thus we see what is
become of Mr. Arnaud's first Remark, and whether my supposition touching the
persons of the first rank, ought to be respected as an extravagant and senseless
distinction.

Mr. ARNAVD's second Remark contains, That it is false the use of this
expression Corpus Christi, which was spoken to those who Communicated, was
according to the intention of the Church, to make them meditate on the Body of
Jesus Christ in abstracto; that it is certain on the contrary, that this
formulary Corpus Christi was designed to instruct them in the truth of the
mystery, and exact from 'em the confession of it, so that 'twas a formulary of
Instruction and a profession of Faith, and not of Practice and Action.

THIS discourse has all the characters of a person that finds himself
entangled. What means he by meditating on the Body of Jesus Christ in
abstracto? Is it meditating on his Death, Resurrection, and sitting on the
right hand of the Father? It Is certain that this was the intention of these
words according to the design of the Gospel, as appears by the testimonies
which I alleged from the Author of the Commentaries attributed to S. Hierom,
Primasus an African Bishop, and S. Basil; and this may be confirmed by several
other passages, and by these words of S. Augustine, We call Aug. lib. 3. de
Trin. cap. 4.
Bread and Wine that which being taken from the Fruits of the Earth, and
consecrated by the mystical Prayer, is received by us for the Salvation of of
our souls in remembrance of the Death which our Lord has suffered for our
sakes: And by these of Tatianus, Jesus Christ having taken the Bread and
Tatian. in Diacess.
Wine, testified they were his Body and Blood, and commanded his Disciples to
eat and drink thereof, in remembrance of his approaching Sufferings and Death.
But for this purpose 'twere better to read the words of S. Paul. Every time ye
eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup, ye declare 1 Cor. 11.
the Lords Death till he comes. If by meditating on the Body of Jesus Christ in
abstracto, he means the meditating on it without conceiving it present on the
Altar, it is not sufficient to say it is false, that this was the design of this
formulary, Corpus Christi, according to the intention of the Church, he must
prove that the Church meant by these words to represent this Body present in
its proper substance in the Eucharist, which is what he must prove if he
designs to uphold the Author of the Perpetuity's Argument, and does not think
it sufficient, to say, This is most false.

THIS formulary, says he, was designed to instruct them in the truth of the
mystery: Who doubts it? It was a formulary of use, and instruction both
together, as I plainly intimated in my answer to the Author of the Perpetuity;
It behooves us only to know what is this truth of the mystery in which it
instructs men. 'Twas, says he, moreover a formulary and profession of Faith,
and not of Practice and Action. And I say 'twas both the one and the other. I
have proved 'twas a formulary of Practice, I acknowledge 'twas a formulary of
profession of Faith. But that this Faith of which it required the profession
was the substantial Presence of Jesus Christ in the Sacrament, is what I deny
and what Mr. Arnaud ought to prove. I prove it, says he, by the word Amen which
the Communicants answered. The Amen which the Communicants pronounced,
signifies nothing less than this Presence of substance. The Book of the
Initiated attributed to S. Ambrose draws thence only this conclusion vere
carnis illius Sacramentum est; It is Ambros. de iis qui mist. init. cap. 9.
lib. 4. de Sacr. cap. 3. Aug. Sermon. ad infr. Sermon. de quarta feria.
truly the Sacrament of the Flesh of Jesus Christ. The Author of the Book of
Sacraments, wrongly cited by Mr. Arnaud, under the name of S. Ambrose, refers
it to the Spiritual Communion of Jesus Christ himself, which we have in the
Sacrament. S. Austin refers it to our selves, being made the Body of Jesus
Christ and his Members. The Author of the Treatise of Dressing the Lords Field,
refers it to the Faith of the Death of Jesus Christ, and effusision of his
Blood. Pope Leo refers it to the reality of the humane Nature of Jesus Christ,
against the Error of the Eutichiens. And it signifies nothing for Mr. Arnaud to
offer so earnestly what this Pope says, Hoc ore sumitur quod fide creditur, and
frustra ab illis Amen respondetur a quibus contra id quod accipitur disputatur,
for it is clear enough that these terms signify nothing else but that the
Sacrament which we receive with our mouths, is a declaration and confirmation
of what we ought to believe, to wit, that Jesus Christ has assumed a real
humane Nature, because it is the Sacrament of his real Body which we receive,
and that the Amen which is answered is the Seal of this truth, so that when the
Heretics dispute against it, they dispute against the very Amen which they
pronounce. And this is the sense of Leo, in all which there is no substantial
Presence.

AS to what remains, Mr. Arnaud takes a strange liberty. I told the Author of
the Perpetuity that this formulary Corpus Christi was a formulary of use and
action designed for the stirring up of the Communicants to meditate on the
Death of Jesus Christ, and proved it very clearly by these words of the Author
of the Commentaries attributed to S. Hierom. Our Savior has given us his
Sacramen to the end that by this means we should always remember THAT HE DIED
FOR US, AND THEREFORE WHEN WE RECEIVE IT FROM THE HAND OF THE PRIEST, WE ARE
TOLD THAT IT IS THE BODY AND BLOOD OF JESUS CHRIST; and by those of Primasus,
Every time we do this we ought to remember, THAT JESUS CHRIST DIED FOR US; AND
THEREFORE WE ARE TOLD IT IS THE BODY OF CHRIST, to the end that remembering what
he has done for us we may not be ungrateful. What does Mr. Arnaud hereupon? He
conceals these passages, and concludes from his own authority, That these
notions of use, and this ecstasy of the Soul immediately transported by these
words Corpus Christi to the meditation of the Body of Jesus Christ in
abstracto, are Mr. Claudes Dreams, exactly opposite to the sentiments of the
Fathers, and the Churches intention, and that there is small likelihood the
faithful would depart from them to dive immediately into these kind of
Meditations.

IT IS certain Mr. Arnaud can conquer when he pleases, he suppresses my
Arguments, recites my words in a contrary sense, turns things into ridicule,
and flourishes all this over with passionate expressions. But proceed we to his
third remark.

IT affirms I conclude nothing tho the false Principle on which I ground Page
573.
my Arguments were supposed a true one. Although, says he, 'twere true that these
words Corpus Christi were not designed by the Church to instruct the Faithful,
but only to excite in them certain inward motions, and set them on meditating
upon the Body of Jesus Christ; yet this intention of the Church hindered 'em
from understanding the sense of these words: and 'twould be still ridiculous to
suppose, that these ignorant persons should so immediately enter upon the
practice of these inward motions, that they could not understand the terms
which the Church made use of to excite them.

I ANSWER, Mr. Arnaud charges me with two things unjustly, the first, That I
affirm this Formulary was not designed by the Church to instruct the Faithful,
but only to excite internal motions in them, which I never imagined: I affirmed
expressly the contrary, as may be seen by whosoever shall consult that part of
my answer noted in the Margin. There Is Answer to the second Treatise of the
Perpetuity part 2. chapter 2. page 259. In Quarto Edit.
little sincerity in this imputation; and as little in charging me with a
conclusion which I do not draw, and in suppressing that which I do. I do not
conclude the intention of the Church which designed these terms, Corpus Christi
to excite inward motions in the Souls of the Communicants, should hinder them
from understanding the sense of these words. I know that as the use which is
made of things does not hinder but we may consider the nature of 'em if we
will, so that which is made of words does not hinder a man from examining their
sense. But, I say, there are several persons who stop at the bare notion of use
without going farther, and thence I concluded it may be well supposed that in
the ancient Church there were several persons who hearing the words Corpus
Christi when they Communicated, applied themselves only to the practice of the
inward affections of devotion, which these terms excited, without going any
farther, and making reflection on what the terms, being applied to the
Sacrament signified. Let any man now judge, whether my supposition be
ridiculous, extravagant and senseless, as Mr. Arnaud would make people believe;
or whether it is not rather by a spirit of contradiction that Mr. Arnaud has
taken upon him to refute it.

IT may also be here confider'd by the way, whether he has had reason to call
absurd the notion I instanced touching light, when I said our conceptions about
it every morning are not under the idea of a body or accident, or motion of
air, but under the idea of a thing which serves us and leads us forth to
labor. And this I think is the sense of the greatest part of the world, and
perhaps of Mr. Arnaud too if he would speak his mind, there being few persons
who think when the day begins to appear, or withdraw, of conceiving the light
under the notions which Philosophy offers, be they what they will. At least I
have the anonimous Author of the Discourse containing several reflections on
the modern Philosophy of Mr. Des Carts on my side, for he freely acknowledges,
That this idea is such in effect as Mr. Claude supposes it in every workman,
just as the workman says, that when the light of the day fails him, he had
rather have the light of the Lamp than that of the Candle, for this or that
kind of work.

CHAP. III.
A Defense of the second, third, and fourth Rank of persons against the
Objections of Mr. Arnaud.

THE first rank of persons being defended against Mr. Arnaud's subtilties, it
now concerns us to examine his Objections against the three others, but to do it
with greater brevity: I shall not trouble my self with his useless words, but
as to matters of moment I shall not pass by any of 'em.

THE second rank is of those that proceeded so far as the question, how this
visible Bread, this subject called Sacrament, is the Body of Jesus Christ; but
finding an inconsistency in the terms, their minds settled on the only
difficulty without undertaking to solve it.

Mr. ARNAVD says, That the Fathers have not known these kind of Lib. 6. chapter 7.
page 575.
people; he means they have not mentioned them in their Writings. But supposing
the Fathers never knew 'em, does Mr. Arnaud believe the Fathers must needs know
or expound all the several manners of taking things, which were practiced by
all particular persons? Had they nothing else to do but to make general
inventories of men's fancies, to find out and denote distinctly the strength or
weakness of each individual person. If he imagins it is a sufficient reason to
affirm there were not any persons in the ancient Church, who finding great
difficulty in this proposition, that the Bread is the Body of Jesus Christ,
stuck here without undertaking to clear the point, to say the Fathers have
known none of this kind, he must acknowledge at the same time that there were
none likewise that took these words in this sense, That the substance of Bread
is changed into the substance of the Body of Jesus Christ. For I maintain that
the Fathers have not known any of these kind of people, never spoke of 'em,
never offered 'em as an example to doubters, nor declared that this was the
true sense of their expressions. Neither can it be answered, that if they have
not mentioned 'em, 'twas because all the Faithful took them in this sense. For
Mr. Arnaud confesses himself, It Is probable Lib. 6. chapter 1. page 529.
that the belief of the Faithful has been ever clear and distinct on the
subject of the Real Presence, and that they have ever known whether what was
given them was or was not the Body of Jesus Christ, although they knew not always
so expressly and universally whether the Bread did or did not remain in the
Sacrament. Any man may see what means such an acknowledgment from Mr. Arnaud, I
repeat it here again, that it is possible the Faithful did not always so
expressly and universally know whether the Bread remains or not in the
Sacrament, which is without doubt at this time a very considerable
acknowledgment. But not to extend it further than the terms will bear, we may
at least conclude thence that the Fathers ought to suppose there were persons
who probably would not take these words, The Bread is the Body of Jesus Christ,
in this sense, The substance of the Bread is changed into the substance of the
Body of Jesus Christ: and hereupon may be asked why they have not observed the
exactness and quickness of understanding in the one, to deliver the rest from
the ignorance wherein Mr. Arnaud acknowledges they may have been.

AGAIN, who told Mr. Arnaud that the Fathers knew not at least in general there
might be persons who met with difficulty in this question, How the Bread can be
the Body of Jesus Christ, because of the inconsistency of the terms of Bread
and Body? This is the difficulty S. Austin proposes in express terms on behalf
of persons newly Baptized, in a Sermon he preached to 'em. How, says he, is the
Bread his Body, and the Wine his Blood? Sermon. ad i^s.
The same difficulty is proposed by Theophylact, Let no body be troubled, says
Theophyl. in Joan. 6.
he, that he must believe Bread to be Flesh. This was the difficulty which the
Fathers were willing to prevent or resolve by this great number of passages
which explain in what sense we must understand the Bread to be the Body of
Jesus Christ, to wit, because it is the Symbol of it, the sign or figure, the
Sacrament of it, because there is some kind of proportion between Bread and
Body, etc. as I showed in my Answer to the Author of the Perpetuity. Now what
were all these explications for but to help those that were perplexed with these
ways of speaking, The Bread is the Body of Jesus Christ, the Bread is made the
Body of Jesus Christ, and who for want of such assistance might make thereof a
rock of offense.

NEITHER need Mr. Arnaud make so many exclamations, How Lib. 6. cap. 7. p. 575.
should those people discern the Body of our Savior, who were not solicitous
to know him, and that the Eucharist bore its name? What Devotion could they
have for this mystery, seeing Devotion supposes Instruction? Although they knew
not how 'twas meant the Bread was the Body, yet did not this hinder 'em from
having a respect for our Savior's Body, from having a real Devotion,
considering that our Lord was dead and risen for 'em, unless according to Mr.
Arnaud it be no real Devotion to meditate on the Death and Resurrection of
Christ. Neither did this hinder 'em from receiving with great respect the Bread
and Wine, as pledges and remembrances of our Lords Body and Blood. For it is not
impossible for persons to know the Eucharist to be a remembrance of the Body
and Blood of Jesus Christ, and that also the Bread and Wine are said to be the
Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, without knowing that the first of these
expressions is the cause of the second, which is to say, that the Bread and
Wine are said to be this Body and Blood, because they are the memorials and
pledges of it.

BUT, says Mr. Arnaud, This laziness which makes the character of this Page 576.
second order, would last their whole life, and not only some little space of
time. That it would do so, we never told Mr. Arnaud, it is his addition. 'Twas a
lazyness in a matter of the greatest concernment. I confess it is very important
to make a good use of the Sacrament, which is what I suppose these persons did;
but when a man shall find difficulty in knowing how the Bread is the Body of
Jesus Christ, and knows not how to solve it, we must not therefore despair of
his salvation. This, says he again, is a laziness from which a man may be freed
by the least question offered to a Priest or Laick that is knowing, by the
instructions which the Pastors gave to those that were admitted to the
Communion, and by those they every day gave to the people concerning this
mystery. It Is true they might be freed from it by a thousand expressions of the
Fathers, which denoted the Bread and Wine are called the Body and Blood of
Jesus Christ by an exchange of names which is made between the signs and the
things signified. But we are not wont to do every thing immediately which we
can do; and it is not to be denied but several were freed from it by this means;
but this does not hinder but that we may reasonably conceive a rank of persons
who had not of 'emselves sufficient knowledge to clear this difficulty.

Mr. ARNAVD earnestly demands of us, Why these people did not Page 577, 578.
understand the Bread to be the Body of Jesus Christ in a sense of
Transubstantiation, or in a sense of Consubstantiation, rather than to take
them in this sense, that the Bread remaining Bread was the Body of Jesus
Christ; seeing the sense of Transubstantiation has been followed by all
Christians since six hundred years; and that of Consubstantiation has been
embraced by the Lutherans: whereas the last sense has been followed by no body,
and as yet never entered into any man's thoughts. I answer in two words, 'twas
because neither Transubstantiation, nor Consubstantiation were then found out,
and that these persons we speak of had not Philosophy enough to invent 'em
themselves. They followed nature, which will not suffer us to take otherwise
this proposition, if we understand it literally, than by conceiving the
ordinary idea of real Bread, and the common notion of a real Body; that is to
say two inconsistent ideas. Moreover, not to insist upon what Mr. Arnaud says,
that the sense of Transubstantiation has been followed by all Christians for
this six hundred years; after what has been seen hitherto we may judge what
truth there is in this proposition. Neither do I at present mind what he says,
that the last sense has been followed by no body: this is as little ture as the
rest. Rupert held the assumption of the Bread, John of Paris has openly
asserted it; not to mention here that the true opinion of the Greek Church
since Damascen is, that the Bread remaining Bread is the Body of Jesus Christ
by the union of the Divinity, and by way of augmentation of the Body of Jesus
Christ. But when there is occasion to deny or affirm things, Mr. Arnaud is
always at his liberty.

I SAID that these persons of the second rank of whom we now speak, finding
great inconsistency in these terms, Bread and Body of Jesus Christ, found no
sense in this proposition, The Bread is the Body of Jesus Christ, and that it
appeared to them unintelligible. Mr. Arnaud says hereupon, That when two
inconsistent notions are affirmed one of another, we learn three things. 1,
These two notions affirmed, that is to say, the notion of each one of the
terms. 2. The affirmation which is made of 'em. 3. The falsity and
impossibility of this affirmation, and that if this proposition is of a person
to whom we cannot attribute a falsity, we have a fourth knowledge, which is,
that this impossible affirmation is not the sense which the Author of the
proposition had in his mind. I grant this. But I grant not the consequence he
would draw hence, that one knows an inconsistent sense; for that which he calls
an inconsistent sense is not a sense. We know an inconsistency, a mutual
repugnancy of terms which cannot be reconciled; but we do not conceive a sense.
Mr. Arnaud says, That this Philosophy surpasses his understanding, and seems to
him to contain a manifest falsity. We must then endeavor to explain it to him,
and make him acknowledge the truth of it. And for this effect it must be
supposed that we speak here of an affirmative proposition, The Bread is the
Body of Jesus Christ; that we speak of persons who respected the three terms of
which this proposition consists, according to their literal signification,
conceiving the common idea of Bread, the common idea of a human Body, and
taking the term est in a sense of being real. This being supposed, I say, that
in respect of an affirmative proposition, a sense is a notion which unites two
ideas, and in which a man's mind may acquiesce, either in deceiving or not
deceiving it self; if it be not deceived, it is a real sense, if it be it is a
false sense. The knowledge of an inconsistency is on the contrary a notion that
so separates two ideas, that it makes them oppose and overthrow one another,
and declares them irreconcilable. Now it is not to be imagined that a man can
reconcile in his mind two ideas which his understanding judges to be absolutely
repugnant. To conceive a sense, is to conceive a thing possible, to conceive an
inconsistency is to conceive that there is therein an impossibility; to
conceive a sense is to conceive a state wherein the mind or understanding may
subsist; whereas to conceive an inconsistency, is to conceive that there is not
there a state wherein the mind can subsist. It is then certain, as I said, that
an inconsistency is not a sense, and that it is to speak abusively to say an
inconsistent sense; for this is as much as to say a sense which is not a sense,
a sense is a notion which unites two ideas, and an inconsistency disunites
them. All Mr. Claudes subtilty, Page 580.
or rather deceit, says Mr. Arnaud, lies in that he does not distinguish
between a conceived and an expressed sense, and a sense believed and approved
of. It Is certain that those who find a proposition includes an inconsistency
according to the letter, and see no other sense therein, do approve no other;
but it is not true that they conceive no other sense therein, for they conceive
an inconsistent sense, which is to say, that they conceive only inconsistent
terms are therein affirmed, and therefore disapprove of 'em, and conclude from
the inconsistency of this sense, that this is not the sense of the proposition
of the Scripture and the Church.

BUT Mr. Arnaud's Philosophy has given here a false stroke; for, fot to say
that a man conceives an inconsistent sense, is to speak absurdly. We must
distinguish between those that offer an inconsistent proposition, and these
that judge it inconsistent. Those that offer it, do not always see the
inconsistency of the terms, either because they conceive them under respects
wherein the inconsistency does not discover it self, or because they conceive
them confusedly, and in such a manner wherein they hide from themselves the
contradiction, and then those that judge of their proposition enter into their
thoughts, and conceive the sense which the others have imagined to be possible,
although in effect it be not. They suspend a while their own judgments, to put
themselves in the place of others, and by this means conceive this apparent
possibility which has deceived them. But this is not to conceive an
inconsistent sense, but on the contrary a sense that appears consistent and
reasonable to abused persons, although at bottom it be otherwise. Whilst a man
judges of it according to the false lights of these persons, he calls it a
sense, because his mind acquiesces therein, as seeing nothing therein
impossible, but as soon as he judges of it upon the account of the
inconsistency of the terms, it is no longer a sense, it is a mere contradiction
that has no sense, and which is unintelligible. I confess, that as men's minds
are subject to fearful capricio's, it sometimes happens that they advance
propositions, wherein contradictions are so evident that they must needs have
seen 'em themselves: such as is that of this Philsosopher mentioned by Mr.
Arnaud, who affirmed, That if God pleased, two and two should not be four: but
in this case it is requisite to say that these persons impose on the world, and
understand not themselves what they say. For, for to say that a man can make to
himself a sense of a contradiction, when it appears to him to be a
contradiction, that he can unite two ideas, by affirming one of the other at
the same time, wherein he sees they cannot be accorded; that is to say, that he
can persuade himself that a thing is possible, even then when it seems to him
to be impossible. If this be Mr. Arnaud's Philosophy, he must Philosophise by
himself for me.

IT IS then clear, I had reason to say, that this second rank of persons, which
I supposed in the ancient Church, who found inconsistency in the terms of this
proposition, The Bread is the Body of Jesus Christ, conceived properly no sense
at all in it. For as to their parts they could not find any in it, seeing the
proposition to them seemed inconsistent. Neither could their Pastors help 'em,
seeing it is laid down for a maxim, that they knew not in what sense the Fathers
understood it. But, says Mr. Arnaud, not knowing Page 580.
any other way to make the Eucharist to be the Body of Jesus Christ, they must
make an entire separation of the Bread and Body, and absolutely deny the
presence and existence of Jesus Christ in the Bread, which is rejecting the
Real Presence. I answer that this is not a good conclusion, the persons of
which we speak found no sense in the proposition, The Bread is the Body of
Jesus Christ, the two ideas of Bread and Body appeared to them inconsistent,
they knew no other means of making the Bread to be the Body, I grant, but
seeing 'twas a proposition of their Pastors, whom they would not charge with
falsity; and being taught it as from the authority of Jesus Christ himself,
it is not to be doubted but they acknowledged in general that it must have a
good sense, although they knew not which was this good sense; and therefore I said
in my answer to the Perpetuity, that their minds stopped at the only difficulty,
without undertaking to resolve it. It Is fruitless to enquire whether they
rejected by a positive judgment the unity of these two substances Bread and
Body, or whether their minds hung in suspense, notwithstanding what appeared to
'em from the inconsistency of the terms. I have not attributed to them this
rejection, as Mr. Arnaud says I have, in impertinently transferring what I said
of them, who went as far as the Sacramental sense, to those of this second
rank, who proceeded not so far. But whether they formally rejected this unity
of two substances, or only suspended their judgments, it is clear they neither
rejected Transubstantiation, nor Consubstantiation; for neither one nor the
other of these two opinions establishes the unity of these two substances Bread
and Body, in the sense we understand it here, that is to say, by affirming that
the Bread remaining Bread is the Body of Jesus Christ. They may have denied the
Real Presence in this last sense, that is to say, judged that the Bread
remaining Bread, cannot be the Body of Jesus Christ; but as to other ways since
found out to make the Bread to be the Body, having no knowledge of 'em, they
could not reject them. They rejected (if you will) the unity of the two
substances, they conceived no sense in this expression, the Bread is the Body
of Jesus Christ; yet they acknowledged it must have a good and a true one,
although they knew not in particular which that was, they carried off their minds
from this difficulty, but in all this they conceived no distinct notice either
of Transubstantiation or Consubstantiation.

IN vain does Mr. Arnaud endeavor to persuade us, That the natural Page 583.
idea of these words, The Bread is the Body of Jesus Christ, in explaining them
in the usual manner was, that appearing Bread 'twas not so, but the very Body
of Jesus Christ, and that it is a renouncing all the lights of reason to pretend
that this so common, true, and authorized sense by custom never entered into the
thoughts of any man during eight hundred years. All this signifies nothing,
seeing his pretended sense is contrary to nature, the question concerning Bread
which a man sees, and which all the notices of sense and reason assure to be
Bread, these same notices do not inform us that it is not Bread, or that it is
only an appearance of it. The question likewise concerning a Body which we know
is in Heaven, and which is like unto that which we have, the notices of reason
urge not a man to understand that this Body is there under the appearance of
Bread. So that should we suppose that during eight hundred years this sense
entered not into any bodies thoughts, we shall suppose nothing but what is very
natural and reasonable. But, says Mr. Page 582.
Arnaud, when Raphael led young. Toby, if any one that knew who he was should
say, this Man whom you see is an Angel, Toby would not have imagined that he
was both Man and Angel too; but easily conceive he meant only, that appearing
Man he was really an Angel. But does not Mr. Arnaud consider that this example
is quite different from our case? When the Angels appeared under the form of
men, there was always some sensible character that distinguished them, and
easily showed there was something more than natural in 'em. There Is nothing
like this in the Bread, the apparition of Angels in a humane shape, was very
frequent under the old Testament, and Toby was instructed in his infancy in the
belief of this. This apparition of the Body of Jesus Christ under the form of
Bread was unheard of in the Church. We know that an Angel leaves Heaven, when
he comes to appear on Earth in a humane shape; whereas we know on the contrary
that the Body of Jesus Christ is so in Heaven that it will not leave that place
till the last Judgment. We know an Angel is of a spiritual nature, and a man
consults not his eyes to know whether he is present or not; but we know that
the Body of Jesus Christ is of a sensible nature, the object of our sight and
feeling. Had then any one said to Toby, This man whom you see is an Angel,
perhaps Toby had taken this proposition in Mr. Arnaud's sense, because he would
have been led to it, by what I now come from representing touching the
appearance of Angels. But suppose as we ought to suppose in this place of our
dispute a man that knows not as yet the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, nor that
of Consubstantiation; that knows not the Principles of it, that never heard of
it, nor of an appearance of Bread without its substance, nor of a humane Body,
impalpable, invisible, and existent in several places at a time; and moreover,
knows that the Body of Jesus Christ is in Heaven. Let this man be told the
Bread is the Body of Jesus Christ, it is certain that the light of reason will
never lead him to this violent explication, That that which appears Bread, and
is not, is the very Body of Jesus Christ in substance. As to the rest, Mr.
Arnaud ought not to abuse several passages of Calvin, Beza, and Zuinglius
disputing against those called Lutherans. Their sense is, that if these words,
this is my Body, may be literally understood, we must rather admit the sense of
the Roman Church than that of the Lutherans. But it does not hence follow that
the sense of the Roman Church is the most natural one, nor that the people must
find it of themselves; this consequence does not any ways follow.

SO that here are two of the ranks of persons which I asserted delivered from
the unjust pursuits of Mr. Arnaud: The third, says he, is less troublesome Book
6. ch 8. page 586.
than the others. Why? Because, adds he, it consists only of persons that
believed the Real Presence, and had a distinct Faith of it? This rank is of
those, who going as far as the question, How the Sacrament is the Body of Jesus
Christ? proceeded also to the solution of it; but their minds stopped at general
terms, as that Jesus Christ is present to us in the Sacrament, and that we
receive therein his Body and Blood without searching a greater light. It Is
certain, says Mr. Arnaud, there might be in effect faithful persons in the
ancient Church that penetrated no farther into this Mystery than barely to
believe that Jesus Christ is therein present, and that we receive therein his
Body and Blood. God be praised that we have at length once said something which
Mr. Arnaud does not contradict. And to return him the same kindness do tell
him, that what he grants here does not at all displease me. For this plainly
shows there were faithful people in the ancient Church that knew nothing of
Transubstantiation, but conceived only a Presence of Jesus Christ in the
Sacrament, and a reception of his Body and Blood under a general notion: yet
Mr. Arnaud pretends that this notion, how general soever it might be, was
distinctly the Real Presence. Which is what I deny, and must examine. The
question is then only whether these persons believed distinctly the Real
Presence, he pretends it and I deny it.

THEY knew, says Mr. Arnaud, neither the key of Figure, nor the key of Page 587.
Virtue, according to the Hypothesis it self. So that neither the presence of
Virtue, nor the presence of figure came into their thoughts. I grant it. What
presence then could they conceive but the Real Presence, but the Real
Reception? And why must they have given to these words another sense than that
which they naturally have? This is ill concluded. They would have conceived a
confused and general idea of Presence without descending to a particular and
precise distinction. I confess it is very hard for persons that have their
sight, and never so little of common sense, not to acknowledge that the Body of
Jesus Christ is not in the Eucharist in this ordinary and corporeal manner, by
which a body is naturally in one place: and I am sufficiently persuaded that
those persons in question could not come so far as to enquire how the Eucharist
is the Body of Jesus Christ, without conceiving the idea of his visible and
sensible Presence to reject it: but we shall suppose nothing that is
unreasonable, in saying that in carrying off their thoughts from this corporeal
Existence, they conceived it present under a very confused notion; for it is a
usual thing with persons that are unlearned, to consider things in a confused
manner; and therefore we commonly see they cannot express themselves otherwise
than in certain obscure and general terms, which do never well show what they
have in their minds. It cannot be denied but this kind of confused ideas are
usual among people. But Mr. Arnaud must not imagine that these persons of whom
we speak believed the substantial Presence of the Body of Jesus Christ in the
Sacrament, for rejecting the idea of the corporal Presence, as it is likely they
did by the very instinct of nature, to maintain they believed a substantial
Presence, we must suppose either that they had the idea of another manner of
substantial presence of a body than the corporeal one, or at least that they
knew there was some other which was not less a substantial Presence than the
corporeal one, although they knew it not. Now of these two suppositions the first
is acknowledged to be false by Mr. Arnaud himself, and the second is wholly
contrary to reason; for who should inform them there was another manner of a
substantial presence of a body than a corporeal one? Nature shows us no other,
the expressions of their Pastors mentioned no other; whence then must they have
it? It must then be said they had a confused idea of another manner of presence
than the substantial one, they beheld it in the expressions of their Pastors,
felt it in the motions of their Consciences; but to denote precisely what that
was, was what they could not otherwise do than by general terms of presence,
reception, and such like. Now this was in effect to believe not a substantial
Presence, but a Presence of union, a Presence of salutary efficacy, in
reference to the Soul, although they comprehended it not in its full distinction.

THE fourth rank is of those who after they had been puzzled with the
inconsistency of the terms of Bread and Body of Jesus Christ, found the real
knot of this difficulty, to wit, that the Bread is the Sacrament, the memorial
and pledge of the holy Body of our Redeemer. They found it, says Mr. Arnaud,
because it pleases Mr. Claude to suppose so, but 'twas after a long search. My
supposition contains nothing but what we see happens every day in the world.
It Is certain there are persons who be full of doubts, this is no wonder, and we
find 'em not so easily freed from them; they esteem themselves happy when after
a long search they get them resolved. What extraordinary matter is there then
in this supposition.

BUT whilst they were in search of it, and could not find it, adds Mr. Arnaud,
dares Mr. Claude say their minds were not smitten with any idea of the Real
Presence by all the passages and instructions of the Fathers. They never knew
of any key of Virtue, or Figure, how then understood they the words of the
Fathers which assured them that the Lamb of God is present on the Eucharistical
Table; that the Bread appearing Bread was not so, but the Body of Jesus Christ;
that we drink the immortal Blood of Jesus Christ; that the Blood of Jesus
Christ is added to ours; that it enters into us; that this single Body, which
is distributed to so many thousands is entire in each of 'em; that it is the
Body and Blood of Jesus Christ in truth; that we must not doubt of it, seeing
he has said so himself; that although what we see has nothing like to a human
body, yet none refuse to believe what Christ himself has asserted to be true;
that the Bread is changed into the very Body of Jesus Christ; that the Bread is
made the Body of Jesus Christ by the ineffable operation of the Holy Spirit;
that we must not look for the usual course of nature in the Body of Jesus
Christ. Mr. Claude cannot defend himself from these passages, but by applying
to 'em his keys of Virtue and Figure, and enduring a thousand vexatious
oppositions. Now these persons being strangers to these inventions, conceived
the literal idea of these words, they conceived that Jesus Christ entered into
us, that 'twas not Bread, but the Body of Jesus Christ, that 'twas not to be
questioned; that they ought to give their senses the lie: and thus during all
the time of this search, they had maugre Mr. Claude, the Real Presence still in
their minds.

TO make this arguing good, there must be several things supposed, which Mr.
Arnaud himself will not approve to be reasonable. First, we must suppose that
those of this fourth rank now in question, had either heard a great part of the
Fathers preach, which the Roman Church alleges in her own favor as well
Greeks as Latins of several Ages, or read almost all their Writings concerning
the Eucharist; for what Mr. Arnaud now recited to us is a rhapsody of several
expressions to be found here and there in Gelasius of Cyzique, Cyril of
Jerusalem, Chrysostom; Cyril of Alexandria, Gregory of Nysse, Hesychius,
Gaudencius, Epiphany, Damascen and Ambrose. Secondly, We must suppose they made
an exact collection of all these expressions of the Fathers which Mr. Arnaud
abuses, and put them altogether to make a better survey of them, and grounded
thereupon their difficulty. Thirdly, We must suppose that those of this fourth
rank did all the same thing, or at least, communicated this rhapsody to one
another, to behold therein all of 'em the Real Presence during the time of
their doubting. Fourthly, We must suppose they took care to collect nothing
that might carry off their minds from the Real Presence, or offer 'em contrary
objects.

LET Mr. Arnaud consider, if he pleases, that those of this fourth rank now in
question are a middle sort of people, whom we suppose to be persons of small
reading, or study, who were not capable of making either for themselves or
fellows, collections of difficult passages, but only heard their Pastors say
that the Bread of the Eucharist is the Body of Jesus Christ, or is made the
Body of Jesus Christ. For when we suppose persons that knew all these
expressions of the Fathers proposed by Mr. Arnaud, and that have collected 'em,
'twill be just to suppose likewise they were not ignorant that the Fathers
taught also, That what we see on the Altar is Bread and Wine, creatures and
fruits of the Earth; that they are signs and mystical symbols of the Body and
Blood of Jesus Christ; that these symbols leave not their own nature, but
remain in their first substance; that our Savior Christ has honored them with
the name of his Body and Blood, not in changing their nature, but in adding
grace to their nature; that Jesus Christ as he is God is every where, but as
Man is in Heaven; that his Body must be in one place; that when his Flesh was
on Earth it was not in Heaven, and that being now in Heaven, it is not
certainly upon Earth; that the Bread is not properly his Body, nor the Wine his
Blood, but so called, inasmuch as they contain the mystery of 'em; that our
Savior has made an exchange of names, having given to his Body the name of
Symbol; that he has called the Bread his Body, to the end we might know that he
whose Body the Prophet had anciently figured by Bread, has now given to Bread
the figure of his Body. By this means when Mr. Arnaud pretends the former
passages gave the idea of a Real Presence, I may pretend likewise that these
last mentioned carried the same persons off from it, and led 'em to a
Sacramental sense. But as I said, it is not needful to put them of this fourth
rank upon collecting passages out of the Fathers on either hand, seeing we
suppose they were only meanly instructed in points of Religion.

TO finish this Chapter, and the defense of the second, third, and fourth ranks
of persons which I supposed were in the ancient Church, we have only to answer
in few words an objection which Mr. Arnaud has proposed in his tenth Chapter,
which respects these three ranks in general; I mean the second, third, and
fourth: which objection consists in this, That there being two sorts of doubts,
the one in which a man understands and conceives a thing, but knows not whether
it be or be not, whether it is possible or impossible; as when a man doubts
whether Beasts think, whether our blood circulates in the body; others wherein
a man knows not what makes the doubt; as when one doubts of the causes of the
flux and reflux of the Sea, or of the sense of a passage of Scripture, when the
sense which appears is false, and yet a man sees no other: there is this
difference between these two ways of doubting that in the first, there is no
need to have the thing explained to us, it is sufficient we have proofs given us
of it. But the second which includes an ignorance of the manner, necessarily
requires an explication. That the doubt or ignorance which Mr. Claude
attributes to three of the ranks, which compose his system, is of this second
kind, that is to say one of these doubts which have need of information and
explication of the manner of the thing, being the persons in question were
offended at the inconsistency of these terms, Bread and Body, and knew not how
it could be true, that the Bread was the Body of Jesus Christ, or changed into
the Body of Jesus Christ; so that their ignorance could not be cured, but by
showing 'em the manner in which the Bread might be the Body of Jesus Christ, to
wit, in Figure aed Virtue. In the mean time the doubt against which the Fathers
have pretended to fortify the Faithful is removed by the same Fathers by
confirming and several times repeating that the Eucharist is the Body of Jesus
Christ without the addition of an explication of Figure, or Virtue. Whence it
follows, that the doubt they would take away is not in any wise that which Mr.
Claude attributes to three of his ranks. For his doubt requires not proofs but
illustrations, that is to say, the question is not to prove the Eucharist to be
the Body of Jesus Christ, but to explain in what sense this is true. Now in all
the passages of the Fathers wherein they mention a doubt, they are only
solicitous to prove that the Eucharist is the Body of Jesus Christ, without any
elucidation, and they prove it by these words, Hoc est corpus meum: or by
these, Panis quem ego dabo caro mea est, or by the diverse examples of the Power
of God, the Creation of the world, the Miracles of the Prophets, and by that of
the Incarnation.

I PRETEND not to examine here all the parts of this discourse, 'twill be
sufficient to make some remarks which will clearly discover the impertinency of
it. First, The division Mr. Arnaud makes of the doubts is insufficient for the
subject we are upon; for he should again subdivide into two, the second kind of
doubt, and say that sometimes those that doubt in being ignorant of the causes
or manner of the thing, yet do nevertheless acknowledge the truth of the thing
it self, and hold it for certain, although they know not how it is. Thus when a
man doubts of the causes of the flux, or reflux of the Sea, he yet believes
that this flux and reflux is true. When Divines doubt of the manner after which
God knows contingent matters, this hinders 'em not from believing he knows
them; and when they doubt concerning the manner in which the three persons
exist, in one and the same essence, this does not hinder them from believing
that they do exist. But sometimes the ignorance of the manner makes people
doubt of the truth of the thing it self. Thus Nestorius not being able to
comprehend how the two Natures make but one Person in Jesus Christ, doubted of
this truth, that there were in Jesus Christ two Natures and one Person; and not
only doubted of it, but denied it. Thus Pelagius, because he could not
understand how Grace operates inwardly on the hearts of the Faithful rejected
this operation. We may call this first doubt a doubt proceeding from mere
ignorance, and the second a doubt of incredulity. Secondly, Mr. Arnaud takes no
notice that the doubt which arises from the inconsistency of these terms, Bread
and Body, so far prevailed in the minds of some, as to make 'em doubt of the
truth it self of these words. How can this be, said they, seeing we see Bread
and Wine, and not Flesh and Blood, Who will doubt, Cyril Hieros. Catech. mist.
1.
says Cyril of Jerusalem, and say, it is not his Blood? You will tell me,
perhaps, says the Author of the Book, De Initiatis, I see quite another thing,
how will you persuade me I receive the Body of Jesus Christ. And the same kind
of doubt we have observed among the Greeks of the 11th. Century in Theophylact,
Quomodo inquit? caro non videtur: and in the 12th. in Nicolas Methoniensis; for
he entitles his Book, Against those that doubt and say the Consecrated Bread
and Wine are not the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ. Perhaps, says he,
you doubt, and do not believe, because you see not Flesh and Blood, but Bread
and Wine. Thirdly, Mr. Arnaud takes notice, that when we have to do with these
kind of doubters, who will not acknowledge the truth of the thing it self,
because they are ignorant of the manner of it, we usually take several ways to
persuade them; sometimes we confirm the thing it self, without expounding to
'em the manner, although it be the ignorance of the manner which makes them doubt
of the thing. Thus our Savior seeing the doubt of the Capernaits, How can he
give us his flesh to eat? did not set about explaining the manner of this
manducation to 'em, but opposes 'em by a reiterated affirmation of what he had
told 'em. Verily, verly, says he, if you eat not the Flesh of the Son of man
and drink his Blood, you will have no life in you, etc. Sometimes the
explication of the thing and the manner of it are joined together; and thus our
Savior dealt with the doubt of Nicodemus, How can a man be born when he is
old; can he enter again into his Mothers womb and be born? Verily, verily, says
our Savior, I say unto you, unless a man be born of Water and of the Spirit,
he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. These words do at the same time both
confirm and explain. But when we have to do with doubters that are only
ignorant of the manner without calling into question the truth of the thing,
then we usually explain only the manner without confirming any more the thing,
because this alone is sufficient to instruct them; and it is thus the Angel
bespeaks the Virgin: How, said she, can this be, for I know not a man? The Holy
Spirit, says he, shall come upon thee, and the virtue of the most high shall
overshadow thee; therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of thee,
shall be called the Son of God.

TO apply these things to the present occasion, I say the Fathers had to do
with two sorts of Doubters; the one who were only ignorant of the manner, how
the Bread is, or is made the Body of Jesus Christ? but yet who held the
proposition to be true, although they knew not the sense of it: and they are those
that make up the third, second, and fourth ranks in my Answer to the
Perpetuity: others who went so far as to call in question the truth of the
proposition under pretense they understood not the manner of it. As to these
last, supposing the Fathers contented themselves with sometimes confirming
their proposition by the words of Jesus Christ, who is Truth it self, it must
not be thought strange; the nature of the doubt led 'em to this: yet is it true
they have always added to the confirmation of the thing, the explication of the
manner, as may be apparently justified by several passages which we have
elsewhere cited. But when they had only to do with the first sort of Doubters,
then they contented themselves with explaining the manner, without pressing the
truth of the words. Thus does S. Austin, (after he had proposed the doubt of
those that were newly Baptized, How is the Bread his Body, and the Wine his
Blood?) make this answer, My Brethren, these things are called Sacraments,
because that which we Sermon. ad inf.
see is one thing, and that which we hear another; what we see has corporeal
species, but what we hear has a spiritual fruit. To this end do all the
passages of the Fathers tend which declare how the Bread is the Body of Jesus
Christ, to wit, or because it is the Sacrament of it, the sign and figure, or
because it stands for it, or because it communicates it to us, or because
Christ changes it into the efficacy of his Flesh; and those which term it the
typical Body, the symbolical Body, the mystical Body, and those that attribute
to the words of Christ a Sacramental or figurative sense; for these are as so
many explications of the manner which serve to clear up the doubt in question.

Mr. ARNAVD's illusion then is a double one* for on one hand what ought to be
referred to one kind of doubt, he refers to another: what refers to the doubt
of incredulity which respects the truth of the words, he refers to the simple
doubt of ignorance which consists only in not knowing the manner how the Bread
is the Body of Jesus Christ: and this illusion is grounded on the imperfect
division which he has made of the doubts. On the other hand he suppresses
whatsoever the Fathers have said in order to the explaining in what sense the
Sacrament is the Body of Jesus Christ, and offers only what they have said to
confirm that it is so. As to the passages he proposes, he shows but small
sincerity in telling us the Fathers add no explication of figure or virtue; for
the greatest part of those he alleges speak either of the Type, or Figure, or
Sacrament, or spiritual Understanding, or Virtue. Cyril of Jerusalem speaks of
the type of Bread, and of the type of Wine. The Author of the Treatise De
Initiatis concludes that it is the Sacrament of the Flesh of Jesus Christ.
Gaudencius says, That the Bread is the figure of the Body of Jesus Christ.
Chrysostom says that God gives us in the Sacrament the intelligible or
spiritual things by means of sensible. And Hesychius recommends to our
consideration the virtue of the Mystery, and spiritual understanding of it.

CHAP. IV.
Defense of the Fifth Rank against the Objections of Mr. Arnaud.

THE fifth rank of persons which I supposed were in the ancient Church was of
those that at the hearing of these propositions the Bread is the Body of Jesus
Christ, the Bread is changed into the Body of Jesus Christ, the Bread is made
the Body of Jesus Christ, proceeded immediately to their true and natural
sense, without perplexity or difficulty, and without considering the
inconsistency of the terms, very well understanding that the Bread remaining
Bread is consecrated to be to us a Sacrament which imparts to us our Lords
Body, and these had a more clear and distinct knowledge of the truth, and an
apprehension better fitted to understand the style and common expressions of
the Church.

Mr. ARNAVD spends all the 11th. Chapter of his sixth Book to show that these
persons, whom I suppose had necessarily before their eyes a distinct idea of
the Real Presence. Which is what he endeavors to prove. First, By the example
of this infinite number of Christians which were found to hold in the beginning
of the 11th. Century the belief of the Real Presence, and who had taken up this
Faith from the same expressions of the Fathers which ever rung in the ears of
the Faithful of the first eight Centuries; whence it without doubt follows that
these expressions which have persuaded the whole world into the belief of the
Real Presence, might well give the idea of it to those which preceded them.
Secondly, He offers the double idea which the metaphorical terms offer to the
mind, for they offer, says he, to the mind that which one would have it
understand, and show it at the same time the image by which one represents it.
Thus this expression of Scripture, Vicit Leo de tribu Juda, puts us upon
thinking that Jesus Christ is compared to a Lion by reason of his strength; so
that the word Lion forms at the same instant in the mind two ideas, that of the
strength of Christ which is the natural idea of the thing conceived as true,
and which the Scripture would signify, and the idea of a Lion which is the
natural idea of the Word, but which is only the resemblance of the truth which
the Scripture would make us conceive. It is easy, says he moreover, to
conclude hence that when a man should take all the words of the Fathers which
express the Real Presence for metaphorical ones, when one shall give 'em all
the senses which the Ministers give them, and suppose that the Faithful of the
fifth Rank were all of 'em born every whit as metaphorical as Aubertin was
after he had corrupted his judgment by vain wranglings for thirty years space,
when we should grant they had all an infused knowledge of 'em, and had 'em also
as present as the first Principles, they could not but see the Real Presence in
the expressions of the Fathers, either as the true idea which they would mark,
or as the image of this idea, but an image so lively and sensible, and denoted
by such a great number of expressions, that it is impossible but their mind must
have been touched with 'em. Thirdly, Mr. Arnaud uses for the same design the
example of other Ministers, Who conceived, says he, a literal sense in the
passages produced by the Catholics. In fine he uses for this end the very
passages of the Fathers, and especially one of S. Hilary, and another of
Gregory of Nysse. We shall answer in order these four pretended reasons.

AS to the first which is taken from the example of the people of the 11th.
Century, it is evidently ineffectual by means of two essential differences
there are between these people, and those of the eight first Centuries. The
first is, that the idea of the Real Presence, I mean of that about which we
dispute, was offered to those of the 11th. Century by the Disciples and
followers of Paschasus, who maintained, and taught it, and applied thereunto
the passages of the Fathers, dazzling the eyes of the world by false colors,
and giving to these passages a sense which the people would never have
discovered, had they been led by the light of nature. But there can be nothing
said like this of the people of the eight first Centuries, to whom the idea of
this substantial and invisible Presence was not yet discovered. They had not
been taught it, nor were they told 'twas in this sense they must take the
expressions of their Pastors. Moreover, the people of the 11th. Century had not
the clear and easy passages of the Fathers proposed to 'em, which might give
the true meaning of the Sacrament, and at the same time serve for an
explication to the obscure expressions, and by this means showing 'em only one
side of the thing, and making 'em consider it in wrong circumstances, 'twas no
hard matter for 'em to be deceived, and take that for a Real Presence which was
far from being it. But we must make another judgment of the eight first
Centuries, wherein the Pastors instructing their flocks, gave them other ideas
of this mystery, which carried them off from that of the invisible and
incorporeal Presence.

We may in a manner apply the same answer to Mr. Arnaud's third reason, which
is taken from the example of several Ministers, who although they pretend that the
true sense of the passages of the Fathers produced by those of the Roman
Church, is the metaphorical one, yet do conceive the literal sense. For there
is a great deal of difference between us and the people of the eight first
Centuries. They lived in those times wherein the idea of the Real Presence,
such as the Roman Church believes, was not discovered; whereas we live in those
times wherein it is continually represented before our eyes. Both Rhetoric and
Philosophy are set on work to show it us in the Writings of the Fathers. It Is
not possible then but entering into the sense of those that dispute incessantly
against us, and putting our selves in their places to comprehend what they
think, but we must conceive in the passages which they alledg to us, the sense
of the Real Presence, although we judge it to be false. It Is also true that they
offer some to us under the name of the Fathers, which as Mr. Daille has well
observed, seem in no wise to admit the sense of the Protestants. But these
passages are of two kinds, for either they are falsely attributed to the
Fathers, as is that denoted by Mr. Daille, That the Bread changes its nature,
and becomes by the Almighty Power of God the Flesh of the Word, which he has
considered as the words of S. Cyprian, under whose name they have been usually
cited, whereas they are Arnaud of Bonneval's, an Author of the 12th. Century.
As to such as these I confess it is not easy for Protestants to accommodate
them to their sense, but very easy on the contrary to conceive the idea of the
Real Presence in 'em; but this happens by their being regarded as the words of
the Fathers, whereas indeed they be not. The others are really the sayings of
the Fathers, but contain a particular sentiment, which is neither that of the
Roman Church nor that of the Protestants; so that it cannot seem strange if
those that would accommodate them to the sense of the Protestants found
themselves perplexed with 'em; and such are several passages in Gregory of
Nysse, Anastasius Sinaite, and Damascen, which to speak properly, are neither
for the Church of Rome, nor for us; I mean, do neither confirm our positive
belief nor theirs, although they alledg them in their own favor.

AS to what Mr. Arnaud says touching the metaphors, I grant they do naturally
form this double idea of which he speaks; but he is not ignorant there are, as
I said, metaphorical terms, which use has made proper: so that they do not of
themselves offer to the mind the natural idea which they signify, but only the
metaphorical one; unless a man's mind makes a particular reflection on them.
Thus the term of House in Astrology, the term of Aristotle and Plato in a
Library, and I know not how many others of this nature, do not present more to
the mind than the idea of the things which they originally signify. Let Mr.
Arnaud call them as long as he will equivocal terms, dark metaphors which are
abolished by use, this does not hinder the truth of my remark, nor the
application which I made of it to the terms of Corpus, Corpus Domini, Corpus
Christi, which use had made so proper to the Sacrament, that they brought no
other idea to the mind than that of the Sacrament, according as our senses
represent it, without bringing in that of the natural Body of Jesus Christ. It
is true, says Mr. Arnaud, Page 602.
that the custom of employing some terms in a metaphorical use does sometimes
in such a manner obscure the double idea, that the mind feels no more than the
impression of the thing signified and conceived as true. This is exactly what I
would have. I desire no more, and it signifies nothing to alledg that this does
not contradict the rule which the Author of the Perpetuity had proposed,
because he spoke only of terms which were really metaphorical, and not of
equivocal terms, such as those are wherein the double idea is not felt. This, I
say, signifies nothing, for besides that the Author of the Perpetuity had
proposed his Principle a little too generally, my exception invalidates the use
which he would make of it; for it shows that in applying this Principle to the
terms, Corpus, Corpus Domini, Corpus Christi, a man can draw no advantage
thence, nor say that they brought into the mind the idea of the Real Presence,
because that in effect these terms did not represent more than the idea of the
Sacrament, according as our senses offer it.

I confess we cannot apply this remark to several passages of the Fathers,
wherein the figure is more sensible; and therefore we have only applied it to
these terms precisely, Corpus, Corpus Domini, Corpus Christi, by which the
Sacrament has been often designed. An answer is not the less good for being
proper and particular to a subject. And as to other passages which the Author
of the Perpetuity proposed, we have already maintained, and do still, that
their natural sense was the Sacramental one, and not that of the Real Presence,
excepting some which we will speak to hereafter. And for the better
understanding of this, we must first distinguish the particular sense of each
term, from the sense of the whole proposition; each term has its proper common
and ordinary signification, and being thus taken apart, brings naturally into
the mind the idea of that which it signifies. But the first and natural sense
of th'entire proposition must not always be taken from the natural
signification of each term, but oft-times from the force of the matter in
question which guides nature to a certain sense, without suffering her to
imagine any other: and this is often the metaphorical sense, which I illustrated
by the example of these propositions, The Stone was Christ, The King is the
head of Gold, The seven stalks are the seven years. The particular terms Stone,
Christ, was, taken apart do naturally bring into the mind the idea of what they
signify. The Stone offers the idea of a Rock, Christ the idea of Jesus Christ,
was, gives the idea of an affirmation, but the simple and natural sense which
results from these three terms gathered together, is no other than the
metaphorical one, by reason of the matter in hand, which suffers not naturally
the mind to conceive another. It Is the same in reference to these propositions,
The Bread is the Body of Jesus Christ, the Bread is made the Body of Jesus
Christ, the Bread is changed into the Body of Jesus Christ, the Body of Jesus
Christ enters into us, we receive the Body of Jesus Christ, and such like. If a
man considers each term of these in particular, they naturally bring into the
mind the idea of what they ordinarily and commonly signify, the Bread, that of
Bread, the Body of Jesus Christ, that of the Body of Jesus Christ, is, that of
an affirmation, changed, that of a change, enter and receive, that of an
entrance, and reception: But the sense which results from these terms collected
being determined by the matter in hand, can be naturally no other than a
mystical sense, to wit, that the Bread is the Sacrament, the sign, the pledge,
the memorial of the Body of Jesus Christ; that it serves us instead of it, that
it is mystically changed into this Body, that this Body enters into us by its
symbol, that we receive and partake of it by a spiritual reception and
participation. This is the true and natural sense of these expressions, and
that which first presents it self to the mind by reason of the matter in hand.

NEITHER the truth of my Principle, nor the truth of the application which I
make of it can be disputed me. The Principle is, that when the matter in
question determins the propositions to a certain sense which they may
reasonably receive, then we must not seek for the natural sense of these
propositions in the natural signification of each term taken apart, but from
the matter it self; and that the sense to which the matter determins them is
the simple and natural sense. This Principle may be justified by a thousand
examples drawn from the ordinary use of human speech, in which is made every
moment propositions, which would be senseless did not a man take the natural
sense of the matter in question. Each Art and Profession has also its
particular expressions which would be as so many extravagancies, were they not
understood according as the matter determins them; and this is in my opinion,
what no one can contradict. The application which I make of this Principle is
no less undeniable; for it is true that the expressions of the Fathers on the
Eucharist are determined to a certain sense by the very nature of the
Eucharistical action, which is a Sacrament or a mystery of the Body and Blood
of Jesus Christ: Seeing then their expressions are capable of receiving a
Sacramental and mystical sense, it must be granted that that is the natural
sense.

THE natural sense of a proposition is that which may be most naturally in the
mind of him that made it; but to judge well of it, we must consider the matter,
and see whether it has not led them to explain themselves in this manner. Now
it will be granted me that the question here being about signs or mystical
symbols, and a Spiritual Communion which we have with Jesus Christ, men have
more naturally in their thoughts the mystical and Sacramental sense than that
of Transubstantiation, or Consubstantiation.

BUT besides this distinction which respects the expressions both in
themselves, and in relation to those that have used them, there must be made
another, which regards the persons to whom these expressions are addressed. For
there are some that have small knowledge of the matter in hand, which know only
confusedly what a Sacrament or mystery is, who have made little reflection on
the manner after which our Lord communicates himself to us in the Eucharist;
and there are others that have this knowledge more distinct and better formed.
Now it being the matter or subject in hand that determins the sense of these
expressions, it is certain they are more or less clear, more or less
intelligible, according as this matter is more or less understood by every one:
But it is likewise certain, that to mark well the natural sense of 'em, we must
suppose persons who have a distinct knowledge of the subject in question, and
manner after which the Church has expressed her self about it* and not ignorant
persons that have only a very obscure notion of it. The natural sense of the
expressions of each Art, and each Profession is without doubt not that in which
those may take it, who have scarcely any knowledge of this Art, or this
Profession but that wherein intelligent and able persons take it; and it is for
this reason the later are consulted rather than the others upon any difficulty.
I confess Religion ought to be the Art and Profession of the whole world, but
men are neither wise nor honest enough to apply themselves exactly to it. It
cannot be denied but there have been always many persons in the Church little
advanced in the knowledge of the mystery of the Gospel. It Is not from them then
that we must learn the natural sense of the expressions of the Fathers. They
might have been the object of their Faith, tho not of their Understanding. I
mean, they might believe 'em to be true without diving into the sense of 'em,
and knowing what they signify. And this is the meaning of S. Austin in his
Sermon to Children. What ye see, says he, is Bread and Wine, which your eyes
likewise tell you, but the instruction which your Faith demands is, that the
Bread is the Body of Jesus Christ, and the Cup, or that which is in the Cup his
Blood. This is said in a few words, and perhaps this little is sufficient to
Faith, but Faith desires to be instructed; for the Prophet says, If ye do, not
believe, how will you understand? Ye may reply, seeing you have commanded us to
believe, explain to us what that is, to the end we may understand it. Whilst
these persons remain in this degree of Faith without understanding, it is not to
them we must address our selves for the finding out the natural sense of the
propositions of the Fathers, seeing they do not understand 'em. We must desire
this of them that are more advanced in knowledge, who know what the Church means
by these ways of speaking, and can give a good account of the natural
impression they make on their minds.

BUT who are these people? They are those that learned from the Fathers
themselves, what a Sacrament or Mystery is, who knew that a Mystery or
Sacrament is when we see a thing, and understand and believe another, who knew
that the Bread and Wine of the Eucharist are signs, images, figures, memorials,
representations, resemblances, pictures of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ,
who knew, that the Bread and Wine are to us instead of the Body and Blood, that
Jesus Christ is signified and communicated to us by means of these symbols, and
that in partaking of this visible Bread we spiritually eat our Lords Flesh, who
knew, that the signs take commonly the names of the things which they
represent, that the Sacraments are called after the name of the things
themselves, that our Savior did not scruple to say, This is my Body, when he
gave the sign of his Body, that he made Bread his Body in saying, This is my
Body, that is to say, the figure of my Body, that we must distinguish between
the Bread of our Lord, and the Bread which is the Lord himself, that the
consecrated Bread is honored with the name of our Lords Body, although the nature
of Bread remains, that the nature or substance of Bread ceases not to be, and
that that which we celebrate is the image or resemblance of the Body and Blood
of Jesus Christ, who knew, that the humanity of Jesus Christ is local, absent
from Heaven when on the Earth, and left the Earth when it ascended up into
Heaven, that to eat the Flesh of Jesus Christ is to believe in him, that this
locution is figurative, and must not be taken according to the letter,
signifying we must communicate of our Lords Passion, and call to remembrance
that his Flesh has been Crucified for us.

IT IS such kind of persons as these who are well instructed in the sense of the
Fathers, that are to be consulted to find the natural sense of these other
expressions which Mr. Arnaud alleges in his favor. What likelihood is there
that with these preparatives which they received daily from their Pastors they
should stick at these expressions they heard 'em use, That the Bread is the
Body of Jesus Christ, that it is made the Body of Jesus Christ, changed into the
Body of Jesus Christ, that the Body of Jesus Christ enters into us, that we are
refreshed with his Blood, and nourished with his Flesh, and other expressions
of this nature; what likelihood is there they should hesitate at 'em, or see
any other sense in 'em, than the Sacramental or figurative one? Now these are
the persons whereof my fifth rank consists, whom I supposed to have a knowledge
of the truth more distinct and clear than the others, and a mind better fitted
to understand the style, and ordinary expressions of the Church. Let the same
instructions, the same expositions be given now to the people which the Fathers
gave them, let neither Transubstantiation, nor the Real Presence, nor the
conversion of the substance of Bread into the very substance of Christ's Body,
nor the Body of Jesus Christ concealed under the vail of accidents without a
subject, nor th'existence of these accidents without a subject, nor the real
existence of the Body of Jesus Christ in several places, nor his double
Presence, that is to say, his visible and invisible one, nor his Sacramental
state after the manner of a Spirit be mentioned, let 'em not be enjoined to
adore the Sacrament of the Eucharist with that Sovereign adoration which is due
to Jesus Christ alone; and in a word, let all things be suppressed which we
find the Fathers did not speak or do, and let the impressions and
prejudications which these novelties have introduced into men's minds be lost:
let the same instructions and expositions, I say, be given to the people now
which the Fathers gave them, and then let 'em be told as long as you will, that
the Bread is the Body of Jesus Christ, that it is changed into the Body of Jesus
Christ; for I am persuaded, and believe every reasonable man will be so too,
that the people will never conceive from these expressions either
Transubstantiation, or Consubstantiation, but understand 'em, without
difficulty in a Sacramental sense. Where! Where Is then this great noise which
the Real Presence made, knocking, as the Author of the Perpetuity words it,
millions of times at the gate of the hearts of all the Faithful? Is not this
clatter a mere dream, and has Mr. Arnaud any reason to reproach me with the
deafness of my ears?

BUT 'twill perhaps be questioned, whether persons of mean capacity (whom we do
not suppose to have this knowledge of the style and sense of the Church) did not
receive by these words the impression of the Real Presence. I answer, we shall
do 'em no wrong by supposing they did not understand them: You have commanded
us to believe, said they in S. Austin; Sermon. ad inf.
explain to us then, how the Bread is the Body of Jesus Christ, to the end we
may understand it. They did not understand it then before the explication. In
effect the greatest part of the Fathers words taken literally are void of any
natural sense, Philosophy must give 'em one; for how can we understand
naturally that the Bread is the Body of Jesus Christ, according to a literal
sense, or changed into the Body of Jesus Christ, seeing we behold it still to
be Bread? I confess there are some of these expressions which are apt to offer
to ignorant people the idea of a Real Presence, but not of the real invisible
and incorporeal Presence, touching which we contend, but on the contrary, the
idea of a corporeal Presence, for a man's mind, especially that of an ignorant
man, does not imagine the existence of a human, invisible, insensible, and
impalpable Body. I moreover say, that this idea of the corporeal Presence would
be immediately rejected as false by the most stupid and ignorant, from the
testimony of their own senses, which they could not but consult, supposing at
least they knew Christ's Body was a human one. But supposing they did not, it is
likely their simplicity would lead them to believe that the natural Body of
Jesus Christ was really upon Earth in the form of Bread, such as they saw in
the Eucharist: and this is what S. Austin says little Children would do were
they earnestly and gravely told it is the Body of Jesus Christ.

AS to the passages of S. Hilary, and Gregory of Nysse, which Mr. Arnaud
alleges, as offering the idea of the Real Presence, I confess the first is
able to surprise the ignorant, and make 'em conceive a corporeal Presence;
seeing it has these words, that Jesus Christ is in us in reality of nature, and
not by a simple consent of will: and then again, that Jesus Christ dwells in us
naturally; which literally signifies that our Lords Flesh exists in us in such
an ordinary and corporeal manner as the flesh of animals exists in us when we
eat 'em; which was the sense wherein the Capernaits took the words of Jesus
Christ. Mr. Arnaud himself seems to have acknowledged this, seeing he believed
himself obliged to add in his Translation a corrective that mollifies or
explains this term naturally. Naturally, says he, that is to say, really. But
this, that is to say, really, ought not to be written in Italick, as if 'twere
S. Hilary's own explication; and if the fault be the Printer's, and not Mr.
Arnaud's, he should at least have set it in the Errata, because it causes two
illusions at a time: on one hand it makes a man believe S. Hilary taught the
Real Presence of Jesus Christ in us, in proper terms, seeing he says that he
remains in us naturally, that is to say, really, which is not true: and on the
other it hinders us from perceiving that the ignorant taking the naturally of
S. Hilary according to the letter, would have had the idea of a corporal and
natural Presence, and not that of a spiritual and invisible Presence. These are
a kind of faults for which people are not wont to be oversorry when they
happen; for they have a desired effect for some time, and when they chance to
be discovered may be laid on the Printer. But howsoever it is certain that all
the impression which this passage of S. Hilary could make on the mind of an
ignorant person was only to put him upon conceiving a corporal Presence, which
he might easily reject, by the testimony of his proper senses. But to speak the
truth, there is little reason to suppose the Books of S. Hilary De Trinitate
came to the knowledge of such ignorant and simple people as we speak of.

THE passage of Gregory of Nysse gives naturally the idea of a change of Bread
into the Body of Jesus Christ, by the union of the Bread into the Word, and by
way of augmentation of the natural Body of Jesus Christ, as appears from the
example which he brings of the Bread which Jesus Christ ate, which became the
Body of the Word, which is far remote from the Transubstantiation of the Church
of Rome, who will have the substance on the Altar to be the same in number as
that which our Savior Christ assumed from the Virgin, and which is now in
Heaven. There Is little likelihood that simple and ignorant people understood
what Gregory meant, even supposing they were acquainted with his Catechism,
which is not very likely. But supposing they knew it all by heart, and
comprehended the sense of it, they could thence only conceive this change by
union to the word, and augmentation of the Body of Jesus Christ, which Damascen
has since explained more clearly. And this is what Gregory supposes also, not
as the true Faith of the Church, but only as a probable opinion, according as
he formally explains himself, Perhaps, says he, we are in the right.

AND this is what we had to say concerning Mr. Arnaud's sixth Book. Whatsoever
success this Dispute might have had, he could not thence promise himself any
advantage, because as we have already observed more than once, the eight first
Centuries being out of the time wherein we suppose the change was wrought, when
he shall have proved the Real Presence, or Real Absence was distinctly held
therein, he will be still told the question concerns not those Ages, but the
following. But it is not the same with me, who draw thence several advantages.
For first, neither Mr. Arnaud, nor the Author of the Perpetuity can
henceforward prevail by the equivocation of the term of Real Absence, which may
be taken either for the rejection of the visible or corporeal Presence, or for
the rejection of the invisible Presence, seeing we have showed 'em that in this
debate the question concerns not the Real Absence in the first sense, but the
Real Absence in the second. Secondly, They can no longer confound these two
things as if they were but one, to wit, to be in a condition to acknowledge that
the Real Presence does not agree with the lights of nature, and to be in a
condition to acknowledge it is a novely which was never held in the Church,
seeing we have showed 'em there is a great deal of difference between these two
dispositions, and that it does not follow hence that those who are in the
first, are also in the second, which is precisely that which is here in
question. Thirdly, Neither will they I think any more confound two sorts of
very different doubts, the one of incredulity which deny the thing it self, and
the others of simple ignorance which consist only in not knowing the manner,
yet without denying the thing, seeing they have been showed clearly enough the
difference of 'em, and that they ought not to refer to one of these doubts what
belongs to the other. Fourthly, They can no longer blind the world by this vain
distinction of three ways of rejecting the Real Presence, or by a general
rejection, without denoting any one kind of 'em, or by a formal rejection of
all the kinds, or by a bare view of the nature of things, seeing we have showed
'em that the first is impossible, that the third brings no advantage to 'em,
and that there is only the second which they can reasonably stick to, and which
yet they renounce, because they find it unjustifiable. Fifthly, It Is likely
they will no longer obstinately maintain that a known inconsistency, that is to
say, a pure impossibility, and respected as such, is a sense after the
illustrations given on this subject. Sixthly, They can no longer say that the
ancient formulary of the Communion, Corpus Christi must necessarily direct the
minds of the Faithful to conceive the Body of Jesus Christ present in the
Eucharist which they received, seeing it had another use, which was to raise
'em up to meditate on the Death and Resurrection of their Savior; this other
use being sufficient to employ many of their minds. Seventhly, They will
henceforward in vain pretend that the terms which the Fathers used in their
ordinary instructions, brought naturally the idea of the Real Presence into
their Auditors minds, seeing we have showed that the natural sense of their
Propositions did not depend on the natural signification of each term, but on
the matter in hand, which determined them to a figurative sense. Eighthly, They
have had no reason to pretend that all the Faithful have always had a distinct
belief either of the Presence or Real Absence, in the sense wherein the Roman
Church understands these terms, seeing we have showed them five ranks of
persons in the Church of the first eight Centuries, who had no formal knowledge
of either the one nor the other. Ninthly, It being thus in reference to the
first eight Centuries, it hence follows 'twas the same by greater reason in the
following, which were far darker. Tenthly, And that which is most important is
that one may already know by this, that the change which occasions our
principal question has been not only possible, but easy. For there being only
two things which can hinder it, the one the distinct belief of the Real
Absence, that is to say, the formal and positive belief that the Body is not in
the Eucharist by its proper substance, neither visible nor invisible; and
the other the knowledge, diligence, and fidelity of the Pastors, watching over
their Flocks, ready to acknowledge and repel the new errors, and make them known
to their people. It Is already apparent that the first of these things is an
unjustifiable supposition, and contrary to all probability. And as to the other
it is certain it calls in question the credit of all Historians, and the
judgment of all learned men who agree in this, that in the 9th. 10th. and 11th.
Centuries the Ecclesiastical order did not abound with famous men, and
especially the 10th. Century.

CHAP. V.
General Considerations on Mr. Arnaud's Ninth Book. An Examination of the
Objections which he proposes against what he calls Machins of Abridgment, and
Machins of Preparation.

HAVING considered Mr. Arnaud's 6th. Book, we must now in order pass on to the
9th. whose running Title is, The impossibility of the pretended Change of the
Churches Belief in the Mystery of the Eucharist. It Is certain the genuine state
of the question is only, whether this change has really happened; this other,
whether 'twas possible or impossible, is a frivolous question tending to
fruitless Speculations and tedious Debates; which is what I clearly showed when
I treated of the method of the Perpetuity. And which likewise several Roman
Catholics have acknowledged, who have written on this Subject since the Author
of the Perpetuity, Father Nouet was of opinion he had better lay aside all this
part of the In his Preface.
Dispute, and comprehend it under the Title of Particular Debates wherein the
Church of Rome is not concerned, nor ought to be mentioned. Mr. De Baune in
that elegant Letter which he published under the name of an Ecclesiastic to
one of his Friends, distinguishes likewise two quarrels wherein he says I have
engaged my self, the one against the Real Presence in the Eucharist, and the
other against the Author of the Perpetuity of the Faith: and he adds, that in
this latter I only encounter with a particular person. Mr. Pavillon, a Priest
and Almoner to his Majesty speaks his mind more fully in his triumph touching
the Eucharist. The question is not t'examine whether Page 197.
the Church could change her belief, and how this change could happen; for this
is a going about the bust, and running upon whimsies. The question is only to
enquire whether this pretended change has effectually happened. He calls all
these pretensions of impossibility frivolous questions, and mere whimsies; for
these Gentlemen do one another right now and then. But howsoever Mr. Arnaud has
his maxims apart, and he obliges us to distinguish on this subject two
questions; the one, whether the change before us has been possible; and the
other whether it has really happened. It Is certain that the first appears already
very clear by the refutation of the pretended distinct knowledge of the
Presence, or Real Absence, as we lately observed: for although Mr. Arnaud has
treated of it only in reference to the eight first Centuries, without troubling
himself with the following; yet it is easy to perceive that if it could not
have place in those Centuries, wherein there was greater light, it could not by
stronger reason in the others, wherein there was a far greater and more general
ignorance. Yet for better information in this matter, we must see what Mr.
Arnaud has offered touching this pretended impossibility of the change. We
shall here then discuss again the question, whether in supposing that Paschasus
an Author of the ninth Century was the first that proposed the Doctrine of the
substantial invisible Presence of the Body of Jesus Christ in the Eucharist, it
might happen that this opinion in succession of time has been received and
established amongst Christians. For this is in fine what Mr. Arnaud handles in
his 9th. Book, and which we shall now examine. We shall not in truth find he
has made use therein of great Arguments to confirm his Opinion, for he seldom
troubles himself about that; nor has he exactly endeavored to refute the means
of the possibility which I alleged, nor defended the Answers of the Author of
the Perpetuity. Mr. Arnaud does not care to take so much pains. But we shall
find he has taken care to collect here and there seven or eight passages out of
my Book, and of them joined together made a body, which he calls my Machins,
and divided them into five orders, with titles according to his own fancy. He
calls the first, The Machins of Abridgment; the second, The Machins of
Preparation; the third, The Machins of Mollifications; the fourth, The Machins
of Execution; and the fifth, The Machins of Forgetfulness. Now although we may say
in general that Mr. Arnaud's mind abounds with pleasant fancies, by which he
can easily find out odd names to make serious matters look ridiculous; yet
t'excuse him, we may say that in this occasion he has followed, not his own
natural inclination, but that of the Cartesian Philosophy, with which his mind
is said to be extremely taken up; for you must know this Philosophy makes
Machins of every thing. But howsoever let us see what work Mr. Arnaud makes with
mine.

THE first which he calls the Machin of retrenchment is taken out of two of my
passages; the first of which bears, That the question is not of the Answer to
the second Treatise, Part 3. chapter 6. Book 9. chapter 3. p. 886.
whole world, but of the West, on which Mr. Arnaud makes this Commentary in my
name, That is to say, says he, I will not have the question concern it, I will
not take the trouble to explain how the Doctrine of the Real Presence and
Transubstantiation has introduced it self into the East, into the Patriarchats
of Constantinople, Alexandria, Jerusalem, and Antioch, into the Churches of the
Armenians, Nestorians, Jacobits. I do not care to trouble my self with guessing
how it has penetrated into Ethiopia, Moscovia, Mesopotamia, Georgia, Mingrelia,
Moldavia, Tartaria and the Indies. It Is better to say, it is not there, this is
sooner done; and by this means I shall free my self out of a great perplexity.
But, says he, Mr. Claude will give us I hope leave to tell him, that he is a
man and not God; so that neither his words nor his will are always effectual.
He would not have the Doctrine of the Real Presence to be in all these great
Provinces. But it is there, and will be maugre him. The matter depends not on
him, and we have demonstrated it by proofs which I hope he will not question.
He fills five great pages with this kind of discourse, saying over and over
again the same thing.

Mr. ARNAVD must pardon me if I tell him he has gotten a little too high. Is he
so possessed with the charms of his own Eloquence, and force of these illusions
touching the Greeks, Armenians, and other Eastern Christians to imagine a man
must be a God to cope with him? I think considering what we have observed, a
man need neither be an Angel nor an extraordinary person to demonstrate again
clearly that the question concerns not these Churches, because they do not at
all believe the Roman Transubstantiation: and supposing they did believe it,
which they do not, 'twould be no hard matter to find they had received it from
the Latins by means of the Croisado's, Seminaries, and Missions, which is
sufficient to exclude them from this Dispute.

THE second passage from whence Mr. Arnaud has taken my pretended Machin of
Retrenchment, is this, The question concerns not all those in the Answer to the
second Treatise, Part. 3. chapter 6.
West, who profess themselves Christians, but only one party that have grown
prevalent, and endeavored to get the Pulpits to themselves, thereby to become
Rulers over the whole Church. Whereupon he cries out, Did ever any Book 9. chapter
3. p. 890.
body affirm that the common people of the 11th. Century held not the Real
Presence, and had only a confused knowledge of this Mystery? But Mr. Arnaud does
not mind what he writes. We speak of the first fifty years of the 10th.
Century, and he comes and alleges to us the common people of the 11th.
Century. It Is sufficient we tell him, says the Author of the Perpetuity, that
Refut part 3. chapter 6.
this change cannot be attributed to the first fifty years of this Century, to
wit, of the 10th. seeing it is incredible that the Faithful of the whole Earth
having been instructed in the distinct belief of the Real Absence, should have
embraced an Opinion quite contrary in condemning their first sentiments, and
without this change's having made any noise. These are the very words I
recited, and on which having said, that the question concerned not a change
begun, and finished in the 10th. Century, but the progress of a change begun
eighty two years before the 10th. Century, and finished by the Popes toward
the end of the 11th. I added, that our Debate was not about all those in the
West that professed themselves Christians, but only about one party that
strengthened themselves, and endeavored to become masters of the Pulpit, that
they might afterward be masters of the whole Church. It evidently appears the
question was about the first fifty years of the 10th. Century. And thereupon
Mr. Arnaud tells us by way of exclamation, Is there any one that affirms the
common people of the 11th. Century held not the Real Presence, and had only a
confused knowledge of this Mystery? No, Berenger himself acknowledges the
contrary in calling this Doctrine the Opinion of the people, sententia vulgi,
and in maintaining the Church was perished. It must be acknowledged there is a
strange disorder in this kind of disputing. I will grant that the common people
of the 11th. Century held the opinion of the Real Presence, through the labors of
Paschasus his Disciples; but it does not follow 'twas the same in the first
fifty years of the 10th. for when a new Doctrine disperses it self in a Church,
an hundred and fifty years make great alterations in it. When we speak of the
time in which Paschasus wrote his Book of the Body and Blood of Christ, it is
not likely we suppose the people to be in the same state they were in two
hundred years after the opinion of the Real Presence had made considerable
progresses. Neither will we suppose 'em to be in the same state the first fifty
years of the 10th. Century; for when we speak of a change which was made in the
space of near three hundred years, common sense will show there was more or
less of it according to the diversity of the time. It is then reasonable on my
hypothesis to consider in the beginning of the 10th. Century those that held
the Real Presence, only as a party that strengthened themselves, and
endeavored to make 'emselves most considerable in the Church, but it is in no
sort reasonable to oppose against this the common people of the 11th. Century,
seeing that in eighty, or an hundred years the face of things might be easily
changed.

IT IS moreover less reasonable to ofter us the discourses of Lanfranc, Book 9.
chapter 3. page 890.
who bragged, that in his time all the Christians in the world believed they
received in this Sacrament the true Flesh and Blood of Jesus Christ, born of
the Virgin. For supposing what Lanfranc says were true, the sense he gave to
these words, the true Flesh, and the true Blood of Jesus Christ, understanding
them in a sense of Transubstantiation was false, as we have sufficiently
showed. Has any body charged this testimony to be false? says Mr. Arnaud, No;
there is no one but Mr. Claude who does it six hundred years after without any
ground. But does Mr. Arnaud know all that Berenger answered, and those that
adhered to him? And supposing they were ignorant of the true belief of the
other Churches separate from the Latin, does it hence follow that in effect
they believed Transubstantiation, and that the proofs I have given of the
contrary be not good?

DOES Reason, adds he, show that in this point, the Faith of the Pastors Ibid
was not that of the People? No; it proves the quite contrary, it being
incredible that Ministers who are persuaded of the truth of the Real Presence
should not take care to instruct them in it, whom they exhorted to receive the
Communion, to whom they ought to judge this belief to be absolutely necessary to
make them avoid the unworthy Communions. Mr. Arnaud fights with his own shadow.
We never told him that those who believe the Real Presence did not endeavor to
insinuate it into the peoples minds, according as they were more or less
prejudiced, or zealous in the propagation of this belief, and more or less
qualified to teach it, and more or less again according to the circumstances of
times, occasions, persons. But how does this hinder me from saying that during
the first fifty years of the 10th. Century it was not all them that made
profession of Christianity in the West, but a party that strengthened
themselves, and endeavored to render themselves the most considerable.

IS this, says Mr. Arnaud again, a sufficient reason to show that the people
were not persuaded of the Real Presence, because some Historians who tell us
that Berenger troubled the Church by a new Heresy, do at the same time
likewise inform us that he perverted several persons with his novelties? But we
did not offer this alone as a sufficient reason to persuade him the people did
not believe the Real Presence in the beginning of the 10th. Century. I confess
that upon this alone one may justly say either that those who followed
Berenger, followed him in leaving their first Belief, and embracing a new
Opinion, or that they followed him because he Preached only what they believed
before, or that they adhered to him because they were further instructed in a
mystery of which they had but small knowledge, or little certainty. So far every
man is at liberty to take that part which he shall judge the most reasonable:
but should I say there were several that followed him upon the account of their
knowing what he taught was the ancient Doctrine, I shall say nothing but what is
very probable, having showed, as I have done in my answer to the Perpetuity,
that Bertran's Doctrine was publicly taught in the 10th. Century; for it
follows hence probably enough, that this Doctrine was not then wholly extinct,
that is to say, in the beginning of the 11th. Century, when Berenger appeared.

THESE are Mr. Arnaud's first objections, which as is plainly seen, are not
over demonstrative, that the change we suppose is impossible. Those which
follow are not much better, as will appear from the reflections we shall make
on 'em. The second order of these pretended Machins which he attributes to me,
is what he calls Machins of Preparations, and he draws these from two passages,
the one of my first answer, and the other from my second. The first is contained
in these terms; In this dark Age, that is to say in the 10th. the distinct
knowledge of the true Doctrine was lost, not only in reference to the Sacrament,
but almost all other Points of the Christian Religion. The second speaks of the
Ages which followed the first eight in these terms. The first light which was
taken from the people to keep 'em in ignorance Answer to the second Treatise,
Part 2. chap. 3.
was God's Word. The second was the clear and solid Expositions of the Writings
of the Holy Fathers in reference to the Sacrament. The third, the knowledge of
other Mysteries of Christianity which might strengthen men's minds, and
encourage their zeal for the truth. The fourth was suffering natural reason to
decay and fall into a kind of languishment. And as to their senses they had
open War declared against 'em.

THOSE that shall take the pains to read the 4th. Chapter of Mr. Arnaud's Chap.
4. page 891.
9th. Book, which has for its title, The Machins of Preparation Examined, will
find therein a prodigious profusion of words, much heat and vehement
declamations, but very few things worth regarding; wherefore passing by, as I
shall do whatsoever is useless and redundant, the rest will not take up much
time. First he charges me with offering things without any foundation, proof,
or reason. I answer then Mr. Arnaud has forgot the proofs Page 892.
we brought touching the disorders of the 10th. Century, and according to his
reckoning the testimonies of Guitmond, Verner Rollevink, Marc Antony Sabellic,
John Stella, Polydor Virgil, Elfric Arch bishop of Canterbury, Edgar King of
England, Genebrard, Bellarmin, Baronius, Nicolas Vignier, and the Author of the
Apology for the Holy Fathers the defenders of the Doctrine of Divine Grace,
shall be esteemed as nothing. The one tells us, That the truths of Religion
were vanished away in this Age from men. The other, That therein was a total
neglect of all ingenious Arts. The third, That all persons in general so
greatly indulged 'emselves in idleness, that all kinds of Virtues seemed to be
laid asleep with 'em. The fourth, That the Monks and Priests minded only the
enriching 'emselves. The fifth, That the Bishops and Priests neglected the
reading of the Holy Scriptures, and instructing the people out of 'em. The
sixth, That the Churchmen spent their lives in Debauches, Drunkenness, and
Uncleanness. The seventh, That 'twas an unhappy Age, an Age void of excelling
men either in Wit or Learning. The eighth, That there were no famous Writers in
it, nor Councils, nor Popes that took care of any thing. The ninth, That
Barbarism and ignorance of Learning and Sciences either Divine or Human reigned
more in it than in the former Ages. The tenth, That 'twas an iron and leaden
Age, an obscure and dark Age. And the eleventh, That 'twas an Age of Darkness
and Ignorance, wherein excepting some few Historians, there were no famous
Writers on the Mysteries of Faith. Mr. Arnaud knows all this, and that we might
increase the number of these Testimonies with several others, were it
necessary, yet tells me with the greatest transport, That I offer things
without any ground, proof, or reason, things which I know to be false, and mere
imaginations.

HE says, adds he speaking of me, that the distinct knowledge of almost all
Chap. 4. page 829.
the other Mysteries but that of the Eucharist was lost in the 10th. Age. Now
he knows the contrary of this, and is persuaded of it, seeing that as to the
common Mysteries, and such as are believed by both Parties, and contained in
the ancient Symbol, it cannot be said they of the 10th. Age were ignorant of
'em; and yet as to the points controverted between the Calvinists, and the
Roman Church, excepting that of the Eucharist, all the Ministers his Brethren
do frankly acknowledge, that long before the 9th. and 10th. Century the whole
Church believed what the Roman Church does believe at present of 'em. Let him
tell us then what are these truths of Faith, the distinct knowledge of which
were lost in the 10th. Century.

IT IS no hard matter to satisfy Mr. Arnaud. These truths the distinct knowledge
of which was lost in the 10th. Century are the same which are contained in the
Symbols. Does he imagine that if a man be not ignorant of the Symbols, that
therefore he must know distinctly the Mysteries therein contained; and does he
put no difference between being ignorant of a thing, consusedly knowing it, and
distinctly knowing it? Do all those that know the Creed, distinctly understand
the Mysteries contained therein? Certainly a man's mind must be strangely
benighted that reasons after this manner. They were not ignorant of the
Mysteries contained in the ancient Symbols, they had then a distinct knowledge
of 'em. If this Argument holds good we may attribute the distinct knowledge of
the principal Points of Christianity almost to all kinds of persons, to
Artificers, Husbandmen, Women, yea Children; for there are few in either
Communion but have heard of them, and know something in 'em, and yet it must be
granted there are few of these who can be properly said to know them
distinctly. I pretend not to treat here on the common place of the confused
knowledge, and the distinct knowless. This is needless. It Is sufficient to
observe that the term of distinct knowledge is equivocal; for it is sometimes
taken for the formal and express knowledge of a thing, in opposition to the
ignorance of this same thing, or to what the Schools call an implicit knowledge;
and sometimes it is taken for a clear and full knowledge, in opposition to a
confused and perplexed one. When the Author of the Perpetuity said that all the
Faithful ought always to have a distinct knowledge of the Presence, or Real
Absence, he took the term distinct knowledge in the first sense; for he did not
mean that all the Faithful must know clearly and fully the Doctrine of the Real
Presence in every respect, but that they had a formal, express and determinate
thought of rejecting or admitting it. But when I said that the distinct
knowledge of the Mystery of the Eucharist, and almost all the other Mysteries of
Christian Religion was lost in the 10th. Century, I took this term in the
second sense, meaning not that there was no more formal knowledge of these
Mysteries; that is to say, that they formed no more any express and determined
thought on the Articles of the Christian Faith, and that Jesus Christ is God
and Man, that he was born of a Virgin, died for us, rose again and ascended up
into Heaven, and that there is an Eucharist; but meaning that they had only a
very small knowledge of them, such as is common to persons unlearned, and who
rarely apply themselves to meditate on matters of Religion; who go indeed for
Christians, but trouble themselves with no more knowledge than barely to learn
the Creed, and receive some other general Instructions. It Is easily perceived
that this was my sense, and that the ignorance I attribute to these persons of
the 10th. Century, from the concurrent Testimony of all Historians, was not so
great as to keep 'em absolutely from all knowledge of the principal Points of
Christian Religion, as if they were become Pagans, or Atheists, or bruit
Beasts, but that it hindered them from having that clearness of apprehension and
distinct knowledge, which comes by study and pains, and the hearing of able
Preachers. Which will evidently appear upon consulting the particular places of
my Answer, wherein I treat of the 10th. Century; for I attribute to it a
confused knowledge of the Mysteries of Religion. Now a confused knowledge is
moreover a formal knowledge. Elsewhere I compare their knowledge to that of a
Child who is wont to see First Answer near the end.
his Nurse, ill dressed, lean and sick, which still supposes he sees her, although
he sees her not in her usual condition. In another place I say the Pastors grew
Answer to the second Treatise, Part 2. chapter 3. and Part 3. chapter 7.
careless of instructing the People, and the People likewise of informing
themselves in matters of Religion; that there were few persons that applied
themselves to the meditating on the Christian Mysteries; that the Pastors
extremely neglected the instructing of the People, and that the People grew as
careless as they in matters of their salvation. Now the meaning of all this is
not that they wholly lost all kind of knowledge, but that it was very scanty. In
fine, 'twill appear this is my sense to him that shall cast his eyes on the use
I pretend to make of the obscurity of the 10th. Age, which was to show that the
people of it had not light enough to discern whether the Doctrine of the Real
Presence was an innovation in the Christian Religion, or whether 'twas a
Doctrine of the Fathers. Now this does not oblige a man to suppose an absolute
ignorance of the Christian Mysteries, but that the knowledge of them was very
confused. Which Mr. Arnaud could have well enough seen, if he pleased; but he
thought 'twere better to betake himself to Sophisms, imagining they would not
be laid open, and that he might so disguise the subject that few persons should
be able to understand it. And it is on this Principle which is neither true, nor
sincere, that he has grounded this reasoning, the common Mysteries held at this
day by both Parties, and contained in the ancient Symbols were not unknown in
the 10th. Century; therefore they of that Age had a distinct knowledge of the
truths of the Christian Doctrine.

WHATSOEVER follows in his fourth Chapter turns upon the same equivocation. Did
they leave off, says he, reading the Holy Scripture Page 892.
in the Churches and Cloisters? Did they give over explaining of it to the
People and teaching it in the Schools? Do not the writings of those Authors
which we have that lived in that Century, such as those of S. Odon and Raterius
Bishop of Verone make it appear that the Scriptures and Fathers were studied.
Why does he say that the people had concealed from 'em the clear and solid
expositions of the Fathers. Was not the Eucharist therein called the Sacrament
of the Body of Jesus Christ, the Mystery of the Body of Jesus Christ, Bread and
Wine? But all these interrogations are needless. A man may say they did not
absolutely give over the reading of the holy Scripture, and expounding it.
Perhaps Odon and Raterius were a little studious. Perhaps the Eucharist was
called a Sacrament, a Mystery, Bread and Wine; and yet it may not follow the
People had a distinct knowledge of the points of Religion. The Greeks,
Armenians, Moscovites, Ethiopians, Jacobites, Nestorians did not wholly lay
aside the reading of the Holy Scripture, and of some Fathers in their Church,
and Cloisters; and yet is it true that all these people, yea their very Monks
and Prelates lived in a very confused knowledge of the mysteries of the Gospel.

WHAT he adds touching some Historians, and Bishops that wrote Books, is built
on the same foundation. Besides that there appears not any thing in these
Authors but what is very mean, their small number does well warrant our saying
this Age was void of Learned men, and that people had but a very confused
knowledge of the mysteries of the Gospel.

IT IS false, says he, that in this Age open War was denounced against the
senses. If this be false, how does he himself understand they taught
Transubstantiation in it? For can this Doctrine be taught without opposing the
testimony of our senses, seeing they show us it is Bread and Wine?

BUT these small objections are very inconsiderable in comparison of Mr.
Arnaud's grand pretension, which is, that this confused knowledge which I
attribute to the 10th. Century, is but a mere empty sound, whose sense I my
self do not understand. In searching his Book, says he, in what sense he took
it, I found that confused knowledge and distinct knowledge are one and the same
thing in his language, which is to say, that the knowledge which he calls
confused is every whit as clear as that which he calls distinct. This discovery
would be a very fine one indeed, were it not merely imaginary. It Is grounded on
that describing some-where the instructions of the Fathers of the eight first
Centuries, I say, that they taught therein the Sacrament to be Bread and Wine,
that this Bread and Wine were the signs and Figures of the Body of Jesus
Christ, that they lost not their natural substance, but were called the Body
and Blood of Christ, because they were the Sacraments of 'em. He hence
concludes that it is in these Articles wherein consists according to my way the
distinct knowledge of the Mystery of the Eucharist. He afterward observes that
in another place speaking of the trurh of the Eucharist which have been always
popular, I say, That the Mystery of the Eucharist has been always popular in
the outward form of its celebration, and in the general acts which Christians
ought to perform in it. To take Bread, to drink Wine in remembrance of the
Death and Resurrection of Jesus Christ our Lord, to receive these things with a
religious frame of mind as a great Sacrament which the Lord has ordained, to
raise up ones Faith to the Body and Blood of our Savior, to find therein the
consolation of our Souls; this without doubt is popular. It is popular to
hearken to the testimony of sense which tells us that it is Bread, and yet to
hear that it is the Body of Christ, the Sacrament of the Body of Christ, its
pledge, its memorial. It is popular to know that Jesus Christ is in Heaven, and
that from thence he shall come to judge both the quick and dead. Whence he
concludes with Authority that the distinct knowledge which I give to the first
Ages, and the confused one which I attribute to the 10th, are but one and the
same thing.

IT must be allowed that never any consequence was more violently drawn than
that of Mr. Arnaud's. First, It is not true that the Articles which I give of
the distinct knowledge, are the same with those of the popular knowledge. Among
the first is found, That the Bread and Wine lose not their natural substance.
That they are called the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, because they are the
Sacraments of 'em, which is not found in the Articles of the popular knowledge.
How will he have this to be then one and the same thing. There is a great deal
of difference between harkning to the testimony of ones proper senses which
show the Eucharist to be Bread and Wine, and learning from the instructions of
Pastors that the Eucharist is Bread and Wine. The first induces a man to
believe that to judge of it by sense it is real Bread and Wine, but the second
goes farther; for it shows this very thing which the senses depose, to be the
true belief of the Church. Now these two things are wholly different as any man
may see. The first does not dispose men to reject Transubstantiation as a
novelty contrary to the Faith of the Church, for it remains still to know
whether the Faith of the Church be not contrary to the testimony of sense. The
second does dispose 'em to it; for it shows that the Doctrine of the Church is
according to the deposition of the senses. Now the first is according to my
rule belonging to the popular knowledge; and the second belongs to the distinct
knowledge. What reason is there then in having these two knowledges to be the
same. Thirdly, Mr. Arnaud has not observed that when I spoke of the distinct
knowledge of the eight first Centuries, I did not pretend exactly to denote all
the Articles of it, this was not my business in that place. But only to observe
some of the principal ones which were sufficient to make known the sense of
these Propositions, The Bread is the Body of Jesus Christ, it is changed into
the Body of Jesus Christ. But it does not hence follow but that there were
therein some others very considerable ones, which may be gathered from the
passages of the Fathers, which I produced in my first part, as that the change
which happens in the Eucharist is not a change of Nature, but an addition of
Grace to Nature; that Jesus Christ, as to his human Body, or human Nature, is
so in Heaven that he is no more on Earth; that the manducation of the Body of
Jesus Christ is spiritual and mystical; that we must not understand it
literally, it being a figurative expression; that the Sacrament and the verity
represented by the Sacrament are two distinct things: and several others which
are not necessary to be related. Supposing it were true that the Articles of
the popular knowledge were the same with those I marked of the distinct
knowledge, which is evidently false, yet would it not follow that these two
knowledges according to my sense would be the same thing, seeing I never
pretended to make an exact enumeration of all the points of the distinct
knowledge, nor exclude them which I now denoted, which are no wise popular. In
fine, Mr. Arnaud has not considered that of the same Articles, whether popular,
or not popular, a man may have a distinct knowledge and a confused one,
according as he makes a greater or lesser reflection on them, according as they
are respected with more or less application, according as each of those that
has the knowledge of 'em has more or less understanding, natural or acquired; so
that supposing we attributed to the distinct knowledge of the eight first
Centuries only the Articles which I specified, supposing these Articles were
the same as those I attribute to the popular knowledge, which is not true;
supposing again there were no difference in 'em, as there is in respect of some
of these Articles, between the knowing of 'em popularly, that is to say, either
by the help of the Senses, or by the natural motion of the Conscience; and to
know them by the instruction of the Pastors, as a thing which the Church
believes, and from which a man must not vary, it would in no wise thence follow
that the confused knowledge were according to what I laid down, the same thing;
the object of these two knowledges would be the same, but the knowledges would
be distinct. And thus have we showed Mr. Arnaud's subtilties.

CHAP. VI.
Mr. Arnaud's Objections against what he calls the Machins of Mollification,
and the Machins of Execution Examined. The state of the Twelfth Century.

MR. ARNAVD will not suffer me to say in my Answer to the Answer to the second
Treatise, Part 2. chap. 7.
Author of the Perpetuity, That Error does not insinuate it self by way of
opposition, or a formal contradiction of the truth, but by way of addition,
explication, and confirmation, and that it endeavors to ally it self with the
ancient Faith to prevent its immediate opposition. And this is what he calls my
Machins of Mollification, which he pretends to overthrow in his fifth Chapter.
The inventions, says he, of Mr. Claude are Book 9. chapter 5. page 899.
usually attended with very considerable defects. To which I have no more to
say but this, that the pretensions of Mr. Arnaud are commonly very high, but
generally very ill grounded; well offered, but ill defended.

IT IS false, says he, that Paschasus did not teach his Doctrine, by expressly
condemning those that were of a contrary Opinion. Mr. Arnaud hides himself
under a thin vail, pretending not to understand what he does very well. We do
not say that Paschasus did not propose his Doctrine by condemning those of a
contrary Opinion. This is not the point in question. The question is, Whether
he did not propose his Doctrine as the Doctrine of the Church, which was not
sufficiently understood, and which he therefore more clearly explained? Now
Paschasus himself decides this difference, as I have showed in my Answer to the
Perpetuity. For speaking in the beginning of his Book touching his design, he
says, That all the Faithful ought to understand the Lib. De Corpore and Sang.
Dom. cap. 2.
Sacrament of our Lords Body and Blood, which is every day celebrated in the
Church, and what they ought to believe and know of it. That we must seek the
virtue of it, and instruct our Faith under the Discipline of Jesus Christ, lest
we be esteemed unworthy, if we do not discern it enough, not understanding what
is the dignity, and the virtue of the mystical Body and Blood of our Savior.
And lest it should be imagined this was only a way of speaking to excite the
Faithful to instruct themselves in this Mystery (yet without supposing that in
effect they were ignorant of the exposition he was going to make of it) we need
only call to mind what he says in his Letter to Frudegard, wherein speaking of
the success his Book met with, I am informed, says he, that I have moved
several to understand this mystery, which shows, Epist. ad Frud.
that according to him his Book was a more clear and express exposition of the
Churches sentiment, and that he had actually brought over several persons from
an obscure, to a clear knowledge of this Mystery. But without going any further,
we need only read a passage of Odon Abbot of Clugny, which Mr. Arnaud himself
has produced; for it expressly justifies what I say, Paschasus, says he, has
wrote these things, and several others to learn us Book 9. chapter 6. page 913.
the reverence we owe to this mystery, and make us know the majesty of it: and
if those who pretend to be knowing would take the pains to read his Book, they
will find such great things in it, as will make 'em acknowledge they understood
little of this mystery before. After this testimony of one of Paschasus his
principal Disciples, who lived in the 10th. Century, I think it cannot be
denied that Paschasus proposed his Doctrine by way of explication. He wrote,
says he, to teach us what reverence we owe to this mystery, and to make us know
the majesty of it. He will have also the learned before the reading of this
Book to be in a manner ignorant of this mystery, and seeing he is pleased the
learned should be no better qualified, I hope he will pardon the ignorant by a
stronger reason.

AND thus do we see on what design Paschasus and his Disciples taught their
Opinion, to wit, as an illustration of the common Faith, an explication of what
was known before but obscurely, and not as a Doctrine directly opposite to an
Error with which men were imbued. I acknowledge that this design proved not
successful to 'em in respect of all, and there being several who regarded this
opinion as a novelty which ought to be rejected; and as to them I doubt not but
Paschasus and his Disciples proceeded with 'em by way of opposition and
contradiction, as we are wont to do against professed enemies: but how does this
hinder them from proposing their Doctrine by way of explication, and even this,
to wit, whether it was an exposition of the ancient Doctrine or not, was in part
the subject of the contradiction.

IT is not possible, says Mr. Arnaud, that a Doctrine should be approved of Book
9. chapter 5. page 900.
immediately by all those to whom it was proposed. There must certainly be some
who reject it, and warn others against it. I grant it, but that it hence
follows as Mr. Arnaud would have it believed, that my pretension is impossible,
is what I deny, and that with reason; for a man may well propose a new opinion
by way of an explication of the ancient Faith, and defend it afterward by way
of contradiction against adversaries who reject it, and respect it as a novelty.

IN fine, adds Mr. Arnaud, this means will not serve the end for which Ibidem.
Mr. Claude designs it, which is to hinder men from rising up against this
Doctrine, and make the change insensible to those which suffered it. We never
told Mr. Arnaud that this means absolutely hindered the insurrection he
mentions, but in effect the contrary; to wit, that several did rise up against
Paschasus; but we pretend likewise 'twas easy to cheat several by making 'em
receive this novelty, under the title of an explication, and that in their
respect, they conceived therein no other change than that which ignorant people
do conceive, when they imagine a greater illustration of the Faith of the
Church, and what those learned persons could conceive of it, mentioned by Odon,
who by reading Paschasus his Book, acknowledged they had hitherto but small
knowledge of this mystery. All the effect which this could produce was, to
excite them against their former ignorance, and to esteem themselves obliged to
Paschasus for his good instructions. Now we know that these kind of
insurrections make no great noise.

BUT, says moreover Mr. Arnaud, others must be surpised in a contrary Page 901.
manner, they must needs deride the absurdity of this new Doctrine. They must be
astonished at the boldness of Paschasus and his Disciples proposing of it as
the Faith of the Church. They must be mightily offended at their being accused
of ignorance, and infidelity for not believing that which no Body ever did
believe. Who told Mr. Aruaud there were not in effect several in Paschasus his
time, who had these kind of sentiments touching his Opinion. Pascasus himself
acknowledges that several called in question his Doctrine, he says he was
reprehended for taking our Savior's words in a wrong sense; he endeavors to
answer some of their objections, seems to intimate he was accused for writing
his Book by an Enthusiastic rashness and pretended Revelation. And in effect
John Scot, Raban, and Bertram wrote against his novelties and opposed them. But
this does not hinder its being true, that he proposed his Doctrine as an
explication of the common Faith, and that this way might procure him many
followers. And so far concerning the Machins of Mollification.

I come now to the pretended Machins of Execution. Mr. Arnaud immediately
complains that I sometimes make the Real Presence to be established by the
noise of Disputes, and otherwhiles acknowledge there was no Dispute in the 10th.
Century, wherein I pretend this was effected: I think, Book 9. chapter 6. page 902.
says he, we had best leave him to his choice, and that by choosing one of
these chimerical means, he may acknowledge he has rashly and falsely offered the
other. Were Mr. Arnaud's request reasonable, we would not stick to grant it,
notwithstanding the sharpness of his expressions. But it is unjust and
unwarrantable: for it is certain that the change in question has happened, and
that with and without Disputes. There was a contest in the 9th. Century during
the time wherein Paschasus lived, as I now said. We do not find there was any
in the 10th. but in the 11th 'twas very hot. So that any man may see there is
no contradiction in what I offered, let Mr. Arnaud say what he pleases. Which I
hope he will grant me, when he considers, First, That what I said concerning
the senses that were attackt by the noise of the Dispute, and the Authority of
the Court of Rome, must be referred to the 11th, Century, and that 'twill not
be found I attributed it to the 10th. Secondly, That when I spoke precisely of
the 10th. I did not suppose any Disputes in it, but on the contrary a gross
ignorance, which hindered 'em from disputing.

Mr. ARNAVD cannot comprehend that there were, or that there were not any
Disputes. The means, says he, that they proposed the Doctrine of the Real
Presence to so many persons that never heard of it, or had an aversation to it,
and that they have been persuaded immediately, so that they made no resistance.
And so far for the Disputes. The means likewise that so many Disputes should
produce no Writings, that the Paschasits should publish nothing to satisfy the
doubts proposed to 'em. That the Bertramits in rejecting the Doctrine of the
Real Presence should never publish the reasons for it. And here we have
something against the Disputes.

BUT people must never argue against matters of fact. It Is certain there were
Disputes against Paschasus his Doctrine in the 9th. Century, we learn as much
from Paschasus himself; it is also certain there were likewise in the 11th. on
the same subject. We are informed of this by the History of Berenger. It
appears that the Doctrine of Bertram had likewise its course in the 10th. We
learn this from the Paschal Homilies and Sermons of that time which are extant.
It Is also certain the Real Presence was taught therein. We know this by the
example of Odon Archbishop of Canterbury who made use of Miracles to persuade
the world of the truth of it. Yet does it not appear there were any Disputes
raised on this point, nor Writings on either side. It seems to me we ought to
stop here, and argue not against these matters of fact, seeing they cannot be
denied, but on these facts to draw notices thence which may clear our principal
Question, which is whether Paschasus was the Innovator, or whether the
innovation must be attributed to John Scot, to Bertram, to Raban, or any other
adversaries of Paschasus his Doctrine.

THIS is the Point to be dispatched, for what signifies the marking one by one
of the Authors that have written the lives of the Saints of the 10th. Century.
What matter is it to us who wrote the life of S. Radbodus, or that of S.
Godart, or S. Remacle? We do not see, says Mr. Arnaud, in any of these Book 9.
chapter 6. page 907.
lives that either of 'em busied himself to instruct the people in the Doctrine
of the Real Presence, and to refute the contrary opinion. Were this observation
true what good would redound from it? Did these Historians design to learn the
world the sentiments of their Saints on every particular Article of Religion,
or to inform us what was the subject of their Sermons and instructions which
they gave their people? Moreover, who supposes all these Bishops were Preachers
of the Real Presence? It is sufficient there were some that have authorized
this Doctrine, William of Malmsbury, as Mr. Arnaud himself acknowledges, relates
of Odon the Archbishop of Canterbury, That he confirmed several in the Faith
that doubted of the truth of our Lords Ibidem.
Body, having showed them by a miracle, the Bread of the Altar changed into
Flesh, and the Wine of the Chalice changed into Blood. Whether these doubters
were the Disciples of John Scot, or not, it is not necessary to enquire; it is
sufficient that this relation shows us there were several persons that
withstood the Doctrine of the Real Presence, and that these persons were neither
inconsiderable for their number, nor fame; seeing a Primate of England, the
Archbishop of Canterbury was forced to make use of a Miracle for their
Conversion. Mr. Arnaud likewise tells us from the Life of S. Dunstan Page 9 8.
that he preached the Real Presence; and we have seen already what he himself
alleges touching Oden the Abbot of Clugny, who exhorted those that thought
themselves learned to read Paschasus his Book, telling 'em they might learn
such great things in it, as would make 'em acknowledge they had hitherto but
small knowledge of the mystery of the Eucharist. This methinks is sufficient to
show there were endeavors in the 10th. Century to establish the Real Presence.
For what could these great things be which the Learned had no knowledge of, and
in which they were to be instructed by Paschasus his Book, but the mysteries of
the Real Presence? 'Twould be absurd to say, that by these great things we must
understand only the Devotion and Piety with which we ought to receive the
Sacrament. For it is to be supposed, these Learned folks, mentioned by Odon were
not ignorant that Jesus Christ is on the Altar by the proper substance of his
Body, neither could be ignorant that it ought to be received with all the
Respect and Devotion we are able; and therefore there was no need to send 'em
to Paschasus his Book to discover therein this consequence, seeing it discovers
it self sufficiently enough by the bare idea which the Gospel gives us of Jesus
Christ.

MOREOVER, he that desires to see the strange effects of prejudice, need but
read the 7th. Chapter of Mr. Arnaud's 9th. Book. He pretends to show therein,
as the title of the Chapter bears, That the mixture of the Page 914.
two Doctrines which Mr. Claude is obliged to admit in the 10th. Century, is a
thing the most contrary imaginable to common sense. He exerts all his parts, to
show this mixture is impossible, he cannot endure there should be therein
either ignorant or profane persons, nor Paschasists, nor Bertramists, and
argues thereupon till he has lost both himself and his Readers.

YET is this a real matter of fact against which all Mr, Arnaud's subtilties
will not prevail, That the two Doctrines have been mixed in this Century. I
already proved it in my Answer to the Perpetuity, but Mr. Arnaud has thought
good to suppress my proofs, and pass 'em over in silence, to make way for his
reasonings. But let him argue as long as he will, he cannot hinder its being
true, that in the 10th. Century The English were taught this Doctrine, that as we
consider two things in the same creature, as for instance in the Lib.
Catholicor. Sermon. ad Bed. Hist. l. 5. c. 22. Abraham Veloci.
water of Baptism, the one that it is naturally true it is corruptible Water;
and the other that according to the spiritual mystery, it has a saving virtue;
so likewise if we consider the Eucharist according to our natural
understanding, we see it to be a corporeal and elementary creature; but if we
regard the spiritual virtue, then we understand there is life in it, and that
'twill give immortality to those that shall partake of it with Faith. That
there is a great deal of difference between the invisible virtue of this holy
Eucharist, and the visible species of nature; that in respect of its nature it
is corruptible Bread, and corruptible Wine, and that by the virtue of the
Divine Word it is truly the Body and Blood of Christ, yet not corporeally, but
spiritually. That there is a great deal of difference between this Body in
which Jesus Christ has suffered, and that Body which is Consecrated in the
Eucharist: For the Body with which our Savior has suffered was born of the
Virgin, has Blood, Bones, Skin, Sinews, and is endued with a reasonable Soul.
But his spiritual Body which we call the Eucharist is composed of several
grains, without Blood, Bones, Members, and Soul; and therefore we must not
understand any thing of it corporeally, but spiritually.

II. Mr. ARNAVD cannot hinder it from being true, that the Ibidem.
people were instructed in this manner. The heavenly food with which the Jews
were nourished by the space of forty years, and the Water which ran from the
Rock, represented the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, which we now every day
offer in the Church. They were the same things which we offer at this day, not
corporeally, but spiritually. We have already told you that our Savior Christ
before his Passion Consecrated Bread and Wine to be his Eucharist, and said,
This is my Body and Blood. He had not yet suffered, and yet he changed by his
invisible virtue this Bread into his own Body, and this Wine into his own
Blood, in the same manner as he had already done in the Wilderness before he
was incarnate, when he changed the heavenly Manna into his Flesh, and the Water
which ran from the Rock into his own Blood. He that eats my Flesh and drinks my
Blood has Eternal Life. He does not command us to eat that Body which he
assumed, nor drink that Blood which he spilt for us, but by this he means the
holy Eucharist, which is spiritually his Body and Blood, which whosoever shall
taste with a pure heart shall live eternally. Under the ancient Law the
Faithful offered to God several Sacrifices, which signified the Body of Jesus
Christ to come; this Body I say which he offered to God his Father as a
Sacrifice for our Sins. But this Eucharist which we now Consecrate on Gods
Altar is the Commemoration of the Body of Jesus Christ offered for us, and
Blood shed for us, according as he himself has commanded, saying, Do this in
remembrance of me.

III. Mr. ARNAVD must be remembered that Elfric Abbat of Sermon. Elfrici apud
Eund. Voloc.
Malm^sbury, and who was afterward (as it is thought) Archbishop of
Canterbury, and lived in the same time, wrote, That the Eucharist is not the
Body of Jesus Christ corporally, but spiritually; not the Body in which Jesus
Christ has suffered, but the Body in which he spoke the night before his
Passion, when he Consecrated the Bread and Wine, and said of the Consecrated
Bread, This is my Body, and of the Consecrated Wine, This is my Blood, which is
shed for many for the remission of sins. -- The Lord who before his Passion
Consecrated the Eucharist, and said, the Bread was his Body, and the Wine truly
his Blood, does himself every day Consecrate by the hands of the Priest the
Bread into his Body, and the Wine into his Blood, by a spiritual mystery, as we
find it written. This enlivening Bread is not in any sort the same Body in
which our Lord suffered, and the Consecrated Wine is not the Blood of our Lord,
which was shed as to the corporeal matter, but it is as to the spiritual. The
Bread was his Body, and the Wine his Blood, as the Bread of Heaven which we
call the Manna with which the people of God were nourished during forty years,
and the water which ran from the Rock in the Desert was his Blood, as says the
Apostle in one of his Epistles, they ate of the same spiritual food, and drank
of the same spiritual drink. The Apostle does not say corporally but
spiritually. For Jesus Christ was not then born, nor his Blood spilt, when the
people ate of this food, and drank of this Rock.

IV. Mr. ARNAVD cannot hinder Wulstin Bishop of Salisbury in Mss. in Colleg. S.
Bened. Cant.
his Sermon which he made to his Clergy, from speaking in this manner; This
Sacrifice is not the Body of Jesus Christ wherein he suffered, nor his Blood
which was shed for us; but it is made spiritually his Body and Blood, as the
Manna which fell from Heaven, and the water which gushed out of the Rock,
according to the saying of S. Paul, I will not have you Brethren to be
ignorant, that our Fathers have been all under a Cloud, and passed the Sea, and
all of 'em baptized by Moses, in the Cloud and in the Sea, and that they have
all eaten the same spiritual food, and drank the same spiritual drink; for they
drank out of the spiritual Rock which followed them. Now this Rock was Christ:
and therefore the Psalmist says, he gave them the Bread of Heaven, Man has
eaten the Angels food. We likewise without doubt eat the Bread of Angels, and
drink of this Rock which signifies Christ, every time we approach with Faith to
the Sacrifice of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ.

V. Mr. ARNAVD must know that the people were publicly In eod. Mss. Eccl.
Vigorn.
taught, That Jesus Christ brake the Bread to represent the fraction of his
Body, that he blessed the Bread and brake it, because it pleased him so to
submit the human nature which he had taken to death, that he has also added
that he had in it a treasure of Divine immortality. -- And because Bread
strengthens the body, and the Wine begets blood in the flesh, therefore the
Bread relates mystically to the Body, and the Wine to the Blood.

VI. He must know that Heriger Abbot of Lobbs in the County of Sig de Script.
Eccles. cap. 137. de Cest. Abb. Lob. tom. 6. Spicil. p. 591.
Liege, publicly condemned Paschasus his Doctrine as new, and contrary to the
Faith of the Church. Which we learn by Sigibert and the continuer of the Acts
of the Abbots of Lobbs; for both of 'em say, That he produced against Rabbert a
great many passages of the Fathers Writings touching the Body and Blood of our
Lord.

VIII. Mr. ARNAVD himself confesses that John Scot, who withdrew Book 9. chapter 6.
p. 909.
into England about the end of the preceding Century, made perhaps some
Disciples of his Doctrine. It Is true he would have these Disciples to be secret.
But why secret? John Scot kept not himself private, Bertran and Raban were
neither of 'em in private, Those that disliked Paschasus his Novelties hid not
themselves in the 9th. Century. Why then must the Disciples of John Scot lie
secret in the 10th. wherein were Homilies that were filled with Doctrins
contrary to that of Paschasus publicly read? Besides, as I have already said,
there is no likelihood that Odon Archbishop of Canterbury should think himself
obliged to have recourse to such a famous miracle as is that related by William
of Malmsbury, to confute those that durst not show themselves.

SEEING therefore on one hand the Doctrine of the Real Presence taught in the
10th. Century, and on the other the contrary Doctrine preached, and publicly
held, it seems to me we may say with boldness that this Century was mixed; and
Mr. Arnaud cannot give us a greater prejudice against his way of arguing by
pretended moral impossibilities than to use them in a case wherein the matter
of fact so plainly appears.

IT IS moreover very strange that Mr. Arnaud should endeavor to persuade us
'twas not possible there could be in this Century ignorant people that had no
other than a confused knowledge of Gospel Mysteries; after the testimonies we
have brought him of so many Authors who unanimously depose the contrary. Does
he expect we will believe him sooner than William of Tyr an Historian of the
12th. Century, who tells us, speaking of the 10th. and 11th. That the Christian
Faith was decayed amongst those who William of Tyr. lib. 1. cap. 8.
called themselves Christians, that there were therein no more justice, equity,
or any other virtue, that the world seemed to draw toward an end, and was
about returning to its former Chaos, that the lives of Churchmen were no
better than the peoples, for the Bishops grew negligent of their charge, were
dumb dogs that could not bark. Does he hope we shall give a greater deference
to his reasons than to the testimony of Herive Arch bishop of Rheims, an Author
of the 10th. Century, who assures us, that Christian Religion was nigh decayed,
Pr^f. ad Concilium Trosl.
and standing as it were on the edg of a precipice. We have, says he, in the
Council of Trosly, scarcely any good order observed amongst us, the whole state
of the Church is overthrown and corrupted, and not to spare our selves, we that
ought to correct the faults of others, are as bad as the rest; we are called
Bishops, but do we do the office of a Bishop? We leave off Preaching, we behold
those committed to us forsake God, and plunge themselves in all manner of
lewdness, and yet are silent; we reach not forth to 'em the hand of correction.
If at any time we tell 'em that which does not please 'em, they answer us in
the words of our Savior, the Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses his seat, etc.
So that in this manner are we struck dumb, and the Lords flock is lost, are
drowned in vices, and exposed to the cruel teeth of wolves. There being no body
to show 'em the way of life, how can it be but they must wander into the paths
of error? Thus in them is accomplished what is said by the Prophet, This
ignorant people shall be struck with jealousy; and again, My people are gone
into captivity, because they had no knowledge. Where are they who are converted
by our Preaching and have brought forth fruits worthy of repentance? Who is the
man that by hearing us has left his luxury, covetousness, or pride?

This good Bishop who deserves without doubt for his zeal not to be Concilium
Trosl. cap. 3.
comprehended amongst the number of others, describing in a decretal of his
Council assembled at Trosly the condition of the Monasteries of his time, says,
That as well the Monks as the Nuns lived without Rule, and Discipline, applying
themselves to worldly affairs; that some of 'em were constrained by necessity
to return into the world again, that the Monasteries were possessed by
Lay-Abbots who lived therein with their Wives, Children, Soldiers and Dogs;
that the Abbots were not in a capacity t'examine the Rules of their Convents,
to read, or understand 'em; and if at any time the Book was offered 'em, their
reply was, Nescio literas. He afterward represents the violence of those that
ravished the goods of the Church, persecuted, and put to death the Priests,
forcibly took away their Neighbors Estates, laying snares for the innocent,
putting 'em to death and plundering their houses, and says the number of these
latter was infinite, and that they imagined 'twas a gentile thing to live by
Rapine. Afterward he turns his discourse to the Ravishers of Virgins, and
Women, and those that contracted clandestine and incestuous Marriages, and
shows the number of these was not small. Thence he comes to the scandalous
conversation of Priests with Women, to perjured Persons, Quarrels, Murders;
and in fine, concludes by an exhortation to the Bishops his Suffragans to do
henceforward their duty. Alas, says he, Ibid. in Epil.
alas! through our negligence, and ignorance, and by the neglect and ignorance of
our Predecessors, and that of our Brethren who are still living, several do
perish in their Vices, and at this time there are an infinite number of people
of both Sexes, Ages, and Conditions, ignorant of the Faith, know not their
Creed, or Pater noster. How can these people, supposing they were of honest
conversation, do good Works, having not the foundation of Faith? And what
excuse can we make for our selves? when they die they enter not into life, for
they are unacquainted with it, but they enter into eternal death, which they
cannot avoid, being without Faith; for the just live by Faith. We are then, as
Gregory says, the murderers of these people that perish, whereas we should be
their guides to save them. For it is for our sins this multitude are
degenerated, because we carelessly neglect the giving them the instructions of
life. Will Mr. Arnaud now persuade us 'twas impossible there should be persons
in the 10th. Century that had only a confused knowledge of Christianity?

THE ignorance, says he, of the mystery of the Eucharist cannot subsist with
Book 9. chapter 7. page 915.
a million of Preachers of the Real Presence, and a million of people that
rejected it. When Mr. Arnaud is in his Closet, a million of Preachers costs him
no more than thirty; and his Commission is as soon given to a great number as a
small. But what is most admirable, is, that when we come to count these
Preachers of the Real Presence, we do not find 'em to be above four or five at
most; one of which, as I already observed, plainly tells us, that those of his
time that personated learned men had small knowledge of this mystery, till they
read Paschasus his Book, which must be according to him the fountain of their
light. It Is moreover to be observed that what I now alleged of Herive in the
Council of Trosly, is of the year 909 that is to say, in the beginning of the
10th. Century. Now it is certain the darkness waxed greater after this Century,
but we see to what degree it arrived then. Most of the Abbats knew not how to
read. The Pastors left off Preaching to and instructing of the people; and an
infinite number of people of either Sex, both young and old, could not say
their Creed, nor the Lords Prayer during their whole lives. Methinks it cannot
be well concluded hence there were at that time in the Church neither ignorant
nor profane persons; much less can it be concluded hence, there were then but
three sorts of persons, the Paschasists, the Bertramists, and those that passed
from one opinion to another. It Is sufficient, says Mr. Arnaud, to tell Page 916.
Mr. Claude in a word, that to act as he must suppose they have done, they must
not have been men, but some other kind of Animals, and such creatures as we
never heard of. To which I answer, that if he will not allow 'em to be Men, he
shall make Satyrs, or Centaurs of 'em if he will: for as to my part I must
suppose 'em to be what they are. If he does not find the Paschasists had zeal
enough for the Real Presence, he ought to impart more to 'em if he can. And if
the Bertramists have not well discharged their duty, we for our share must
deplore their stupidity, seeing we cannot help it. But howsoever it is certain
there were Paschasists, and that there were Bertramists; and it is likewise as
certain that the Pastors carelessness, and the People ignorance were both very
great. These are matters of fact, against which it is in vain to dispute. All
that can be rationally said, is, that the ignorance of the one, and the
carelessness of the others made 'em agree in the subject of the Real Presence.
I mean they disputed not about it, because they wanted ability to do it, as
well as zeal and industry.

Mr. ARNAVD endeavors in vain to persuade us that the disorders Book 9. chapter 9.
page 957.
of the 10th. Century were no greater than those of the others, and that the
state of the Church in this world is to include in the same external Society
both living and dead Members, Stubble and Wheat; it is a necessary consesequence
of this state, that a man may reproach every Age with several disorders, and
that each time of the Church may be respected as having two different faces,
according as a man casts his eyes upon the good that credit it, or the wicked
that dishonor it.

WHAT he says is but too true, and so it is too true that the 10th. Century has
improved the former errors; for besides that the common disorders have appeared
in it in a different degree, there were particular ones in it which the
preceding Ages were not acquainted with. Never was there such an ignorance
before which the Council of Trosly then denoted. The neglect of the Bishops and
Priests was never so great as that Council, Elfric Archbishop of Canterbury,
and William of Tire describe it. Covetousness never reigned so much amongst the
Monks and Priests, as Polydor Virgil testifies it did then. Such an universal
degeneracy, as we find attributed by Authors to those times, we never yet heard
of. There were never seen in the Church of Rome the like disorders as those
that were observable throughout this whole Century. Such a relaxation of
Discipline in the Cathedral Churches (the superintendency of which was
committed to Children of 5, 10, 12, and 14 years) was never before known. Most
Writers that have mentioned it are Historians that designed not to pass
censures, or aggravate in general the degeneracy of men, but to remark the
particular characters of this Century which distinguish them from the rest. And
therefore they call it the unhappy Age, an Age of lead, the iron Age, an
obscure and dark Age, an Age of darkness and ignorance, a most wretched time
wherein the just were not to be found, and wherein truth had for saken the
earth, an Age, in short, wherein happened a general decay of all virtues.

IT IS in vain for Mr. Arnaud to say again, 'twas an Age of Zeal, Fervor, Book
9. chapter 7. page 947.
Conversions, Reformations in Princes, in Princesses, in Bishops, in Religious
Persons, and in the People. For first, it is certain that in respect of those
which Mr. Arnaud speaks of, that their Zeal, their Fervor, their Conversions,
their Reformations, such as they were had not that prevalency as to make 'em
dispute amongst themselves of the Real Presence. On one hand was taught, as we
have already observed, That there is a great difference between this Body in
which Jesus Christ suffered, and that which is Consecrated in the Eucharist;
that the one is born of the Virgin, has Blood, Bones, Skin, Nerves, and is
endued with a reasonable Soul; but that the other which is his spiritual Body
consists of several grains, without Blood, Bones, Members, and Soul. That as in
the Water of Baptism there are two things to be considered, one that according
to nature it is corruptible water, and the other according to the spiritual
mystery, this water has a salutary virtue; so the Eucharist according to the
natural understanding is a corporeal and corruptive creature, and according to
the spiritual virtue, life is in it, it gives immortality to the Faithful.
'Twas taught, that the Bread and Wine are spiritually changed into the Body and
Blood of Jesus Christ, as the Manna was changed into his Flesh, and the water
of the Rock into his Blood. That the Bread is not in any wise the same Body in
which our Savior suffered, nor the Wine the Blood which he shed for us, but
his Body and Blood spiritually. In this Age were several passages of the
Fathers collected and urged against Paschasus touching the Body and Blood of
Jesus Christ. On the other hand the Pastors were exhorted to come and learn in
Paschasus his Book what they were as yet ignorant of. Miracles were likewise
wrought to confirm those that doubted of the Real Presence; but we do not find
they disputed about it one against another. If the reason which I offer from
the ignorance, and negligence of the one and the other does not well relish
with Mr. Arnaud, let him give a better, I Will gladly receive it, provided he
denies not certain matters of fact, against which no arguments must be offered.

THE Zeal, Fervor, Conversions and Reformations which he attributes to the
10th. Century, hinder not the truth of what we observed concerning the
Religious living without Rule, their Abbots being married and Laymen, the
Bishops neglecting to instruct their Flocks, and an infinite number of either
Sex and all Ages, being ignorant of the Creed and Lords Prayer, and living and
dying in this ignorance. This is a matter of fact attested by Witnesses of that
very Age. This does not hinder but the Roman Church was for this whole Century
in a fearful disorder, as speaks the Author of the Perpetuity, and Baronius too
when he tells us, Our Savior Bayon. annal. Eccles. Tom 10. ad ann. 612.
Christ slept then in his Ship. He slept and made as tho he saw not these
things, he let them alone, he arose not to take vengeance; and that which was
worse, there were no Disciples who by their shrieks should awake the Lord
sleeping, for they were all asleep themselves. What think you were the
Cardinals, Priests, and Deacons that were elected by these Monsters, seeing
there is nothing more natural than for every thing to produce its like. Who
doubts but they consented to all which they did who had chosen 'em, but that
they imitated 'em and trod in their footsteps, but that they all desired our
Savior should sleep on, and never rise to judge them, nor awake to call 'em to
account for their wicked deeds. Luitprand produces a Letter of John the XIIth.
to the Council, which the Emperor Otton assembled at Rome to depose him, which
shows us how admirable the Popes were for Learning in those days. Joannes
Episcopus servus servorum Dei omnibus Episcopis. Nos audivimus dicere quod vos
vultis alium Papam facere, si hoc feceritis, Excommunico vos de Deo
omnipotenti, ut non habeatis licentiam ullum ordinare and missam celebrare. The
Councils answer is as elegant. Est vestris in literis scriptum quod non
Episcopum sed puerilem ineptiam scribere deceret, excommunicastis enim omnes ut
non habeamus licentiam canendi missam, ordinandi Ecclesiasticas dispositiones,
si al^um Romanoe Sedi constitueremus Episcopum. It a enim scriptum erat, non
habeatis licentiam ullum ordinare. Nunc usque putavimus, immo credimus duo
negativa unum facere dedicativum, nisi vestra autoritas priscorum sententias
infirmaret autorum.

THE Zeal, Fervor, frequent Conversions, and Reformations of those days could
not hinder but that Symony was very frequent, as I proved in my Answer to the
Perpetuity by the testimonies of Luitprand, and Glaber, and by the very
confession of the Author of the Perpetuity himself, which might be further made
to appear were it necessary. Now judge I pray you what science and zeal there
could be in a Church where the ministerial Office was upon sale to him that
offered most. And moreover, the Arch-bishopricks, and Bishoprics commonly
bestowed on Children incapable of discharging those great trusts; which
Baronius expressly asserts: for having told Baron. ad ann. 925.
us from the testimony of Frodoart that Heribert Earl of Guyenne and Suelphus
Archbishop of Rhemes were agreed, that after the death of Suelphus the
Archbishopric should come to Heribert's Son, he says, that Heribert to make
quick work caused Suelphus to be poisoned, and his Son to be chosen in his
place, who was not above five years old; that the news of the Election being
brought to the King, he confirmed it, which was also done by Pope John the Xth.
To which Baronius adds, That this example was quickly followed by several
Princes, who promoted their own or relations Children to the Episcopal Seats as
often as they became vacant, which, says he, was likewise done in Rome it self in
those days, Constantinople, and other great Cities. And would to God, adds he,
this custom had went no farther than those days, and that so detestable a
wickedness against the Churches Canons were unknown to the following Ages. Let
Mr. Arnaud himself judge whether ignorance and carelessness are not the natural
effects of such disorders.

WHEREUNTO we may add the Tumults and continual Wars with which the West was
afflicted during this whole Century; for it is certain that from the beginning
to the end of it all Europe resounded with the noise of them. France was
therein troubled by the League of Robert, and the dreadful consequences happening
thereupon, by the Wars against the Normans, Danes, and Germans, and by those
which happened upon the rejection of Charles Duke of Lorrain, and the Election of
Hugo Capet. England was therein disturbed by diverse Civil Wars, and the
frequent Incursions of the Danes, Scotch, Irish, and other people still
professing Paganism. Spain was also molested by the Moors, Arabians, and
Saracens, by the Invasions of the Normans, and by the dreadful Divisions of the
Christians.

GERMANY spent this Century in perpetual Confusions, the Danes, Sclavonians,
and Huns ravaged all things by their irruptions which often happened. For
Children to contrive the death of their Parents was ordinary, and Great Persons
to rise up against their lawful Princes, (which commonly ended in bloody
Battles) not to mention the cruel Wars which the Emperors had to maintain in
Italy against the Factious, and in Calabria against the Greeks and Saracens.)
As to Italy she was throughout this whole Century, in the most deplorable state
imaginable; on one hand by the Princes of Tuscany, on the other by the Wars of
the Italian Princes one against another, and the Arms of the Emperors and
neighboring Kings. In short, the confusions were then so general, that there
was scarcely a corner in Europe wherein a man that loves quiet could obtain it.
Now who is it but knows that times of War and Divisions are apt to introduce
carelessness, looseness, and ignorance of the mysteries of Religion into the
Church.

I CONFESS there were in this Age some endeavors after a Reformation; bu
besides that they were but mere essays that proved ineffectual, I deny they
were strong enough, supposing they could have had a wished for success, to stir
men up to search into the Controversy of Christ's Real Presence in the
Sacrament. The most considerable were those made in the Council of Trosly
already mentioned by us, and it will not be amiss to make some remarks on what
was resolved therein. Let us endeavor, Council. Trost. n Epilog^.
say these Fathers which were not above twelve) by our own means and by the
Priests under us, to avoid as much as in us lies, this terrible damnation,
which we have drawn down upon our selves and the people committed to our
charge. Let us instruct 'em both by our Doctrine and Example. Let us behave our
selves as the Ministers of Christ, that our Office be not dishonored, and it be
said of us, the Priests are without knowledge, those to whom the Law is
committed have not known me, and lest we fall into the fault of Ely who
corrected not the faults of his Sons. First then let every Christian ground
himself well in the Christian Religion, which is the Catholic Faith, without
which a man cannot be called a Christian. Let him believe in the Father, Son,
and Holy Spirit, one only true God, three persons in unity of substance. But
yet know that the Son alone took on him our Flesh to save us, and thus suffered
Death, rose again, ascended up into Heaven, and will come in the same Flesh to
judge both quick and dead. Let him believe in the Holy Ghost, and that by him we
have the remission of sins in our Baptism, and that through his Grace our sins are
continually pardoned by the penitence and ministry of the Priests. Let him
believe also a real and general Resurrection of the Flesh at the coming of
Jesus Christ. This is the true foundation of Faith which must be adorned by
Good Works; for as it is impossible without Faith to please God, so Faith cannot
be persect if it shows not it self by Charity, for if it be void of works it is
become dead in it self. They afterward proceed to the rules of morality,
recommending Hope, Charity, Humility, Chastity, Temperance, Sobriety, and
condemn Pride, Envy, Hatred, Variance, Drunkenness, Calumny, Magic,
Divinations, etc.

HERE we have without question very commendable endeavors, but they reach no
farther than the instructing of the people in the Articles of the Creed and the
principal points of morality. These Fathers in their greatest zeal to reform
both themselves and others, make no mention of the Real Presence. 'Twas not
then above fifty years when the Dispute was very hot on this subject, and Books
were wrote on both sides. Yet it seems they took no notice of it, much less
determine to instruct the people in what they ought to hold of it. All their
care was to remove that ignorance of the Fundamentals wherein the people lay,
and correct that fearful corruption of manners wherein the greatest parr spent
their lives. Now this shows us that Mr. Arnaud can draw no advantage from these
essays of a Reformation, for supposing they had their whole effect, they
extended not so far as the question of the Real Presence, because they suppose
either that the people were not ignorant of it, or that the Pastors were
themselves so persuaded of it, that it was needless to instruct them in it, or
exhort them to instruct their Flocks in it. But what likelihood is there that
this in numerable multitude of people of both Sexes, and of all Ages and
conditions of life, that knew not their Creed, nor the Lords Prayer, and lived
without any knowledge of the Principles of Christian Religion should know the
Doctrine of the Real Presence. Were they all in those days born imbued with this
Doctrine? What likelihood is there those Abbots that knew not the Statutes of
their Monasteries, and who to excuse themselves from reading 'em when offered
to them, were forced to say, nescimus literas, were not likewise greatly
ignorant of the Mystery of the Eucharist? What reason is there to say the
Pastors themselves were commonly instructed in it, seeing Odon. Abbot of
Clugny, as we have already seen, testifies that those who pretended to be
learned yet had little knowledge of the Sacrament till they read Paschasus his
Book.

THERE were likewise other Reformations made in this Century, but they served
only to establish some order in the Monasteries, and the observance of
particular Statutes under which the Religious are obliged to live by their
profession; and this does not hinder but that ignorance and carelessness were
very great in respect of the Mystery of Religion.

AS to the Conversions, it is certain there were some, but Mr. Arnaud knows very
well the greatest part of 'em were wrought by force, or the interests and
intrigues of Princes. And thus those that were converted might well embrace
their Religion implicitly or in gross, without troubling themselves with
particular Doctrins, as the greatest part of the People of the Roman Church do
at present. In the year 912, according to Matthew of Westminister, Rollon, or
Raoul, Duke of Normandy embraced the Christian Religion to espouse Gill the
Daughter or Sister of Charles III. King of France. In the year 925, Sitricus
King of Denmark caused himself to be Baptized to espouse Edgite the Sister of
Etelstan King of England, but a while after he returned to Paganism. In the
year 926, Elstan having vanquished in Battle several petty Kings which were
then in England, obliged them and their Subjects to receive the Christian
Faith. In the year 949, Otton King of Germany having subdued the Sclavonians,
these people redeemed their lives and Country by being Baptized. In the year
965, Poland was converted to the Christian Faith by the Marriage of Miezislaus
its King with the Daughter of Boleslaus Duke of Bohemia. John XIII. Antipope
to Benedict V. sent thither Gilles Bishop of Tusculum to establish under the
Authority of the King his Religion in that Country. In the year 989, Adalbert
Archbishop of Prague went into Hungary to endeavor the conversion of those
people; but this was under the authority and power of Geisa King of Hungary,
who was converted by commerce with Christians whom he freely permitted to live
in his Kingdom. So that all these conversions about which Mr. Arnaud and the
Author of the Perpetuity make such a noise to advance the glory, zeal, and
knowledge of the Bishops of the 10th. Century do not at all conclude what they
pretend.

LET the Reader then join all these things together, and judge which of us two
has most reason, Mr. Arnaud who maintains it to be impossible that the belief
of the Real Presence, supposing 'twere a novelty in the Church, could make any
progress therein in the 10th. Century without Disputes and Commotions, or I who
maintain that these progresses were not only possible, but easy to be
conceived, First, There were Disputes on this subject in the 9th. Century,
which is a matter of fact not to be denied. Secondly, Although the question was
therein agitated, yet was it not decided by any Council, nor by the Church of
Rome, nor by any other public Authority. Thirdly, Those of the 10th. Century
fell into a very confused knowledge of the Mystery of Christian Religion, in
general, the People, the Religious, and the greatest part of the Priests and
Bishops, lived in very gross ignorance, and in a prodigious neglect of the
chief Offices of their Charge, as we have fully proved. Fourthly,
Ecclesiastical Discipline was wholly laid aside in this Age, and the temporal
state of the Church lay in a perpetual and general confusion. Fifthly, It
appears that the Doctrine of Bertram which was contrary to the Real Presence was
therein preached in several places. Sixthly, It also appears that that of
Paschasus was so too, and was endeavored to be under-propt by Miracles, and
Pastors exhorted to read Paschasus his Book to be instructed in the Mystery of
the Eucharist. Seventhly, To which we may add, that the persons that taught the
Real Presence in this Century were people of great credit and authority. Odon
that confirmed it by Miracles was Archbishop of Canterbury, and was in great
reputation. The Other Odon who had such an esteem for Paschasus his Book was an
Abbot of Clugny, a restorer and reformer of several Monasteries, of whom
Baronius says, That he was chosen by God as another Jeremiah Baron. ad an. 938.
to pluck up, destroy, scatte^, plant and build in that wretched Age.

ALL these matters of fact being clearly proved as they are, what impossibility
is there that the Doctrine of Paschasus (which he taught in the 9th. Century, as
an explication of the true Doctrine of the Church, confirming it as much as he
could by several passages of the Fathers taken in a wrong sense, no public
Authority having condemned it) should have followers in the 10th. That these
his Disciples finding 'emselves credited and authorized by their Offices and
Employs in a Church wherein ignorance, carelessness, and confusion reigned, have
themselves communicated and dispersed it in the minds of several, without
resistance; and thus this Doctrine has made in the space of these hundred years
insensible progresses, establishing it self by little and little under the name
and title of the Churches Faith, till having been at length directly and
formally contradicted in the 11th. as an innovation, this Doctrine found it self
the strongest, and triumphed over the contrary Doctrine. What difficulty can be
raised against this Hypothesis, which may not be casily solved? If it be said
that Paschasus did not propose any thing but what all the faithful already
distinctly knew and believed, Paschasus himself will answer for me, that he has
moved several persons to the understanding of this Mystery, which supposes that
before his time 'twas not sufficiently known, and that he discovered things of
which the people were ignorant. Odon will answer for me that the most learned
had but little knowledge of the mystery of the Eucharist if they had not read
Paschasus his Book. If it be said his Doctrine met with no contradiction,
Paschasus himself will tell you that some blamed him for attributing more to
the word of Christ than the truth it self has promised us, and it is hereon he
disputes against his Adversaries. Should a man deny that the two Doctrins, that
of Paschasus, and that of his Adversaries were both taught in the 10th.
Century, he will (I think) be convinced of the contrary by the proofs I have
given; and in effect there is no great likelihood that the Doctrine of John Scot,
and Bertram, who wrote by the command of King Charles the Bald of France, and
that of Raban, three persons of great note in the Church, should be thus
extinct in so short a time, without any Councils condemning it, without the
Court of Romes concerning her self with it, without the interposition of
temporal Princes, and that there should, I say, remain no trace of it in the
10th. Century. He that shall think it strange that the people of the 10th.
Century have taken for the Faith of the Church that which was in effect an
innovation, need only call to mind the ignorance wherein the people lived; for
when a man does not know what the Church believes, it is no hard matter for him
to be deceived, and to take that which she does not believe for what she does.
That man that questions this ignorance need only for his conviction to read the
proofs I have given of it. Should any man alledg it to be strange such men as
an Archbishop of Canterbury and an Abbot of Clugny should be deceived, it is
easy to show the weakness of this objection by the example of several that are
men of better parts than those now in question, who now take for the Doctrine of
the Church what is not so. The Disciples of Paschasus found in his Book such
specious Arguments as deceived 'em, and it is a thing ordinary enough to be
surprised by false colors. Should it be said to be impossible but that the
Disciples of Paschasus (knowing Bertram's Doctrine was taught in several places)
have openly condemned it and disputed against those that held it. First, I
answer, I do not know whether we may absolutely say there was no dispute about
it, for there may be disputes and we not know of 'em; but supposing there were
not? I answer, that seeing it is no Miracle that disputation should cease
sometimes in an enlightened Age, amongst learned and zealous men, without any
Conversions on either side, it is much less one in a dark and troublesome Age
wherein persons thought of nothing less than disputing. The Disciples of
Paschasus thought they were obliged to be contented in recommending the reading
of Paschasus his Book to all persons, and in confirming their Opinion by
Miracles. If it be likewise said that those that followed the Doctrine of
Bertram ought to dispute against those that followed that of Paschasus, I must
say so too, but that men do not do always what they are obliged to do, because
they have not always that zeal, knowledge, or industry which they ought to have.
How should they dispute one against another, who left for the most part their
Flocks without Pasture, without Instruction, without Preaching. Howsoever, this
is as I said a thing certain, that there were persons in this Century, who held
the Doctrine of Paschasus, and others that of Bertram. Whether they disputed or
no, it concerns me not to know; it is sufficient for me that this Age held both
these Doctrins, which I think cannot be denied. When two opposite Doctrins are
taught, and both as the true Faith of the Church in an Age of Ignorance, to
speak after the manner of men, and according to the terms of our Dispute, it is
equally impossible either of them should get the upper hand; because they want
that understanding which is requisite to to make aright judgment: and moreover,
if the one be asserted by persons of Authority and great Reputation, it is
almost impossible but this will carry it away from the other. Whence it follows
the progress of the Real Presence in the 10th. Century has been not only
possible, but easy, and even unavoidable. To which, if we add another matter
of fact, which is that we do not find there were Disputes in this Century on
this subject; whence we will conclude that these progresses we speak of have
been made in an insensible manner, at least in our respect, which is to say,
that if there were any noise or contests, the knowledge of 'em never came to us,
which suffices to decide the question between us two.

AND this is what I had to say touching the state of the 10th. Century in
respect of Transubstantiation and the Real Presence. I take no notice of those
violent accusations which Mr. Arnaud brings against our Morals, under pretense
we do not reckon Piety to consist in affected Penances, and outward
Mortifications, which for the most part have more show than substance. We
praise and recommend as earnestly as we can the practice of Fasting, but
believe it better to abstain from Vice than Meats; the use of which God has
given us with sobriety. We believe every man ought to be content with the
condition wherein God has placed him, to make good use of his Estate, and
endure Poverty without envy, murmurings, and repinings; to live holily in
Caelibacy, and chastely in Marriage; to carry our selves justly to our
Inferiors, and obediently to Superiors. But we do not approve of men's
withdrawing themselves out of that rank and order wherein providence has placed
them, nor making of particular rules, and binding men to the observance of 'em
by Vows, nor that the Rich should ransom their sins by great offerings to
Ecclesiastical persons who have no need of 'em, ^or of Voluntary Poverty, much
less that men should imagine to satisfy the Almighty for their sins, and merit
any thing of him by these kind of observances, It Is not from Seneca we have
learned this Divinity, but S. Paul. This great Doctor would not have us to be
concerned for these things, which he calls Commandments and Doctrins of men,
which says he, have some appearance of wisdom in a voluntary devotion and
humility of spirit, and in that they spare not in any kind the flesh. Let Mr.
Arnaud extol as much as he pleases the glory of the 10th. Century by these
mortifications, he shall never persuade reasonable people that an age wherein
appears on one hand an almost universal ignorance of all that is good, a
prodigious neglect of the mysteries of Religion, an almost universal corruption
of manners, a strange kind of Devotion to all manner of Vices, a deplorable
relaxation of Ecclesiastical Discipline; and on the other several Monasteries
founded, and outward austerity practiced, that this could be an Age of
Benediction and Grace.

MOREOVER, what we have said of Edgar King of England, Dunstan Archbishop of
Canterbury, and the quarrel of the Ecclesiastics in England, has been grounded
on good Testimonies. William of Malmsbury tells us Edgar was reproached for
dishonoring the first years of his Reign with Cruelties, and strange
Pollutions, one of which was that being enamored with the Wife of Etelwold his
Favorite, he got him out one day into the Forest to Hunt, and there caused him
to be cruelly murdered. Another of his wickednesses was the forcibly carrying
away a Maid that he loved, who to avoid his pursuits had cast her self into a
Monastery, and taken therein the Vail. Another time falling in love with a
Dukes Daughter, and having given orders to have her brought to him, the Mother
who would not consent her Daughter should be dishonored, substituted one of her
Maids in her place, who was also very fair; which Edgar understanding, he was
thereat so enraged that he changed their rank and quality, and made this
Servant Mistress over her own Mistress. He a while after espoused Elfride, the
Widow of his Favorite, whom he had caused to be slain.

IT is said that Dunstan Excommunicated him, because he had violated the
respect due to a Monastery, and drew out thence a Woman who wore the Habit of a
Religious, although she was none, and abused her. It Is certain, Guilliel. Malm.
lib. 2. c. 8.
says he, that Wulfritte (for this was the Maids name) was not a Nun but a
Laick, who fearing the King, had taken the Vail, which the King snatching from
her abused her. At which Dunstan being offended in that he dared to lust, after
a person that had only the Vmbra of Religion, made use of his Pontifical power
against him. Now as we must judge of the zeal of Dunstan from the Historians own
words; so we cannot but say there was a great deal of hypocrisy in this
action; for is it not an horrible hypocrisy to have less regard to the
Sacrament of Baptism, an Ordinance instituted by God himhimself, than to this
human institution. William of Malmsbury represents Dunstan displaying all his
Pontificial Power to revenge the outrage offered to the shadow of Religion,
Vnde offensum, says he, beatum Dunstanum quod illam concupisset quoe vel
umbratice sanctimonialis fuisset, vigorem pontificalem in eum egisse, of the
Consecration of Baptism, or the enormity of the action he says never a word.
Let not Mr. Arnaud take it ill that I call this hypocrisy. He says my censure
is unjust, because this Maid was Baptized, and so Edgar had violated in her the
character and the consecration of Baptism as well as in the others. But what
signifies this remark? This Maid was Baptized without doubt; and for that
reason we esteem it ill that Dunstan grounded his severity, and his Episcopal
fury on a bare shadow of Religion without any notice of her Baptism.

AS to the quarrel of the Ecclesiastics and Monks in England, I have said
nothing but what is grounded on the testimony of Polydor Virgil, as appears by
what I related in my Answer to the Perpetuity. The Historian lays it upon the
insatiable covetousness of the Monks, neither does he excuse Polydor. Virg.
Hist. Ang l. 6.
the Priests from the same charge; and as to the image of the Crucifix that
spoke, he says expressly there were several people of good report that believed
'twas rather an Oracle of Phoebus, than an Oracle of God; which is to say, that
this voice was uttered not by the will of God, but by the fraud of men. What I
also said that their disputations were not concerning the Gospel, that they
were all agreed to let that rest without understanding it, without preaching
it, and without reading it is grounded on the testimony of Elfric Archbishop of
Canterbury, who lived at the same time, for he was Primate of England in the
year 989, a year after the death of Dunstan, according to the report of Matthew
of Westminster. In these days, says Elfric, the Priests Elfric Ser. ad Sacerd.
Miss. in Bibl. Colleg. S. Bened. Cant.
and Bishops are become so careless and idle, who ought to be the Pillars of
the Church, that they regard not the holy Scriptures, nor instruct Disciples
that may become their Successors: as we find several Holy men did who left
behind 'em several good Disciples. Their minds are more taken up with worldly
Honors, Concupisence and Covetousness than the Laics: and what a sad example
do they give their Flocks, not daring to speak of Justice, because they neither
love it, nor observe it.

CHAP. VII.
Mr. Arnaud's Objections against what he terms Machins of Forgetfulness,
Examined. The Examples of the insensible Changes alleged in answer to the
Perpetuity, Defended.

I SAID in my Answer to the Perpetuity, That if we had this Dispute Answer to
the second Treat. chapter 1.
with Greeks or Egyptians we should not perhaps take it ill for them to ask us
how this change was wrought; but we cannot bear without some kind of regret and
vexation these same Transubstantiators, this very party that made the change,
who have used a thousand tricks insensibly to effect it, that have made use of
Fraud and Violence, to hinder its being wrought with noise, that have taken
infinite care to deprive posterity of the knowledge of the manner how 'twas
done, to come now to us and demand how this could be.

WHEREUPON Mr. Arnaud tells us first, That we have in effect to Book 9. chapter 8.
page 9^3.
do with not only Egyptians and Greeks, but likewise Moscovites, Ethiopians,
Nestorians, Jacobites, Armenians and Indians; that all these people make the
same questions as the Author of the Perpetuity, and require the same
satisfaction. But that Mr. Claude cannot answer 'em, seeing they had no
Paschasus, nor Popes, nor Monks, nor Councils, nor Croisado's, nor Inquisitors
to work this Establishment. In the second place he says that I am unjust in
accusing Page 954.
the Catholics of this Age for making the change in question, and employing
Croisado's and Inquisitors against us. That these are not the same persons that
were in the 10th. Century, and that as to his part he has made use neither of
Cheats nor Artisices to hinder this change's being made with noise.

THE first of these Answers is already refuted. We have nothing to do either
with Greeks, or Egyptians, Moscovites, Ethiopians, Nestorians, Jacobites,
Armenians, nor Indians in the affair of Transubstantiation. Mr. Arnaud puts
questions to us about them without their consent or order. The Doctrine of
Transubstantiation has been a long time insinuating of it self amongst 'em,
which when effected we shall have the Emissaries and Scholars of the Seminaries
to be Witnesses of the Innovation.

THE second Answer is frivolous. We neither accuse Mr. Arnaud nor his Friends
personally for having done any thing to deprive us of the knowledge of the
manner in which the change happened: whatsoever they have thereunto contributed
consists only in the false Citations, and Sophisms in their Books, but of these
we will not here complain. We only complain here of their drawing advantage
from the ill means that have been used by other persons on their side, whose
Successors and Defenders they are, to deprive Posterity of the knowledge of the
Innovation in question, and I believe there is a great deal of Justice in this
complaint. A Council has caused John Scot's Book to be burned, there are none
to be had of 'em at this day. We have lost the Writings of Heribald Bishop of
Auxerre, the Letter of Raban to Egilon, Eriger's Book against Paschasus,
Berenger's Works, their Books who wrote in his favor in the 11th. Century. We
know no more of this long History than what we can gather here and there in
suspected Authors Adversaries to Berengarius and his Doctrine. Moreover there
have been given the public under the name of the Fathers false and supposed
Books: their real Works have been altered, and false pieces inserted in them to
make the world believe there were no Innovations in their Doctrine. I say Answer
to Nouet.
nothing but what may be easily justified, and which I have already clearly
proved elsewhere. If I complain of Mr. Arnaud's injustice who makes advantage
of these frauds put upon us, and which he knows to be such, in like manner as
what the Emissaries have done in the East, whence he would make us believe they
of those parts have ever held Transubstantiation and the Real Presence. This is
I think a complaint for which no rational person will condemn me.

I likewise proposed some examples of insensible changes which have happened in
the Latin Church, whence I concluded 'twas not impossible one should have
happened by the introduction of the Doctrins of Transubstantiation and the Real
Presence. Mr. Arnaud to extricate himself out of the perplexity which these
examples caused him, has devised some distinctions, some of 'em imaginary, and
others unnecessary, by means whereof he has pretended to invalidate the change
in question, and they are these differences which we must now examine.

IT cannot be denied but that the custom of communicating of both kinds, that
of giving the Communion to little Children, and that of Fasting till the
Evening, and some others have been changed in the Latin Church. Mr. Arnaud does
not gainsay it, but tells us these customs are still used in the Eastern
Churches, so that the change has not been universal, whereas if that of the
establishment of Transubstantiation were true, we must suppose it happened at the
same time throughout all the world, and all Christian Churches. This is his
first difference which he amplifies and exaggerates after his manner. But the
answer is not difficult, to wit, that there is not any Transubstantiation or
Real Presence, such as the Roman Church holds in the Eastern Churches, or if
there be, it is brought in by the Emissaries and Scholars of the Romish
Seminaries: besides that a change is not ever the less insensible in respect of
those that have admitted it, for its being less universal.

THE second difference is, that in the greatest part of the expressions which I
propose the point concerns some established custom, whereas here the question
is touching a new Doctrine universally established, which is, says he, extremely
different, a general inconveniency may universally abolish a custom; but when
the question is touching the remedying of an abuse every man follows his
particular judgment in the choice of remedies. And this especially shows us the
impossibility of the change in the subject of the Eucharist. For this must be
said to be an universal establishment of an extraordinary Doctrine which cannot
subsist with the infinite diversity of judgments, respects and inclinations
which happen in so many different Churches, which being divided in such small
matters, cannot be expected to unite in a Doctrine so offensive that it is
strange it has found any followers, neither could it, had it not been
authorized by an universal consent.

I confess there is a great deal of difference betwixt an ancient custom that is
abolished, and a new Doctrine that is established. But this difference does Mr.
Arnaud more hurt than good. For ignorant people are more earnest to conserve
their customs which they know, than they are to reject a Doctrine which they
know but imperfectly, and concerning whose novelty they cannot judge. When an
ancient public and perpetual custom is abolished, the innovation is more
manifest than when a new Doctrine is introduced, for the novelty of it is
concealed, it is offered as being the ancient Faith; and they that offer it
pervert for this effect some ordinary expressions, turning 'em into another
sense. Customs are of themselves popular, and when they are changed, people are
apt to imagine their Religion is about being taken away from 'em: but as to
Doctrinals, the people are wont to suffer those that have greatest authority in
the Church to preach what they please, and obediently receive it without any
examination. As to the rest, it is certain there has happened something in
reference to the Eucharist, which is like what Mr. Arnaud observes, that when
we leave an ancient custom every man takes a different course, and follows his
own particular judgment. For the Latins and Greeks in departing from the plain
and genuine explication of the Ancients, which was, that the Bread and Wine of
the Eucharist are figures and images of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ,
have fallen upon different sentiments, the Greeks having taken the party of the
union of the Bread with the Divinity, and augmentation of the Body of Jesus
Christ, and the Latins that of Transubstantiation. But we must not pass over in
silence what Mr. Arnaud confesses, that the Doctrine of the Latins is so
offensive that it is strange it has found any followers, had it not been
authorized by an universal consent. This acknowledgment must at least show the
world how important it is to prevent being abused by this pretended universal
consent, and engaging in a sentiment which moreover is so offensive. But as the
discussion of this question touching the universal consent has no proportion
with the capacity of most people, this very thing should show, that to ground
ones Faith on a solid foundation, wherein there is no deceit to be feared, the
best which one can do, is to keep to the Word of God.

THE third difference which Mr. Arnaud remarks consists in that the changes
which I alledg are changes of Practice and Discipline, whereas that in question
is a change of Opinion and Doctrine. Now, says he, Discipline is a thing of it
self liable to change, and the benefit of it depends on circumstances which are
mutable; but Doctrins are immutable in their own nature: that which is true at
one time being so always. Every body knows that Discipline may be altered, and
every one knows that Doctrins cannot change. So, adds he, to introduce a new
Discipline, it is not necessary to deceive the world, nor show it is ancient, but
to introduce a new Doctrine the novelty must of necessity de disguised, which is
oftentimes impossible. In fine, the belief of a Doctrine necessarily imports the
condemnation of the contrary opinion, whereas one may embrace a Discipline
different from another, yet without condemning that which one leaves.

THERE are several things to be said to this discourse. For first, It is not
true that all the points of Practice and Discipline are mutable. The practices
which our Savior Christ himself has instituted in his Church with an express
command of observing 'em are perpetual, immutable, and necessary, at least as
to necessity of precept, and such is the Communion of both kinds. Secondly,
There are few persons amongst the people that are prepossessed with this
opinion that the points of practice and Discipline may be changed, the greatest
part go not so far as this distinction of points of Practice, and Doctrins. The
abolishment of a practice rather appears to them a change of Religion than an
abolition or introduction of a Doctrine, because of two parts whereof a Religion
consists, to wit, the Doctrins, and Practices, these last are most popular.
Thirdly, There are practices which are so strictly joined with Doctrins, and
are in such a manner the dependances and consequences of 'em, that it is
impossible to change them, without also changing the Doctrins, and consequently
without condemning all contrary Doctrins. Such is the practice of communicating
under both kinds; for it was anciently grounded on this belief, that Christ's
command belongs as well to Ministers as the People; as appears by Paschasus his
own testimony, Drink ye all of it, says he, to wit, as well the Ministers as
other Lib. de Corp. and Sang. Domin. c. 15. etc. 19. Gela. apud Gra. Canon.
Comperimus de cons. did. 2. Lib. c. cap. 10. p. 989.
Believers: and this was joined with the condemnation of the contrary practice.
It is not well done, says the same Paschasus, to Communicate of the Flesh
without the Blood: This Mystery, says Pope Gelasius, cannot be divided without
committing a great Sacrilege. It is a mere abusing the world, says Mr. Arnaud,
to pretend to establish an universal Doctrine which is received in the whole
Church on a single passage of a Popes Writings, recited by Gratien, and to
oppose this single passage against the constant practice of all the Churches in
the world, who have given the Communion to the faithful under one species in
sundry occasions. But of whom would Mr. Arnaud have us to learn better the
belief of the Church in the time of Gelasius himself, who was at the head of
the Church of Rome, who calls her self the faithful depository of Tradition? Is
Mr. Arnaud so scandalized at the producing of a Testimony of a Pope? It is
Gratien, says he, that relates it. Is it the less authentic for that? Gratien
did not invent it to serve us, we did not inspire him with it; and the
Correctors of Gratien have not so much as doubted of it. This passage, adds he,
may receive several rational explications. I know he endeavors to elude every
thing by explications, but we should know whether these explications be just:
Mr. Arnaud should propose 'em, and then we might examine 'em. This constant
practice of all the Churches that have given the Communion to the faithful
under one kind in several occasions is likewise a thing that ought to be
proved. Mr. Arnaud knows he need not long stay for an answer, to what is
alleged touching that subject.

THE Communion of little Children is likewise another practice appendant to a
Doctrine, for the ancient Church had this custom, because she believed this
Communion absolutely necessary for the salvation of Infants. S. Austin says so
in express terms. Ecclesioe Christi tenent proeter baptismum Aug. de Peccat
rear. and remiss. lib. 1. c 24.
and participationem Dominicoe mensoe non solum non ad regnum Dei, sed nec ad
salutem and vitam oeternam posse quemquam hominum pervenire. Mr. Arnaud is
angry with me for making this belief an universal Doctrine of the Church, To the
end, says he, its authority may be (with plausible pretenses) trampled Page 990.
under foot, and a Doctrine of Tradition rejected. But what have I done in this
matter more than the Jesuit Maldonat (who was as much a Catholic as Mr.
Arnaud) did before me? Missam facio, says he, Augustini and Innocentii Maldon.
in Joan. 6. Binn. not. in Epist. Innoc.
primi sententiam quoe sexcentos circiter annos viguit in Ecclesia, Eucharistam
etiam, infantibus necessariam. What have I done more than Binius in his Notes
on Innocent's Letter to the Fathers of the Council of Mileve. It appears, says
he, that Innocent' s opinion which has been in vogue for six hundred years, and
which was followed by S, Austin was, that the Eucharist is necessary to little
Children. But seeing the command to receive the Eucharist does not oblige those
that cannot receive it, and that we must reckon them unfit to receive the
Eucharist that cannot receive it with the respect due to it, the Church,
instructed by the use of several Ages, and the Decree of the Council of Trent
has well determined, not only that the reception of the Eucharist is not
necessary to Children, but that it ought not to be given 'em.

I know, adds Mr. Arnaud, that there are on this subject some passages of Page
990.
S. Austin and Innocent the First, which are difficult. But Mr. Claude knows
very well that Fulgentius and Bid have explained these passages. He knows also
that Cardinal Perron and several other Catholic Authors have solved them. To
the passages of S. Austin, and Innocent, Mr. Arnaud might add others, which
will admit of no explication, as those of Gelasius the First in one of his
Epistles, of the Author of the Hypognosticks, of Gregory the Second, of the
second Council of Toul, and some others. And as to the softening Expositions of
Fulgentius, they hinder not but that the opinion of the ancient Church was in
effect what we now presented, as also the Answers of Cardinal Perron, which are
for the most part but mere illusions.

WE may reckon amongst the practices depending on a Doctrine that of the
relative adoration of Images which has insinuated it self into France, and
Germany since the 8th. and 9th. Century. For it is certain that in all the
foregoing Ages and long after, France and Germany rejected this Adoration as
unlawful and contrary to true Piety. Which appears by the Council of Francfort
held under Charlemain, and consisting of above three hundred Bishops, of
France, Italy, Germany, and England, wherein the second Council of Nice was
condemned. This moreover appears by the Book of Images of Charlemain, by the
Testimonies of Agobard Bishop of Lions, Jonas Bishop of Orleans, and Walafridus
Strabo, by the Council of Paris, under Lewis the Debonnair, and by the
Continuer of Climoinus. We find likewise in Nicetas Choniatus that the Germans
in the 12th. Century persisted in this opinion. The Germans, says he, and the
Armenians agree in this, Nicet. Choni. l. 2. Page 986.
that they reject the worshipping of Images. Mr. Arnaud, who cannot deny so
plain a matter of fact, says, that the Bishops of Francfort admitted the
adoration of the Cross, which is only an image of the true Cross, that they
admitted likewise the historical use of images; and that without doing violence
to nature, the historical use of Images cannot be separated from the relative
adorations of the same images. But this is an impertinent disputing against the
Fathers of Francfort, and the Churches that have followed them. The question is
not whether they were contrary to themselves, or whether they did violence to
nature. But whether it be true that the contrary belief and practice have
insensibly crept into these very Churches, without noise, opposition, and
disputations. Now this is what cannot be denied.

IT is not at all strange, says Mr. Arnaud, that the particular opinion of
these Bishops which is contrary to nature, reason, and the general consent of
the whole Church should be laid aside, and that the Popes who used this
condescension toward 'em did not openly oppose 'em, but tarried till time wore
out this Error, whereby they have had the success which they expected from so
charitable a conduct. So far is it from being strange that this should happen,
that 'twould be a greater wonder if this has not happened. This methinks is a
disposing too freely of the judgments and consent of rational people. It will
not then be strange according to Mr. Arnaud that the Popes, and all this party
that were in the opinion and practice of the relative adoration of Images
should use any condescension toward three hundred Bishops assembled in
Council, the Kingdom of France; and all Germany which were in a contrary Belief
and practice, that they should be cautious of opposing them in this particular,
and patiently expect till time remedied this mistake. But according to the same
Mr. Arnaud, this will be the greatest of all follies, and the highest
extravagancy imaginable to suppose that some Paschasists, and Bertramists,
which is to say, those that believed the Real Presence, and those that believed
it not in the 10th. Century, did not dispute one against another: and although
that moreover they were not in a condition to dispute, and had other things to
trouble themselves about, other interests to mind, yet must it be a folly to
imagine they were of that patient and charitable disposition the Popes were of,
who referred these things to be remedied by time. Mr. Arnaud forbids us to be
astonished at France and Germanies insensibly changing a Doctrine and a Rite; he
forbids us to concern our selves about the questions of the birth and progress
of this change, the stupidity of the Bishops on both sides, who looked upon one
another as Excommunicated persons, yet without daring to speak to one another
about it, being withheld by a holy condescension, and the hope of the good
effects of time, and by the mavelous meekness of the Laics, some of whom
were worshipers of Images and others not, and some of 'em consequently
Anathematized by the Council of Nice, and others condemned by that of
Francfort, and yet lived in peace, without noise, without mutual oppositions,
without disputes. But if we will hear him on the other change touching the
Eucharist, he commands us not only to be astonished, but to esteem it a fearful
prodigy that the Doctrine of the Real Presence which sprang up in the 9th.
Century, was taught and maintained as being the ancient and perpetual Doctrine
of the Fathers, should make insensible progresses during the darkness of the
10th. Century, and that there should have been persons in the same Church that
have believed it, and others that have not, without falling foul upon, and
opposing one another. When the question of the adoration of Images was agitated
in the East, it vehemently heated men's minds, so that each party proceeded to
Anathema's, Banishments, and Bloodshed: and in the West, the contrary party to
the Adoration wrote, and held Assemblies, whereas when the question of the Real
Presence was handled, in the 9th. Century there were neither Councils called,
nor Anathema's pronounced, nor Banishments, nor any extraordinary matter. Yet
in respect of the former, Mr. Arnaud will that by virtue of condescension and
the effects of time, the Party for the Adoration has insensibly fortified
themselves, and at length got the upper hand; but as to the other he will not
grant that the Real Presence could advance and communicate it self to several
persons, but the whole Universe must be shaken with it. Let the Reader then
Judge of Mr. Arnaud's equity.

NOTHING, says he, is more astonishing than this universal forgetfulness Page
287.
in the 11th. Century, whether there was therein any other Doctrine amongst
Christians than that of the Real Presence. But who told him that they of the
11th. Century forgot the contest which had been in the 9th. Was not John Scot's
Book burnt by a Council? Let him forget it if he will, there will redound no
advantage to him by it, seeing it is certain that in the 9th. Century the
Doctrine contrary to the Real Presence was taught; I mean, that which asserts
the Eucharist not to be the Body of Jesus Christ, Christ born of the Virgin,
and that it is only the Body of Jesus Christ Sacramentally and virtually.
Moreover, Mr. Arnaud does not observe that this very thing is against him; for
if it be true that those of the 11th. Century forgot such a matter of fact as
that which is justified by the testimony of Paschasus himself, this is a
sufficient mark that the 10th. Century which holds the middle between the 9th.
and 11th. was o'respread with thick darkness, seeing the ideas, and memory of a
thing so considerable were therein lost.

BUT we must examine his fourth difference. A fourth circumstance, Page 960.
says he, which does further strangely distinguish this pretended change in the
Doctrine of the Eucharist, from all these other changes, is the very nature of
this Doctrine. (He means of the Real Presence and Transubstantiation.) For it is
clear, that had it been new it must have extraordinarily surpised all those
that never heard of it, which is to say the whole Church. I confess that in
effect the Doctrine of the Conversion of Substances in the Eucharist has
something in it that is very surprising and more offensive than whatsoever is
done in other changes. But Mr. Arnaud knows very well that this quality of
offensive and surprising in a Doctrine, is not strong enough to produce actually
of it self an opposition or a rejection; on the contrary, most people love in
matters of Religion those things that are surprising and wonderful, of which we
see examples in most Religions. But howsoever the Teachers of the Real Presence
provided against this inconveniency three ways, the first was the making 'em a
Buckler of the Almighty power of God. The second, the publishing of Miracles
which really happened about the Eucharist, to wit, visible apparitions of Flesh
and Blood. And the third, the asserting 'twas always the Faith and belief of
the Church, accommodating to their sense some passages of the Fathers ill taken
and ill explained.

HITHERTO we have had whatsoever Mr. Arnaud has said that is considerable on
the question of the possibility or impossibility of the change in his 6th. and
9th. Book. Whatsoever is therein of moment we have considered and answered
solidly and pertinently as Mr. Arnaud himself, I hope, will acknowledge. I
should have been very glad if he would have told us his opinion on a passage,
taken out of a Book, called, The new Heresy publicly maintained at Paris in
the College of Clermont. The Author of this Book therein discovers the order
and means which he pretends his adversaries use to introduce Novelties
insensibly into the Church, and he instances for this purpose the Parable of
the Tares that were sown in the night, whilst men slept, which took root, and
in time grew up, which is very near the manner after which, according to us,
the change was wrought touching the Eucharist, This Author has well
comprehended it, as judging it far from being impossible; but Mr. Arnaud
thought meet to say nothing to this passage.

I should likewise been very glad, that having treated as he has done with
great earnestness of the Doctrine of the Greek and other Eastern Churches, he
had made reflection on several Doctrins and Practices which separate them from
the Latins, and in which there have happened of necessity, either amongst the one
or the others, insensible changes. For example, how came it to pass the Greeks
lost the belief of Purgatory, supposing this were a Doctrine of the first
establishment of Christian Religion. How came they to believe the Holy Spirit
proceeds from the Father alone, and also that unleavened Bread in the
administration of the Eucharist is an abomination, and likewise that the
Priests may as well as the Bishops administer Confirmation; and again, that the
Church of Rome is not infallible in matters of Faith, and that the Saints enjoy
not the beatifical vision of God till the Resurrection: and in short, how came
they to believe all the rest of those opinions which they hold contrary to
those of the Latins? There must of necessity have been a time wherein the
Greeks and Latins were agreed in all these Articles, whether we conceive that
then neither of 'em held them, which is to say, that these Articles be not of
Apostolical Tradition, whether we suppose they held them in common since the
first Preaching of Christianity, which supposes that these Opinions were left
'em by the Apostles, or whether we imagine that the Greeks as well as the Latins
have ever held what they now hold at this day, but that they supported mutually
one another, which supposes that both of 'em held these Opinions as needless
ones, and regarded the contrary opinions as tolerable ones. Now in whatsoever
sort we take it, there have of necessity happened insensible changes without
dispute, noise, and opposition, although there may be the same objections brought
against 'em, and the same questions started which the Author of the Perpetuity
and Mr. Arnaud have urged against the change in question.

SHOULD we suppose a time wherein neither the one nor the other held these
Opinions, how come they in fine to be imbued so generally with 'em, and so
contradictorily, that a whole Church should hold the contrary of what the other
believes? Is there not in this double change at least as much reason to be
astonished and surpised, as in that which has happened according to us, in
respect of the Real Presence? Have both the Latins and Greeks fallen asleep
without knowing any thing of the fire of Purgatory, or Procession of the Holy
Spirit, or quality which the Eucharistical Bread ought to be of, or the
administration of Confirmation, or Beatifical Vision of the Saints, nor the
Infallibility of the Church of Rome; and have they all together at the same
time awakened possessed with contrary opinions on each of these points? Whence
had they their opinions? Did not he who first taught them 'em advertise 'em
that he Preached Novelties to 'em which they never heard of? If he did tell 'em
of this, it is strange he should be followed immediately by his whole Church,
and that such new Doctrins should be so immediately and zealously embraced. If
he did not tell 'em this, it is then very strange no body took notice of these
Innovations, that the Bishops and Priests did not oppose 'em, and that of all
that innumerable multitude of Religious persons not one of 'em has exclaimed
against the Innovator. Had the Innovator made use of some expressions of
Scripture and of the Church to conceal the novelty of these Doctrins, and to
make people believe that that was the ancient Faith, how can one conceive these
terrible equivocations, that expressions have been taken in one sense during a
certain time generally by the whole Latin Church, or generally by the whole
Greek Church, and that immediately in another, they have been taken generally
by the same Churches in another sense?

IF we suppose a time wherein both Greeks and Latins believed the same thing in
respect of these points, the same difficulties and the same questions return in
respect of that of the two Churches which has changed. Suppose for example that
the Greeks and Latins both believed the Church of Rome is infallible, that the
Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father and the Son, that one may use
indifferently in the Eucharist unleavened Bread, and that which is leavened,
and that the Bishop alone has the right of Confirmation, how happens it the
Greeks have passed into contrary Opinions without divisions amongst 'em till
the Council of Florence? Has this happened all at a stroke? Was this done
insensibly and by succession of time? If this has happened all at once, it must
be granted this change is exceeding strange, that so many Bishops, Priests, and
Religious should so suddenly renounce their former Opinions, and embrace
contrary ones without any Divisions amongst 'em. But it is yet strange, they
should change 'em without perceiving it, without acknowledging they had made
great and considerable Innovations in their Church, and comparing their first
and ancient Faith with this new one. For it is certain that in respect of all
these Articles which are in contest, the Greeks positively maintain and have
ever maintained they have not innovated in any thing. If this change was
wrought by succession of time, let us be showed the Disputes and Divisions they
have had amongst 'em since on these Articles they have separated from the
Church of Rome, till the Greek Empire fell into the hands of the Latins, which
is to say during above two hundred and fifty years. If it be alleged the
change was made insensibly, we must return to the four times of the Author of
the Perpetuity, and apply to 'em the same difficulties and objections he has
raised.

IN fine, if we suppose a time wherein the two Churches held each of 'em their
Opinions, yet mutually bearing with one another without proceeding to an
express condemnation of the contrary Opinions, besides that it is difficult to
comprehend how the Latins believing the Roman Church infallible, and their
Sacrifice with unleavened Bread good and lawful, could suffer the Greeks
holding on the contrary that the Roman Church may err in matters of Faith.
Besides this, I say, 'twill be demanded how they could change so suddenly their
Opinion in reference to the controverted Articles, holding 'em before for
unnecessary points, and afterward for necessary ones, respecting before the
contrary Opinions to theirs as tolerable Errors, and afterward respecting 'em
as abominable and intolerable ones: whereupon one may make the same questions,
how it could come to pass that the whole Greek Church has believed at one time
that the Eucharist of the Latins with unleavened Bread was nevertheless the
true Body of Jesus Christ, an object of supreme Adoration, and in another that
'twas only a dead Azym, a Jewish abomination; that she should respect it at one
time with that Reverence and Devotion due only to the Son of God, and at
another immediately succeeding the first, which is to say from night to
morning, regard it with horror, washing and purifying the Altars whereon it had
been celebrated as if they had been polluted.

WE may apply the same questions and difficulties to the Armenians, Jacobites,
Coptics, Nestorians, in reference to several of their Opinions of which Mr.
Arnaud cannot show the original, nor tell us after what manner they were
dispersed amongst these people, nor how they have left the contrary opinions
which the Church of Rome still holds as being of Apostolical Tradition. How has
it happened for instance that the Nestorians have left the use of Confirmation,
and that of Extreme Unction, that the Jacobites have left that of Confession,
and the belief of Purgatory, that the Coptics have laid aside the Doctrine of
Purgatory, and use of Extreme Unction, and so of the rest. For Mr. Arnaud, I
think, would have me suppose, that according to him these points have been
heretofore held and practiced by all Christians.

THESE examples do clearly discover the vanity of these pretended moral
impossibilities which the Author of the Perpetuity, and Mr. Arnaud have urged
with such great exaggeration. For they may be all as strongly applied to the
changes which have happened in these Eastern Churches, and yet it must be granted
that these changes happened there. Mr. Arnaud may argue as long as he pleases,
start questions, and raise difficulties, these insensible changes are more than
possible, for they are come to pass either in these Churches, or in the Latin,
which has Opinions, and contrary Customs, which shows that these Gentlemen's
whole Philosophy is but a mere Speculation, proper only for persons that abound
with leisure, which does not at all agree with the manner after which things
are carried on in the world.

BUT in short the use which is made of the Seminaries, and Missions, and the
course which the Emissaries take in the East, as we have observed in the second
Book, with the project of Thomas a Jesu to make in a short time, all the
Greeks, good Roman Catholics, according as I have related in the fourth Book;
all this I say shows clearly that at Rome, and elsewhere amongst the most
zealous, it is not at all accounted impossible to introduce insensibly, and
without disturbance the Doctrins of the Romish Church amongst people that have
'em not, and in effect it must be granted that their present labors are not
unsuccessful, and that time will probably finish the work.

CHAP. VIII.
That Paschasus Ratbert was the first that taught the Real Presence and
Conversion of Substances. Mr. Arnaud's Objections Answered.

WE must come now to particular matters of fact which relate to the History of
the Change. Not but to speak truly this difcussion appears to me very needless,
considering what we have already done. For if the principal question which
respects the novelty of Transubstantiation and the Real Presence be ended, and
moreover there results from our Dispute that the change was possible, and that
there is nothing more vain than the objections which the Author of the
Perpetuity and Mr. Arnaud have made on this subject, I see not any necessity
there is of informing a man's self in what manner this change happened. What
matter is it to us who was the first Author of this Innovation, who the
promoters of it, what facilities or difficulties were met with in the
establishing of these Doctrins, whether Paschasus carried on his business with
craft, or simplicity; whether John Scot, Bertram, and Raban wrote against him
before or after his death? What signifies the knowing of these things provided
we are certain not only that the change in question was possible, but actually
happened? And this does now appear so plainly as will satisfy every rational
man. In examining Mr. Arnaud's 6th. and 9th. Book we have made it appear that
his pretended impossibilities are mere chimera's. And as to the actual change,
besides that we shall always have right to take it for granted by our proofs of
fact, which is to say by the passages of the Fathers, which we have cited, till
Mr. Arnaud and his friends have taken pains to answer 'em solidly: besides
this, I say, what I showed concerning the Eastern Churches not holding the
Doctrins in question, neither in the 11th. nor following Centuries, and the
Greeks and Latins not knowing 'em in the 7th. and 8th. Century, is more than
sufficient for the concluding that these Doctrins are not of the first
establishment of Christian Religion, and consequently that their introduction
is an innovation. Yet will I not desist from examining the points of History
which respect this change, because this change is indeed the first and
principal subject of the Dispute between Mr. Arnaud and us.

Paschasus Ratbert, a Religious of Corbie that lived in the 9th. Century was
(according to us) the first who taught the conversion of the substances of the
Bread and Wine, and the Real Presence of the Body of Jesus Christ in the
Eucharist. He treats of these Points in three different places of his works, in
his Book of the Body and Blood of our Lord, in his Commentaries on the 26th.
Chapter of S. Matthew, and in his Letter to Frudegard. Book 8. chapter 8. page 36.
Mr. Arnaud calls our pretension on this subject a new Hypothesis and a pure
work of fancy. But, adds he, as men's fancies are very different, that of other
Ministers who wrote besore Aubertin turned not on this hinge, as not thinking
'twere their interest to set 'emselves more against Paschasus than other
Authors of that Century. So that this same Paschasus against whom they
pronounce such woes, was at first, in another course of fancy, one of their
best friends. Henry Boxornius a fnrious and passionate Calvinist asserts, that
he perfectly well explained the Doctrine of the Eucharist, and makes him a
Calvinist by the common privilege of all the Ministers, to make Calvinists of
whom they please. Hospinien likewise treats him very kindly, and takes him for
one of the witnesses of the true Doctrine of the Church during the 9th. Century.
Blondel seems not to have any particular quarrel against him, but only charges
him for following the innovations which he attributes to Anastasius Sinait and
the Greeks, which he pretends were embraced by Charlemain, and the Council of
Francfort, but does not think of making him an Author of any considerable
change in the world.

IT must be acknowledged there is a great deal of rancor and injustice in this
discourse. First, seeing Mr. Arnaud himself affirms that Paschasus taught the
Real Presence and Transubstantiation, why does he make it criminal in Mr.
Aubertin and me to do the same? Does the aversion which he has to our persons
transport him so far, that he cannot endure we should be agreed with him, no
not in one point? I acknowledge that as often as Mr. Aubertin and I affirm
Paschasus taught the Real Presence and Transubstantiation, we do at the same
time add that he was an Innovator, wherein we are at odds with Mr. Arnaud. But
why may we not at least agree with him in one Point, if we cannot in more? Let
him oppose us as often as he will touching the innovation of Paschasus, we shall
not dislike it, for he maintains his own sentiment; but let him give us leave
to tell him that Paschasus also taught the Real Presence and
Transubstantiation, seeing that herein we say nothing but what he himself
asserts, and all Roman Catholics with him.

SECONDLY, it is not generally true that those who wrote before Mr. Aubertin did
not acknowledge that the Doctrine of Paschasus was the Real Presence and
Transubstantiation. The Author of the Orthodox Treatise Page 479.
touching the Eucharist, Printed at Lions in the year 1595. expressly mentions
that Paschasus laid the foundations of Transubstantiation, and
Consubstantiation. Mr. Le Faucheur says he taught that the Eucharist Lib. 9.
Chapter 6.
was the proper Body and the proper Blood of Jesus Christ residing
substantially in the Bread and Wine. Du Plessis ranks him amongst those that
Book 4. of the Sacrament pretended in the Mass. chapter 8
have proposed a contrary Doctrine to that of the Fathers and the Church. And
long before them Berenger himself attributed to Paschasus the Doctrine of the
conversion of the substances as well as we. Sententia, said he, according
Lanfranc de Corp. and Sang. Dom.
to Lanfranc, imo vecordia vulgi, Paschasi, atque Lanfranci minime superesse in
altari post consecrationem substantiam panis and vini.

BUT it is needless to cite Authorities, when the point concerns a matter which
may be cleared by reading Paschasus himself. He that takes pains to read
exactly his Book De Corpore and sanguine Domini, his Commentaries on the 26. of
S. Matthew, and his Letter to Frudegard, will find, First, That he held and
taught the substance of the Bread and Wine was changed absolutely into the same
Flesh which is born of the Virgin, which died, and rose again, although the
color, and savor of Bread and Wine still remains. Secondly, That he held and
taught that the Flesh of Jesus Christ enters into our flesh, and that as he has
joined our substance to his Divinity, so he will have his substance to be in
our flesh. Thirdly, That he held and taught, that the words of Jesus Christ,
This is my Body, must be understood neither of the figure of his Body, nor his
Body in the Sacrament, nor of his Body in virtue, but of his Body born of the
Virgin, Crucified and Risen, in propriety of nature. Fourthly, That he disputed
as strongly as he could against those that held the contrary. Fifthly, That
there were made against his Doctrine such objections as naturally arise from the
Real Presence, such as the Roman Church does at this day believe it to be.
Sixthly, That he endeavored to answer these objections on the Hypothesis of
the Roman Church.

IT hence, methinks very clearly results that Paschasus held and taught the
same Real Presence, and the same substantial conversion, as Gregory VII. and
Innocent III. established since in the Latin Church, and that this truth cannot
be called in question. Yet must what I observed in my answer to the Perpetuity
be remembered, that the Book De Corpore and Sanguine Domini does not every where
contain the Doctrine of the conversion of substances in a manner so express, or
uniform, but that there are here and there several passages which seem at first
to favor the subsistence of the Bread, and several others that are capable of
a Sacramental sense, or may be turned to the union of the Bread with the
Divinity, acording to Damascen's Doctrine. Mr. Arnaud must grant me this, seeing
he sometimes alleges Paschasus his expressions, t'elude such kind of ones
which are to be met with in the Fathers. Now hence it has happened that several
Protestants having been deceived by these passages, have reckoned this Author
amongst the number of those that held not Transubstantiation. But their error
having sprang from the want of attentive examining the depths of his Doctrine,
Mr. Arnaud does not do right in drawing hence advantage against those that have
entered into a more exact scrutiny of him, especially considering that this
opinion justifies it self by the bare reading of Paschasus his Writings, and
that this is moreover Mr. Arnaud's own sentiment, and that also of his whole
Church.

WE need only now see whether Paschasus in teaching the Real Presence and
Transubstantiation has been an Innovator, that is to say, whether he first
taught a Doctrine which no body ever before him did teach. Mr. Arnaud affirms,
that according to my proper Principles this would be impossibly human. His
reason is that I said in some places of my answer, That the expressions of the
Fathers were not of themselves capable to give rise to this opinion, and
therefore the idea of it must come from elsewhere. That supposing these
expressions and a thousand such like were every day uttered by the Fathers,
they could never form in the peoples minds the idea of a Transubstantiation, or
a Real Presence, such as the Roman Church teaches, unless they were
propossessed with it by some other means. That there is no likelihood that
before Paschasus made this first explication, men abandoned their senses and
reason to conceive the Real Presence, and that certainly no place but the
solitary and idle Convent of Corbie could bring forth such an extravagant
fancy. Let a man upon this judge, says Mr. Arnaud, what kind of blade this Book
8. chapter 8. p. 839.
Paschasus must be according to Mr. Claude, seeing that on one hand he was able
to invent an opinion which could never come into any bodies head but his own;
and further had the power and good luck to persuade the whole world into the
belief of it with circumstances which are yet more admirable. Certainly this is
beyond the reach of man.

I ANSWER, that Mr. Arnaud draws his consequences always ill. We said that the
people who usually follow the lights of nature and common sense, and whose
meditations are not strong enough of 'emselves to invent this pretended manner
of making the Body of Jesus Christ to exist in Heaven and on Earth both at a
time, could not raise the idea of this from the expressions of the Fathers, and
Mr. Arnaud hence concludes it is impossible that Paschasus has invented this
opinion, or been able to persuade others to embrace it. This consequence is
absurd, for we have examples of such kind of persons as Paschasus who have
wandered from the true lights of nature, and fallen into remote imaginations,
which no body ever had before 'em, and which the people were (certainly) never
capable of. I confess that in some respect one may marvel at these figuaries of
human invention, because they are irregularities, it being likewise astonishing
to see men capable of so many disorders; but it must not be hence concluded
that these disorders are more than human, or that it is impossible for a people
who did did not invent an opinion themselves, to follow it when it is well
contrived and colored. We see this happens every day, and Mr. Arnaud should
propose something more solid.

THE true way to know whether Paschasus was an Innovator or not, is to enquire
whether those that went before him taught the same Doctrine, for if they did, we
are to blame in charging him with an innovation; but if on the contrary we find
their Doctrine different from his, we cannot doubt but he innovated. And this is
the course Mr. Aubertin has taken; for he offers not the history of the change,
of which he makes Paschasus the first Author, till he showed by an exact
discussion of each particular Century, that till Paschasus his time no body
ever spoke like him; whence it follows of necessity, that he was an Innovator.
It belonged therefore to Mr. Arnaud and the Author of the Perpetuity (had they
designed to deal sincerely) to take this course, and show that Paschasus said
nothing but what others said before him. This would have been an easy and
direct method, supposing Paschasus had not been an Innovator, but Mr. Arnaud
does not like the engaging in these kind of discussions.

HE thought it more for his purpose to fall upon a fruitless criticism by which
he pretends to conclude, That no body publicly declared himself Book 8. chapter 8.
p. 841.
against Paschasus his Book all the time he lived, That no body wrote against
him, That no Bishop, no Abbot of his Order reproached him with it, That there
were only some persons who showed in secret they were frighted at these truths,
and said not in writing, but in particular discourses, that he had gone too
far, and yet this was not till three years after he had published his Book.

SUPPOSING this remark to be as certain, as Mr. Arnaud has made it, what
advantage will he pretend hence? Will Paschasus be ever the less an Innovator
for his not finding any thing published against him during his life? All that
can be concluded hence is, that his Book was but little known at first, and
afterward but of small esteem with great men; and that if they believed
themselves obliged at length to write against his Doctrine, 'twas only because
they saw several followed it, whom 'twas necessary to undeceive. For to imagine
that John Scot, Bertram, and Raban shunned the opposing him during his life,
that they might not bring upon 'em so terrible an Adversary, must proceed from
the ignorance of what these three great men were, who had another kind of
esteem amongst the learned than Paschasus. It Is also a ridiculous conjecture to
imagine they lay quiet during his life, because his Doctrine was then the common
Doctrine of the Church, which they dared not oppose. For if this reason hindered
'em from writing against Paschasus during his life, why did it not do the same
after his death, seeing the common Doctrine of the Church was still the same,
and Paschasus carried it not away with him into his Grave?

BUT at bottom there is nothing more uncertain than this remark of Mr. Arnaud.
For as to John Scot, there is not the least reason to guess he wrote since
Paschasus his death. We know he wrote of the Eucharist by the command of
Charles the Bald, and consequently whilst he was in France, whether this was
before or after the year 852, 'twill be in my opinion hard to determine. As to
Raban we cannot be certain whether this Egilon to whom he wrote his Letter
against Paschasus, was either Egilon Abbot of Fuldad, who died in the year 822,
or another Egilon Abbot of Prom, who succeeded Marquard in the year 853. For as
to what is said by the anonimous Treatise which Father Celot published, which
is, that Raban was Archbishop of Mayence when he wrote this Letter, is very
weak. It Is true it terms him Raban of Mayence, but upon another occasion, to
wit, when the Author accuses him to have taught, that the mystery of the Body
and Blood of our Lord is exposed to the common condition of aliments; whereas
when he mentions the Letter which he wrote against Paschasus, he calls him only
Raban, and hence can be nothing certain gathered. As to Bertram, Mr. Arnaud
alleges no other reason but this, That there is little Book 8. chapter 8. p. 842.
likelihood he would write against his Abbot whilst he was under his
Jurisdictiction, and that Paschasus who believed his Doctrine could not be
attacked without a crime, must have complained of this attempt. But is Mr.
Arnaud ignorant of what the President Maugin has written touching Bertram, that
he was not only a very learned but a very honest man; a bold defender of the
Dissert. c. 17.
Catholic Faith against all Innovators, and that he wrote against Hincmar his
own Bishop, although he was upheld by the Kings Authority. What likelihood is
there that a man who scrupled not to write against his Metropolitan and such a
man as Hincmar, who was countenanced by the King, would stick to write by the
Kings order too against Paschasus although he was his Abbot.

IT signifies nothing for Mr. Arnaud to say, That Paschasus clearly testifies
that his Doctrine was only attacked by private Discourses and not by Books. For
this cannot be collected from his expressions, unless we read 'em with glosses
and interpretations of Mr. Arnaud. Let those, says Paschasus in his Commentary
on the 26th. of S. Matthew, that will extenuate the term of Body, hear me;
those that say, that it is not the true Flesh of Jesus Christ which is now
celebrated in the Sacrament in the Church, and that it is not his true Blood,
imagining they know not what, that it is in this Sacrament the virtue of the
Flesh and Blood, and make the Lord a liar, saying, that it is not his true
Flesh, nor his true Blood, by which we declare his true death; whereas truth it
self says, This is my Body. And a little lower, I am astonished at some peoples
saying it is not the real Flesh and Blood of Jesus Christ in the same thing, but
that it is Sacramentally so, a certain virtue of his Flesh, and not his Flesh,
the virtue of his Blood, and not his Blood, the figure and not the truth, the
shadow, and not the Body. And in another place a little further, I spoke of
these things the more largely and more expressly, because I understand that some
rereprehend me as if I would (in the Book which I wrote concerning the
Sacraments of Christ) attribute to these words more than the truth it self
promises. And in his Letter to Frudegard, Sed quidam, says he, loquacissimi
magis quam docti dum hoec credere refugiunt, quaecunque possunt, ne credant
quoe veritas repromittit, opponunt, and dicunt nullum corpus esse quod non sit
palpabile, and visible, hoec autem inquiunt, quia mysteria sunt videri
nequeunt, nec palpari, and ideo corpus non sunt, and si corpus non sunt, in
figura carnis and sanguinis hoec dicuntur, and non in proprietate naturoe
carnis Christi and sanguinis, quoe caro passa est in cruce, and nata de Maria
Virgin. Ecce quam been disputant contra fidem sine fide. It appears from these
passages that Paschasus his opinion was contradicted, That he was accused for
taking Christ's words in a wrong sense, That he had several clear and solid
objections offered him, whether by word of mouth, or writing, or by Books, or
bare discourses, he does not inform us. But one may well conclude hence that
this opposition consisted not in secret discourses, as Mr. Arnaud would have us
believe. Are we wont to call private discourse a formal opposition by way of
objection, dispute, censure, and clear and precise explication of the contrary
opinion? Opponunt, says he, quoecunque possunt, Ecce quam been disputant,
dicunt non in se esse veritatem carnis Christi vel sanguinis, sed in Sacramento
virtutem carnis non carnem. Audivi quosdam me reprehendere, etc. Do men thus
express themselves when they would represent private discourse? But, says Book
3. chapter 8. p. 843.
Mr. Arnaud, Paschasus in his Letter to Frudegard, assures, that although some are
deceived through ignorance, yet there is no body that dared openly contradict what
the whole earth believes and confesses of this mystery. I answer, that the
sense of Paschasus is, that no body dared contradict openly what the whole
Earth believes and confesses of this mystery, to wit, that it is the Body and
Blood of Jesus Christ, according as it is expressed in this clause of the
Liturgy which he alleges, Vt fiat Corpus and Sanguis dilectissimi filii tui
Domini nistri Jesu Christi; and by the words of Christ, This is my Body. Now
what he says is true in the sense which we suppose must be given to the words
of Christ, and to the terms of the Liturgy, but it does not hence follow that
those that opposed the sense which Paschasus gave to these very words of the
Liturgy, and to those of Christ, explained themselves very plainly against him,
for there is a great deal of difference between acknowledging the truth of these
words, and acknowledging the sense which an Author would give 'em, They
confessed that the words were true, and could not be questioned without a
crime; but yet this hindered 'em not from setting 'emselves against the sense of
Paschasus. Paschasus pretends to draw advantage against 'em by their
acknowledging the words, imagining the words were plainly for him; but he does
not at all say they dared not to dispute openly against him, nor against the
sense he gave these words. This is a delusion of Mr. Arnauds, just as if any
one having said that there is no body yet amongst the Protestants that has
openly denied the Eucharist to be the Body of Jesus Christ, Mr. Arnaud would
thence conclude that there is none of 'em then that has yet openly contradicted
the sense in which the Roman Church understands it, and that they explain
themselves about it only in secret discourses. But pray why must these be
secret discourses during Paschasus his life, seeing Mr. Arnaud is obliged to
confess there were after his death public Writings which appeared against his
Doctrine? Is not this a silly pretension which at farthest can only make us
imagine Paschasus as a formidable man who held the world in awe during his life,
and against whom no body dared open his mouth till after his death.

BUT laying aside this imagination of Mr. Arnaud come we to the principal
question, to wit, whether Paschasus was an Innovator. Mr. Arnaud to defend him
from this charge has recourse to the Greek Church, which gives, says he, such
an express testimony to his Doctrine of the Real Presence Book 8. chapter 9.
in the 7th. 8th. and 9th. Centuries, that it must needs shame those who out of
a rash capricio have the boldness to affirm that Paschasus was the inventer of
it. He adds, That all the principal Authors of the Latin Church of the same
time who clearly taught it in such a manner as they ought to teach it according
to the state of their time, do overthrow this ridiculous Fable. To pass by Mr.
Arnauds expressions which are always stronger than his reasons, we need only
send him to th'examination of the Greek Authors of the 7th. 8th. and 9th.
Centuries, and Latin Authors of the 7th. and 8th. for he will therein find
wherewithal to satisfy himself above his desires. Let Us only see whether he
has any thing better to offer us.

HE has recourse next to his great common place of moral impossibilities, and
supposing that according to us none of the Clergy, or Laity imagined that Jesus
Christ was really present in the Eucharist, that they all took the Eucharist
for Bread and Wine in substance, that they knew the Bread and Wine were signs
and Sacraments of the Body of Jesus Christ by which we obtain his Graces, and
that we must meditate on the Passion of Jesus Christ in receiving them; that
Paschasus very well knew that his opinion was opposite to that of the Church,
and that he remained in her external Communion only out of a carnal motive,
lest he should find himself too weak if he departed out of it; supposing I say
this, he thus reasons, Let us imagine a Religious under a Regular Discipline,
and him so young that he calls himself a Child, and who thinks he has
discovered this mavelous secret, that Jesus Christ is really present on Earth
in infinite places, that all Christians receive him really every time they
partake of the Eucharist, but that by a deplorable blindness they are ignorant
of this happiness, do not know the Savior whom they have often in their hands
and which they receive into their mouths, and take his real Body for an image
and simple figure; that he is the only man that knows the truth of this
Mystery, and is destined to declare it to the world. This conceit is already
very strange and contrary to the idea which a man necessarily forms on
Paschasus from his Writings, there being nothing more remote from the humility
and simplicity appearing in 'em than this prodigious insolency with which Mr.
Claude charges him, so that we may truly say he could not worse represent the
character of his mind. He afterward says, that this enterprise of Paschasus of
instructing all people in this new opinion was the greatest enterprise that
ever any man undertook far greater than that of the Apostles when they
determined to Preach the Gospel of Jesus Christ throughout all the world. For
in fine they were twelve, they wrought Miracles, had other proofs than words,
they made Disciples, and established them Doctors of the truth which they
preached. Paschasus had nothing of all this. He triumphantly fills five great
pages with this discourse.

TO answer this with somewhat less heat, we will reply that these arguings would
have been perhaps of some use had Mr. Arnaud lived in Paschasus his time, and
was obliged to make an Oration before him in genere deliberativo to dissuade
him from making his Book public. But who told him at present that Paschasus
must necessarily have all these things in his mind, and studied 'em neither
more nor less than Mr. Arnaud has done in his Closet? Who told him that all
those who teach novelties think throly on what they do? When Arius a simple
Priest of Alexandria troubled the Church, by teaching this dreadful novelty
that the Son of God was but a Creature, there is no great likelihood he proposed
to himself at first the changing of the Faith of the whole world, for
instructing the people, and every where overthrowing what the Apostles had
established, or compared his design with that of the Apostles, and examined
what there was more or less in it? It Is the same in reference to Eutychius and
other teachers of new Doctrins, their first thoughts were presently to set
forth what they imagined most consonant to truth, leaving the success to time,
and mannaging themselves afterward as occasion required. The greatest affairs
do usually begin after this manner, men enter upon 'em without much reflection,
and afterward drive 'em on through all that happens unforeseen.

2. TO discover the vanity of Mr. Arnaud's arguings, we need only apply them to
John Scot, or Bertram. Suppose we then as he would have us, that in their time
the whole world believed firmly and universally the Real Presence and
Transubstantiation, and all the Faithful had a distinct knowledge of it, knew
all of 'em that the substance of Bread and Wine no longer subsists after their
Consecration, that what we receive in the Communion is the proper substance of
the Body of Jesus Christ, the same numerical substance which was born of the
Virgin, dead and risen, and is now sat at the right hand of God, that the same
Body is in Heaven and on Earth at the same time. John Scot a simple Religious
undertakes to disabuse all the people, to persuade them that what they had
hitherto taken for the proper substance of the Son of God was a substance of
Bread, that through a deplorable error they had hitherto worshipped an object which
deserved not this adoration, and that henceforth by his Ministry and at his
word all the Earth should change its Faith and Worship. Does this design appear
less strange to Mr. Arnaud than that he imputes to Paschasus, upon our
supposition? All the difference I find is, that Scot's enterprise would be
greater and harder than that of Paschasus; for it is difficulter to root ancient
and perpetual Opinions out of men's minds, than to inspire them with new ones;
to make 'em lay aside their Rites, Altars, the object of their supreme Adoration
and Piety, than to make 'em receive new Services in reference to a subject for
which they have already a great respect. Howsoever it is certain that John Scot
wrote a Book against the Real Presence, and according to Mr Arnaud's
Hypothesis, this Book was an innovation contrary to the common Faith of his
Age. A thousand Arguments will never hinder but that according to him this is
true. Why then will he have it to be impossible for Paschasus, who wrote a Book
touching the Real Presence, to advance any novelty with which the Church before
that time was unacquainted? Why must there be in Hypothesis's which are alike
facilities on the one side, and impossibilities on the other? Paschasus and
John Scot wrote, one for the Real Presence, and the other against it. This is a
fact which is uncontrollable. One of 'em must necessarily have offered a new
Doctrine contrary to the general belief, and consequently one of 'em must be an
Innovator. If it be possible that 'twas John Scot, it is yet more probable
'twas Paschasus; if it be impossible that 'twas Paschasus, it is yet more
impossible to be John Scot. Mr. Arnaud then need not so warm himself in his
consequences, seeing it is his interest as well as ours to acknowledge the
nullity of 'em; and we may truly affirm without doing him wrong, that never man
spent his pains to less purpose, than he has done in this occasion.

3. ALL that can be reasonably said of Paschasus, is, that being yet young, and
imagining the substances of Bread and Wine did not subsist in the Eucharist,
but were changed into the substance of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, he
thought this marvail was not enough known, and that 'twas necessary to explain
it. And therefore he undertakes to instruct his Disciple Placidus in it, to
whom he dedicates his Book, and the rest of his Scholars. This appears from the
reading of his Preface, and second Chapter. Placuit, says he in his Preface, ea
quoe de Sacramento Sanguinis and corporis tibi exigis necessaria, quoe tui
proetexantur amore ita tenus perstringere, ut coeteri vitoe pabulum and salutis
haustum planius tecum caperent ad medelam, and nobis operis proestantior
exuberaret fructus mercedis pro sudore. And in the second Chapter, Tanti
Sacramenti virtus investiganda est, and disciplina Christi fides erudienda, ne
forte ob hoc censeamur indigni si non satis discernimus illud, nec intelligimus
mysticum Christi Corpus and sanguis quanta polleat dignitate quantaque
proemineat virtute -- ideo timendum ne per ignorantiam quod nobis provisum est
ad medelam fiat accipientibus in ruinam. There cannot be gathered any more than
this touching the first design of Paschasus. His designs without doubt extended
not so far as the whole Universe, they only respected Placidus and some other
Scholars which he taught, and the end he proposed was to give 'em the knowledge
of this mystery which he had obtained, believing 'twas not sufficiently known.
His Book which was designed only for young people was yet read by many others,
it excited the curiosity of several, as he himself tells us in his Letter to
Frudegard, Ad intelligentiam, says he, hujus mysterii plures ut audio commovi:
I have stirred up several people to understand this mystery. It Is likely
several became of his mind, and it is certain others condemned his opinion:
Audivi, says he, quosdam me reprehendere, and that others in fine remained in
suspense and uncertainty. Quoeris, says he, to Frudegard, de re ex qua multi
dubitant, and lower, Multi ex hoc dubitant quomodo ille integer manet, and hoc,
Corpus Christi and Sanguis esse possit. This first success so little
advantageous obliged him to write his Commentary on the 26th. of S. Matthew,
where he urges the words of Christ, This is my Body, and argues as strongly as
he can against those that say it is the Body of Jesus Christ in a Figure, in a
Sacrament, and in Virtue. In fine, Frudegard having offered him a passage of S.
Austin out of his third Book, De Doctrina Christiana, wherein this Father says,
that to eat this Flesh and drink this Blood is a figurative locution, which
seems to command a sin, but which signifies to meditate on the Death and
Passion of Jesus Christ for us, he thence takes occasion to write the Letter to
Frudegard, wherein he endeavors by all means to defend his Doctrine, pressing
again the words of Jesus Christ, and relating some passages of the Fathers, and
Liturgy which he imagined were on his side, And this is all that can be said
historically touching Paschasus his fact, in which I think there is nothing that
hinders us from believing he was an Innovator, that is to say, that the Doctrine
he offered was not that of the Church, as will be made plain by what we shall
alledg anon. Mr. Arnaud should argue from these matters of fact, and not from
imaginary suppositions.

PASCHASVS, says he, proposes immediately his Doctrine without Book 8. chapter 8. p.
848.
any Preface, or insinuating address, without supposing any other Principle
than that God can do what he pleases. His Doctrine then was not new. This
consequence is too quick. He does not mention that horrid blindness wherein he
must suppose the world. Although he does not speak of it, what can be thence
concluded, those that propose novelties as the perpetual Faith of the Church
are cautious of absolutely acknowledging that in this respect the world lies in
an error. Yet does Paschasus insinuate in his Book that this mystery was
unknown, that is to say, that men knew not yet his Doctrine, as I have already
showed, and in his Letter to Frudegard he formally acknowledges that several
were ignorant of it. Quamvis, says he, plurimi ignoraverint tanti mysterii
Sacramenta. He does not trouble himself, adds Mr. Arnaud, to confirm what he
says by proofs sufficient to dissipate this error. What follows hence? He
proves it as well as he can, that is to say ill; yet does he advertise his
Placidus in his Preface that he took what he offered out of the principal
Authors of the Church, and he names S. Cyprian, Ambrose, Hilary, Augustine,
Chrysostom, Jerome, Gregory, Isidor, Isychius and Bid: Now here are, I think,
great names enough.

Mr. Claude, adds further Mr. Arnaud, would persuade us that a young Religions
Page 850.
having taught in a Book a Doctrine unheard of contrary to sense and reason, and
having taught it without proofs, living in a great communalty, having commerce
with a great number of Religious, Abbots, and Bishops, was yet advertised by
none of 'em that he offered an error contrary to the Doctrine of the Church, and
that not only he escaped unpunished, but for thirty years together no body
testified any astonishment at his Doctrine; so that he only learned from other
peoples report, and that thirty years after he wrote his Book that there were
some persons who found fault with it. Mr. Arnaud's prejudice puts him upon
strange things. Does he not see we need only turn his reasoning on John Scot
and Bertram to expose the weakness of it? They wrote against the Real Presence:
who told them they offered an error contrary to the Doctrine of the Church? who
punished 'em for it? what Popes, what Councils condemned 'em? who, setting
aside Paschasus, stood up against those that affirmed the Eucharist was not the
Body of Jesus Christ otherwise than Sacramentally, figuratively, and virtually,
and not really, Non in re esse veritatem carnis Christi vel Sanguinis, sed in
Sacramento, virtutem quandam carnis and non carnem, virtutem Sanguinis and non
Sanguinem? Supposing no body did address themselves to Paschasus himself to
charge him with the publishing in his Book a new Doctrine, what can be
rationally inferred hence, but that his Book was at first but little known by
learned men who were fit to judge of it, because a Book designed for Scholars
does not usually make any great noise, or because perhaps that it was despised,
seeing that in effect there was little in it to the purpose. But, says Mr.
Arnaud, at least the Monks of the Convent of Corbie must oppose him, Had they
done it, they had done no more than they ought. But Paschasus was their Master
that taught 'em, and the Disciples are not wont to contradict their Masters.
Paschasus had immediately won to his interests Placidus, who was a person of
Quality and a Dignitary in this Convent, as appears by the terms of Paschasus
himself, for thus does he bespeak him. Dilectissimo filio, and vice Christi
proesidenti, Magistro Monasticae Disciplinoe, alternis successibus veritatis
discipulo. Again, who told Mr. Arnaud that no body for thirty years reprehended
Paschasus to his face? how knows he this, that he can be so confident of it?
Does Paschasus himself positively assure him of it? No. But it is because
Paschasus says, Audivi quosdam me reprehendere. I am informed that some blame
me. Every man sees that this expression is not sufficient for the drawing of
this consequence, and that an Author may speak thus, although he was told of his
fault to his face. In fine, who informed Mr. Arnaud that the contradictions
which Paschasus met with did not happen till thirty years after the publishing
of his Book? Because he complains of this in his Commentaries on S. Matthew,
which were published not till thirty years after. A frivolous reason, as if the
censures which were made of his Doctrine, must needs be of the same date as his
Commentaries wherein he mentions 'em, and endeavors to defend himself. It must
be acknowledged that never man argued more unhappily than Mr. Arnaud.

NOT only, adds he, he was not reprehended by any of his Superiors, Page 850,
851.
Friends, and Brethren, but he still believed the whole Church was on his side.
For in his Papers which he wrote not long before his death he presses his
unknown adversaries of whom he had notice, by the Authority of the whole
Church, and clearly affirms a man cannot oppose his Opinion without
contradicting the Faith of it. Videat qui contra hoc venire voluerit magis quam
credere quid agat contra ipsum Dominum, and contra omnem Ecclesiam. He says
that no body dared yet openly contradict this Doctrine which he taught, nor
oppose what the whole world owned to be true. Ideo quamvis quidam de ignorantia
errent, nemo tamen adhuc est in aperto qui ita hoc esse contradicat quod totus
orbis credit and confitetur. In short he accuses those as highly criminal, who
using the common Prayers of the Church explained them in a sense of figure and
virtue, contrary to the consent of the whole Earth. Nefandum ergo scelus est
orare cum omnibus, and non credere quod ipsa veritas testatur, and ubique omnes
universaliter verum esse fatentur.

I answered the Author of the Perpetuity, That Paschasus did not say the whole
world was formally of his opinion, but that this was a consequence which he
would draw from the whole worlds believing to be true and above all question
the words of Jesus Christ, This is my Body, which he imagined contained his
Belief, and from the Churches saying in her Canon, Vt fiat Corpus and Sanguis
dilectissimi filii tui Domini nostri Jesu Christi, to which the people
answered, Amen. That there is a great deal of difference betwixt positive
assuring that the whole Church believes by a distinct and unquestionable Faith
a Doctrine, and the iutroducing of it by consequences drawn from some
expressions which a man believes to be favorable to this Doctrine, but which are
not so greatly favorable but that they may be of use to those who believe a
contrary Doctrine.

HERE, says Mr. Arnaud, is a distinction well worthy of Mr. Claude' s invention
who admirably well pretends to answer a matter when he does nothing less, and
to distinguish by terms which have no sense, that which reason cannot
distinguish. Let us in good time see then whether my distinction be as
extravagant as Mr. Arnaud would make it. When a man maintains against an
opponent a Doctrine which is said to be the common Doctrine of the Church, either
this proposition that it is the common Doctrine of the Church, is so clear and
evident, that the Adversaries themselves must grant it, or it is not so clear
nor evident but that it is questionable. As to the first case, a man need not
trouble himself to prove it: for its taken for a Principle, and such
consequences are thence drawn as are judged fitting. For instance, When the
Gentlemen of the Roman Church teach that our Savior Christ died not only for
the Elect, but also for all men in general; that all Gods Commands are possible
to be kept by the Just, according to the present condition of their ability;
that the substance of Bread is really converted into the substance of the Body
of Jesus Christ; that the Wicked receive the Body of Jesus Christ, and eat it
with their bodily mouths in the act of the Communion; it is so evident that
these are the common Doctrins of this Church, that there needs no proving 'em;
and should any one in the bosom of the Roman Church oppose these Articles,
there is no body would take pains to prove to him that they are the Faith of the
Church, for they would be supposed to be undeniable Principles, and he would
have only hence consequences drawn against him. As to the second case, that is
to say when it is not clear that this is the Faith of the Church, and that this
point is in dispute, both parties apply themselves to the bringing of proofs,
and each commonly endeavors to authorize his Opinion under the specious name
of the Faith of the Church.

BUT as this question touching the common Doctrine of the Church may have two
senses, one which regards precisely the present Church, which is to say, the
Church in the time of the contest, the other which respects the Church in the
preceding times, which is to say, before the controversy, it may also receive
two sorts of proofs, some which refer to the present time, others which refer
to the Ages which have preceded us. When a man proves for the time present, he
alleges testimonies of the modern Church, when he proves for the past time, he
alleges 'em of those that have lived before us, and the question determins it
self according as the proofs are good, or bad, conclusive, or not conclusive.

TO apply this to the matter in hand, I say, That Paschasus never advanced for
an undeniable Principle, that his Doctrine was the Doctrine or common belief of
the Church in his time; on the contrary he has formally acknowledged that there
were in his time three sorts of persons in the Church; the first reprehended
him for misunderstanding the words of Christ. Audivi quosdam me reprehendere
quasi ego in eo libro quem de Sacramentis Christi edideram aliquid his dictis
plus tribuere voluerim quam ipsa veritas repromittit, and affirmed on the
contrary that the Eucharist was the Body of Jesus Christ in figure and virtue.
Non in re esse veritatem carnis Christi vel Sangainis, sed in Sacramento,
virtutem quandam carnis and non carnem. Others that doubted of the truth of his
Doctrine, multi dubitant, says he, several times. And in fine, others that erred
through ignorance, which is to say, that had not yet heard of these marvails which
he proposed. Quamvis plurimi, says he, dubitaverint vel ignoraverint tanti
mysterii Sacramenta. And a little lower, Quamvis ex hoc quidam de ignorantia
errent. He was then far from vaunting that his Doctrine was undeniably the
common Faith of the Church of his Age.

I say in the second place, that whatsoever design Paschasus had to make people
believe that he taught nothing but what was according to the Doctrine of the
Church; yet did he never alledg for this effect the men of his time, nor ever
said the Bishops which then governed the Churches, the Abbots, Priests,
Religious, and all learned men held the same language as he did, and all of 'em
unanimously confessed, that the substance of Bread was changed into the Body of
Jesus Christ born of the Virgin according to the propriety of his nature.
Neither did he ever aver he held his Doctrine from Masters that taught it.
Paschasus was far from asserting this.

HE keeps to three things, to some passages of the Fathers, to the words of
Jesus Christ, This is my Body, to a clause of the Liturgy, which says, Vt fiat
Corpus and sanguis dilectissimi filii tui Domini nostri Jesu Christi: And as to
the passages of the Fathers having proposed 'em, he concludes, That from thence
one may know that what he wrote was not an effect of Enthusiastical rashness,
nor a young man's vision; but that he offered these things (to those who were
desirous of 'em) from the authority of the Word of God, and the Writings of the
Holy Fathers. Now seeing, adds he, it appears that all men have not Faith, yet
if they cannot understand, let 'em learn to believe with the Fathers that
there is nothing impossible with God, and acquiesce in the Divine words without
the least doubt of 'em. For we never as yet read any have erred in this point,
unless those that have erred touching the person of Jesus Christ himself, although
several have doubted, or been ignorant of the Sacraments of so great a mystery.
Is this the language of a man that loudly glories in the consent of the whole
Church? Were he assured he wrote nothing but what was according to the common
belief, what need he justify himself from the suspicion of Enthusiasm and
pretenses to Visions? Are we wont to suspect people in this sort who say only
what the whole world says and believes? And designing to justify himself, why
must he rather betake himself to some passages of the Fathers, (whose sense and
terms he may justly be said to have corrupted) than to the testimony of persons
in his own time, and to say if he was an Enthusiast or Visionary, all the
Bishops, Abbots, Priests, Religious, Doctors, and Christians in general were so
too, seeing they all believed and spoke as he did? But instead of this he
complains that his Doctrine which he termed that of the Fathers was not kindly
received: Nunc autem, says he, exinde quia claruit quod non omnium est fides.
He exhorts those who reprehended him, to believe with the Fathers that nothing
is impossible with God, and to acquiesce in the words of Jesus Christ. Discant
quoeso cum talibus credere, si adhuc nequeunt intelligere, quod Deo nihil est
impossible, discant and verbis divinis acquiescere, and in nullo de his
dubitare.

WHEN then he adds that hitherto 'twas not heard that any person erred on this
subject, unless 'twere those who had erred touching Jesus Christ himself. Quia
usque ad proesens nemo deerrasse legitur nisi qui and de Christo erraverunt. He
would say that till then no body had contradicted the Doctrine of the Fathers,
leaving it to be understood that then 'twas contradicted, because they
contradicted his, which he maintained was that of the Fathers. So far we do not
find him boasting of the consent of the Church in his time, for we see on the
contrary several things which sufficiently denote that he was far from doing it.

AS to the passages of the Liturgy, and words of Christ, he says, that the
Priest prays in the Canon in these terms, Vt fiat Corpus Jesus Christi, that
all the People cry Amen, and so the whole Church in every Nation and Language
confesses that it is this she desires in her Prayer. Whence he draws this
consequence, Vnde videat qui contra hoc venire voluerit magis quam credere quid
agat contra ipsum Dominum and contra omnem Christi Ecclesiam. Nefarium ergo
scelus est orare cum omnibus, and non credere quod ipsa veritas testatur, and
ubique omnes nniversaliter verum esse fatentur. Let those then that had rather
contradict this than believe it, consider what they do against the Lord himself
and his whole Church. It is then a great fault to pray with all people, and not
to believe what the truth it self attests, and what all do universally, and
every where confess to be true. His Argument is a Sophism which amounts to
this, Our Savior Christ says it is his Body, and the whole Church confesses the
same. But they that at this day deny that it is his Body in propriety of nature
deny that it is his Body. Therefore they contradict Jesus Christ and his Church.
Who sees not but there is a great difference between reasoning in this manner,
and positively assuring, that the whole Church believes it is his Body in
propriety of nature? I will have this, says Mr. Arnaud Page 852.
to be only a consequence. Are not Authors persuaded of the truth of the
consequences which they draw, and do they not offer them for true as positively
as their principles? Mr. Arnaud gives an exchange. The question is not whether
Paschasus was persuaded of the solidity of his consequence or not, but whether
we ought to be persuaded of it our selves, and take it for a testimony touching
the public belief of his time. Mr. Arnaud should know that when a man
testifies of a matter of fact, and afterward draws thence by way of argument,
and consequence another fact, he is no farther credible in respect of this
latter, but only as his argument or consequence appears just to us. If I say
for example that Mr. Arnaud confesses in the first edition of his Book, That
it is possible the faithful knew not always so expressly, Book 6. chapter 1.
and universally, whether the Bread did or did remain in the Sacrament, and I
from hence draw by way of argument and consequence this proposition, That Mr.
Arnaud acknowledges Transubstantiation was not anciently an Article of Faith in
the Church. My testimony in respect of the latter fact will be no farther
credible than my consequence will be good. It Is the same here. Paschasus
assures us, that the whole Church in his time called the Eucharist the Body and
Blood of Jesus Christ, saying these words, Vt fiat Corpus dilectissimi filii
tui. So far he acts as a witness, we must believe him. Whence he draws this
consequence. That those that do not believe it to be the Body of Jesus Christ
in propriety of nature, but only in Sacrament contradict the Church. Here he
acts the part of a Disputer, if his arguing be good, we will believe him, if it
be a Sophism, we'll not matter it. Now it is a sophism; for according to the
maxim of S. Augustine, The Sacraments assume the names of the things of which
they are Sacraments, so that to deny the Eucharist to be the Body of Jesus
Christ in propriety of nature, it does not follow a man thereby contradicts the
Church which calls it the Body of Jesus Christ.

BUT, adds Mr. Arnaud, it is moreover false that this is only a consequence.
Book 8. chapter 9. p. 852.
For this proposition that the whole Church believed the Real Presence was
included both in the Principle and Conclusion of Paschasus his argument. He
concludes, That those who deny the Real Presence commit an horrid crime in
opposing the Faith of the Church. Here we have it comprehended in the
conclusion. Did ever man hear such kind of reasoning? It Is false that this is
only a consequence, because it is a proposition contained in the conclusion.
This is just as if a man should say it is false that it is day. Why? Because the
Sun is at his height, for for to be day, and the Sun to be at its height, are
not more the same thing, than to be a consequence, and to be a proposition
contained in the conclusion of an argument. Are these the prodigious effects of
Mr. Arnaud's Logic? And the Principle of this conclusion is, adds he, not that
the Church simply recites these words; Vt fiat Corpus dilectissimi filii tui,
but understands them in the sense of the Real Presence. Which is what I deny.
The Principle whereon Paschasus argues is no other than this, That the Priest
says, Vt fiat Corpus dilectissimi filii tui, and the People answer, Amen. That
the Church did, or did not understand this of the Real Presence, is what
Paschasus does not touch on. He is careful not to advance so far, Had he known,
says Mr. Arnaud, that the Church took these words in another sense, he must
needs be a mad man to reproach as he does these persons for being contrary to
the sense of the whole Church. He supposes then this for a Princile, that the
whole Church took them in the sense of a Real Presence, and consequently
supposes she held entirely this Doctrine. This is mere wrangling. Paschasus does
not say that these persons against whom he inveighs were contrary to the sense
of the Church, but only, that they went against the Church, to wit, inasmuch as
they went, according to him, contrary to the terms of the Liturgy. Secondly,
Whether he did or did not know that the Church took these terms in another
sense, it is not necessary to enquire, seeing he does not explain himself
therein, and speaks neither far or near of the sense of these terms. And it is
likely he knew there were at least three sorts of persons in the Church, the
doubters, the ignorant, and formal adversaries of his Doctrine who took 'em not
in this sense. Thirdly, Supposing we say not that Paschasus was mad, but argued
like a Sophister, what inconvenience will follow, and what shall we say more
than appears from the bare reading of his discourse? He would have the Church
on his side, what could be more easy, supposing at that time the conversion of
substances, and Real Presence were believed, than to proclaim clearly and
plainly that the whole Church, Bishops, Religious, the Doctors, and generally
all the faithful believed his Doctrine neither more nor less, and there only
needed them to be consulted. Articles of Faith of this nature cannot lie hid in
a Church which holds them. His Adversaries could not have denied this truth,
and had they the impudence to do it they might easily be convinced by a million
of persons then living. Why had he recourse to arguing and consequences? Why
must this consequence be drawn by the hair out of a passage of the Liturgy,
which may receive I know not how many explications? Why did he not at least say
'twas certain the Church understood this clause in the sense of a Real
Presence? Wherefore was he silent touching the sense, and argued only from the
force of these terms, Corpus dilectissimi filii tui, etc. as if all those that
utter these terms, or add to em their Amen, believed the Real Presence? Which
shows us two things, the first, that Paschasus acted like a Sophister,
sheltering himself as well as he could under the Authority of the Church,
against the reproach objected against him of being a Visionary, and an
Enthusiast; and the other, that in effect he was an Innovator that had broached
a Doctrine unknown to the Church of his time; for had he the advantage which Mr.
Arnaud supposes he had, which is, that the whole Church was of his opinion, and
the people commonly believed the Real Presence and conversion of substances of
Bread and Wine, he would not have failed to make the best of it, and o'rewhelm
his adversaries with it.

Mr. ARNAVD will now then perhaps comprehend that there is a difference between
a man that affirms a thing for certain, and of which he himself is a witness,
and one that draws a consequence, and perhaps will no longer say, That my
distinction separates by terms which have no sense, that which reason cannot
separate. And at the same time acknowledge, that never pretension was worse
grounded than that of the Author of the Perpetuity, and his own. They affirm
the whole Church was of Paschasus his mind. But whereon do they ground their
supposition? Were the Adversaries of Paschasus agreed about it? No. Does
Paschasus himself expressly affirm it? No. But it is because Paschasus insinuates
it by an equivocal term which the Church made use of. But does Paschasus
formally assert, that the Church understood this term in the sense which he
gave it? No. But it is because Paschasus must thus understand it, says Mr.
Arnaud, to make his reasoning just. Take away then from Paschasus his reasoning
the justness which Mr. Arnaud would give it, the subint^lligitur is annulled,
and these Gentlemen bare of proofs.

THESE words of Paschasus, says Mr. Arnaud, Miror quid volunt quidam nunc
dicere non in re esse veritatem carnis Christi vel Sanguinis, sed in
Sacramento, virtutem quandam carnis and non carnem, furnish us with another
proof of the same nature. For they show that this solution of virtue was new,
and that Paschasus had not learned it but of late. Mr. Arnaud does well to
advertise us that it is a proof of the same nature as the others, for it is so in
effect, that is to say, a very slight one, and scarcely worth offering.
Paschasus is astonished at what his Adversaries say in reference to virtue, not
that this solution appears to him new. He says nothing of it in this respect,
but because it does not appear to him conformable to these words of Jesus
Christ, This is my Body, nor to these others, The Bread which I shall give is
my Flesh, nor to these, He that eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, dwells in
me, and I in him. Let but Mr. Arnaud read Paschasus his Text, and he will find
what I say to be true. Jesus Christ, says he, did not say, this is, or in this
mystery is the virtue or figure of my Body, but he has said without feigning,
This is my Body. S. John introduces likewise our Lord, saying, the Bread which
I shall give is my Flesh, not another than that which is for the life of the
world. And again, He that eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, dwells in me and
I in him. Vnde miror, adds he, quid velint, etc, What can be concluded hence
for the novelty of this solution of virtue?

IN fine, Frudegard himself, says moreover Mr. Arnaud, to whom Paschasus Page
857.
wrote about the latter part of his life to remove some doubts he had on this
mystery may serve further to confute the falsity of Mr. Claude' s fable, who
pretends no body could have the idea of the Real Presence unless he took it
from Paschasus his Book. Dicis, says Paschasus, to him, te sic antea
credidisse, and in libro quem de Sacrament is edidi ita legisse, sed profiteris
postea te in libro tertio de doctrina Christiana B. Augustini legisse quod
tropica sit locutio. Mr. Arnaud will have these words, Dicis te sic antea
credidisse, to denote that the Doctrine of the Real Presence was the Faith in
which he had been brought up, and that the following, Et in libro quem de
Sacramentis edidi ita legisse, denote that the reading of Paschasus his Book
had confirmed him in it. But who knows not that in these kind of discourses the
Particle Et, is very often a Particle which explains, or gives the reason of
what was before said, and not that which distinguishes, as I have already
observed in another place. He would only say that before he thus believed it,
having so read it in Paschasus his Book. And that Mr. Arnaud's subtilty might
take place, he must have said, not that he had thus believed it before; but
thus believed it from the beginning, in his youth, that he afterward thus
found it in Paschasus his Book, who had confirmed him in his belief, but that
afterward he had found in S. Austin that 'twas a figurative locution. In this
manner he had distinguished the three terms of Mr. Arnaud, whereas he
distinguishes but two, antea, and postea, and as to the first, he says he had
thus believed it, and thus read it in Paschasus his Book, denoting by this
second clause the place where he drew this Faith.

AND these are Mr. Arnaud's objections, but having examined them, 'twill not be
amiss to represent the conclusion he draws from 'em. I do not believe, says he;
that having considered all these proofs seriously one can imagine, that
Paschasus in declaring the Eucharist to be the true Flesh of Jesus Christ
assumed of the Virgin, has proposed a new Doctrine. Neither can I believe that
amongst the Calvinists themselves any but Mr. Claude will be so obstinate as to
maintain so evident a falsity, and one so likely to demonstrate to the world
the excessive boldness of some of their Ministers. Thus does Mr. Arnaud wipe
his Sword after his victory. Can you but think he has offered the most
convincing proofs imaginable, obliged us to be everlastingly silent, and that
the Minister Claude must be a strange kind of a man, seeing he alone of all his
party will be able to harden himself against such puissant demonstrations and
clear discoveries.

CHAP. IX.
Proofs that Paschasus was an Innovator.

I SAID in the preceding Chapter that the best way to be informed whether
Paschasus has been an Innovator, was to search whether those that went before
him, and wrote on the same subject, have, or have not taught the same thing as
he has done, I repeat it here, to the end it may be considered whether after
the discussion which Mr. Aubertin has made of the Doctrine of the Ancients, and
what I have wrote also thereupon either to the Author of the Perpetuity, or
Father Nouet, or Mr. Arnaud, we have not right to suppose, and to suppose as we
do with confidence, that no body before Paschasus taught the conversion of the
substances of Bread and Wine, or substantial Presence of the Body and Blood of
Jesus Christ in the Eucharist. Whence it follows he was the first that brought
this new Doctrine into the world.

BUT besides this proof which is an essential and fundamental one, we shall
offer several others, taken from the circumstances of this History which do
much illustrate this truth. The first of this rank is taken from Paschasus
himself's acknowledging he moved several persons to understand this mystery.
Although I wrote nothing worth the Reader's perusal in my Book Epist. ad Frud.
which I dedicated cuilibet puero (I had rendered these words to a young man,
because that in effect his Book was dedicated to Placidus. Mr. Arnaud would
have it rendered to young people, this is no great matter) yet am I informed
that I have excited several persons to understand this mystery. Now this shows
that before his Book came forth his Doctrine was unknown, whereunto we may also
add the passages wherein he declares how the Church was ignorant of this
mystery, as we have already observed.

TO judge rightly of the strength of this proof, and to defend it against Mr.
Arnaud's vain objections we should first show what kind of ignorance, and
intelligence Paschasus here means. For Mr. Arnaud has wonderful distinctions on
this subject. Ought not Mr. Claude to know, says he, that besides Book 8. chapter
10. p. 860.
this knowledge common to all Christians which makes 'em believe the mysteries
without much reflection, there is another clearer one, and which is often
denoted in S. Austin by the word intelligence, which does not precede, but
follows Faith, as being the fruit and recompense of it, sic accipite, sic
credit, says this Father, Vt mereamini intelligere, fides enim debet
proecedere intellectum ut sit intellectus fidei proemium. As then all
Christians believe the mysteries, they believed likewise all of 'em the
Eucharist in Paschasus his time in the same manner as we believe it, (which is
to say that they all believed the Real Presence and Transubstantiation) but
they had not all of 'em an understanding of it, that is to say, they had not
all considered this adorable Sacrament, with the application which it deserves,
That they did not all know the mysteries contained in the symbols, the
relations of the Eucharist with the Sacraments of the ancient Law, the ends
which God had in appointing them, those that have right to partake of 'em, the
dispositions with which a man ought to approach to 'em, the greatness of their
crime who profane the Lords Body, and the rest of those things which are
explained in Paschasus his Book. All this is contained under the word
intelligence, and he comprehends it therein himself in explaining afterward
what he means by this term, and by making an abridgment of his whole Book
without marking in particular the Real Presence. The question then is, whether
in Paschasus his sense the ignorance, and consequently the intelligence he
speaks of do not extend as far as the Real Presence. Now this is what will be
soon decided if we examine the passages themselves of this Author without
suffering our selves to be blinded by Mr. Arnaud's illusions. At the entrance
of his second Chapter, wherein he declares his design to dissipate this
ignorance, and remedy the evils it caused, he describes it in this manner,
Sacramentum Dominici Corporis and Sanguinis quod quotidie in Ecclesia
celebratur, nemo sidelium ignorare debet, nemo nescire quid ad fidem, quidve ad
scientiam in eo pertineat. Will you then know what kind of ignorance this was,
Paschasus tells you immediately, Nescire quid ad fidem Paschas. de Corp. and
Sang. Dom. cap. 2.
quidve ad scientiam pertineat. Here are precisely the two parts of Mr,
Arnaud's distinction contained in the definition which Paschasus gives of it.
For nescire quid ad fidem pertineat, is not to have this knowledge which makes
me believe the mysteries without much reflection, and nescire quid ad
scientiam, is not to have this other clearer knowledge which Mr. Arnaud calls
particularly intelligence. So that Paschasus and his Commentatator are not at
all agreed. Paschasus extends the ignorance he speaks of to the things which
relate to Faith, which is to say, according to him, the Real Presence, and Mr.
Arnaud restrains it to other things. But let us hear Paschasus further, Fides,
says he, est erudienda ne forte ob hoc censeamur indigni, si non satis
discernimus illud; nec intelligimus mysticum Christi Corpus and sanguis quanta
polleat dignitate quantaque proemineat virtute. We must instruct our Faith,
lest for want of doing it we be reputed unworthy in not sufficiently discerning
this Sacrament, and understanding the excellent virtue and dignity of it. Can
any man explain himself more clearly? The ignorance consists in not well
understanding the great dignity of the mystical Body of Jesus Christ, which in
his sense signifies not to know, that it is the proper substance of the Body of
Jesus Christ born of the Virgin, and the intelligence on the contrary consists
in knowing it. But to take away from Mr. Arnaud all pretense of the validity of
his distinction, observe here what Paschasus adds afterward. He receives the
Sacrament ignorantly who is wholly ignorant of its virtue and dignity, and
knows not the circumstance of it, and does not truly know that it is the Body
and Blood of our Lord, according to truth, although it be taken in the Sacrament
by Faith. Mr. Arnaud will not deny that in the style of Paschasus to be the
Body and Blood of our Lord according to truth, is to be it substantially and
really. Now the ignorance consists in the not knowing this, and by the reason
of contraries the intelligence consists in knowing it according to Paschasus.

Mr. ARNAVD will say without doubt that Paschasus in all this whole second
Chapter, intended only to show the necessity there is of instructing persons
before they come to receive the Communion, but that he does not suppose this
ignorance was actually in the Church; and that on the contrary, this necessity
of instruction, in the manner which he exaggerates, denotes that they took a
great care in those days to teach the Communicants the Doctrine of the Real
Presence. But this evasion will not serve turn. For besides that Paschasus says
expressly, That he receives the Sacrament ignorantly that knows not it is the
Body and Blood of our Lord according to truth; which is an expression of a man
which acknowledges there are actually persons that thus receive the Sacrament:
Besides this a man needs only read the passages of his Letter to Frudegard,
where it cannot be denied but he speaks of ignorant persons which were then
actually in the Church; I say, there needs no more than the reading 'em to find
he understands this same ignorance which he had described in the second Chapter
of his Book. For having immediately proposed, as from the part of Frudegard,
the objection taken from a passage of S. Austin, That the Sacrament is called
the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ by a figurative locution, Quod tropica
locutio sit ut Corpus Christi and Sanguis esse dicatur, which respects as
Epist. ad Frud.
every one sees the Article of the Real Presence; and having endeavored to
satisfy it, he passes over to another objection, which respects the same Real
Presence. Multi, says he, ex hoc dubitant quomodo ille integer manet, and hoc
Corpus Christi and Sanguis esse possit. Several doubt because they cannot
comprehend how Jesus Christ remains entire, and yet the Sacrament to be his
Body and Blood. He answers this Objection as well as he can, then immediately
adds, Here you have, dear Brother, what came into my thoughts at present, and
because you are one part of my self, I believe I ought not to conceal any thing
from you, although I cannot express my mind in this particular as it is necessary.
As to your self, I desire you would read over again my Book touching this
matter, which you say you have heretofore read, and if you find therein any
thing reprehensible or doubtful, refuse not the labor of reading it again. For
although I have not written any thing worth the Readers pains in a Book which I
dedicated to young people, yet am I informed that I have stirred up several
persons to the understanding of this mystery. Who sees not that in all this his
whole scope is the Real Presence. His whole preceding dispute was on this
Article, and these terms, If you find in my Book any thing reprehensible or
doubtful, can only relate to the same Article, for there was no question of any
thing else. When then he adds, That he has stirred up several persons to the
understanding of this mystery, it is clear that he has respect to the same
thing, and means he has rescued several from the ignorance wherein they lay
touching the Doctrine of the Real Presence.

BUT to leave no room for contradiction and cavil, I need only represent what
he writes toward the end of this same Letter, where having said he has
confirmed his Doctrine by the testimonies of Pope Gregory, the Council of
Ephesus, S. Jerome and some others, he adds, Et ideo quamvis ex hoc quidam de
ignorantia errent nemo tamen est, etc. Although some do err through ignorance in this
point. What can be said to this? Here we have formally an actual ignorance on
the Article of the Real Presence, on the same Article which was disputed him by
his Adversaries, on the same Article on which he produced the words of Jesus
Christ, This is my Body, and the clause of the Liturgy, Vt fiat Corpus and
Sanguis, dilectissimi filii tui Domini nostri Jesu Christi, on the same Article
whereon he had alleged several passages of the Fathers, Quamvis, says he, ex
hoc quidam de ignorantia errent.

DOES any man desire another express and formal testimony of Paschasus, I need
only produce these words of his Commentary on the 26th. of S. Matthew to
satisfy him. I have been more large on this subject of our Lords Supper than
the brevity of (...) Commentary permits, because there are several that have
another sentiment touching these mystical things, and several are so blind as
to think the Bread and Wine are nothing else but what we see with our eyes, and
taste with our mouths. Here we have then actually persons that did not believe
the Real Presence, and those not inconsiderable for their number, seeing he
denotes them by the term of several, and which he expresses so clearly that Mr.
Arnaud will be at a loss what to answer.

Mr. ARNAVD who well perceived he might be opposed on the first answer,
bethought himself of giving us another, in which, contrary to his usual manner,
he relaxes something of what he advanced. Not but that, says Book 8. chapter 10. p.
852.
he, this word intelligence may likewise respect the Real Presence, not as a
new truth, but as a truth which might be fuller comprehended, and in a manner
which penetrates more lively the heart, for there are several degrees of
growing in the knowledge of a mystery which one believes already by Faith. He
would say there might be people who knew less strongly, and livelily the Real
Presence, and that in this respect they might acquire the intelligence of it,
but that there were none that were wholly ignorant of it, or to whom Paschasus
his Book gave the intelligence of it as of a new truth. But Paschasus himself
refutes this gloss, Quamvis ex hoc quidam de ignorantia errent. This is an
ignorance which according to him extends so far as the making 'em err in the
Article of the Real Presence. To err in an Article through ignorance, is it not a
not believing of it at all, as having never heard it mentioned? Is not this a
knowing nothing of it, a having no knowledge, and consequently no Faith in it?
Now such were Paschasus his ignorant persons, who were far different from those
of Mr. Arnaud. In a word, they were people who thought the Bread and Wine were
nothing else in respect of their substance, than what they appear to our eyes
and taste, as Paschasus now spoke.

THIS Principle being well established, as I believe it is at present, 'twill
be no hard matter to see the consequence of it. The Author of the Perpetuity
and Mr. Arnaud affirm as an undoubted truth that all the faithful Communicants
have ever had a distinct knowledge either of the Real Presence, or Real Absence;
of the Presence, if it were taught in the Church, of the Absence, if the
Presence were not therein taught. Whereupon I raise this Argument. There cannot
be any person in a Church wherein the Real Presence is commonly taught, but
knows distinctly the Real Presence. Now in the Church of the 9th. Century, at
which time Paschasus lived, there were people that were ignorant of the Real
Presence, and erred in this Article through ignorance. Therefore in the Church of
the 9th. Century the Real Presence was not commonly taught. The first
proposition is of the Author of the Perpetuity and Mr. Arnaud, without
distinction or restriction; the second is of Paschasus himself: the conclusion
of it I think then is inevitable.

'TWILL be replied that this Argument is one of those called, ad hominem, which
does indeed press an adversary by his own proper Principles, but which are not
always absolutely conclusive, because it may happen that the Principles of an
Adversary on which they are grounded be false and imprudently offered. This
Argument then may be convictive against the Author of the Perpetuity and Mr.
Arnaud. But the Principle of Mr. Arnaud and the Author of the Perpetuity may be
false, and consequently the conclusion I draw thence.

TO solve this difficulty, besides that it is a great advantage for the cause
which I defend, that as able Doctors as these Gentlemen remain convict by their
own proper Principles. It Is to be observed that theirs being alternative, must
be distinguished into two propositions; one of which is, All the Communicants
have had a distinct knowledge of the Real Presence if the Church of their time
taught it. And the other, All the Communicants have had a distinct knowledge of
the Real Absence, if the Church of their time did not teach the Real Presence.
In respect of this second proposition the Principle is false, as I have showed
in my Answer to the Perpetuity, and in the beginning of his 6th. Book, in I
think an unanswerable manner. But in respect of the first the Principle is
true, and must be granted, for in effect it is not conceivable that a Church
should believe and teach commonly that what we receive in the Communion is the
proper substance of the Body of Jesus Christ; and yet let persons of age
Communicate without instructing them in it; That she should believe and teach a
man must adore this Sacrament which we receive, publicly practice this supreme
Adoration, and yet one part of the Communicants know nothing of it, and in this
respect err through ignorance. It is then clear that my argument is not barely one
of those termed ad hominem, seeing it is not grounded on the second proposition
of these Gentlemen's Principle, which is in contest, but on the first in which
both sides are agreed: so that my conclusion has all the strength and truth
that can be desired in every respect.

NEVERTHELESS we must answer two of Mr. Arnaud's minute objections. Paschasus
says, That he dedicated his Book to young People. It Is Book 8. chapter 10. p. 859.
then, says he, unlikely, that Paschasus designed to instruct the whole world
in a truth of which he believed both the learned and unlearned were ignorant. I
answer, 'twas not indeed likely that he had immediately so vast a design. It Is
more likely he proposed his Doctrine as he himself says, petentibus, to her
Scholars who prayed him to show them his sentiment in this matter; but this
does not hinder his Doctrine from being new. He says, says Mr. Arnaud again,
That he had not written any thing worth his Readers pains. Now no man who
discovers a mystery of this importance uses such humble expressions which
suppose he says nothing but what is vulgarly known. Mr. Arnaud deceives himself;
for besides what I intimated in several places, that those who introduce new
Opinions by way of addition, or explication of the ancient ones do not openly
declare 'em to be new, but on the contrary endeavor to make 'em slip in by
means of received expressions; besides this, I say, this humility of Paschasus
relates not to the things themselves which he wrote, nor his sentiment; for he
could not term them scarcely worth his Readers perusal, whether they were new,
or not. But this relates to the manner of writing 'em, according to what he
says to Frudegard, Celare non debui quoe loqui ut oportuit minime potui.

BUT pass we on to the second proof, which shows Paschasus to be an Innovator.
It Is taken from the effect which his Doctrine produced in several persons minds,
which was, that they opposed him. I have discoursed, Comment in Matthew. 26.
says he, of these things more at large, because I am informed some people have
blamed me, as if (in the Book which I published of the Sacraments of Christ, I
would give more to his words than they will bear, or establish something else
than the truth promises. These censurers proceed further, for they opposed a
contrary Doctrine against that of Paschasus, to wit, that 'twas the Body of
Jesus Christ, in figure, in Sacrament, in virtue. Which Paschasus himself tells
us. Let those, says he, that will extenuate this term of Body hear, Ibid.
They that tell us it is not the true Flesh of Christ which is now celebrated in
the Sacrament in the Church, nor his true Blood. They tell us, or rather feign
I know not what, as if 'twere a certain virtue of the Flesh and Blood. He
afterward repeats two or three times the same thing. They proceeded so far as
to accuse Paschasus of Enthusiasm, twitting him with having a young man's
vision, as we remarked in the foregoing Chapter. For this is what may be justly
collected from these words to Frudegard. You have at Epist. ad Frud.
the end of this Book the sentiments of the Catholic Fathers which I briefly
marked, that you may know that it is not through an Enthusiasm of rashness that I
have had these Visions, being as yet a young man. Supposing Paschasus taught
nothing but what the whole Church believed and commonly taught the Faithful,
whence I pray you came these Censurers? The whole world lived peaceably during
eight hundred years in the belief of the Real Presence; all the Preachers
taught it, all Books contained it, all the Faithful believed it and distinctly
knew it; there not having been any body yet that dared contradict it: and yet
there appear persons who precisely oppose it as soon as Paschasus appeared in
the world. But who so well and quickly furnished 'em with the Keys of figure
and virtue which Mr. Arnaud would have had all the world to be ignorant of, and
the invention of which he attributes to the Ministers. Why if we will believe
him they were people that dared not appear openly, that whispered secretly in
men's ears, and yet were so well instructed that they knew the principal
distinctions of the Calvinists and all the subtilties of their School. But
moreover, what fury possessed them to attack thus particularly Paschasus who
said nothing but what all the world knew, even the meanest Christian, and what
all the world believed, and who moreover had no particular contest with them?
They could not be ignorant that the whole Church was of this opinion, supposing
she really did hold it; for as I already said, the Doctrine of the Real Presence
is a popular Doctrine. It is not one of those Doctrins which lie hid in Books or
the Schools, which the learned can only know. It Is a Doctrine which each
particular person knows if he knows any thing. Why then must Paschasus be thus
teas'd? If they had a design to trouble the peace of the Church, why did they
not attack its Doctrine, or in general those that held it, which is to say,
according to Mr. Arnaud, the whole world. Why again must Paschasus be rather
set upon than any body else? Does Mr. Arnaud believe this to be very natural?
Are people wont to set upon a particular person, to the exclusion of all
others, when he has said no more than what others have said, and what is taught
and held by every body? Is such a one liable to reproaches and censures? Are we
wont to charge such a one with Enthusiastical rashness and pretense to Visions?
It is clear people do not deal thus but with persons that have gone out of the
beaten road, and would introduce novelties in the Church. It Is such as these
whom we are wont to accuse, to censure and call Enthusiasts and Visionaries,
and not those that neither vary from the common terms or sentiments.

TO elude the force of this proof Mr. Arnaud has recourse to his Chronology.
Lib. 8. Chapter 10. p. 861, 862.
He says that the last eight Books of Paschasus his Commentaries on S. Matthew
were not written till thirty years after his Book De Corpore and Sanguine
Domini. That he speaks therein of his Censures as persons that reprehended him
at the very time he wrote this Commentary, Miror quid volunt nunc quidam
dicere, and that it does not appear he was reprehended before; seeing he did
not attempt to defend himself. Whence he concludes, That this Book which Mr.
Claude says offended the whole world as soon as 'twas made, was published near
thirty years before 'twas censured by any body.

I have already replied to this Chronology of Mr. Arnaud. Supposing there were
in effect thirty years between Paschasus his Book, and the Censures of his
Adversaries, 'twill not hence follow that his Doctrine received a general
approbation during these thirty years, for perhaps this Book was not known, or
considered by those that were better able to judge of it than others. Printing
which now immediately renders a Book public, was not in use in those times;
and it is likely Transcribers were not in any great have to multiply the Book of
a young Religious of Corbie, which he at first intended only for his particular
friends. Supposing this Book was known, it might be neglected through contempt, or
some other consideration, as it often happens in these cases, although a Book may
contain several absured and extraordinary Opinions; because it may not be
thought fitting to make 'em public, till it afterward appears there are
persons who be deceived by it, and that it is necessary to undeceive them.
Moreover, what reason is there to say, that the censures of these people happened
not before the time wherein Paschasus wrote his Commentary on S. Matthew? It Is
because, says Mr. Arnaud, he says, Miror quid volunt quidam nunc dicere. But
this reason is void, for this term nunc according to the common style of
Authors does refer it self rather in general to the time in which Paschasus
lived, than precisely to that in which he wrote his Commentary. And as to what
Mr. Arnaud adds, That it does not appear he was reprehended before, seeing he
did not attempt to defend himself. This concludes nothing, unless we suppose
that Paschasus was in a capacity, and in humor, to defend himself as soon as he
knew he was censured. Now this supposition must be proved before it be offered
as a thing certain, for this supposition does not establish it self. How many
persons are there who having set forth singular opinions, do for a long time
patiently undergo all censures and reprehensions without replies, in
expectation of a convenient time to defend themselves. Paschasus had begun his
Commentary on S. Matthew a great while before he became Abbot; it is probable he
was willing to stay till the explication of these words, This is my Body, which
he believed so advantageous to his cause should furnish him with an occasion to
speak of his sentiment, and to defend it against the attacks of opposers. So
that Mr. Arnaud's Chronology for this time will stand him in no stead.

WHO has given this liberty, adds he, to Mr. Claude to give the name of Page
868.
world to these unknown persons, of whom Paschasus only heard some mention, but
who never contradicted him to his face, nor ever wrote against him? This term
cannot be reasonably used but to denote the greatest part of Christians, or at
least those who had read Paschasus his Book. Now it is exceeding false in this
sense that the world was astonished at Paschasus his Book, seeing none of his
Friends, none of his Society, none of those with whom he met in Ecclesiastic
Assemblies and Councils, have formally reprehended him for it.

BUT who has given Mr. Arnaud Authority to attribute the name of unknown
persons to Paschasus his Adversaries, and to say thereupon what he says, seeing
he has no grounds for it, as I have already showed? Who told him that John
Scot, Bertram and Raban, who were not obscure persons in the Church of the 9th.
Century, have staid till Paschasus his death before they declared themselves
against his Opinion, supposing 'twere true they did not write till after his
Death, which is very uncertain? Who has given him power to conclude, That the
world was not astonished at Paschasus his Book, under pretense it does not
appear, That he was formally reprehended about it, neither amongst his own
Society, nor in the Ecclesiastical Assemblies, nor Councils, seeing it does no
more appear, that Bertram and Raban, when they taught a contrary Doctrine to
that of Paschasus, have been formally reprchended for it, either by any one of
their Order, or in the public Assemblies, or Councils wherein they assisted?
Who has given him right to say, as he does, that the world of whom I speak
consists of some small number of rash and troublesome Disputers, who privately
blamed what they dared not contradict in public? I shall not here repeat what
I have already observed, That it is absurd to endeavor to make us conceive the
Adversaries of Paschasus his Doctrine as persons that blamed in secret what they
dared not contradict in public; seeing the Gentlemen of the Roman Church are
forced to acknowledge, at least that after the death of Paschasus, there were
public Writings against this very Doctrine, and of which writings the Authors
being famous men, did not at all conceal their names; as if the reason of this
pretended fear depended not on the Doctrine, but person of Paschasus, who must
have been at this rate the terror of Ecclesiastical Writers, whilst he lived. I
shall only say that Mr. Arnaud has no reason to reduce Paschasus his
Adversaries, that is to say, those who would not receive his Doctrine to a small
number. One may in truth reasonably suppose, that amongst those that rejected
this novelty, there were some that made head, or appeared more than the rest;
and in this sense Paschasus might say that he understood some reprehended him.
But to conclude hence that these were the only persons of their party, and that
all the rest of the Church followed the sentiment of Paschasus, is a groundless
fancy. Raban speaking of Paschasus his party, calls 'em formally Poenitent.
Rab. cap. 33.
some, Quidam, says he, nuper de ipso Sacramento Corporis and Sanguinis Domini
non rite sentientes dixerunt hoc ipsum Corpus and Sanguinem Domini quod de
Maria Virgin natum est. And the anonymous Author which Cellot the Jesuit has
caused to be Printed expresses himself in the same manner on this subject.
Some, says he, say that what is received from the Altar is the same thing as
that which was born of the Virgin. Others deny it and say it is another thing.
Paschasus himself formally acknowledges, that those who were not of his
opinion, were not a small number; for he describes them under the name of
several or many: Ideo, says he, in hac coena Christi prolixius elaboravi quam
brevitas poscat tractatoris quia in his mysticis rebus plures aliud sapiunt.

AS often, says Mr. Arnaud, as a difficult mystery is proposed, although believed
universally by the Faithful, in a manner which causes a greater application of
Spirit, those men's minds which are not sufficiently humble, are likely to be
dismayed at it, and to endeavor by their reason to find out ways whereby to
avoid the difficulties which they cannot bear. And thereupon they often set
upon, the person who has proposed it to 'em endeavoring to distinguish him
from the rest of the faithful. Even sometimes these ill opinions be already
formed. For there are found too often persons in the very bosom of the Church,
who giving too great liberty to their thoughts and reflections, conceive ideas
of mysteries different enough from those which the other faithful have of 'em,
in turning to their sense most of the common expressions. And hence it happens,
that if any one else in following the common notions uses any term which they
also cannot reduce to their particular sense, they charge this person with
boldness and rashness. And this is properly what we have reason to believe
happened in Paschasus his time.

DOES Mr. Arnaud think to escape by these circuits and artifices: A difficult
mystery, says he, believed universally by the Faithful is proposed in such a
manner as makes people apply themselves the more to it. Does he pretend
Paschasus had said any thing which is new in his Book concerning the Real
Presence to make men consider more that point, supposing it believed
universally by the Faithful? Does Paschasus examine the consequences of it, or
exaggerate the miraculousness of it, or offer several objections on the
contrary? He does nothing of all this. But only says it is the same Flesh of
Christ which was born of the Virgin and rose again: That the substance of Bread
is converted into the true Body of Jesus Christ, although the color and savor of
Bread remains: That the substance of Christ's Body enters into our flesh. Now
this is what all the Faithful universally believed and held distinctly
according to Mr. Arnaud. As all Christians believe the mysteries, said he,
three pages before, so they likewise all believed the Eucharist in Paschasus
his time in the same manner as we believe it. They all then believed that it is
the same substance of the Body of Jesus Christ, which he assumed of the Virgin,
and which is now in Heaven, and that the substance of the Bread is converted
into it; yet without any change either in the taste, or color of the Bread.
What has Paschasus done to make 'em more mind it? Those men's minds, adds Mr.
Arnaud, which are not sufficiently humble are apt to startle, and endeavor by
their reason to find out ways whereby to shun the difficulties which they
cannot bear. Whence should this startling come, supposing they believed of the
Eucharist what is commonly believed at this day of it in the Church of Rome?
Did they never hear say before that they received in the Communion the proper
substance of the Flesh of Jesus Christ, born of the Virgin, dead and buried,
nor that the substance of Bread is converted into this substance? If 'twere a
novelty, as to them, they did not then believe Transubstantiation, nor the Real
Presence; for it is precisely in these ideas wherein these Doctrins do consist;
and if it be this particular manner of proposing the mystery which affrights
them, it must be necessarily acknowledged either that they were strangers to
these ideas before, or that they had been till that time very stupid and
drowsy, seeing they felt not the least trouble about it, although they had 'em
always before their eyes; whereas now a simple proposal of the same things,
without any objection, without exaggeration, affrights, and constrains them to
find out by their reason ways whereby to avoid the difficulties which they
cannot bear. And then they commonly set upon him who proposed it to 'em,
endeavoring to distinguish him from the rest of the faithful. Which is to say,
that they then lose their senses. For it is mere madness to set particularly
upon Paschasus, who only proposed to 'em in a manner the most simple
imaginable, if we will believe Mr. Arnaud, without either Preface, says he,
artificial method, or disguise, what the whole Church believed, and what they
believe themselves. Even sometimes these ill opinions are already formed. Here
Mr. Arnaud acknowledges one part of the truth. For the truth is, that these
people here mentioned never heard of the novelties of Paschasus. They knew only
that the Eucharist was the Body of Jesus Christ in Figure, in Sacrament, and in
Virtue, as they themselves explained their sense about it; and this was the
true cause of their astonishment, and the only reason for which they accused
Paschasus of Enthusiasms and Visions. But let Mr. Arnaud explain, if he
pleases, in what manner according to him these persons lived in the Communion
of the Church. They turned to their own sense, says he, most of the common
expressions. How happens it Mr. Arnaud, who but the last moment could not
suffer me to say Paschasus abused an expression of the Church, and turned it to
another sense, now comprehended well enough, that this whole Party turned to
their sense most of the common expressions? He that told us that Paschasus
would be a mad man should he make use of this expression had he known the
Church understood it in another sense, will grant at present that these persons
accommodated the greatest part of the Churches expressions to their sense,
without troubling 'emselves with the sense wherein the Church understood them?
Mr. Arnaud's Argument is like Aristotle's prima materia, capable of any form at
diverse times. Does his interest require the Churches expressions to be abused?
This may be done, there are reasons for it. Does the same interest require that
it be a senseless thing to abuse 'em: This cannot be, and the reasons on the
contrary are not wanting. For in fine, either these people were ignorant of the
true sense in which the Church understood these expressions, or they were not.
If they were ignorant of it, Paschasus might be as well ignorant of it as they.
If they were not ignorant of it, and yet abused it, Paschasus might as well do
the same, contrary to his own knowledge. They turned to their sense most of the
usual expressions. It seems that Mr. Arnaud by this supposes there were some of
these expressions which might be turned by them. Yet he adds; And hence it
happens that if any other person in following the ordinary notions makes use of
any terms which they cannot in the same manner reduce to their particular
sense, they charge this person with rashness. This discourse thus couched has
no coherence, for if amongst the ordinary expressions there remained still some
of 'em, which they could not reduce to their sense, why must they set upon
Paschasus in particular, who not only followed the sense of the Church, but
also her expressions, to wit, those which were too plain and full to be
perverted? Why must he then be accused of rashness? It Is evident Mr. Arnaud
stood upon Thorns, when he wrote this Answer. A reason must be given why these
persons before us reprehended Paschasus in particular, and accused him of being
a rash person. Now there cannot be naturally any other but this, That Paschasus
had proposed a new Doctrine in the Church which was never before heard of;
having asserted the Eucharist to be the same Flesh of Jesus Christ born of the
Virgin, dead and risen again. Mr. Arnaud to avoid the making of this
Confession, supposes there were a party in the Church that did not believe the
Real Presence; he will have these persons turn to their sense the common
expressions; but not being able to do the same with that of Paschasus, this was
the reason why they set upon him in particular, and accused him of rashness. To
make this answer pass current, it must be necessarily supposed that the
expressions of Paschasus were peculiarly of this nature, that they could not be
turned to the sense of these people, and that this was their particular
character which distinguished them from all the common expressions, for a
reason must be found why they set particularly upon Paschasus as a rash person,
and this reason must be something that was singular in Paschasus, But to
acknowledge this frankly and clearly Mr. Arnaud must engage himself in terrible
ill conveniences, for this would be an acknowledging there was not any thing
in the common expressions of the Church at that time which was expressly for the
Real Presence, and which might not be turned to another sense; which is to say,
that all the common expressions were general, equivocal, and ambiguous. By this
means he would have exposed himself to abundance of questions, as amongst
others to these, Whence Paschasus could know the Church believed the Real
Presence, seeing all her expressions were capable of another sense. Whence he
knew the Church understood these expressions in one sense rather than in
another, seeing she never expressed her self about 'em in a clear and incapable
manner of being perverted. Who has given liberty to Paschasus to determine what
the Church did not determine, and to express in particular terms what the Church
only expressed in general ones? Mr. Arnaud who plainly foresaw these
inconveniences, has thought best to expess himself in an aenigmatical manner,
as those generally do who on one hand are urged by the force of truth and
sequel of their own arguing, but who on the other are retained by the fear of
saying too much. They pervert, says he, to their sense most of the common
expressions, And hence it happens, that if any body else in following the
common notions, makes use of any term which they cannot in the same manner
reduce to their particular sense, they accuse this person of rashness. This is
exactly what we have reason to believe happened in Paschasus his time. Here Is
exactly the description of a man that flies, but fears to be taken in flying,
and therefore provides for himself another evasion against all occasions.

MY third proof is taken from Paschasus his proposing his Opinion in the manner
of a paradox which must ravish the world with admiration. Although these things,
says he, have the figure of Bread and Wine, yet must we Lib. de Corp. and Sang.
Dom.
believe that they are nothing else after Consecration than the Flesh and Blood
of Jesus Christ. And therefore the truth it self said to his Disciples, This is
my Flesh for the life of the world. And to explain my self in a more wonderful
manner. Et ut mirabilius loquar, it is entirely nothing else but the Flesh which
was born of the Virgin and suffered on the Cross, and is risen from the
Sepulcher. These terms ut mirabilius loquar, are the expression of one that
pretends to say something extraordinary and surprising.

Mr. ARNAVD answers, That all Miracles are not Paradoxes: I grant Book 8. chapter
10. p. 865.
it, and therefore they are not all expressed in this manner, ut mirabilius
loquar. Did S. Chrysostom, adds he, offer a Paradox when he broke forth into
this expression concerning the Eucharist, O wonderful! he that is at the right
hand of God is between the hands of the Priests? I answer, that in effect this
discourse of Chrysostom is a true Paradox, a Paradox of an Orator, which seems
at first to contradict common sense, although that in effect being rightly
understood it does not; but that of Paschasus is a false Paradox, because it
opposed in effect and at bottom not only common sense, but likewise truth. As
to what remains, I know not why Mr. Arnaud will have these terms translated, ut
mirabilius loquar, by these. The better to explain to you this marvail. The
Rules of Grammar must be changed to favor this Translation, ut mirabilius
loquar, naturally signifies, to speak, or explain my self in a more admirable
manner, or at most, to say something more admirable, which is to say, that the
expression which he was going to use, or the thing it self which he was about
to speak, was extraordinary and surprising. Now this shows he acknowledged at
least that his expressions or conceptions were new, whence it is not difficult
to conjecture that his Doctrine was as new as his expressions.

WE may make another conjecture from his submitting his Doctrine to the judgment
of Frudegard, and entreating him to see what is reprehensible in it. He tells
him he sends to him his Commentary on the 26. of S. Matthew, and adds, Vt ex
ipso considerare queas, quid intelligibilius credendum sit, vel quid in me
reprehendendum cum charitate, To the end that you may know what is more
rationally to be believed, or what there is in me that may be charitably
blamed. Mr. Arnaud is mistaken if he believes I ground my conjecture in general
on this deference of humility which Paschasus had for Frudegard. We know that
wise Authors are wont to acknowledge themselves liable to mistakes, and submit
themselves to the censures of their friends. It Is not this. Here is something
more particular which I desire may be considered. Paschasus declares in his
Letter that he was censured for teaching the Real Presence, and taking the
words of our Lord in a wrong sense. Even Frudegard himself proposes to him an
objection against his Doctrine, he defends himself the best he can, he desires
Frudegard to read his Book over often, he sends to him his Commentary on S.
Matthew, wherein he treats of the same thing, and leaves Frudegard to the
liberty of his judgment, to see what may be more rationally believed, or what
may be charitably reprehended in him, Quid intelligibilius credendum sit, vel
quid in me reprehendendum cum charitate. Who sees not the question is only of
the Real Presence, and that what he submits to the judgment of Frudegard is to
know which is most reasonable, either to believe it, or not to believe it; to
know whether it be, or be not worthy of reprehension to have offered it. But
who does not likewise see that this cannot be the language of a man that taught
nothing but what the Church then believed; for people do not thus submit the
Faith of the whole Church, and such a clear, certain, and undeniable Faith, as
Mr. Arnaud supposes this was, to the judgment of a particular person, leaving
him at liberty to take that part which he finds most reasonable, and that of
reprehending him, that is to say of censuring him, provided he does it with
charity.

Mr. ARNAVD reckons for my 6th. proof this, That Paschasus does Page 868.
never vaunt this his Doctrine was formally that of the whole Church. This
remark consists in a fact which we have already discussed, and found to be
true. I need only add, that if ever man was obliged loudly to offer, and
without hesitation, the formal consent of the Church of his time, and to
protest he had said nothing but what all the Bishops, and Religious of his time
spoke in conformity with him, and what all the Faithful made profession to
believe with him, 'twas Paschasus. He was set upon in particular, he was
reprehended for ill expounding the words of Christ, his Doctrine was opposed by
a contrary Doctrine, he was accused for being a rash person, a visionary. Now
how could he after all this neglect the sheltering himself from all these
insultings, and making 'em return with confusion upon his Adversaries by saying
clearly that all the faithful people in the Church at that time, whether
Pastors or others spoke no otherwise than he did, and that his Adversaries were
fallen into the utmost excess of impudence? But instead of this he has recourse
to some passages which he perverts as well as he can to his sense, and to a
clause of the Liturgy wherein there is Corpus Christi.

PASCHASVS furnishes us likewise with another conjecture from the manner in
which he explains his sentiments on this subject of the Eucharist. For he keeps
as much as he can the Sacramental expressions, endeavoring to accommodate them
to his sense, and proceeds sometimes so far that he seems to conserve the
substance of Bread; which appears by several passages which I remarked in my
answer to the Perpetuity, and which is not necessary to repeat here. Mr. Arnaud
answers, That the only conclusion which reason draws from hence is, that these
Sacramental Page 866.
expressions do perfectly agree with the Faith of the Real Presence. But if
they do agree it is by constraint, and in doing violence to the nature and
signification of the terms. When Paschasus says for example, In pane and vino
sine ulla decoloratione substancioe hoc mysterium interius vi and potestate
divina peragitur. What violence must not be offered these terms to accommodate
them to the change of the substance of Bread? For to say that the substance of
Bread loses not his color, is an expression which naturally includes this
sense, that the substance remains with its color. What violence must not be
offered these other terms. Caro and Sanguis per Spiritum Sanctum consecratur,
alioqui mihi nec caro est nec sanguis est, sed judicium quod percipio, quia
sine donante spiritu nullum male proesumentibus donum ex Deo proestatur. What
violence I say must not be offered them to accommodate 'em to the sense of
Transubstantiation? For naturally these terms signify, that it is the Holy
Spirit dwelling in the Faithful, which makes the Bread and Wine be to 'em the
Flesh and Blood of Jesus Christ, for which reason the Wicked who have not the
Holy Spirit do not receive this Flesh and Blood. This language then of
constraint shows that Paschasus strove still to conserve the common
expressions, although that in effect they were contrary to him, whence we may
easily conclude that he was an Innovator.

A seventh proof may be taken from the testimonies of Bellarmin and Sirmond
both Jesuits, which I have already mentioned in my Answer to the Perpetuity.
The one says that Paschasus was the first Author that wrote seriously and at
large of the truth of the Body and Blood of Christ in the Eucharist, and the
other assures us, that he was the first that explained the true sentiment of
the Catholic Church, in such a manner that he has opened the way to others.
The first idea which these words present us with is, that Paschasus was the
first Author that proposed the Doctrine of the Real Presence clearly, and in
plain and precise terms; for this is what is meant by the Serio of Bellarmin,
and especially the Explicuit of Sirmond. And 'twill signify nothing to answer
as Mr. Arnaud does, that these passages mean only that Paschasus was the first
who collected into one Book what lay scattered in Book 8 chapter 10. page 867.
several of the Fathers Writings, according as Athanasius was the first who
wrote expressly Treatises on the Trinity, and S. Cyril the first who largely
wrote of the Incarnation and Unity of persons in our Lord and Savior, as S.
Augustine is the first who has largely and seriously treated of Original Sin,
and that as Paschasus had good success in this labor, and in effect well
collected the true sentiments of the Fathers, so he has been followed by all
that came after him. This answer is an illusion, for it is far from completely
answering Sirmond's words, Genuinum, says he, Ecclesioe Catholicoe sensum ita
primus explicuit, Invita pasch.
ut viam coeteris aperuit, qui de eodem argumento multa postea scripsere. He
means not that Paschasus was the first who collected in one Book what lay here
and there in the Writings of the Fathers, but that he first explained the true
sense of the Catholic Church. Before him, according to Sirmond, this true
sentiment, which is to say, the Doctrine of the Real Presence, for this is what
he means, was a confused and hidden matter. Paschasus was the first who brought
it to light, and he did it in such manner that he opened the way to all that
came after him. Till his time this way lay hid, he found it, first entered into
it, and by his example moved others to do the same, Now this is the honestest
confession imaginable, that Paschasus was the first Author of this Doctrine; for
in fine this explication of the true sentiment of the Church, and this way, are
nothing else but the Real Presence, and he was the first discoverer of it.
There cannot be any thing said like this of S. Athanasius in respect of the
Trinity, nor of S. Cyril in respect of the Incarnation, nor of S. Augustine in
respect of Original Sin. It may be indeed said that they have treated more
amply of these matters than what was done before, that they have more firmly
grounded them by disengaging them from the objections of Heretics; but it can
never be said they were the first that explained the true sentiment of the
Catholic Church, for it was explained, and distinctly known before them. The
Church worshipped before Athanasius his time three distinct persons in the
Godhead, acknowledged two Natures, and one only person in Jesus Christ before
S. Cyril's time, and S. Austin's, and also believed that all the Children of
Adam came into the world infected with his corruption.

THESE are the seven proofs of Paschasus his Innovation, which Mr. Arnaud has
cited from me, and which he has endeavored to answer. But, besides these,
there are also some others which he has past over in silence, and of which
'twill not be amiss to put him in mind. I draw then an eighth from the
testimony of Berenger, which makes Paschasus precisely as we do, the Author of
the Opinion which asserts the real conversion of the substances of Bread and
Wine. Sententia, says he, imo vecordia vulgi, Paschasi Apud Lanfranc. lib. de
Corp. and Sang. Dom.
atque Lanfranci minime superesse in altari post consecrationem substantiam
panis and vini. The opinion, or rather folly of the Vulgar, of Paschasus and
Lanfranc, that the substance of Bread and Wine remains not after the
Consecration. Lanfrac who cites these words, says a little after, that when the
Letters of Berenger were read at Rome, 'twas known that he exalted John Scot
and condemned Paschasus, intellecto quod Joannem Scotum extolleres Paschasium
damnares. This moreover appears by Berenger's Letter to Richard, injustissime
damnatum Scotum Joannem, injustissime nihilo minus assertum Paschasium in
Concilio Vercellensi. And his Letter to Ascelin, You are, Tom. 2. Spic. in not.
advitam Lanfran. ad Luc. D' Actery.
says he, of a contrary opinion to all the laws of Nature, contrary to the
Gospel, contrary to the sentiment of the Apostle, if you are of Paschasus his
opinion in what he ALONE has fancied or forged in his imagination, that the
substance of Bread does no more subsist in the Sacrament of our Lords Body.
Sapis contra omnes naturoe rations, contra Evangelicam and Apostolicam
sententiam, si cum Paschasio sapis, in eo quod SOLVS sibi confingit Sacramento
Dominici Corporis decedere panis omnino substantiam. Now on one hand this shows
Mr. Arnaud's injustice, which attributes to the modern Ministers the invention
of this History which makes Paschasus the first Author of the opinion of the
Real Presence; and on the other this gives a great presumption that what the
Ministers say touching Paschasus is true, seeing in the 11th. Century when the
Dispute about the Eucharist grew hot, people said the same thing then we do
now. We see Paschasus in the 9th. Century charged with Enthusiasms and Visions;
in the 11th. respected as the Father of Transubstantiation, as he that drew it
only from his own fancy, these two matters of fact are moreover confirmed by I
know not how many other considerable matters hereunto relating. And Mr. Arnaud
comes telling us confidently, that he marvails we should dare still attribute
this Innovation to Paschasus, and that our proofs are mere sophisms and
conjectures not worth the minding.

THE anonymous Author which Cellot the Jesuit has published furnishes us with a
9th. proof in his way of defending Paschasus. For having said, That some assert
what we receeive from the Altar is the same as that which is Cellot in append.
ad Hist. Cottesch.
born of the Virgin, and that others deny it, and say that it is another thing,
he adds a little after. Now for those which say it is the same thing as that
which was born of the Virgin, or say it is another thing, we shall relate the
several opinions of the Holy Fathers which do indeed appear to be different,
but yet be satisfactory enough were they fully understood with discretion. Now
I speak of Paschasus Ratbert, Abbot of Corby, who whether he was required, or
provoked, for it is uncertain which, has wrote on this matter a Book of about an
hundred Chapters, which he has filled with several Authorities of the Fathers,
and under the name of S. Ambrose has therein established that what we receive
from the Altar is entirely the same Flesh which was born of the Virgin,
suffered on the Cross, risen from the Sepulcher, and is at this day ossered for
the life of the world. Raban in his Epistle to the Abbot Egilon, and one Ratram
in a Book dedicated to King Charles, argue sufficiently against him, saying,
that it is not this same Flesh; which they prove by the testimony of S. Hierom,
which says, that the Body of Jesus Christ may be said to be in two manners, and
by the Authority of S. Augustine, which says, that this term may be taken three
ways. And because they maintain that in S. Ambrose' s Books we do not find it
exactly thus, we shall relate not only the passage of S. Ambrose without any
alteration, but also those of S. Augustine, S. Hierom, and others in the manner
we found 'em, to the end that having considered them it may appear to those to
whom it shall please God to reveal it, that these great men did not differ one
from another in opinion, and that in the Catholic Church we must all have the
same mind without the least Schism. Hitherto we do not find that this defender
of Paschasus has recourse to the public Belief of the Church of his time, or
protests that Paschasus has offered nothing but what all Christians did
generally agree to, except some small number of troublesome Disputers, who
denied in secret what they dared not contradict in public, as Mr. Arnaud
speaks.. We find on the contrary that he denotes those which held the Doctrine
of Paschasus under the name of some, and the opposite party under the name of
others. Dicentibus quibusdam idem esse quod sumitur de altari, quod and illud
quod natum est ex Virgin, aliis autem negantibus. This is not the language of
one who was persuaded the whole Church spoke like Paschasus. But this will
still further appear if we consider what this same Author adds afterward, for
having alleged some passages of the Fathers which he believed favored
Paschasus, Hoec ideo, says he, posita sunt si forte per ea simplicitas Paschasi
Ratberti possit excusari, unde maxim ab obloquentibus Rabano and Ratramno
sugillari videtur, quid dixerat eandem esse carnem quoe de Altari sumitur and
de virgin generatur, and quoe quotidie adhuc pro mundi salute immolatur. I
have brought these passages to see whether one could not excuse the simplicity
of Paschasus Ratbert, especially in respect of that particular for which he is
blamed by his Adversaries, Raban and Ratram, for saying that what we receive
from the Altar is the same Flesh which was born of the Virgin, and is still
every day immolated for the salvation of the world. Now let any man seriously
tell me, whether people are wont to defend after this manner one who has the
whole Church on his side, excepting some troublesome rash Disputers? Is such a
ones simplicity endeavored to be excused by any body? Do we say in such a
case, if perhaps it may be excusable? Do people place on one hand
irreconcilable Adversaries who defame him, and on the other simple excuses, and
excuses offered in a fearful and doubtful manner, Si forte simplicitas
Paschasii possit excusari? Let Mr. Arnaud say what he pleases, the discourse of
this anonymous Author offers such an idea of the Adversaries of Paschasus as of
persons that delivered themselves openly in the Church, who had then advantage
over Paschasus, even to the defaming him for teaching the Real Presence, and
furnishes us at the same time with the idea of Paschasus, as of a man who must
be excused upon the account of his simplicity, but yet his expressions may be
defended by some passages of the Fathers. Now these two ideas plainly enough
show that Paschasus was an Innovator.

THERE are other proofs in my Answer to the Perpetuity which I do not think
necessary to repeat here, having nothing more to add to 'em. We will pass then
to Authors who were Contemporaries with Paschasus, to know of them whether they
taught the same Doctrine as he did.

CHAP. X.
Of Authors in the Ninth Century, Walafridus, Strabo, Florus, Remy of Auxerre,
Chstriian Drutmar.

WE may now say (I hope (with some kind of confidence, notwithstanding Mr.
Arnaud's insultings, that Paschasus was an Innovator. This is a truth
sufficiently cleared by what I have already done in the two preceding Chapters.
But to make this (if possible) more plain, we must make some few reflections on
the Authors which were of the same Century as Paschasus, besides what I already
said of 'em in my Answer to the Perpetuity. For if it appears that these
Authors have not held the same language as he did; if it appears on the
contrary that they have expressed themselves on the Eucharist quite otherwise
than he has done; if one party of 'em have formally declared themselves against
his Doctrine, I see no reason why any man should still obstinately maintain that
Paschasus has said or wrote nothing but what the Church of his time believed
and taught with him.

FIRST it is certain we shall not find the Authors of that Century, although they
were not inconsiderable for their number, and almost all of 'em wrote something
on the Eucharist, have delivered themselves on so great a subject in the manner
Paschasus has done, neither in respect of the sense, nor terms. Let any man
show us for example they have asserted that the substance of the Bread is
converted into the Body of Jesus Christ, in such a manner that it does not any
longer remain, although the savor and color still remain, or taught that the
substance of the Flesh of Jesus Christ enters into our Body, that what we
receive from the Altar is nothing else but the same Flesh which was born of the
Virgin, which died and was buried, and that it is this Flesh in propriety of
nature; or have said that this Flesh of the word pullule (this is the
expression Paschasus uses) which is to say, that it multiplies it self, and
that this multiplication is made in the Sacrament, and yet the same Flesh of
Jesus Christ, and that yet he remains wholly entire. Let any one show us any
thing like this in these Authors. Mr. Arnaud ought to have employed himself in
this, instead of expatiating as he has done upon vain arguments. Twenty whole
Chapters will not so well satisfy rational persons, as twelve clear passages
out of Authors of the 9tth. Century, did they contain the same Doctrine which
Paschasus has set down in his Writings; for this would show the conformity
there was between him and his Contemporaries, and at the same time discharge
him from the accusation of novelty, which we lay against him. But there is no
danger of Mr. Arnaud's taking upon him this task, because he knows it is
impossible to acquit himself well of it.

IN the second place it is certain these Authors have not only not spoke of the
Eucharist as Paschasus has done, but on the contrary, have spoke of it in a
very different manner from his: whence we may easily collect that his Doctrine
agreed in no sort with theirs. I shall begin with Walafridus Strabo, whose
words may be seen more at length in my answer to the Perpetuity. We shall find
him thus speaking, That Jesus Christ has established Answer to the second
Treatise, part 3. chapter 2.
the Sacraments of his Body and Blood in the substance of Bread and Wine. That
our Savior has chosen the Bread and Wine, to wit, the same species which
Melchisedec offered, to be the mystery of his Body and Blood: That instead of
this great diversity of Sacrifices which were in use under the Law, the
Faithful must be contented with the simple Oblation of Bread and Wine. Mr.
Arnaud may talk as long as he pleases, that these are expressions which do
naturally link themselves with the belief of the Real Presence. Which is what
we deny him. These expressions do naturally signify nothing else, but that the
Sacrament is real Bread and real Wine, and if any use these kind of expressions
in the Church of Rome, they do it merely by constraint to accommodate
themselves in some sort to the expressions of the Ancients. Mr. Arnaud again
tells us that Walafridus says, That the mysteries be really the Body and Blood
of our Lord. But we have already several times told him that Walafridus
explains himself in the same place, and refers this really to the virtue, not
the substance of Christ's Body, which also appears from the title of his
Chapter, which is, De virtute Sacramentorum.

FLORVS, an Author of the same Century, who has wrote a kind of Florus magister
in Exposit. Missae.
Commentary on the Liturgy, says, That the Oblation although taken from the simple
fruits of the Earth is made to the Faithful, fidelibus, the Body and Blood of
the only Son of God. After which, borrowing the words of S. Augustine, he says,
That the Consecration makes us this Body and this mystical Blood. And the
better to explicate what he means by this Body and this mystical Blood, he
adds, That the Creature of Bread is made the Sacrament of the Flesh and Blood
of Jesus Christ, that it is eaten Sacramentally, that it remains wholly entire
in Heaven, and is so in our hearts. And again a little further, Whatsoever is
done in this Oblation of the Body and Blood of our Lord is a mystery. We see
therein one thing, and understand another; what we see has a corporal species,
what we understand has a spiritual fruit. What he says of this mystical Body
and Blood which he explains afterward by the Sacrament of the Flesh and Blood
of Jesus Christ, in referring to this alone the effect of the Consecration
sufficiently denotes he had not in his view either change of substance, or any
Real Presence. The opposition likewise which he makes of Jesus Christ eaten in
parts in the Sacrament, to himself who remains entire in Heaven, and who enters
entire into our hearts does no less denote it; for to what purpose is this
distinction? If our Savior Christ be really in the Sacrament, is he not eaten
entire in the same manner in our hearts, and wholly entire in Heaven? The
former words, that whatsoever is done in the Eucharist is a mystery wherein we
so one thing, and understand another, testify the same thing; for what is
this thing which we see, but the Bread and Wine, and what is this other which
we understand but the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, which are the object of
our understanding? He explains himself immediately afterward, The mystery,
says he, of our Redemption was Wine, according to what our Savior himself
says. I will drink no more of this fruit of the Vine. And again, Our Lord
recommends to us this mystery, saying, Do this in remembrance of me, which the
Apostle explaining, says, As often as ye eat of this Bread, and drink of this
Cup, ye show forth the Lords Death till he comes: The Oblation then of this
Bread, and this Cup is the Commemoration, and annunciation of the Death of
Jesus Christ. That which is most considerable is his making this Commentary on
the very words of the Consecration, without adjoining a word either of the
conversion of substances, or substantial Presence of the Body and Blood of our
Lord.

Mr. ARNAVD, who often loses his time in vain contests, leaves all these
principal passages which I come now from relating, and sets himself only
against the translation of these words, Oblatio quamvis de simplicibus terroe
frugibus sumpta, divinoe benedictionis ineffabili potentia efficitur fidelibus
Corpus and Sanguis. I said that this fidelibus must be rendered, to the
Faithful, and not for the Faithful; and for this I alleged some reasons. This
is a thing, says Mr. Arnaud, which I could willingly grant him, did he ask it
with a better mien: for either translation is indifferent to me. But seeing
he is resolved to carry it away by force, I think I Am obliged to tell him that
he is unjust. So that here Mr. Arnaud has a quarrel with me for my carriage. Si
natura negat facit indignatio versum.


Truly I Am sorry I cannot make my self agreeable to him, I do what I can, as
much as reason and truth will permit; but there are some persons so unhappy
that they cannot give content do what they can.

I am to Mr. Arnaud, what Sabidus was to Martial. I cannot help it. But had he
been pleased to take his eyes off my person, and considered the reason, he had
seen, that these two translations are not in effect indifferent, because that
which says, for the Faithful, seems simply to denote that the Eucharist is
naturally designed for the use of the Faithful, and not for that of the wicked;
whereas the other denotes that it is the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, only to
the Faithful, and not to the wicked; which is wholly different. Secondly. That
that which says, to the Faithful, is more conformable to the Rules of Grammar,
according to which commonly, fidelibus signifies, to the Faithful, and pro
fidelibus, for the Faithful. Thirdly, That the sequel of Florus his discourse
denotes his sense to be that the Eucharist is not the Body and Blood of Jesus
Christ, but only to the Faithful, because he immediately adds, that as we eat
Jesus Christ by pieces in the Sacrament, he is wholly entire in our heart,
which can only respect the Faithful to the exclusion of the wicked; and because
he says, that we see in the Sacrament one thing, and understand by it another
which has a spiritual fruit, which moreover appertains only to the Faithful.
What he alleges from Remy of Auxerre, who explains this clause, Vt nobis
Corpus and Sanguis fiat dilectissimi filii tui, by these words, id est ad
nostram salutem fiat Corpus and Sanguis, is invalid, because we may tell him,
that had Florus designed to say the same thing as Remus, he would have
explained himself like to Remus; which he has not done; besides that the
explication of Remus is not contrary to that of Florus: for it does not follow
from the Sacraments being made the Body of Jesus Christ for our Salvation, that
it be made his Body and Blood to the Wicked. All the difference there is
between these two Expositions is, that that of Florus is more clear and express
than the other. We can conclude very clearly from that of Florus that the
Eucharist is the Body of Jesus Christ only to the Faithful, but not to the
wicked, but one cannot draw this consequence from that of Remus, neither can
one draw a contrary one.

THIS conclusion which I draw from the passage of Florus offends Mr. Arnaud; By
the like argument, says he, he will prove that Paschasus did Book 8. chapter 7. p.
822.
not believe the Real Presence, for this Author says as well as Florus that
Jesus Christ grants us by his grace, that the Eucharist be to us his Body and
Blood. He will prove, adds he, That all the Catholic Priests do no more
believe Transubstantiation, seeing they say this Prayer, in the Canon of the
Mass. Quam Oblationem tu Deus in omnibus quoesumus adscriptam, ratam,
rationabilem, acceptabilemque: facere digneris, ut nobis Corpus and Sanguis
fiat dilectissimi tui filii Domini nostri Jesu Christi. I answer there is a
great deal of difference between Florus and Paschasus. Paschasus formally
teaches the Doctrine of the Real Presence and conversion of substances. Florus
does not do any thing like this. When then we judge of Florus his expression,
reason requires us to judge of it according to the sense which it naturally has;
but when we judge of that of Paschasus, we must judge of it according to the
forced and violent sense which is given to this expression to make it agree
with Transubstantiation, and the Real Presence, because it appears to us
elsewhere that Paschasus believed these Doctrins. When Paschasus speaks of what
the Wicked receive in the Eucharist, he speaks of it in a manner so intricate
and confused, that it visibly appears he affects to be obscure. Explaining
these words, He that eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood Lib. de Corp. and Sang.
Dom. cap. 6.
dwells in me and I in him, he introduces our Savior saying, If he does not
first dwell in me and I in him, he cannot eat my Flesh nor drink my Blood. And
what then is it which men do eat: Do not all indifferently take the Sacraments
of the Altar? They take 'em without doubt, but one eats spiritually the Flesh
of Jesus Christ, and drinks his Blood, and the other not, although he seems to
take the morsel from the Priests hand. And what does he then receive, there
being but one Consecration, if he does not receive the Body and Blood of Jesus
Christ? Truly because the Wicked receive unworthily, they eat and drink their
own damnation, acccording to the saying of the Apostle; for they do not try
themselves before they come, nor discern the Lords Body. And this is what the
Wicked eat and drink. They do not profitably receive the Flesh and Blood, but
their own damnation. This plainly appears to be the discourse of a man that
hides himself, and durst not say openly the wicked receive the Body and Blood
of Jesus Christ, and seems to insinuate the contrary; but yet still contains
himself within these terms of spiritually and profitably that he may save
himself by distinctions. Paschasus then is not to be offered as an instance. As
to what Mr. Arnaud alleges out of the Canon of the Mass, I acknowledge it
cannot be concluded thence that the Priests of the Roman Church in our times do
not believe Transubstantiation, because as I have already said, it clearly
appearing elsewhere that they believe it, we must not judge of the terms of the
Canon according to their natural sense. But a man may conclude thence that
those who at first made this Liturgy, had not the same belief with those at
this day; for they spoke then naturally, and according to the common belief of
their Church: Now it is certain that on the Principle of Transubstantiation one
must desire of God not that the Bread be made to us the Body of his Son, but
that it be made the Body of his Son absolutely. There is a great deal of
difference between these two, for if the Bread be transubstantiated it is made
the Body of Jesus Christ in it self, to all respects, and beyond all respects;
but if it be only made to us the Body of Jesus Christ, it is made so only in
our respect, which is to say that it is to us instead of the Body of Jesus
Christ, and communicates the virtue and efficacy of it. It Is in this sense that
the Faithful say in the 84. Psalm, That God is to 'em a Sun and a Shield. And
David in the 119. Psalm, That the Statutes of God have been to him as so many
musical songs. And in the 41. Psalm, according to the vulgar Translation,
Fuerunt mihi lachrymoe panis die ac nocte. This way of speaking is very usual
amongst the Latins, as appears by these examples of Virgil, Erit ista mihi
genetrix, eris mihi magnus Apollo, erit ille mihi semper Deus, Men's sua cuique
Deus, Dextra mihi Deus. And so far concerning Florus.

WE must now pass on to Remy of Auxerre, to whom as Mr. Arnaud Book 8. chapter 7.
page 824.
says, is attributed not only the Exposition of the Mass which goes under his
name, but also the Commentary of S. Paul, which others refer to Haymus Bishop
of Alberstat. They that will take the pains to examine the Doctrine of this
Author, not in the declamations of Mr. Arnaud, but in the passages themselves,
wherein it is found explained, will soon find that he held the Opinion of
Damascen and the Greeks, which is the union of the Bread with the Divinity, and
by the Divinity to the natural Body of Jesus Christ, and that by means of this
union, or conjunction, the Bread becomes the Body of Jesus Christ, and is made
one and the same Body with him. Which does manifestly appear by what I have
related of it in my Answer to the Perpetuity. The Flesh, says he, which the
Word has taken in the Womb of the Virgin Comment. in 1 Cor. 10.
in unity of person, and the Bread which is consecrated in the Church, are the
same Body of Christ. For as this Flesh is the Body of Christ, so this Bread
passes to the Body of Christ, and these are not two Bodies, but one Body. For
the fullness of the Divinity which was in that Body, fills likewise this Bread,
and the same Divinity of the Word which is in them, fills the Body of Christ
which is consecrated by the Ministry of several Priests throughout the whole
world, and makes it one only Body of Christ. He does not say as Paschasus, that
it is entirely the same Flesh born of the Virgin, dead and risen, nor that it is
the same Flesh, because it pullules, or multiplies: But he makes of this Flesh,
and Bread, the same Body by an unity of union; because that the same Divinity
which fills the Flesh, fills likewise this Bread. And elsewhere, Although this
Bread be broken in pieces, and Consecrated all over the world, yet Ibid. in c.
11.
the Divinity which fills all things, fills it also, and makes it become one
only Body of Christ. It lying upon him to give a reason why several parts of
the same Bread, and several loaves consecrated in diverse places were only one
Body of Jesus Christ, there was nothing more easy than to say on the
hypothesis of Transubstantiation that 'twas one and the same numerical
substance, existing wholly entire under the species in each part, and on every
Altar where the Consecration is performed. But instead of this he falls upon
enquiries into the reason of this unity in the Divinity which fills both all
the Loaves of the Altars, and all the parts of a Loaf. Again in another place,
As the Divinity of the Word which fills the whole world is one, so although In
Exposit. Can.
this Body be Consecrated in several places, and at infinitely different times,
yet is not this several Bodies, nor several Bloods, but one only Body, and one
only Blood, with that which he took from the Virgin, and which he gave to the
Apostles. For the Divinity fills it, and JOINS it to it self, AND MAKES THAT AS
IT IS ONE, SO IT BE JOINED TO THE BODY OF CHRIST, and is one only Body of
Christ in truth. To say still after this that the Doctrine of Remy is not that
this Bread is one with the natural Body of Jesus Christ, because it is joined
with it, and that it is joined with it, because one and the same Divinity fills
them, this is methinks for a man to wilfully blind himself, seeing Remus says
it in so many words. He teaches the same thing a little further in another
place, As the Flesh of Jesus Christ which he took of the Virgin is his true
Body which was put to death for our Salvation, so the Bread which Jesus Christ
gave to his Disciples, and to all the Elect, and which the Priests Consecrate
every day in the Church, with the virtue of the Divinity which fills it, is the
true Body of Jesus Christ; and this Flesh which he has taken, and this Bread
are not two Bodies, but make but one only Body of Christ. We may find the same
Doctrine in his Commentaries on the 10th. Chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews.
This Host, says he, speaking of the Eucharist, is one and not many, as were the
ancient ones. But how is it one and not many, seeing it is offered both by
several persons, and in several places, and at several times. A person that had
the hypothesis of Transubstantiation in his mind, would not have stuck to say,
that it is in all places and at all times one and the same numerical substance,
the same Body which pullutes, or multiplies it self, as Paschasus speaks.
Whereas Remy betakes himself to another course without mentioning a word,
either of this unity of substance, or this pullulation. We must, says he,
carefully remark that it is the Divinity of the Word, which being one, filling
all things, and being every where, causes these to be not several Sacrifices,
but one, although it be offered by many; and is one only Body of Christ with that
which he took of the Virgin, and not several Bodies.

IT cannot be denied but this Opinion of the unity of the Bread with the Body
of Jesus Christ by way of conjunction, and by means of the Divinity which fills
the one and the other, got some footing in the Latin Church, even since
Damascen's time. We find it in the Book of Divine Offices falsely attributed to
Alcuinus, almost in the same terms wherein we have seen it in Remus; so that it
seems that one of these Authors only copied out from the other. As the Divinity
of the Word, says this supposed Alcuinus, is one, who fills the whole world,
so, although this Body be Consecrated Cap. 40.
in several places, and at an infinite number of times, yet are not these
several Bodies of Christ, nor several Cups, but one only Body of Christ, and
one only Blood with that which he took of the Virgin, and which he gave to his
Apostles. For the Divinity of the Word fills him who is every where (which is
to say, that which is Consecrated in several places) and makes, that as it is
one, it be also joined to the Body of Christ, and that it be but one only Body
in truth.

WE find this same opinion in another Book of Divine Offices, which Rupert lib.
2. de Divin. Off. cap. 2.
some attribute to Rupert, and others to Walramus, This Body which is taken
from the Altar, and that which is taken from the Virgin, are not said to be,
nor indeed are, two Bodies, because one and the same Word is on high in the
Flesh, and here below in the Bread.

IT is likewise very likely, that in the 11th. Century during the greatest
heats of the Dispute of Lanfranc against Berenger, there were several
adversaries of Berenger who followed this Opinion. Which may be manifestly
collected from an argument which Lanfranc attributes to the Berengarians in
these terms: If the Bread be changed into the true Flesh of Jesus Christ,
Lanfran. de Corp. and Sang. Dom.
either the Bread must be carried to Heaven to be changed there into the Flesh
of Christ, or the Flesh of Jesus Christ must descend on the Earth, to the end
that the Bread may be changed into it. Now neither of these is done. This
Argument necessarily supposes that the Berengarians did set themselves against
persons, who thought the Bread was changed into the Body of Jesus Christ by way
of union and conjunction, or as speaks Damascen, by way of addition, as the
food is changed into our body. On this Hypothesis they had some reason to say,
that either the Body which is above must come down here below, or that the
Bread which is here below must be carried above; for it does not seem
immediately that the conjunction can be well made otherwise: But they could not
have the least reason, or likelihood of reason to form this objection against
the Doctrine of Transubstantiation in the manner wherein the Church of Rome
understands it. For if the substance of Bread be converted into the same
numerical substance of the Body of Jesus Christ which is in Heaven, the
distance, or proximity of this Bread, and of this Body, make not this
conversion, either more easy, or more difficult. Tho the Bread here below be
carried up into Heaven, tho the Body of Jesus Christ which is above in Heaven
descends here below on Earth, this contributes nothing to the making of the one
to be converted into the other. For the conversion of one substance into
another, speaks quite another thing than a kind of local motion, as is that of
ascending or descending. It is then evident that the opinion which the
Berengarians opposed was that the Bread is made the Body of Jesus Christ by way
of union.

WE may moreover justify the same thing by a passage of Ascelinus, one of
Berenger's adversaries; for observe here in what manner he explains his
sentiment in his Letter to Berenger himself, Neque vero mirari, vel diffidere
In notis d' Acheri in vitam Lanfr.
debemus Deum facere posse ut hoc quod in Altari consecratur virtute Spiritus
Sancti, and ministerio Sacerdotis, uniatur corpori illi quod ex Maria Virgin
redemptor noster assumpsit, quippe utrumque substantia corporea, utrumque
visibile, si reminiscimur nos ipsos ex corporea, and incorporea, ex mortali,
and immortali substantia esse compactos, si denique firmiter credimus divinam
humanamque naturam convenisse personam. It Is neither a matter of admiration,
nor of doubt for God to make that which is consecrated on the Altar by virtue
of the Holy Spirit, and ministry of the Priest to be UNITED TO THIS BODY which
our Redeemer took of the Virgin. Both one and the other being a corporeal
substance, both one and the other visible, if we consider that we our selves
are composed of a corporeal substance, and of another that is incorporeal, of a
mortal substance, and of another that is incorporeal, of a mortal substance,
and of another that is incorporeal; and if in fine we firmly believe that the
two natures, the Divine and Humane, are joined together in unity of person.

IT is necessary to relate these passages to show the Readers how greatly Mr.
Arnaud deceives them when he would persuade 'em that this opinion of the
conjunction of the Bread with the Body of Jesus Christ, by means of the same
Divinity which fills them, is a chimera of the Ministers invention. It appears
on the contrary that it is a sentiment which has been in effect held by diverse
Authors in the Latin Church, not to mention here that it is the Doctrine of
Damascen and the Greeks which have followed him. And this is the first
conclusion which can be drawn hence; but from hence also follow several other
most important matters. For first, by this we see that the sentiment of
Paschasus was not that of the Church of his time, as some would persuade us,
seeing those very Authors which Mr. Arnaud alleges in his favor, and who seem
to come the nearest to Paschasus his expressions, are at bottom, and in effect
infinitely distant from his Doctrine. Secondly, Hence it appears there was
nothing regular in the Latin Church touching Transubstantiation, neither in the
11th. nor 12th. Century, seeing considerable Authors then publicly explained
their belief concerning the Eucharist in a manner which suffers the Bread and
Wine to subsist in their first substance. In the third place, from hence is
apparent how little certainty and confidence a rational man can put in the
principle of the Author of the Perpetuity and Mr. Arnaud, who suppose it as a
thing certain, that in the time when Berenger was first condemned, that is to
say in the year 1053. the whole Latin Church was united in the Faith of the
Real Presence, and Transubstantiation, seeing the contrary may be justified, as
well by the argument which Lanfranc relates of the Berengarians, as by the
passage of Ascelinus. In fine, it may be seen here how frivolous and vain Mr.
Arnaud's negative arguments be, who would prove that the Greeks believed in the
11th. Century Transubstantiation, because they did not take Berengarius his
part, nor disputed on this Article against the Latins. For if
Transubstantiation was not then determined in the Latin Church, if one might
therein make a free profession to believe the union of the Bread with the Body
of Jesus Christ, by means of the Divinity, as appears from the example of
Ascelinus, Berenger's great Adversary, what reason could the Greeks have to
dispute and make oppositions?

IT signifies nothing for Mr. Arnaud to raise objections against the sentiments
of these Authors whom I last mentioned; and to say, that if the habitation Book
8. chapter 7. p. 828.
of the Divinity in the Body of Jesus Christ remaining in Heaven, and in the
Bread remaining on Earth, and conserving its nature, and the application of
this Bread to serve for an instrument to communicate the graces merited by the
Body of Jesus Christ, rendered the Bread the Body of Jesus Christ; the same
habitation of the Divinity in the Water of Baptism, and the use which God makes
of it to communicate his graces, would render it likewise the Body of Jesus
Christ, and give occasion to say, that although there be different Waters to
Baptize in, yet these Waters make but one and the same Body of Jesus Christ,
that they are changed into the Body of Jesus Christ, that they pass into the
Body of Jesus Christ, that although they appear to be Water, yet in truth they are
the Body of Jesus Christ. Besides that it does not follow that Authors have not
had a sentiment, that one may form objections to the contrary, there being no
opinion so clear against which we may not raise difficulties. One may moreover
answer him from the part of Remy and others, that the habitation of the
Divinity does not always produce this effect in all the material things which
it makes use of whereby to communicate the graces merited by the Body of Jesus
Christ, to unite them to the Body of Jesus Christ, and to make them become this
Body by way of conjunction and addition. It Is an habitation and a particular
union of the Divinity to the Bread of the Eucharist which produces in it alone
this effect, which must not be extended to other things which Jesus Christ did
not say were his Body, as he said of the Bread. All that can be hence concluded
then is that according to these Authors there must be some difference allowed
between the habitation of the Divinity in the Bread, and the habitation of this
same Divinity in other things, as there is between the habitation of the
Divinity in the Faithful and Saints; and the habitation of this same Divinity
in the human nature of Jesus Christ, seeing this difference appears in the
difference of the effects which they produce. Now this is a thing which these
Authors would gladly allow. One may say the same thing touching the Soul and
Body of Jesus Christ, which are filled with the same virtue of the Divinity,
and yet of which it cannot be said that one is the other. For although the same
Divinity dwells in the Body, and Soul of Jesus Christ, yet this is another kind
of habitation, designed to produce not the abovementioned effect, but another.
The Divinity dwells in all things, and fills them with its virtue, but in a
different manner, and this difference discovers it self only by the difference
of the effects which it produces in the things themselves.

THIS is near what these Authors would have answered had any body offered them
these objections. But I am persuaded they would never have approved of this new
Philosophy, by which Mr. Arnaud endeavors to accommodate their expressions to
the sense of the Roman Transubstantiation. Remy, says he, tells us that the
Divinity which is in the Body of Jesus Christ, P. 832.
and in the Bread joins them together, but not by a simple habitation; for it
would thus join all the creatures where it resides, but by a true operation
which renders them not distant, but immediately united. And this union does not
determine it self to a simple conjunction, but makes that the Bread passes into
the Body of Jesus Christ, that it becomes the Body of Jesus Christ, as wax
becomes fire, according to the comparison of S. Chrysostom and as the Bread
eaten by Jesus Christ became the Body of Jesus Christ, according to the
comparison of other Fathers. This union then is only the way to
Transubstantiation. Remy and other Authors who have followed this opinion,
explain the manner how the Bread is the Body of Jesus Christ, and they say that
it is inasmuch as it is joined to this Body. It Is, says Remy, one only Body and
Blood with that which he took of the Virgin, for the Divinity fills it, and
joins it to it self, and makes that as it is one, so it must be joined to the
Body of Jesus Christ, and be one Body of Jesus Christ in truth. The Divinity of
the Word (says the pretended Alcuinus) fills this Body which is every where,
(which is to say, that which is Consecrated in an infinite of places) adding it
to self, and makes that as it is one, it be also joined to the Body of Jesus
Christ, and be one only Body in truth. These words do not put us upon imagining
they thought of laying open a certain way to Transubstantiation, nor a
preambulatory or preparative union to the conversion, as Mr. Arnaud would have
us believe. This is a mere illusion. It Is clear they teach in what manner the
Bread is the same Body with that which he took of the Virgin, and settle here,
to wit, inasmuch as it is joined to it by the link of the same Divinity, which
fills both the one and the other. Which is what appears from the bare reading
of their passages, and especially that of Ascelinus. Berenger had told him,
that if he followed the opinion of Paschasus, he went contrary to all the laws
of nature. And Ascelinus answers him that it is neither a subject of admiration,
nor a subject of doubt that God can make that which is Consecrated on the Altar
to be united to this Body which our Savior took of the Virgin; which shows he
made the ground of his sentiment to consist in this union; and that he
respected it not as a way to Transubstantiation, but as that which formally
made the Bread the Body of Jesus Christ. The examples which he adds of the Soul
and Body which are joined together and of the two natures united in Jesus
Christ confirm the same thing; for the union of the soul and body, and the
union of the two natures are not in any wise ways, and preparations to any
Transubstantiation; they are on the contrary unions, wherein the two things
united subsist, and on which the mind settles. What Mr. Arnaud says, that this
union does not terminate it self to a simple conjunction, but makes the Bread
pass into the Body of Jesus Christ, is equivocal. For if he means that the
formal effect of this union is, that the Bread remaining what it was, becomes
the Body of Jesus Christ, we will grant him, that this was in effect the
sentiment of these Authors; but if he will have the Bread, ceasing to be what it
was, to become really the same numerical substance which was the Body of Christ
before this change, we deny that these Authors have taken it in this sort. The
comparisons which he alleges of Wax which becomes Fire, and Bread eaten by
Christ which became his Body do contradict this last sense; for the Wax
devoured by the Fire becomes not the same substance of Fire in number that it
was before; and the Bread which our Savior aet became not likewise so properly
the same substance in number, which was before his Body. So what he says
afterward, That to join the Bread to the Body of Jesus Christ, p. 842.
and to make it to be the Body of Jesus Christ, and pass into the Body of Jesus
Christ, signifies to transubstantiate in all the languages of the world, is a
matter ill offered and evidently unjustifiable. For if the Bread becomes the
Body of Jesus Christ formally by reason of the union, as the sense of these
Authors is, in the same manner as the food we receive becomes our body by the
union which it has with it, it is made the Body of Jesus Christ, not by any
real conversion into this same substance of the Body of Jesus Christ which was
before, but it becomes it by way of addition to this substance, or according to
the precise explication which Damascen gives of it by way of augmentation and
growth of the natural Body of Jesus Christ, as we have already seen in the
third Book, when we treated of the opinion of the Greeks.

THIS being thus cleared up, it is no hard matter to answer the passages of
Remy, which Mr. Arnaud alleges with so great confidence, Seeing that a Page
832. Book 8. chapter 7.
mystery, says he, is that which signifies another thing, if it be the Body of
Jesus Christ in truth, why call we it a mystery, It Is because that after the
Consecration it is one thing, and it appears another. It appears to be Bread
and Wine, but it is in truth the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ. For God
accommodating himself to our weakness, seeing we are not used to eat raw Flesh,
and drink Blood, makes these gifts remain in their first form, although they be in
truth the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ. I answer that Remy means that the
gifts appear to be after the Consecration what they were before; to wit, simple
Bread and Wine, that the change which they have received, being become the Body
and Blood of Jesus Christ, by their union with the natural Body, is an
invisible thing, and that this union does not change any thing of their first
form, although it seems it should do it seeing the Bread which our Savior aet,
and which became likewise his Body by union, took the form of Flesh. That God
deals otherwise in the Eucharist by way of condescension to our weakness,
because we cannot suffer this form of Flesh, but yet the union ceases not to be
true, and consequently the Bread is in truth the Body of Jesus Christ, although it
does not appear to be so. This is the true sense of Remy grounded on his own
Hypothesis, and not that which Mr. Arnaud imputes to him.

THE second passage as Mr. Arnaud alleges it, is conceived in these terms, As
the Divinity of the Word is one which fills all the world, so although the Body be
consecrated in several places, and at infinitely different times, yet this is
not several Bodies of Jesus Christ, nor several Cups, but the same Body and the
same Blood, with that which he took in the Virgins Womb; and which he gave to
his Apostles. And therefore we must observe that whether we take more, or less,
all do equally receive the Body of Jesus Christ entire. But first I demand of
Mr. Arnaud who gave him that liberty to retrench from this passage a whole
sentence, to alledg what goes before, and what follows, and leave out a whole
period in the middle, without any other reason than that it solves the
difficulty, and clearly shows Remy's sense? Is it fairly done in these kind of
disputes to maim passages of Authors which do not make for us? Moreover were it
some words either before or after, we might perhaps suppose in his favor, that
'twere only an omission, or neglect, and that he did not mind that what he left
out belonged to the same passage, but to retrench a whole sentence from the
middle of a discourse, is I think a thing without example. Here then is what
Remy says, It Is one and the same Body, and the same Blood with that which he
took in the Womb of the Virgin, and which he gave to his Apostles. FOR THE
DIVINITY FILLS IT, AND JOINS IT TO IT SELF, AND MAKES, THAT AS IT IS ONE, IT BE
LIKEWISE JOINED TO THE BODY OF JESUS CHRIST, AND THAT IT BE ONE ONLY BODY IN
THE TRVTH. This period eclipsed leaves all the rest of the passage favorable
to Mr. Arnaud, and therefore he has thought fitting to lay it aside according
to the liberty which he allows himself of removing whatsoever offends him; but
this same period reestablished shows clearly the sense of Remy, which is, that
all the Loaves consecrated in several places are one and the same Body of Jesus
Christ with that which he took of the Virgin, not because they are
transubstantiated into it, but because they are joined with it by means of the
Divinity which is one in all these Loaves.

THE third passage has these words, That as the Flesh which Jesus Christ has
taken in the Womb of the Virgin, is his true Body crucified for our salvation,
so this Bread which Jesus Christ has given to his Disciples and to all those
which are predestined to eternal life, and which the Priests consecrate every
day in the Church, WITH THE VIRTUE OF THE DIVINITY WHICH FILLS THIS BREAD, is
the true Body of Jesus Christ. And this Flesh which he has taken, and this
Bread are not two Bodies, but make one only true Body of Jesus Christ, so that
when this Bread is broken and eaten, Jesus Christ is sacrificed and eaten, and
yet remains entire and living. And as this Body which he deposed on the Cross
was offered for our Redemption, so this Bread is offered every day to God for
our Salvation and Redemption, which although it appears to be Bread, is yet the
Body of Christ. For our Redeemer having regard to our weakness, and seeing us
subject to sin, has given us this Sacrament, to the end that being now
incapable of dying, although we sin every day, we may have a true Sacrifice by
which our iniquities may be expiated. And because all these Loaves make but one
Body of Jesus Christ and are offered for our Redemption, he has said, This is
my Body which shall be given for you, and added, do this, which is to say,
Consecrate this Body, in remembrance of me, to wit, of my Passion, and your
Redemption, for I have redeemed you by my Blood. Our Lord leaving this blessed
Sacrament to all his faithful servants to engrave it in their hearts and
memories has done like a man who drawing near the time of his death, sends to
his friends a great present for a remembrance of him, saying, Receive this
gift, my dear friend, and keep it carefully for my sake, to the end that every
time you see it, you may think on me. There is nothing in all this but what may
very well agree with the Hypothesis of Remy, that the Bread is the Body of
Jesus Christ by way of union and conjunction with the natural Body. This Bread
with the virtue of the Divinity which fills it, is the true Body of Jesus
Christ, because an addition made to the natural Body becomes the true Body. And
these are not two Bodies but one only Body, because that according to the
argument of Damascen an augmentation or a growth of a Body does not make
another, but the same Body. When this Bread is broken and eaten, Jesus Christ
is immolated and eaten, to wit, in this Bread which is joined to him, and yet
he remains entire and living, to wit, in his natural Body. This Bread is
offered for our Redemption, inasmuch as it is a commemoration of it, and an
application made to us of the price of our Redemption on the Cross. And in this
sense it is a true Sacrifice which expiates us because it does represent and
apply to us the true Sacrifice of the Cross of Jesus Christ, as Remy thereupon
formally explains himself in these words, Do this, that is to say, Consecrate
this Body in remembrance of me, to wit, of my Passion and your Redemption, for
I have redeemed you by my Blood. Here are the objections which Mr. Arnaud has
made on Remy, let any one judge whether he has had reason to make such a bustle
with this Author and say, That it appears strange any man should question the
sentiment of an Author which speaks in this sort. For in fine; a body would
think the license of contradicting every thing should have its bounds. 'Twere
well if Mr. Arnaud would accustom himself to judge of things with less prejudice.

WE must now pass on to Christian Drutmar, of whom I had alleged a very
considerable passage taken from his Commentary on the 26. Chapter of S.
Matthew, that is to say, from an explication which he makes precisely of the
institution of the Holy Sacrament. The Author of the Perpetuity had cavil'd on
this passage as much as it is possible, sometimes saying that the translation
which I made of it was not faithful, sometimes that the Text it self was
corrupted, sometimes that the words of which it consists had no coherence,
sometimes that the passage was questioned by Sixtus of Sienne, and that there
was a Manuscript of Drutmar in the Convent of Grey-Friers at Lions which
instead of this explication, Hoc est Corpus meum. Id est in Sacramento,
contained these words, Hoc est Corpus meum. Hoc est in Sacramento vere
subsistens, And I know not how many other frivolous evasions which may be seen
fully refuted in my answer to the Perpetuity. Mr. Arnaud did Answer to the
second Treatise, part 3. chapter 2.
not think it necessary again to engage himself in this dispute. He only tells
us that it is the direct attention to the Sacrament, and external vail which
makes Drutmar to explain these words; Hoc est Corpus meum, by these, id est in
Sacramento. For when a man directs his mind to the Sacrament, and that Book 8.
chapter 4. p. 797.
which strikes our senses, one cannot say strictly that it is the Body it self
of Jesus Christ. It is apparent Bread, it is the sign, the similitude, the
Sacrament of this Body which is the Body of Jesus Christ only in Sacrament, as
Drutmar says. This is not the point in question. But the question is to know in
what sort the people of those days believed the Body of Jesus Christ was joined
to this Sacrament and Vail. It Is by this we must supply Drutmar' s expression;
for nothing can be more unjust than to judge of his sentiment by a word which he
spoke cursorily, and by an abridged expression.

IT must be acknowledged no easy matter to sound the bottom of these
Gentlemen's minds; who ever could imagine that after so many attempts to elude
the passage of Drutmar, Mr. Arnaud finding his labor in vain should betake
himself to the direction of attention? Drutmar writes an express Commentary on
the institution of the Eucharist. He explains these words of our Savior, This
is my Body, in this sense, that is to say Sacramentally. And Mr. Arnaud comes
and tells us by his own Authority that he minded directly only the vail and
appearances of Bread which cover the Body of Christ; as if Drutmar did not
design to give the true sense of our Savior in the explication of these words,
or as if our Savior meant only by these words that the appearances of Bread
signify his Body; or as if a Commentator were not obliged to direct his
attention to the principal, natural and essential sense of the words he
explains, without falling into foreign and fantastical senses which no body
could imagine but himself. For I do not believe it has ever yet entered into any
man's thoughts that these terms, This is my Body, signify, that the accidents
of Bread, or the vail of the appearances of Bread which cover the Body of Jesus
Christ are this Body only in sign and Sacrament. Neither must Mr. Arnaud tell
us that this is a word which Drutmar spoke transiently and for brevity sake;
for it is an express and formal explication of our Saviors words. Supposing
people commonly believed Transubstantiation and the Real Presence, as Mr.
Arnaud would have it, what likelihood is there that in an age wherein people
could not be ignorant, that this Doctrine met with much contradiction in the
person of Paschasus, that Drutmar (who was a Religious of the Convent of
Corbie, which is to say of the same Convent as Paschasus was Abbot of) would
deceive the world, betray the public Faith of the Church, favor those that
opposed it, scandalize his own proper party, and give way to an heretical
explication of Christ's words, and this by the rule of direct attention, and by
the means of abbreviated expressions. In truth Mr. Arnaud shows what kind of
opinion he has of us, when he supposes such kind of answers as these will
satisfy us.

CHAP. XI.
Of other Authors in the Ninth Century, Amalarius, Heribald, Raban, Bertram,
and John Scot.

AFter Drutmar, we must examine Amalarius. If we believe what Andrew du Val the
Sorbonist Doctor says of him in his Notes on the Treatise of the Church of
Lions, entitled, De tribus Epistolis, the question will be soon decided. For
having related on the testimony of Florus a passage of Amalarius he concludes
in these terms, Ex quo conjecturae locus relinquitur Amalarium istum una cum
Joanne Scoto fuisse Berengarii praecursores and veluti ante signanos, Hence we
may conjecture that this Amalarius, with John Scot were Berenger' s
forerunners. If we believe M. the President Maugin, Amalarius was only a
Stercoranist, of whom we shall speak hereafter. If we will believe the Author
of the Perpetuity, Amalarius was Paschasus his Adversary; for he strongly
assures us, That Bishop Usher was Perpetuity of the Faith, page 83.
mistaken when he thought Amalarius' s error consisted in holding the Doctrine
of the Roman Catholics, not only because this supposition is without any
ground, but also because the Epitomy of William of Malmsury joins Amalarius
with Heribald and Raban who were Paschasus his Adversaries. But in short, if we
will consult Mr. Arnaud, he will tell us on the contrary, Book 8. chapter 11. Page
870.
that Amalarius and Heribald were in no wise adversaries to Paschasus. That the
Author of the Perpetuity granted it because he believed William of Malmsbury
said it, but that this does not appear to be true. That Amalarius indeed was a
Sterconarist, but yet never any body taught more expressly the Real Presence.
Thus these Gentlemen, who so greatly insult over us, when they find any
difference amongst us Ministers in the least point of History, or conjecture,
do not always agree among themselves, one says, Amalarius was the forerunner
of Berenger, the other maintains that never any man taught more formally the
Real Presence; the one makes him together with Heribald and Raban a bitter
enemy to Paschasus, and the other protests it is not likely to be true.

TO clear up this confusion, we must have recourse to the passages of
Amalarius, and judge of his Doctrine from it self. He tells us then first, That
those things which are done in the celebration of the Mass, are transacted
Praesat. ad lib. de Offic. Eccl.
as in a Sacrament of our Lords Passion, as he himself commands us, saying,
Every time you do this, do it in remembrance of me; and therefore the Priest
who immolates the Bread and Wine, is in Sacrament of Christ, the Bread, the
Wine and Water and Wine are for Sacraments of the Flesh and Blood of Christ.
The Sacraments must have some resemblance with the things of which they be
Sacraments. Let the Priest then be like our Savior Christ, as the Bread, the
Wine and Liquors are like the Body of Jesus Christ. It appears from these
words, that in the style of Amalarius, to be a Sacrament of a thing is to
represent it, and hold the place of it, for this is precisely what these terms
signify, The things of the Mass are done IN SACRAMENT of our Lords Passion,
and these other terms, the Priest is in Sacrament of Christ. When then he adds,
that the Bread, the Wine and Water are in SACRAMENT of the Flesh and Blood of
Jesus Christ, it is clear he means they stand in stead of it, and represent
them, and this resemblance which he inserts afterward between the Bread, the
Wine and the Water, and the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, because they are
the Sacraments of 'em, confirm the same thing, and at the same time formally
distinguishes them from the Body and Blood themselves.

Mr. ARNAVD answers that Amalarius has followed the language of Book 8. chapter 4.
p. 783.
sense, and that the question here was not to explain the nature of the
Eucharist, but the mysterious references which God would engrave in the symbols
which he has chosen in this mystery. But what reason has Mr. Arnaud to make
Amalarius to have followed the language of sense in opposition to that of
Faith, seeing Amalarius does not mention any thing that leads to this
distinction, and that on the contrary it appears by the terms which he makes
use of, that he honestly meant the Eucharist was real Bread and Wine in
substance. Who told Mr. Arnaud that Amalarius made not the nature of the
Eucharist to consist in the whole action's being a Sacrament of our Lords
Passion, that the Priest immolates the Bread and Wine, that he represents
therein our Savior Christ, and that the Bread and Wine stand for his Body and
Blood? We must judge of Amalarius his Doctrine by his expressions. To be in
Sacrament, according to him, is to represent and stand for, the Bread and Wine
are in Sacrament of the Body and Blood, as the Priest is in Sacrament of Jesus
Christ, they are not then really this Body and Blood.

AMALARIVS himself does clearly explain his mind in another Lib. 3. de Off.
cap. 25. Book ^. chapter 7. page 834.
place, saying, That the Priest bows himself, and recommends to God what is
immolated in the stead of Jesus Christ. Hoc quod vice Christi immolatum est Deo
patri commendat. Mr. Arnaud says this is not an expression contrary to the Real
Presence, because Agapius has made use of it, and that in effect this
expression is grounded on the different state wherein Jesus Christ is in the
Eucharist, and that wherein he has been in his Passion, and that wherein he now
is in Heaven. For this diversity distinguishing him to our senses, it makes one
distinguish him likewise in the expressions, But all this is but a mere
evasion, Amalarius does not say that Jesus Christ in one state, holds the place
of himself in another state. He ingenuously says, that which is immolated in
the stead of Jesus Christ; and if you would know what he means by what is
immolated in the place of Jesus Christ, he has already told you that it is Bread
and Wine which are immolated, and which are in Sacrament of the Flesh and Blood
of Christ.

HE says moreover the same thing elsewhere, The Oblation and the Cup Lib. 3. de
Off. cap. 26.
signify our Lords Body, and when Jesus Christ has said, This is the Cup of my
Blood, he meant his Blood which was in his Body, as the Wine was in the Cup.
And a little further, By this particle of the Oblation which the Priest puts in
the Cup, he represents the Body of Jesus Christ, which is risen from the dead,
by that which the Priest or the People eat, is represented this Body of Jesus
Christ, which is still on the Earth (to wit his Church) and by that which
remains on the Altar, is represented this other Body which is still lying in
the Sepulcher (to wit, the faithful dead.)

IT is in vain that Mr. Arnaud opposes to these passages what the same
Amalarius says, That the Church believes this Sacrament ought to be eaten by
Book 8. chapter 4. p. 785.
men, because she believes it is our Lords Body and Blood, and that in eating it
the Souls of the Faithful are filled with benediction. For it is true that the
reason for which the Church recommends to the Faithful the eating of the
Eucharist, is because it is the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, this is not a
matter in contest, the question is only to know in what manner this is.

IT IS moreover in vain that Mr. Arnaud urges these other words, Credimus Ibid.
naturam simplicem panis and vini mixti verti in naturam rationabilem, scilicet
Corporis and Sanguinis Christi. We believe that the simple nature of Bread and
Wine is changed into a reasonable nature, to wit, of the Body and Blood of
Christ. For his sense is not that there is made a real conversion of one nature
into another, but that there is made a mystical conversion by which it is no
longer mere Bread and Wine, but the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, or as
himself says elsewhere several times the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of
Jesus Christ.

IT IS also no less in vain that Mr. Arnaud endeavors to make advantage of some
terms of Amalarius his Letter to Guntard, which may be seen in Spicilege's
seventh Volume. Guntard was a young man that was scandalized at his seeing
Amalarius spitting without any scruple immediately after his receiving the
Communion, Amalarius answers him that this was a thing natural and necessary to
the preservation of health, and that he thought he did nothing herein which
cast any dishonor on the Body of Christ, that if he imagined he cast out, in
spitting, the Body of Christ, he was deceived. That he would say to him
touching the Body of Jesus Christ which we receive, what the Emperor
Valentinian said to his Army. 'Twas in your power to choose me Emperor, but now
it is in mine to choose whom I please for my Colleague. It Is the same here, for
it is your part to have a pure heart, and to beseech God to give it you; but
it is his to disperse his Body throughout our members, and veins, for our
salvation. For it is he who in giving the Bread to his Apostles has said, This
is my Body which shall be given for you. His Body was on the Earth when he
would, and it is there when he pleases; yea, after his Ascension he has not
disdained to show himself to S. Paul in the Temple of Jerusalem which was on
earth. His sense is, that we ought not to trouble our selves about what becomes
of the mystical Body of Jesus Christ which we receive in the Eucharist, that
it is our part to purify our hearts, and his to give us his Body in the manner
which he thinks fitting; because 'twas he that said of the Bread of the
Eucharist, that 'twas his Body. What he adds concerning his Body being on the
Earth, etc. he says it not with respect to the Real Presence, as Mr. Arnaud
imagins, but in reference to the right which our Savior has to make his
Eucharistical Body what he pleases. For it is an argument a pari (as we call it)
by which he undertakes to prove that Jesus Christ is the master of his
Eucharistical Body, as well as the master of his natural Body, having left it
on Earth as long as he thought fitting, and after his Ascension was not so
taken up with his abode in Heaven, as not to show himself to his Apostle in the
Temple of Jerusalem. And this appears from the sequel of his discourse. I say
this, says he, to the end that if through ignorance, or without my consent there
should proceed out of my mouth any part of the Lords Body, you may not believe
presently hereupon that I am void of Religion, and that I despise my Lords
Body, or that this Body be carried into any place where he would not have it
come. Our Soul lives by this Body, as the Lord himself says, If you eat not the
Flesh of the Son of Man, nor drink his Blood, you have no life in you. If then
this Body be our life, it will not lose being separated from us what it has in
it self, and what we receive from it. My Son, desire your Priests to take heed
they lose not out of their hearts any of those words which the Lord has spoken
in the Gospel, for they are likewise our Life, as well as the Consecrated
Bread. He means, that although he casts out of his mouth in spitting some part of
the Eucharistical Body, yet we must not believe this Body is carried to any
place where our Savior would not have it, or this Body being in this place
lies stripped of the advantage which it has to be the life of our souls, no more
than the words of the Gospel, which although neglected, be yet also our life. What
signifies this to the Real Presence? Will not his discourse be every whit as
coherent and as well followed if we suppose that the consecrated Bread is the
Body of Jesus Christ in Sacrament as he teaches elsewhere, as if we suppose it
to be so in propriety of substance, which we believe that Amalarius never
taught.

THE conclusion which he draws from all this is yet (if you will) less
favorable to Mr. Arnaud. Thus, says he, having taken with an honest and
faithful heart the Lords Body, I have nothing to do to dispute whether it be
invisibly carried up into Heaven, or reserved in our Body till the day of
Judgment, or whether exhaled up in the Air, or whether it flows from our Body
with the Blood when our Veins be opened, or issues out through the Pores, the Lord
saying, Whatsoever enters by the mouth into the belly goes into Excrement.
Which is to say, that it belongs not to us to make all these questions about
the Sacrament, because our Savior does with it what he pleases. As to our
parts, adds he, we ought only to have a care lest we receive it with a Judas' s
heart, lest we despise it; but on the contrary discern it salutarily from other
common aliments. I confess Mr. Arnaud has some reason to conjecture hence that
Amalarius was of the number of those which they call Stercoranists, but on what
side soever he turns himself, he cannot conclude he held the Real Presence, and
this very thing that Mr. Arnaud believes Amalarius was a Stercoranist ought to
convince him on the contrary that this Author did not believe the change or
conversion of the substance in the Eucharist.

HAD Mr. Arnaud consulted the Letter of the same Amalarius to Rangar, which is
within two pages of that which he wrote to Gruntard, he had seen that Amalarius
expounds these words of Jesus Christ, This is the Cup of the New Testament in
my Blood which is shed for you, in this manner, This Cup is a figure of my
Body, in which is the Blood which shall issue from my side to accomplish the
ancient Law, and when it is spilt it shall be the New Testament, because it is a
new and innocent Blood, the Blood of the Man without Sin, which shall be spilt
for the Redemption of Mankind. Explaining aftetwards what is said in the
Liturgy, Mysterium fidei: This Blood, says he, is called the mystery of Faith,
because it profits to the Salvation and Eternal Life of him that believes
himself Redeemed by this Blood, and makes himself an imitator of our Lords
Passion. And therefore the Lord says, If ye eat not the Flesh of the Son of
man, nor drink his Blood, ye will have no life in you. Which is to say, if ye
partake not of my Passion, nor believe that I died for your salvation, ye will
have no life in you. The mystery is Faith, as S. Augustine teaches in his
Epistle to Boniface, as in some manner the Sacrament of the Body of Jesus
Christ is the Body of Jesus Christ, the Sacrament of the Blood of Jesus Christ
is the Blood of Jesus Christ, so the Sacrament of Faith is Faith. It Is plainly
seen this is not the style of a man that believed the Real Presence.

BUT before we leave Amalarius, we must join him to Heribald and Raban, for
they stand all three accused by several Authors with Stercoranism, which is to
say, they believed that what we receive in the Sacrament, is digested and
subject to the necessity of other food which passes into Excrements. William of
Malmsbury in his epitomis'd Manuscript, as the Author of the Perpetuity
acknowledges, attributes to all three of 'em this opinion. The President Maugin
affirms the same thing of Amalarius, and Mr. Arnaud says his proofs be good.
And the anonymous Author published by Cellot the Jesuit, attributes the same
sentiment to Heribald, and Raban, without any mention of Amalarius, Et his
quidem, says he, qui dixerunt secessui obnoxium (quid nunquam antea auditum
est) id est, Heribaldo Antisiodorensi Episcopo qui turpiter proposuit, and
Rabano Moguntino qui turpius assumpsit, turpissime vero conclusit, suus ad
respondendum locus servetur. Thomas Tom. 2. cap. 19. Lib. 8. cap. 12. p. 874.
Waldensis attributes it in like manner to Heribald and Raban, Heribaldus, says
he, Altisiodorensis Episcopus and Rabanus Moguntinus posuerunt Euchariristoe
Sacramentum obnoxium esse secessui. Mr. Arnaud endeavors to substract Raban
from this number, The single testimony, says he, of an Author so little
judicious as this anonymous, is not sufficient to impute this sentiment to
Raban, there being elsewhere nothing in his works but what may receive a good
sense. But has he so soon forgotten what he himself wrote eight lines above.
Raban is accused of the error of the Stercoranists by an anonymous Author, and
by William of Malmsbury. This anonymous is not the only Author that gives this
testimony, William of Malmsbury asserts the same: why then does Mr. Arnaud say
eight lines after, The single testimony of this anonymous Author is not enough?
If his single testimony be not sufficient that of William of Malmsbury will
confirm it; and if these two be not sufficient, Thomas Waldensis will give 'em
his suffrage as I now mentioned. Even Raban himself sufficiently explains his
own sentiment, without any need of other witnesses; for observe here what he
writes in his fifth Book, De naturis rerum; The Lord would have the Sacraments
of his Body and Blood to be received by the mouths of the Faithful, and serve
'em for food (in pastum eorum redigi, others read in partem eorum redigi) to
the end this visible effect should represent the invisible effect. For as
material food nourishes and strengthens the Body, so the Word of God inwardly
nourishes our souls. And in his Book of the instruction of Ecclesiastics, he
formally In instit. Cleric. c. 31.
teaches, that the Sacrament is taken with the mouth, reduced into nourishment
for our Bodies, and converted or changed in us when we eat it. There is no
explication can shift the force and consequence of these terms.

THE question is now whether the opinion of these persons, who have been since
odiously called by way of reproach Stercoranists, be consistent with the Real
Presence, or whether it supposes that the substance of Bread remains in the
Eucharist. If we consult Durand of Troarn to know what these Stercoranists
were, he will tell us that in his time they were accounted the same persons who
maintained that the substances of Bread and Wine remained after the
Consecration. They say, says he, that the gifts of Bread Durand. de Corp. and
Sang. Dom. part. 1.
and Wine which are laid on the Altar remain after the Consecration what they
were before, and are yet in some sort the true Body and true Blood of Jesus
Christ, not naturally, but in figure, And that the substances of the Divine
Oblation are corruptible and digested with other meats. He says the same thing
afterward in two or three several places, and calls these people
Stercoranists, without mentioning several kinds of 'em, as that some of 'em are
for having the substance it self of Christ's Body to be subject to these
accidents, and others who understood it of the substance of Bread.

IT also appears from the Dispute of Guitmond, that this was the sentiment of
Berenger and his followers, for he introduces 'em thus arguing, It Is absurd to
expose the Body of Jesus Christ to the necessity of Excrements. Guitmund. de
verb. Euchar. lib. 2.
Yet whatsoever enters into the mouth, as our Savior says, descends into the
stomach, and is cast into the draught. From this visible and corporeal
manducation in the Sacrament, says Algerus, has sprung the filthy Heresy of
the Alger. de Sac. lib. 2. cap. 7.
Stercoranists. For they say that so great a Sacrament being eaten corporally
is likewise subject to Excrements. Which they endeavor to strengthen by
several arguments, and especially by the words of Jesus Christ, who says in the
Gospel, Whatsoever enters into the mouth, descends into the stomach, and is
cast forth into the draught.

'TWILL be said it hence plainly appears that the Berengarians were
Stercoranists, seeing they believed that the substance of Bread remained after
the Consecration, but that it does not hence follow that all the Stercoranists,
and especially Heribald and Raban held in like manner the subsistence of the
Bread and Wine. I answer, It belongs to Mr. Arnaud to show us that there were
two sorts of Stercoranists, the one who held the Real Presence, and others that
did not believe it. For why must we be led by his authority? we show that those
who were accused of Stercoranism are the same as were opposed for not believing
Transubstantiation. If Mr. Arnaud will needs have that there were two sorts,
it is his part to prove it, for as long as he supposes this without proof, we
have right to deny it him. Yet will it be no hard matter to convince him that
this same Stercoranism which Authors attribute to Heribaid and Raban, is
nothing else than the belief of the subsistence of the Bread and Wine in the
Eucharist, which is to say in a word that it is exactly the opinion of Berenger,
and that 'twas only to render it odious that their adversaries exposed it under
this idea, or representation of Stercoranism. Which is what justifies it self
from the testimony of Thomas Waldensis, who tells us that a subtle Doctor of
his time said, We should interrogate the Priests, whether they did not think
that this thing Thom. Valdens. tom. 2. cap. 52.
which they believed to be the Flesh of Christ was tasted with ones bodily
mouth, and whether being received into the stomach it went into the draught,
according as, adds he, the vile Sect of the Heribaldiens and Lollards taught,
for they say ALL, that this Bread which they imprudently call THE NATURAL
BREAD, is the august Sacrament and consecrated Host. Here I think we have the
Heribaldiens who formally say that the Sacrament, the consecrated Host, which
according to them passes into Excrements, is, The natural Bread. The aforesaid
Waldensis disputing in the sequel against Wicliff, says, Ibid. cap. 26.
that Wicliff proved that the Eucharist was Bread by the experience of nature,
because a man may be fed with Hosts. Whence, adds he, I conclude that as he
admits the digestion of the Eucharist, he must likewise grant that it passes
into Excrements. And thus is he agreed with Heribald and Raban of Mayence, who
have taught that the true Sacrament was subject to the casualty of other food.
It Is plain he puts no difference between the Stercoranism of these two Bishops,
and the subsistence of the Bread of Wicliff. Elsewhere he also more clearly
proves that Honorius of Autun believed that the substance of Bread remained, or
as he speaks, that he was of the Sect of the Panites, because he alleges the
passage of Raban, which bears that the Sacrament passes into our food. Et ipse
enim, says he, de secta Panitarum, Rabani versum Ibid. cap. 90.
ponit infra ubi agit de partibus Missoe, Sacramentum, inquiens, ore
percipitur, and in alimentum corporis redigitur.

BUT if we will besides the testimonies of these Authors hearken moreover unto
reason, we shall find that there is nothing more inconsistent with the belief
of the Real Presence than this pretended error of the Stercoranists; and that
those who will have these two opinions agree together, have never well
considered what they undertook to establish. It is not possible to believe the
Real Presence of the Body of Jesus Christ in the Eucharist, I mean of this same
numerical substance which was born of the Virgin, and is now in Heaven, without
believing at the same time that this substance is not sensible in it, palpable,
visible, extended, capable of being divided in the same manner as 'twas when
our Lord conversed on Earth. 'Twill be the greatest folly imaginable to impute
to persons that have eyes, and see the Eucharist, and have some remains of
common sense to make therein exist this Body without making it therein exist
insensible, indivisible, impalpable after the manner of spirits, as they also
do of the Church of Rome. Now with what likelihood can one make this opinion
agree with that of Stercoranism, which asserts that this Body is digested into
the stomach after the manner of other meats, that one part of it passes into
our nourishment, and the other is subject to the common necessity of aliments.
What is digested is touched by the substance of our stomach, penetrated by our
natural heat, divided and separated into several parts, reduced into Chyle,
then into Blood, distributed through all the several parts of our Body, and joined
immediately to 'em, after it has been made like 'em, whilst that which is most
gross and improper for our nourishment passes into Excrement. What likelihood
is there that persons who are not bereft of their senses can subject to these
accidents, an indivisible and inpalpable substance, which exists after the
manner of Spirits? Moreover they were not ignorant that the Body of Jesus
Christ is animated with its natural Soul, and that what passes into our
nourishment is animated by ours, what a monstrous opinion then is it to imagine
that the same numerical Body can be at the same time animated with two Souls,
with that of Jesus Christ and ours, to be united hypostatically to the Word,
and hypostatically to us? On what hand soever we turn, it is certain that it is
an inexpressible chimera to say that those which were called Stercoranists
believed the Real Presence in the sense which the Roman Church understands it.
It must be acknowledged that they were Panites, as Thomas Waldensis calls them,
that is to say, they believed that the Eucharist was a Real Substance of Bread.
And seeing we showed that Amalarius, Heribald, and Raban were of the number of
these pretended Stercoranists, it must be necessarily acknowledged that they
were contrary to the Doctrine of Paschasus, whence it evidently follows that
this Doctrine was not commonly held in the Church then, as Mr. Arnaud pretends
it was. For these three great men held in it too considerable a rank to permit
us to believe they were contrary to the public Belief in a point so
considerable, and Mr. Arnaud himself will not have us think thus of 'em. One of
'em, to wit, Amalarius, was sent to Rome by the Emperor Lewis to seek the
Antiphonaries, as he himself testifies. The other, to wit, Heribald, was Bishop
of Auxerre, and reputed a Saint after his death, as appears from the
Inscription of his Sepulcher, Here lies the Body of S. Heribald; and the last,
to wit, Raban, was Abbot of Fulde, and afterward Archbishop of Mayence,
accounted one of the most learned men of his Age, as appears by the testimonies
of Baronius and Sixtus of Sienne.

TO these three we must add Bertram, for it cannot be doubted but that he was
also one of those who were afterward called Stercoranists, which is to say, he
believed that this substance which we receive in the Sacrament was subject to
digestion, and passed into our nourishment. He clearly shows his sense in
several places of his Book. For having related these words, of Isidor, The
Bread and Wine are compared to the Body and Blood of Jesus Bertram de Corp. and
Sang. Dom.
Christ, because that as the substance of this visible Bread and Wine inebriate
the outward man, so the Word of God, which is the living Bread chears the
faithful Soul, when she participates of it, he makes this remark. Saying this
he clearly confesses, that whatsoever we take outwardly in the Sacrament of our
Lords Body and Blood, is used for nourishment to our Body. And a little
further, Secundum visibilem creaturam, corpus pascunt. And speaking afterward
of the Eucharistical Body of Jesus Christ, Negari non potest corrumpi, quod per
parts comminutum disparitur ad sumendum and dentibus commolitum in corpus
trajicitur. And again, Non attenditur quod corpus pascit, quod dente premitur,
quod per parts comminuitur, sed quod in fide spiritualiter accipitur.

THESE two last Authors, to wit, Raban and Bertram, besides this Doctrine which
is common to 'em with the rest, have especially this, that they have formally
opposed the novelties of Paschasus by public Writings. Which is what appears
by the testimony of the anonymous Author whose words we have already related;
for he says in proper terms, that Raban and Ratram wrote against Paschasus; to
wit, Raban a Letter to the Abbot Egilon, and Ratram a Book dedicated to King
Charles, and that they defamed him for offering this proposition, that what we
receive from the Altar is nothing else but the same Flesh which was born of the
Virgin, and suffered on the Cross, and rose again from the Sepulcher, and is at
this day offered for the sins of the world.

WE have no reason, says Mr. Arnaud, to believe that Raban attacked Paschasus
Book 8. chapter 12. p. 874.
otherwise than Bertram. Now Bertram does not any where name Paschasus, and not
only, he does not attack him openly, but shuns to appear contrary to him, so
that it cannot be concluded from the testimony of this Author, that Raban was
an adversary to Paschasus his Book. Why can it not be concluded from the
testimony of this Author, seeing this Author formally says it? Can Mr. Arnaud
that never saw this Letter to Egilon better judge of it, than this Author that
did see it? Supposing Raban did not name Paschasus, it will not follow that he
did not attack his Book; for a man may write against a Book, and yet not name
the Author of it. 'Twas a sufficient attacking the Book to combat precisely and
directly the fundamental and essential proposition which Paschasus came from
establishing in it, which was, that what we receive in the Communion is the
same Flesh of Jesus Christ which was born of the Virgin.

THIS anonymous Author, says moreover Mr. Arnaud, is the only person Ibidem.
that speaks of this Letter of Raban to Egilon. 'Twas never cited either by
Berenger, nor by any other Author, 'twas unknown to all the Writers of the
11th. Century. Supposing what Mr. Arnaud says were true, yet would it not be
sufficient for the calling in question the sincerity of this anonymous Author
who speaks of this Letter as of that which he saw. But besides this Mr. Arnaud
hazards himself too much when he positively affirms that this, is the only
Author who speaks of this Letter of Raban to Egilon. He may be convinced of the
contrary by Raban himself who acknowledges it, and makes express mention of it
on the same subject of Paschasus his Doctrine, and in the same sense which the
anonymous does, excepting the name of Paschasus which he does not express,
which plainly defends the sincerity of this nameless Author, Quidam nuper de
ipso Sacramento Corporis and Sanguinis Poen. Rab. c. 33.
Domini non rite sentientes dixerunt hoc ipsum Corpus and Sanguinem Domini quod
de Maria Virgin natum est, and in quo ipse Dominus passus est in cruce and
resurrexit de Sepulchro; cui errori quantum potuimus ad Egilum Abbatem
scribentes de corpore ipso quid vere credendum sit aperuimus.

BUT supposing 'twere true, says Mr. Arnaud, that Raban did in effect Page 875.
contradict Paschasus, this will be but of small advantage to Mr. Claude. Which
he endeavors to prove afterward by the example of several great Wits, and
famous Bishops who have attacked the Divinity of Jesus Christ. He adds, That
Raban was as other men are, as appears by one of his Letters which the Church
of Lions refuted, that it cannot appear strange he should fall into an error
touching the Eucharist, and that the qualities of a Philosopher, Rhetorician,
Astronomer, and Poet, could not render him incapable of being deceived.
Supposing we had only Raban to oppose against Paschasus, the advantage would
not be inconsiderable. Paschasus was only a mean Religious, when Raban was
Abbot of Fulde, and when Paschasus came to be Abbot of Corbie, Raban was
Archbishop of Mayence; whence it follows that the authority of the one was far
greater than that of the other. As to knowledge, it cannot be denied but Raban
infinitely excelled Paschasus, not in the mere qualities of a Philosopher,
Rhetorician, Astronomer and Poet, although these qualifications do much set off a
Scholar: but by the Epithet which Baronius gives him, Audi, says he, quid
vertex hujus temporis Baron. ad ann. 847.
Theologorum Rabanus decreverit. Mr. Arnaud cannot propose Paschasus but only
as the single person of his Party; now were it the same with us in respect of
Raban, it is certain that the presumption would be wholly for this last, and
that it is apparently better to bring the Church on Raban's side, than on
Paschasus's. But we are not in these Circumstances. The Doctrine of Raban agrees
very well with that of other Authors, his Contemporaries; that of Paschasus
agrees with none of 'em. The Doctrine of Raban has disturbed no body, but that
of Paschasus set several persons against him of his own time. There Is not the
least reason for accusing Raban of Innovation, but there are very strong proofs
whereby to conclude that Paschasus was an Innovator. It signifies nothing to
say, that Raban was as other men are, as appears by one of his Letters which
the Church of Lions has refuted: for should a man rigorously examine Paschasus
his Writings, he will find more marks of human weakness than in those of Raban:
besides that from this very thing that Raban had the Church of Lions for his
Adversary, one may hence conclude, according to Mr. Arnaud's way of reasoning,
that his Doctrine on the Eucharist differed not from that of his time; for
otherwise it is likely that the Church of Lions would not have spared him on
such an important Article: and yet instead of this we find on the contrary that
when this Church her self spoke of the Eucharist, it has been in terms which do
not at all favor the Real Presence. When our Savior Christ, says she, gave
Lugd. Eccles. de tenend. ver. Script.
to his Disciples the Sacrament of his Body and Blood, he says, Take, eat, this
is my Body which is given for you: which insinuates that she understood these
words, This is my Body, in this sense, This is the Sacrament of my Body. And a
little further, The Oblation of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, which is to
say, the mystery of his Passion and Death. The example of these great Wits and
Bishops that have attackt the Divinity of Jesus Christ, does indeed show that
'twas not impossible for Raban to fall into error, which is what we do not at
present dispute, for there is no body infallible, no not Mr. Arnaud himself: but
this example concludes the same thing of Paschasus, who was no more infallible
than others. So far they stand upon equal ground, both men, and both liable to
error. It remains to know which of the two actually fell into error, and that
this example of the Bishops does not decide.

IT signifies nothing, adds Mr. Arnaud, to say that no body ever reproached
Book 8. chapter 12, p. 875.
him with this error, for it does not appear that any other Author, save the
Anonymous, saw this Letter to Egilon, so that the only person that had knowledge
of it has condemned it. Raban did not keep this Letter secret, seeing he has
himself made mention of it in his Penitentials, and says he did it against the
error of those who say that the Sacrament was the Real Body and Blood of Jesus
Christ born of the Virgin. Those who saw not his Letter might easily comprehend
by these words the substance of it, and for what end he designed it, if they
have not condemned it 'twas their fault. Yet do we not pretend to draw hence
any great advantage. But moreover, says Mr. Arnaud, how many errors are there
in Authors which have been never taken notice of by any person, nor reproached
to those that taught 'em? There are strange instances of this, and here is one
from amongst the rest which is singular in its kind. Photius testifies that
Theodorus Mospueste wrote a Book against the Doctrine of Original Sin. Both East
and West have been as greatly animated against this Author as can be imagined.
He was condemned even after his Death in the fifth Council: There was never
then any person to be less favored than he. Yet we do not find that this
Capital Error observed by Photius has been Animadverted by any Author of the
6th. Century in the very time when Theodorus was used with most severity. We
must acknowledge with Mr. Arnaud that these kind of arguments by which we
conclude that if a Doctrine has not been condemned by a Church, it follows that
this Church has held it and approved it, are not convincing, and what he
relates of Theodorus of Mospueste is a considerable argument of it. But it must
also be granted that never man was more at variance with himself than Mr.
Arnaud; for what he now said overthrows the better part of his Book. Those that
have read it may remember that the greatest part of his dispute touching the
Greeks is reduced to negative arguments, perfectly like unto those which he now
condemns. The Greeks, says he without ceasing, have not condemned then
Transubstantiation of the Latins. Therefore they believed it with 'em.
Cerularius did not concern himself at Berenger's condemnation, he believed the
Transubstantiation. Humbert did not reproach the Greeks with their not
believing the Real Presence, and Nicetas did not reproach the Latins with their
believing it; therefore they were agreed in this Article. We can scarcely meet
with any thing else but these kind of conclusions in every page. He does the
same on the subject of the other Schismatical Churches, he argues from the
silence of the Emissaries, the silence of the Popes, the silence of the
Armenians, and that of the Nestorians and others. When the question concerned
the 12th. Century, how many times has he remembered the necessity of the
Disputes of the Paschasists and Bertramists; how many prodigious exclamations
has he made at their not being condemned, at their not baiting one another? And
when the discourse was about Paschasus, and the Innovation which we charge him
with, with what exaggerations has he not urged this argument, That Paschasus
was not publicly reprehended by any person for thirty years, was never
punished, nor admonished that he offered a Doctrine contrary to the Church.
Apply I pray you to this Rhetoric, what he says now of this great number of
errors in Ecclesiastical Authors which have been never animadverted by any
body, nor reproached to those who have taught 'em. Add hereunto his example of
Theodorus of Mospueste, and that of John Scot, of whom he says likewise
afterward, that it does not appear that these errors have been condemned by
any Ecclesiastical Censure of that Age, and that of Raban; for he supposes he
might have erred on the Eucharist by a capital Error in denying the Real
Presence, and he affirms that in this case 'twill not be strange that never any
body reproached him with this Error: lay I say all this together, and make a
reform on this ground of Mr. Arnaud's Book, retrench whatsoever agrees not with
this rule which he here gives us, and I am sure you will reduce his Volume into a
less compass by half.

AFTER these first Answers with which Mr. Arnaud was not perhaps Page 876.
well satisfied, he hazards another, which is, that this proposition, That the
Sacrament of the Eucharist is not the Real Body born of the Virgin, may have
two senses, the one that the external part of the Sacrament, which is to say
the visible vail is not really the Body of Jesus Christ, that the Body of Jesus
Christ is not really white, round, and has not in it self all these sensible
accidents which appear to us; the other, that the Body of Jesus Christ is not
really contained in the Sacrament. He pretends that Raban denied this
proposition only in the first sense, and not in the second. But this answer has
neither sincerity nor truth in it. First, it confounds what ought necessarily
to be distinguished. For it is not the same thing to believe that the visible
Vail, which is to say, the accidents of Bread, are really the Body of Jesus
Christ, and to believe that the Body of Jesus Christ is white and round, and
has in it self all the sensible accidents which appear to us. There is a great
deal of difference between these two, as any man may see. Supposing a man
believed that the Body of Jesus Christ is white and round, 'twill not hence
follow he must say that this whiteness and this roundness, which are the Vail
which Mr. Arnaud speaks of, were really the Body of Jesus Christ. In the second
place, I do not think that ever any body imagined that these sensible accidents
of whiteness and roundness in abstracto, as they term it, are really the Body
of Jesus Christ, and whosoever imputes to Raban the combating of this fancy,
charges him with opposing such an imagination as never yet entered into any
bodies mind.

AS to the other proposition, That the Body of Jesus Christ is really white and
round, as it is not customary to express it in these terms, That the Eucharist
is the same Body which was born of the Virgin, so it is not usual to refute it
in these, That the Eucharist is not the same Body which was born of the Virgin;
and this explication of Mr. Arnaud is so forced, and remote from the natural
sense of Raban his words, that there are few reasonable persons to whom 'twill
not appear a pitiful evasion.

YET does Mr. Arnaud earnestly urge not only that 'twas the sense of Raban to
attack this Proposition, but likewise that of Bertram, in his Book De Corpore
and Sanguine Domini. And although the anonymous Author, who according to all
probability lived about the 9th. Century, expressly says, that Raban and Bertram
refuted Paschasus. Yet does Mr. Arnaud affirm the contrary, and says that he
demonstratively proves it. He says for this effect, That there were people in
that time who grossly said that the Body of Jesus Christ was such as the
Sacrament appeared to be, which is to say, that the Body of Jesus Christ has
really the form of Bread. That this opinion was a necessary consequence of that
of Amalarius, that it is from thence he concluded that the Body of Jesus Christ
issued through the pores, and applied unto it these words, Omne quod in os intrat,
in ventrem vadit, and in secessum emittitur. That it is apparent from the
accusation which Florus forms against him of having corrupted France by these
fantastical opinions, that Amalarius had his Disciples. Here then, adds he, we
have people, who said in the time of Charles the Bald, and who must say
according to their Principles, That the Body of Jesus Christ has all the
external accidents which appear to our senses, and that there was no difference
between the Body of Jesus Christ born of the Virgin, and the Sacrament. So that
here are persons against whom may be maintained in an Orthodox sense, that the
Sacrament of the Eucharist is not the Body of Jesus Christ born of the Virgin.
He afterward endeavors to show that Bertram's Book directly attacks only
these persons.

TO solve this difficulty, it must first be supposed as a thing already proved,
that those who have been since called (by way of reproach) Stercoranists,
cannot be those of whom Mr. Arnaud here speaks; who according to him believing
the Real Presence, yet affirmed that the Body of Jesus Christ had all the
sensible accidents which appear in the Eucharist, and that Mr. Arnaud could say
nothing less to the purpose than what he has offered, That this opinion was a
necessary consequence of that of Amalarius, that it is from thence he concluded
the Body of Jesus Christ issued out through the pores, applying to it these words,
Omne quod in os intrat, in ventrem vadit and insecessum emittitur. We have
already seen from the testimony of Tho. Waldensis, that these Stercoranists
were Panites, which is to say, that they conserved the substance of Bread in
the Sacrament, and said all of 'em that the Sacrament was natural Bread. We
have already seen that in effect the belief of the Real Presence is absolutely
inconsistent with this opinion, that the Sacrament passes into our nourishment,
that it is digested, that one part of it is changed into our flesh, and another
part into Excrements.

SECONDLY, we must observe that supposing 'twere true the Stercoranists
believed, as Mr. Arnaud would have it, that the sensible accidents really
affect the Body of Jesus Christ in the Eucharist, there could be nothing more
absurd than to imagine they were those whom Raban and Bertram opposed. For as to
Raban it appears as well from the testimony of the anonymous Author, as by that
of Waldensis, that he was himself a Stercoranist. The same thing appears from
the proper passages of Raban, which I have already related. Whereunto I shall
add another, taken out of his Penitential, Touching what you have demanded of
me, whether the Eucharist Cap. 33.
when it has been consumed, and passed into Excrements like other meats,
returns again to its first nature which it had before 'twas Consecrated on the
Altar. (This opinion is contrary to that of Pope Clement, This Period which I
have included in this Parenthesis has no coherence with the discourse of Raban,
and my conjecture is, that it is a remark which some body put in the Margin,
and which has been afterward forced out of the Margin into the Text.
and several other Holy Fathers, who say, that the Body of our Lord does not go
into the draught with other meats.) Such a question is superfluous, seeing our
Savior says himself in the Gospel, Whatsoever enters into the mouth descends
into the stomach and is cast into the draught. The Sacrament of the Body and
Blood is made of visible and corporeal things, but operates invisibly our
sanctification and salvation of both Body and Soul. What reason is there to say
that what is digested in the stomach, and passes into Excrements, returns again
to its first state, seeing no body ever maintained that this happens. I think
we have clearly here the opinion of Raban on this subject, and that now it
cannot be any longer questioned whether he was a Stercoranist. As to Bertram,
the passages which I related out of his Book do clearly show that he was of the
same sentiment. What can be more unreasonable and worse contrived than this
thought of Mr. Arnaud, that Raban and Bertram have combated the opinion of the
Stercoranists, which is to say, that they have fought against themselves, and
wrote Books against persons without knowing they were themselves of their
party. Mr. Arnaud could not say any thing more unlikely, and therefore we see
that great Wits who believe 'emselves able to overthrow every thing, do
oft-times overthrow themselves, and fall into labyrinths whence they cannot get
out.

IN the third place, how little soever we consider this opinion, mentioned by
Mr. Arnaud, and the manner in which he conceives it, we shall find it is
impossible it should ever come into any bodies mind unless he were excessively
extravagant. Not to mention how difficult it is to state how the natural
accidents of Bread do unloose themselves from their proper and natural
substance to fasten on that of the Body of Jesus Christ, nor how the same
numerical substance can be above in Heaven endued with its own proper
accidents, and here below endued really with the accidents of Bread and Wine. I
shall only say, that unless a man doats extremely, he cannot imagine that the
same numerical Body which is above, exists on Earth in a corporeal and material
manner, as a subject ought to exist that has accidents really inherent; and yet
is there in the natural manner of a real substance of Bread. For every
substance that receives and really sustains the accidents of Bread, must
receive and sustain them in the manner of a true substance of Bread to
accommodate it self to the nature of these accidents. A substance which
receives really the accidents of Bread, must have all its parts in ordine ad
se, as the Schools speak, made as the parts of real Bread, to the end there may
be some proportion between them and the accidents which it receives. And is it
not an extravagancy to say that the parts of the human body of Jesus Christ, to
wit, his head, his arms, and other members do exist inwardly in ordine ad se in
the manner of the parts of Bread, as little crumbs. Who ever saw any thing more
hollow than this Philosophy, a human Body really divisible, really palpable,
really sensible of a divisibility, a palpability, and a sensibility, which is
proper to it, and yet is not natural to it, but borrowed of another subject?
This divisibility and this palpability of the Bread which reside really in the
same substance of the Body of Jesus Christ, made it capable of all the changes
which the Bread suffers, it was digested by the natural heat in the stomachs of
the Communicants, and one part was reduced into their proper substance animated
with their soul, living with their life, and united to them personally. What
did they then believe, did they imagine that this same Body of Jesus Christ, was
at the same time animated with two souls, and living with two lives, or to
speak better with an hundred thousand souls, and an hundred thousand lives, to
wit, that of Jesus Christ, and of those of all the Communicants of the world,
personally united to the Son of God, and personally to an hundred millions of
men at a time; or do they imagine that the Body of Jesus Christ is loosed from
his proper and natural Soul, and dis-united hypostatically from the Word?
Believe me, a man must be fallen into a dreadful disorder of mind to be guilty
of these kind of fooleries. But if these persons of the 9th. Century against
whom Raban and Bertram wrote, believed in effect all these matters, how happens
it, there is no such thing to be found in Authors of those Ages, nor the
following ones; and that to establish this fact, to wit, that there were
persons who believed that the proper Body of Jesus Christ, the same numerical
substance which is in Heaven, is here below really endued with the accidents of
Bread, Mr. Arnaud could offer nothing but some few conjectures impertinently
drawn from a Principle of Amalarius?

BUT you will say, how happens it that the passages which Mr. Arnaud alleges
out of Bertram seem not directly to oppose the Doctrine of Paschasus, and that
sometimes they both meet in their expressions? Bertram declares his design was
against people who maintain that the mystery of the Body of Jesus Christ which
is celebrated in the Church is not made under any figure, nor under any vail,
but that the truth appears therein naked and manifest. He makes to himself the
questions, Whether the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, which is received in the
Church by the mouth of the Faithful, be made as a mystery, or as a truth, which
is to say, Whether it contains any thing concealed which is only perceived by
the eyes of Faith, or whether without the vail of any mystery the sight of the
body sees outwardly that which the sight of the mind sees inwardly; so that
whatsoever is done in this mystery is discovered to the view of sense. And in
the second place, Whether it be the same Body which was born of the Virgin
Mary, that suffered and died. Paschasus on the other hand declares, That it
ought not to be denied that this Sacrament is a figure. He distinguishes that
which is felt outwardly from that which is hid inwardly; and teaches that one
is the figure of the other, Est autem figura vel character hoc quod exterius
sentitur sed totum veritas, and nulla adumbratio quod interius percipitur.

ALL the force of this objection consists in an equivocation. Paschasus takes
the term of figure in one sense, Bertram takes it in another. Bertram affirms
that the Eucharist is a figure in a sense which Paschasus denies. So that their
Doctrins in the main cannot be more opposite than they are. And of this the
readers needed not to have been ignorant, had Mr. Arnaud been pleased to relate
in what manner Bertram explains himself. For having proposed two questions in
the terms which we have seen, he adds, Let us examine the first of these
questions, and to clear it from all ambiguity define what we mean by a figure,
and what by truth; to the end, that having something that is certain before our
eyes, we may better find the reasonable way which we ought to follow. The
figure is a kind of shadow, which by means of some vails, shows us what it
proposes to show us. As for example, when we would signify the Word we call it
Bread, as in the Lords Prayer, where we ask our daily bread, or as our Savior
says in the Gospel, I am the living Bread that came down from Heaven. Thus does
he call himself a Vine, and his Disciples the Branches. I am, says he, the true
Vine, and you are the Branches. In all which there is one thing said, and
another signified. The truth on the contrary is a manifest demonstration of the
thing without using either shadow, image, or vail, it being discovered by
simple and natural expressions, there being nothing to be understood but what
is contained in the terms. It Is not the same in these other examples, for our
Savior Christ is not substantially either Bread, or Vine, nor the Apostles
Branches, Here then we have a figure, but in the last examples, the truth is
uttered in plain and open terms. Now to apply this to the things in question,
to wit, the Body and Blood of Christ. Were this mystery celebrated without a
figure it could not be called a mystery: for one cannot call that a mystery,
wherein there is nothing secret, nothing remote from the corporal senses, nor
hid under any vail. Yet this Bread which is made the Body of Christ by the
ministry of the Priest, shows another thing outwardly to the senses, and offers
another thing to the intelligence of the Faithful. Outwardly one discovers the
form of Bread, its color and savor, such as it was before. But there is
another thing far more precious and excellent which is taught inwardly, a
divine and heavenly thing, to wit, the Body of Jesus Christ which is therein
represented, and it is not by the corporal senses, but by the spiritual
intelligence of the Faithful that this thing is considered, taken and eaten. He
says the same of the Vine, and concludes, seeing no body can deny but this is
so, it is manifest that this Bread and this Wine are the Body and Blood of Jesus
Christ figuratively.

A man must shut his eyes if he cannot see he means that the Bread and Wine of
the Eucharist are a mystery which represent to us the Body and Blood of Jesus
Christ; and that when they be called the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ it is a
figurative locution, like in some sort to these others in the Gospel, where our
Lord is called Bread, a Vine, and his Apostles Branches. Now it is precisely in
this sense that Paschasus denied the Eucharist was a figure. When our Savior,
says he, brake and gave the Bread to his Disciples, C^mment. in Mat. 26.
he does not say that this, or there is in this mystery a certain virtue, or a
figure of my Body, but he says plainly, This is my Body. And a little lower, I
marvail at some peoples saying it is a figure, and not the truth, a shadow and
not the Body. And in his Letter to Frudegard, Sacramentum Corporis Christi and
Sanguinis quamvis Sacramentum dicatur non est aliud quam veritas and quod ipsa
veritas repromisit, which he proves by the same examples which Bertram alleges
of simple locutions, to wit, of the Birth, Incarnation and Passion of our
Savior. These things, says he, which our Savior did as God and Man, be
Sacraments of his Grace and a mystery of Faith, and yet are they nothing but
the truth, although they be called Sacraments. And he afterstards makes this
objection. These things being mysteries cannot (to wit in this quality) be
either seen, or touched, and consequently this is not a Body, and if it be not a
Body, they are a figure of the Flesh and Blood of Jesus Christ, and not this
Flesh and this Blood in propriety of nature. Then answering this objection,
Totum, says he, quod est Christus proedicatur, non in figura, sed in re, and in
proprietate, atque in natura. It Is then plain that Paschasus and Bertram are
directly opposite not only as to sense but terms. So that when Paschasus
acknowledges there is a figure in the Eucharist, meaning by this figure, either
the accidents of Bread and Wine which cover the substance of the Body of Jesus
Christ, or the representation of the Passion of Jesus Christ, this expression
in this sense does not hinder, but Bertram formally contradicted it, and that
the testimony of the anonymous is true. For Paschasus expressly denies the
Eucharist to be the Body of Jesus Christ in figure, and Bertram expressly
affirms it.

AS to wherein both of 'em seem to agree in saying that our senses show it to
be Bread, but that inwardly our Faith discovers therein the Body of Jesus
Christ, this is but an equivocation. Paschasus means we must not refer our
selves to the testimony of our senses in respect of the substance hidden under
the accidents, and by the term of inwardly he means this substance covered with
accidents which he would have us believe to be the substance of the Body of
Jesus Christ. Bertram on the contrary argues from the testimony of our senses,
and concludes that it is real Bread and real Wine in substance. For he maintains
from the evidence of sense that there happens no real change. According to the
species of the creature; says he, and the form of visible things, the Bread and
Wine do not suffer any change. And if they do not suffer any change, they are
not any thing else but what they were before. And in another place, We see not
any thing that is changed in these things corporally. We must then confess,
either that they be changed in another respect than that of the Body, and
consequently that they are not what appears in truth (which is to say, they are
not the substance of the Body of Jesus Christ in truth, because 'twould be then
invisible were it there) but that they are another thing which yet we plainly
see they are not by their proper existence. Or if this will not be
acknowledged, it must of necesssity be denied that they are the Body and Blood
of Jesus Christ which will be impious to say or think. And immediately after he
concludes that the change which happens to the Bread and Wine is a change of
figure; Vt jam, says he, commutatio figurate facta esse dicatur. He also proves
there that the change which happens to the Eucharist does not make the Bread
and Wine cease to be in truth what they were before. We do not find, says he,
that such a change happens here, but we find on the contrary that the same
species of the creature which was before remains still. And a little lower, in
respect of the substance of creatures they are after the Consecration what they
were before; they were before Bread and Wine, and we see they remain in the
same kind, although they be consecrated. And again he concludes that it is not the
Body of Jesus Christ in specie, but in virtute, because our eyes do not see it,
It Is Faith, says he, that sees whatsoever this is, the eye of the flesh
discovers nothing therein, these visible things then are not the Body of Jesus
Christ in specie, but in virtue. He understands then that the testimony of our
senses which show us that they are still Bread and Wine in substance, are true,
and that were the substance of the Body therein, our senses would discover it.
Now this wholly contradicts the sense of Paschasus.

I will not examine, says Mr. Arnaud, whether Bertram understands these Page 881.
words in another sense than Paschasus. But why will not Mr. Arnaud do this,
seeing on it depends the real opposition which is between these two Authors?
They that will contradict an Author, says Mr. Arnaud, directly, do oppose not
only his sense but his words, and they never borrow the words of those whom
they combat to express their own opinion. Whosoever designs to contradict an
author solidly minds particularly his sense, without troubling himself about
his expressions. 'Twas enough for Bertram to refute the new Doctrine of
Paschasus, and this very thing, that he uses his expressions, only more shows
their opposition; for Bertram does not speak of the testimony of our senses on
the subject of the Eucharist in the same terms of Paschasus, but to draw thence
arguments to overthrow the pretended change of substance, and the Real Presence
which Paschasus had advanced; so that this apparent conformity is no less in
effect than a real contradiction.

THIS contrariety of sentiment appears still more in the second question which
Bertram discusses, which is, Whether what the Faithful receive with the mouths
of their bodies in the Communion, is this same Body which was born of the
Virgin, that has suffered for us, died and rose again, and is now at the right
hand of the Father. Paschasus affirms it, and endeavors to establish it by his
Book. Bertram denies it and proves most strongly his negative. The one says
that these things nourish in us that which is born of God, and not that which
is born of Flesh and Blood. The other answers us, that in respect of what we
see, and receive corporally, which is bit with the teeth, swallowed and
received into the stomach, they do not communicate eternal life; for in this
respect they nourish our mortal flesh, and do not communicate any corruption.
The one says, That we must not stop at the savor, nor color of Bread; for
were it changed into flesh (to wit, visibly and sensibly, as he explains
himself in the same place) 'twould be no longer the Flesh of Jesus Christ. The
other teaches, That seeing it is Faith, and not the eye of the Body which
discovers the Bread to be the Body of Jesus Christ, we must hence conclude that
it is not so in specie, but in virtute. The one ever says, that what we receive
from the Altar is this same Flesh which is born of the Virgin. The other says,
that this Flesh which was Crucified, and born of the Virgin consists of bones
and sinews, distinguished into several members, and enlivened by the spirit of
a reasonable soul, having his proper life and motions. Whereas this spiritual
Flesh which nourishes spiritually the Faithful in respect of its outward
species, consists of grains of Wheat and is made by the hands of man, that it
has neither nerves, nor sinews, nor bones, nor different members, that it is
animated with no rational soul, nor can exercise any vital functions. Whence he
concludes that it is not then this Flesh of Jesus Christ which was born of the
Virgin. In a word, the opposition therein is so formal, and so evident, that it
cannot be more plain.

WHAT we have hitherto seen touching Authors Contemporary with Paschasus,
yields us a demonstrative proof that Paschasus was an Innovator; for the rest
do not speak like him, there are two of the famousest of 'em, viz. Raban and
Bertram, who have expressly applied themselves to the refuting of his Doctrine.

TO these two we may add a third, which is John Scot, who wrote also by the
command of Charles the Bald against the novelties of Paschasus. His Book was
burnt in the Council of Verseil, and we understand from the testimony of
Ascelinus in his Letter to Berenger, that the end which he proposed was to show
in this Book that what is Consecrated on the Altar is neither the true Body,
nor the true Blood of Jesus Christ. Toto nisu totaque intention ad hoc solum
tendere video, ut mihi persuadeat hoc videlicet quod in Altari Consecratur
neque vere Corpus, neque vere Christi Sanguinem esse, hoc autem astruere
nititur ex Sanctorum Patrum opusculis quae prave exponit. The Author of the
Dissertation which Mr. Arnaud has inserted in his 12th. Book, pretends that the
Book which we have under the name of Bertram, and that of John Scot are the
same. He endeavors likewise to lessen as much as in him lies the authority of
this Adversary to Paschasus, and I had not finished this Work without examining
his Conjectures, had not one of my Friends informed me that he had eased me of
this pains, as well as this Author has helped Mr. Arnaud. I hope this friend of
mine will soon publish his Piece, which will (or I am greatly deceived) fully
satisfy every unprejudiced man that seeks the truth.

CHAP. XII.
Of Personal Differences which Mr. Arnaud has treated of in his Eleventh Book.

HAving satisfied whatsoever respects the matter of this Dispute, my design
wherein I am engaged of returning an exact answer to Mr. Arnaud's volume seems
to require, I should now pass to the discussion of his eleventh Book which he
has entitled personal differences between the Author of the Perpetuity and me.
The interest also of my defense against Mr. Arnaud's injustices obliges me to
this. Yet can I not wholly keep within this Province, for there are several
reasons hindering me, which I hope judicious persons will not disallow.

FIRST, these personal differences are handled in so sharp and hot a manner, so
full of animosities that 'twere better a thousand times to pass 'em over in
silence, and offer 'em as a Sacrifice to Piety, Patience, and Christian
Charity, than to endeavor to treat of 'em exactly, and repel Mr. Arnaud's
outrages, which cannot be well done without sometimes exceeding the bounds of
Christian moderation.

MOREOVER, although I do not doubt but Mr. Arnaud and the Author of the Perpetuity
have reason to believe that the public will take part with what respects their
persons, yet I cannot pretend it is the same with me. These Gentlemen have made
a noise in the world, they have drawn upon 'em the expectations of all France,
Spain, and Italy. Whereas I am person obscure enough, and whose name is only
known by my interest in this Dispute; so that 'twill be a presumption in me to
believe the public will concern it self in my respect. Should I then here
begin with a long discussion of our complaints, and reciprocal defenses, the
readers might well say to one another that they have nothing to do with this,
and that it is an abuse of their patience after a long discourse of things which
relate to the cause, to engage them further in a tiresom discourse of Personal
Differences.

IN the third place Mr. Arnaud has introduced amongst his Personal Differences
several things to which it is impossible to answer without engaging in tedious
prolixities in matters which of 'emselves have no coherence with that of the
Eucharist. I place in this rank the defense which he makes of a cruel invective
of the Author of the Perpetuity against the first Reformers, which yet Mr.
Arnaud maintains in a more fierce manner, grounding it on Facts, and
Principles, some of which are false, others taken in a wrong sense, and others
invidiously perverted. How can we handle in a few words so important a subject
when the question concerns the justifying the innocence of several great men,
and to show at the same time the justice and necessity of our separation from
the Roman Church? It Is plain this cannot be done in one or two Chapters, and
that this is matter for a great Volume. I reduce under this head these
passionate expressions which begin the 9th. Chapter of this 11th Book, and
which I design to relate here, that the world may judge of 'em. We demand
justice, says Mr. Arnaud, speaking of me, for the excesses of which he has been
guilty contrary to all rules of honesty and truth, which even Pagans would
blush to violate. We would gladly know of him whether his morals will give him
this license. We are already satisfied that the Maxims of their new Divinity
promise impunity to all manner of crimes, provided they be of the faithful
Calvinists who commit them; and we do not question him whether he fears to be
damned by calumniating his Adversaries. We know the solutions of his Doctors
deliver him from this fear, contrary to what S. Paul says, who tells us, that
slanderers shall not enter into the Kingdom of God. But that which we desire to
know is, whether they have of late taken away from Crimes, the name of Crimes,
and stripped them of the general infamy which accompanies 'em, whether the name
of a Slanderer be no longer odious amongst Calvinists, and whether they have
sanctified this name, which is so horrible amongst men that they could not find
a blacker, to show their detestation of it, than to call such Devils. I design
not to repel these discourses to be met with scattered throughout his whole
Book, any otherwise than by reciting 'em, or at most by censuring 'em as
excesses, which do not at all become a person, who pretends to correct our
morals, and teach us virtue and moderation. I shall not retort upon him several
things in my turn, which a just and natural defense seems to permit, and enjoin
me to tell him. But I pretend to justify so well our Morals as will make Mr.
Arnaud blush for shame that he has attackt them with such an outrageous and
malicious air. And this we cannot do here transiently, nor by way of answer to
ten or twelve hot periods, which like lightning have more fire than matter.
It Is necessary for this purpose to be disengaged from all other subjects; for
there needs more time to remedy an evil than to do it, to cure a wound than to
make it.

AND these are the reasons which withhold me from entering into an exact
discussion of Mr. Arnaud's eleventh Book. But because there are in these
Personal Differences some Articles which I cannot wholly pass over in silence,
having too near a relation to the things which we treat of, the Readers I hope
will not take it ill, if I design this whole Chapter to answer them. This Book
consists either of passionate invectives against me, or defenses against some
of my Complaints, or accusations against me. As to the passionate expressions I
concern not my self with 'em, I leave 'em to the public judgment, and Mr.
Arnaud's private conscience. It belongs to him to look whether he has formed
his style according to the lovely idea which he himself has given us of the
true Eloquence, which is, says he, discreet, modest, Book 11. chapter 8. page 1128.
judicious, sincere, true, which serves to disentangle things, and not to
confound 'em, which clears truth, and offers it in such a manner as is proper
to introduce it into the mind and heart, which inspires motions that are just,
reasonable, proportionable to the things which we handle, which has no other
luster but what serves to discover truth, no strength but what is borrowed from
her. He will examine, I hope, at his leisure, whether he has observed all these
grave characters, and whether his eagerness to overcome has not transported him
sometimes into such strange convulsions as are wholly contrary to all morality
and decency.

AS to his defenses, I can with confidence affirm there are none of 'em which
be just and warrantable; but to the end it may not be said I desire to be
believed on my own bare word, let a man judge of 'em by these examples. The
Author of the Perpetuity to prove that Bertram was not clearly of our opinion,
alleged this reason, that Trithemus praised this Author. To this I answered,
that he praised him because in effect he deserved it, and that this only
increased his authority. My sense is plainly that he praised him because he
knew his reputation was great in the 9th. Century, that his Book was therein
well entertained, and his memory honored in the following Ages. For this is
what must be understood by being in effect praiseworthy, and this is likewise
what the terms of my answer insinuate, having added that this only increased
his authority, which is to say, that this testimony of Trithemus showed that
Bertram was authorized in the Church of his time. Whereupon the Author of the
Perpetuity concealing this true sense of my words, imputes to me another, which
is that I said, Trithemus, who believed the Real Presence, praised Bertram for
opposing it, which is a ridiculous sense, and infinitely distant from mine.
This is the subject of my complaint, and here is the defense of Mr. Arnaud,
What is, says he, the sense of these words, Book 11. chapter 3. p. 1105, 1106.
Trithemus praised Bertram, because he was indeed praiseworthy? Do they
signify that he praised him from his own knowledge, or from the opinion of
others? It is clear they have only the first sense, and not the second. All is
clear which Mr. Arnaud speaks, but let us see how he proves it. To commend any
one from the testimony of another, is not to commend him because he is in
effect praiseworthy, seeing there are several people which we do not in effect
judge to be praiseworthy, although thought worthy of praise by others. To commend
a man because he is in effect worthy of commendations, is proceeding on a just
and true ground, and on the reality of things, and not on reports, and popular
opinions. This is a pitiful defense, for it is certain there are people who are
not judged to be praiseworthy although they be praised by others: but I say that
there are others which are deemed praiseworthy in effect, only because we find
'em generally commended in the Age wherein they lived, and in the following
ones, without being blamed by any body. Do not most people thus believe S.
Cyprian, S. Hierom, and S. Augustine praiseworthy, not for having read their
Books, nor examined their Doctrins, but as knowing they were esteemed by their
own and following Ages, and that their memory was never withered in the Church?
Now this is what I say, that Trithemus might know of Bertram without examining
his Book, to wit, that he had the esteem of his Age, and that his memory was
respected in the following ones.

IT signifies nothing for Mr. Arnaud to say, that I ought not to suppose
without proving it that such an Author as Trithemus, who writes a Catalogue of
Ecclesiastical Writers, and gives particular praises to an Author, does it
barely from the relation of others, and that the presumption is on the
contrary, that he has read his Book and speaks of it from his own proper
knowledge. This I say is to no purpose, for it belongs to the Author of the
Perpetuity that argues, and would draw a conclusion from the praises of
Trithemus, to establish well his Principle, to prove that Trithemus has praised
Bertram after he had read and examined his Book, De Corpore and Sanguine
Domini, and not to me who answer, to prove that he has praised him, because he
acknowledges his Fame was great in the 9th. Century. Were a man to judge hereof
by presumptions, they would be rather for my supposition than for that of the
Author of the Perpetuity; for we know very well that those who make Catalogues
of Ecclesiastical Authors do not always take the pains to read exactly all the
Books they mention. The Commendations of Ratram, whom we affirm to be Bertram,
could not be unknown to Trithemus, and we have right to suppose that Trithemus
has not distinguished Bertram and Ratram as two different persons, till the
Author of the Perpetuity has showed us the contrary.

THE second complaint whereon Mr. Arnaud endeavors to defend the Author of the
Perpetuity, respects Mr. Blondel, whom this Author impertinently accuses to
have fallen into contradiction in that he supposes on one hand that Amalarius
was a Calvinist, and on the other that the Synod of Cressy, which condemned
Amalarius was of the same mind; which according to the Author of the Perpetuity
is a manifest contradiction. Observe here his words. Usher an English
Protestant, supposes that Amalarius held Perpetuity of the Faith, sect. 2 p. 80.
the Doctrine of the Catholics, and therefore would have it thought that 'twas
the Doctrine of the Real Presence which was condemned in Amalarius, by the Synod
of Cressy, and by Florus Deacon of Lions. And a little lower, Blondel suffering
himself to be deceived by the desire which he had to raise up adversaries
against Paschasus, fell on this subject into one of the most palpable
contradictions imaginable: For finding on one hand advantage from Usher' s Page
82.
opinion, who makes the whole Synod of Cressy who condemned Amalarius to
consist of Calvinists, he takes this part, and supposes with him that the
Council of Cressy held the Calvinists Doctrine, and were contrary to Paschasus.
But finding elsewhere in the epitomized Manuscript of the Book of Divine
Offices of William of Malmsbury, that Amalarius, Raban, and Heribald wrote
against Paschasus, not considering that this supposition was contrary to that
of Usher, he makes Amalarius again an adversary to Paschasus; so that by a
manifest contradiction, he pretends that the Council which condemned Amalarius,
and Amalarius who was condemned by the Council, were of one mind, and equally
contrary to the Doctrine of Paschasus on the subject of the Eucharist. So far is
what the Author of the Perpetuity says.

TO answer this accusation, I said that this pretended contradiction was Answer
to the second Treatise, part 3. chapter 1.
a fable, That Mr. Blondel did not so much as think of Bishop Usher, and that
the part which the Author of the Perpetuity gives to this Bishop in this
adventure, was a mere Romantic whimsie. That in the main, there was no
contradiction in what Mr. Blondel said; for asserting on one hand that
Amalarius was censured by the Synod of Cressy for writing that the Body of
Jesus Christ was triform and tripartite, and on the other that Amalarius had
been one of those that contradicted the novelties of Paschasus, and in fine
that he does not separate the Fathers of Cressy from the number of these
Opponents, these three things were very consistent together, because it did not
follow from the Synod of Cressy' s condemning the triform and tripartite Body
that they adopted for this all Paschasus his Fancies touching the Real Presence.

LET us now see Mr. Arnaud's defense. He assures us that what the Author Book
11. chapter 4. p. 1108, 1109.
of the Perpetuity has asserted touching Bishop Usher is a very likely
conjecture, that if it be a Romantic whimsie it is not an impossible one. For
it is more than probable that Blondel, who was a man of great reading, writing
on a matter, was not ignorant of the opinion of a person so much esteemed by
his own Party, as Bishop Usher deservedly was: that moreover it is a Romance
that tends only to excuse Blondel, and not to criminate him; for it being
certain that he has contradicted himself, it is always better that this has been
done with some appearance of reason, as is that of following the opinion of a
famous Author, than without any probability.

IS not this a mere mockery of us, or of the Author of the Perpetuity, to
defend him after this rate? This Author relates to us as a matter of fact, that
Usher believed such and such a thing, that Blondel finding advantage in the
opinion of Usher, has taken part of it, that he has joined this part with what
he likewise found in the Epitomy of William of Malmsbury not considering that
the one was contrary to the other. Now we demand of him where he found this
fine History, seeing there appears nothing of it in Blondel's Book. And Mr.
Arnaud answers that it is a conjecture very likely, that if it be a Romance,
it is a Romance that is possible to be true, and one which tends to excuse
Blondel, because it is better he be deceived with some pretext than without any.

LET Mr. Arnaud tell us, if he pleases, in what Morals he has found 'twas
permitted the Author of the Perpetuity to pay us with his conjectures, and his
possible Romances, instead of true Histories, and to tell stories at random to
render Mr. Blondel ridiculous, because it is better he should be ridiculous for
some reason than for none. We thank him for his Charity, but it is excessive,
and unnecessary; for what need was there he should charge his Conscience with
this pious fraud to extenuate a chimerical dishonor, seeing the pretended
contradiction of Mr. Blondel is but a mere imagination.

SVPPOSING, says Mr. Arnaud, we have no other ground to prove Page 1110.
that the Council of Cressy were Calvinists, but their condemning of Amalarius,
to suppose hereupon Amalarius was a Calvinist, this is a contradicting of a
man's self, and this is what Blondel does. How ill does Mr. Arnaud defend his
Friend. It Is not true that Blondel grounded himself on what he says of the
Synod of Cressy, in that this Synod has condemned Amalarius. We shall find
nothing of this in his Book. And supposing he did ground himself on it, he
might do it without falling into contradiction, and without giving occasion to
the accusation of the Author of the Perpetuity; for he might draw a negative
argument thence in this sense. That this Synod which could not be ignorant what
was the Doctrine of Amalarius touching the Real Presence contented themselves
with censuring in him some expressions, as that of Corpus triforme and
tripartitum, without handling his Doctrine at bottom; which is a mark that in
this respect they were agreed with him, and consequently that they rejected the
Real Presence as well as Amalarius. Now in this case one might well dispute the
force of this proof, but there is no likelihood of making a contradiction of
it. But in fine to decide clearly this question, and to show Mr. Arnaud how
dangerous it is for a man to give himself over to too great desires of finding
fault, and to decry Authors, I need only say that when Mr. Blondel reckons the
Synod of Cressy amongst the number of those that have followed Paschasus, he
does not speak of that Synod which condemned Amalarius, but of another that was
held ten years after. In effect he formally distinguishes these two Synods,
saying of one, That this conception of Amalarius, that the Body of
Illucidations on the Eucharist, chapter 18. p. 421, 422. Ibid. p. 427.
Jesus Christ was triform and tripartite, was improved in the year 848. by the
Council of Cressy; and on the other, that several contradicted Paschasus, as
Amalarius, Raban, Heribald, Bertram, or Ratram. John surnamed Erigenus, from
whom, says he, I do not separate Walafridus Strabo, Abbot of Richeneau, nor
Florus a Divine of Lions, nor the Body of the Bishops assembled in the year
858. at Cressy. These are then two different Synods, the one held in the year
848. and the other in the year 858. Of the one he says that it condemned the
Corpus triforme and tripartitum of Amalarius, of the other that he does not
separate them from those who contradicted Paschasus: what contradiction is
here? Had these Gentlemen, who have fallen no less than three times on this
affair of Mr. Blondel, taken the pains to read over the place of his Book here
in question, they would have found what I now tell 'em touching the distinction
of these Synods, and desisted from maintaining their fabulous History, and
imaginary contradiction.

THESE two examples suffice to show the weakness of Mr. Arnaud's defenses. We
must now come to his complaints and accusations, and discover the injustice and
unreasonableness of 'em in few words, which will be no hard matter to do.

FIRST, he complains that I offered some lessening expressions in reference to
the Author of the Perpetuity on the subject of Bertram, or Ratram, that I
opposed the praises which the Author of the Apology for the Holy Fathers gives
this person, and thereupon remarked that these Gentlemen praise or dispraise
people, raise or depress 'em, according as their interests and designs require,
according as they oppose or favor their Opinions. First, Mr. Arnaud assures us
that I falsified the words of the Author of the Chap. 6.
Perpetuity. Secondly, He says I expounded his intentions according to my own
fancy. Thirdly, He will not allow I had any reason to draw from his words
compared with these of the Apology for the Holy Fathers, the conclusion which I
drew thence. We must satisfy him in these three points.

AS to the pretended falsification, observe here in what manner I related in
short the discourse of the Author of the Perpetuity. He says that 'twas Answer
to the second Tome, part 3. chapter 1.
one called Ratram, or Bertram, an obscure and intricate Divine, who adjoined
his reasonings to the ordinary expressions of the Church, and expounded them
according to his fancy, that as he was a Divine, he might argue as he pleased
on this Faith, and that we can easily conceive a Divine may fall into frivolous
reasonings. There needs only the reading of the Author of the Perpetuity's
discourse to acknowledge this to be a just abridgment of it. Mr. Arnaud does not
gainsay it, but he says, I charge the Author of the Perpetuity with calling
Bertram a frivolous and passionate Reasoner, and for having Book 11. chapter 6. p.
116.
said absolutely of him that one may well conceive that a Divine might easily
fall upon frivolous reasonings, whereas he said this only conditionally, to
wit, supposing 'twere granted he was effectually in an error: and this is what
he calls a manifest falsity. But Mr. Arnaud complains impertinently: For I did
not say that the Author of the Perpetuity has thus spoken of Bertram
absolutely, and this Mr. Arnaud acknowledges, to wit, that supposing 'twere
granted that Bertram had effectually erred, this would not at all hurt the
Church, that it is no wonder that one man has erred, that a Divine should fall
into frivolous reasonings. This I say is sufficient for my design. For what
signifies this but that in case Bertram cannot be brought over to them and made
to speak for the Real Presence, he must then be a frivolous Divine, one who has
fallen into frivolous reasonings. Now this is precisely what I said, that these
Gentlemen praise, or dispraise Authors according to their interests. If Bertram
be for 'em all is well, they find no fault in him; but if it must be granted he
is against 'em, then one may easily conceive that a Divine may fall into
frivolous reasonings. And thus Mr. Arnaud's illustration only confirms my
remark. It Is the same in respect of what he adds that I charge the Author of
the Perpetuity with calling Bertram an obscure and intritate Divine, which is
not thus set down in his Book, and that there is only that the greatest
advantage which the Calvinists can pretend to touching this Author is, that he
be set aside as a perplexed and intricate Author which can be profitable neither
to one side nor the other. I desire no more; for this is almost in so many
words to say, that if they cannot have Bertram on their side, he must be put by
as an obscure and intricate Divine whom both Parties endeavor to explain in
their favor, but who at bottom favors neither by reason of his perplexity: If
he be for them all is well, if he be not he shall be laid aside for a mystical
Divine. This falsification then which Mr. Arnaud imputes to me is groundless,
seeing he himself justifies me from it, and he confirms himself the truth of my
reflection.

NEITHER has he more reason in what he says afterward, that I Page 1117.
explain the intentions of others according to my own fancy, and raise up
trophies to my self on imaginary conjectures. These are angry expressions, I
pretend not to dive into the intentions of the Author of the Perpetuity,
neither do I think of raising trophies to my self at his cost. My way of
proceeding is frank, natural, and simple, and if I commit faults, I can
sincerely protest it is against my will. I have said nothing concerning the
Author of the Perpetuity, which I have not proved, not by making conjectures on
his hidden thoughts, but arguing on his Writing, which is a kind of
conjecturing very lawful in disputes.

BUT in fine Mr. Arnaud will not allow I had reason in comparing the words of
the Author of the Perpetuity touching Bertram, which those of the Author of the
Apology for the Holy Fathers to draw thence the conclusion which I drew. He
says my arguing supposes that these two Authors Page 1118.
are but one and the same person. For if they be two different Authors, what
wonder can it be they have had different sentiments on another Author. I
answer, my reasoning supposes only that the Author of the Perpetuity is one of
the friends of the Author of the Apology, and that what is said abroad in the
world of these Gentlemen is true, that they publish nothing but what has been
seen and approved of commonly amongst 'em, which being so, I had right to draw
my conclusion from the comparison of the words of these two Authors, as nearly
as if they were but one and the same person.

IT IS in vain for Mr. Arnaud to say that an Author may be praiseworthy in one
piece, and blameable in another. I grant it, but I say that when one praises,
or blames an Author, to raise up or depress any of his works, it is absurd to
say that one praises him, or blames him in this work. for we praise or blame
absolutely his person, to give hence afterward more or less Authority to the
work in question. When we depress or extol the person for the work sake, then
we praise or blame a man in his work: but when on the contrary we depress or
extol the work by the person, then his praise or blame respects absolutely the
person, and then we draw this consequence, that the work in question is, or is
not considerable. Now we are in this last circumstance, the Author of the
Apology commends Ratram to give the greater weight to his Books of
Predestination, and the Author of the Perpetuity depresses him to take away all
authority from his Book De Corpore and Sanguine Domini, so that their praise
and dispraise respect directly his person.

IT IS moreover in vain that Mr. Arnaud remarks that the Author of the
Perpetuity did not suppose the Book which goes under the name of Bertram Page
1119.
was Ratram's a Religious of Corby Author of the Books of Predestination, and
of the refutation of the errors of the Greeks. That seeing he testifies on the
contrary to incline to the opinion of Mr. Marca, who will have this Book of
Bertram and that of John Scot to be the same. That it appears at least from his
Book that he had no fixed sentiment that Ratram was the Author of it. This is
nothing but powder thrown into the Readers eyes; for supposing 'twere true that
the Author of the Perpetuity were of the opinion of Mr. De Marca, which is,
that this Book which bears the name of Bertram is John Scot's, and not
Ratram's; yet it is certain what he says of the person of this Bertram, or
Ratram (for he proves that these two names are but one and the same name) is on
our supposition that 'twas the Religious of Corby. Whether he admits our
supposition as believing it, in effect to be true, or whether he admits it
merely through condescension, it is needless to inquire: for supposing he admitted
it only through mere condescension, the least his words could signify will be
that supposing he held our supposition to be true, which he does not, he will
have these objections or reproaches to offer against the person of this Author,
to wit, that he is a Divine who departs from the common belief of the Church by
vain Speculations, a Divine who falls into frivolous reasonings, which suffices
to justify the contradiction between him and the Author of the Apology for the
Holy Fathers.

Mr. ARNAVD's second complaint is, that I ridiculed the Author of the
Perpetuity on the means he proposed whereby to make Mr. Aubertin' s Book an
excellent piece, which is to change the Objections of it into Proofs, and his
Proofs into Objections. Mr. Arnaud who has been touched to the quick with it,
thought he was obliged to defend himself by heaping up of words, intermixing
several common places of raillery, alleging instances which have no relation
to the point in question, to distinguish and argue in mood and figure, and
thereupon conclude with authority the sentiment of the Perpetuity is most just
and reasonable.

WERE it worth our while 'twould be easy to show he deceives himself in
whatsoever he offers. But it being unjust to hold the Readers any longer on
trifles, we shall only say, if either he, or the Author of the Perpetuity have
been offended at a very innocent raillery, it does not follow that others have
been so too. We may tell him that his way of changing Proofs into Objections,
and Objections into Proofs, is a conception so rare and well expressed, that
it is hard to hear it offered without finding in it matter of laughter.
Moreover, there is a great deal of difference between saying that to discover
the falsities of a Book, we need only to confront the passages of it with the
Originals, and to say that to make of Mr. Aubertin's Book an excellent piece in
the sense of the Catholics, there need only be changed the Proofs into
Objections and the Objections into Proofs. The confrontation of passages, is
the juster means, the most natural and most ordinary to discover falsities: but
the change of Proofs into Objections, and Objections into proofs, is a kind of
world turned upside down. We may answer him that were his pretended method
received, 'twould be applicable to all sorts of Books of Controversy on either
side, there being few of them but what consist of Proofs and Objections, and
each Party pretending still there is more light in his Proofs than in the
Proofs of his Adversary, which are called Objections. We may tell him in fine
that Mr. Aubertin's Book consists not only of Proofs and Objections, but also
of Instances or Replies against the ordinary Answers which are made to Proofs,
and of Answers to Objections; and this is what cannot be changed, so that when
a man should turn the Proofs into Objections and the Objections into Proofs,
yet would he be perplexed by these instances, and answers, and consequently
must acknowledge he has lost his time and pains, and that the Author of the
Perpetuity has abused him.

Mr. ARNAVD's third complaint is an accusation couched under this title, A
bitter Calumny against the Author of the Perpetuity. He proposes it in his 9th.
Chapter with an impetuosity beyond example, and which shows he wrote it in the
most choleric temper imaginable. He ascends his tribunal, and thence,
pronounces this sentence against me, that I am guilty Chapter 9. p. 1130, 1131.
of an heinous crime, such a one as obliges me both by the Laws of God and men
to public satisfaction. I is, says he again, a detestable calumny, an
abominable crime, the most base and unjust proceeding a man can be capable of.
Let not Mr. Claude marvel at these reproaches, this is no jesting matter. He
must not abuse persons of Honor for to fill up a sentence. If he has expressed
himself thus through incogitancy, I cannot but affirm him to be the most imprudent
man in the world, and if he has done this with mature deliberation, I must
declare him one of the boldest Calumniators as ever was, and am certain there is
no honest man of his Communion but will grant what I say of him and condemn
this his proceeding.

I protest before God with a sincere heart, that I am in no wise concerned at
what Mr. Arnaud tells me. I have answered his Book, and am therewith content.
But I am troubled he should spoil this Dispute, which the public of either
side might read perhaps with profit and pleasure, and having discrediied it, I
say, with passionate and violent expressions which cannot but disgust every
man, he should moreover finish it with rash transports wholly unbeseeming him.
What reason has he for such a passion? I wrote these words in my Book, God will
one day show, who they are that wrong his Answer to the second Treatise, part
2. ch 3. at the end of the Chapter.
Church, the light of his judgment will discover all things, yea, and I hope
before this comes to pass men will break through this ignorance, and then 'twill
be no longer necessary to write in favor of Transubstantiation. There will be
no need of this course for a Reconciliation with Rome, and regaining peoples
favor; for when the face of things shall be changed, this worlds wisdom will
be useless. Here is my crime, this the spark that has set all on fire. We Book
11. chapter 9. page 1131.
understand, says he, this language, and Mr. Claude knows well enough what he
has said himself, and what interpretation his words will bear. He means then
the Author of the Perpetuity wrote not of Transubstantiation by persuasion, but
out of policy, and for worldly respects. For when a Catholic Divine defends
the Church to which he is united, if he believes what he says, we must not
search for other reasons of his undertaking the common cause of the Church in
whose truth he places his hope of Salvation deserves sufficiently to be
defended. So that to charge the Author of the Perpetuity to write only out of
political and worldly respects, is to charge him with not believing what he
writes, and to give this account of it.

THIS passion is a strange thing. Had Mr. Arnaud considered these words with
less heat, he would have found nothing in 'em of what he saw at first. I
confess they may be understood in this sense that this affair was politically
managed, and with respect to the obtaining the favor of the Court of Rome, and
regain the peoples good will, and that this is a worldly wisdom: But 'twill not
be found in 'em, That the Author of the Perpetuity did not write by persuasion,
but only through policy, as Mr. Arnaud imagined. This he will not find. Why then
does he extend my words beyond their natural signification, and why does he
wrong a man so scandalously on the imagination he said what he did not? We
understand, says he, The Book entitled, The Port Royal and Geneva of
Intelligence against the most holy Sacrament of the Altar.
this language. He shows plainly he does not understand it, seeing he charges
me with saying what I did not, and draws his Commentary only from himself, and
not from my words. Had I reproached Mr. Arnaud with the public Writings
printed against him, wherein he is accused for formally opposing the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, and the Real Presence by a proposition to be met with in
his Book of the frequent Communion? Had I told him that of late his opinion on
the Eucharist has been publicly in a Letter treated as suspicious, that he has
been told, That if he be unwilling, Answer to the request presented to the
King, etc. Book 2. chapter 6. p. 187.
together with his friends to be of intelligence with Geneva, he must change
the act of the adoration which they perform assisting at the Mass to the
Elevation of the Host; for they say only, I adore thee raised on the Cross, at
the general judgment, and at the right hand of the Father, without any mention
of adoring him being present in the Church. Had I severely applied my self to
what he says somewhere in his Book, on the Principles of Des Carts his
Philosophy, That God sees in the matter, in the figures and forms only a
different order of parts, to conclude thence that this proposition overthrows
the existence of accidents without a subject in the Eucharist, and consequently
that it is contrary to the common Doctrine of the Church of Rome, as it has been
observed in a Letter Printed not long since, what tempests must I not have
expected, seeing for having only hinted that there might be some policy in the
Author of the Perpetuity's works I have raised such a great disturbance?

Mr. ARNAVD protests he will never for my sake dispense with the Book 11. chapter
9. p. 1132.
rules of Justice, that he will never devine my secret intentions. Let him not
then pretend to read in my heart, nor attribute to me a mystical sense which I
never intended, nor is contained in my words. All those that believe
Transubstantiation are not in a capacity of writing in its favor. Amongst
those that are, how many do betake themselves to other matters? Is it not then
a very likely matter that a person who is at liberty to write on any subject,
but pitches upon Transubstantiation, is it not, I say, very likely his choice
of this point is grounded on some worldly policy and carnal considerations? In
attributing this to him we do nothing but what is very just and innocent. And
this is all that my words signify, to pretend to know more of my mind, is to
attempt a thing which is possible only to God, and yet this Mr. Arnaud would
do, that he might have some color for his passion.

Mr. ARNAVD I hope will suffer me likewise to tell him that what I said
touching some words of the Author of the Perpetuity, which I believed were not
very advantageous to the common mysteries of our Religion, do neither respect
his person nor the main of his sentiments which I never pretended to handle,
but only his expressions which I judged, and still do judge to be too rough and
vehement on points to which we cannot show enough respect. We ought all of us
to be very circumspect in our ways of speaking, to give no oecasion to the open
enemies of the Gospel truths which we jointly profess. This is my opinion, and
my words will not admit fairly of any other explication. Can Mr. Arnaud wonder
we should be offended to hear these questions, Why are the immortality of the
soul, and everlasting bliss so hidden, and as it were so buried in the Books
Perpetuity of the Faith refuted, part 1.
of the Old Testament which are received into the Canon of the Jews? Why did
not Jesus Christ declare his Divinity in such clear and precise terms that
'twere impossible to elude them? What may the Pagans say on what the Church
teaches concerning Original Sin, and this inconceivable transmission of a
crime, which is a spiritual and voluntary action, to all the Sons of him that
committed it, although they could not have any part in his action, and of this
dreadful condemnation of all humane nature for the fault of one man? Can he
think it strange we have been troubled to hear the difficulties which the
mystery of the Trinity contains called dreadful difficulties, and to find 'em
exaggerated in this manner: Were a man in this point to be guided by his
reason, he must needs start back at these inconceivable verities. Should he
pretend to make use of its lights to penetrate them, she will only furnish him
with arms to combat them. Who can but be offended at the propositions which are
in this last work of Mr. Arnaud on the subject of proofs which I alleged out
of the Book 10. chapter 6. p. 1042.
Holy Scripture for the Trinity. That this will be very rational in the mouth
of a Catholic, because he accompanies these proofs with the public
intelligence of the whole Church and of all tradition. But that these same
proofs are infinitely weak in the mouth of a Calvinist without authority,
without possession, and who renounces Tradition and the Churches Authority.
That Mr. Claude, Page 1043.
(who alleges the best part of what there is in the Scripture concerning the
Trinity and Divinity of Jesus Christ) overthrows the Socinians beyond all
remedy, yet in such a manner as is more likely to make 'em laugh than to
convert 'em. I do not believe these questions or propositions are justifiable,
take 'em how we we will; but supposing they were, it must be granted they are
conceived in such rough, dangerous, and excessive terms, that it is for the
public edification to avoid 'em, yea and to censure 'em.

BUT in fine, we must leave these Personal Differences which cannot but be
displeasing. And therefore we will come to the Preface of my Answer to Father
Nouet, which seems to have much incensed Mr. Arnaud, and seeing he seems to be
much concerned at it, we will endeavor to satisfy him about it. What then
does this Preface contain which is so troublesome and grievous? I confess we
have mentioned a matter of fact in it wherein these Gentlemen have been
concerned; to wit, that their Book was refused an Approbation: but this was a
point which showed the reason why this Answer was published against Father
Nouet, a fact moreover that was true and known by every body. We have drawn
thence a consequence which was not advantageous to Mr. Arnaud, it is true; but a
consequence which is very natural: for that Gentleman whose approbation was
sought for to this last work of Mr. Arnaud, and who refused it, is a public
person who gives not his Approbations as a private man, but as holding a rank
and very considerable employ in one of the most famous Universities in Europe.
If the face of things has been since altered, Mr. Arnaud knows the reason of
it; and we too. We have used some expressions of raillery, and this perhaps has
most troubled Mr. Arnaud; but who ever told him that raillery ought to be
wholly banished from a Dispute. Not to fetch examples elsewhere, we know very
well that these Gentlemen have often used it in their Writings, and not without
success; and not to go further, Mr. Arnaud himself has not abstained from it in
this last Book he wrote against me. I do not take it ill, for I had rather at
any time see him merry than angry.

I complained in this Preface of my being brought in impertinently into the
abuses and nullities against the order of the Archbishop of Paris. But I
believe 'twill be now acknowledged that I had reason to admire what was said
therein of me, in charging me with inconceivable boldness in denying the most
evident matters, and maintaining the most false ones. This has occasioned my
making a more general complaint, which is, that these Gentlemen omit no
occasion of testifying their aversion to us in a very sharp and severe manner,
and many times without any pretense or cause. To say hereupon, as Mr. Arnaud
does, that they never speak otherwise than truly and Chap. 11. p. 1162.
justly, and herein only observe the Principles of their Religion, this is to
testify further his passion, and assert a thing the least favorable
imaginable to the Church of Rome. For here the question is not concerning the
main of our Controversies, nor whether we have reason or not. This is a matter
which we do not pretend to meddle with in a Preface, and when this shall be the
point we shall be able to show that it is neither with truth, nor reason that
these Gentlemen speak of us as they do. The question here is touching the
manner after which they speak, ever rending us with injurious expressions? To
say that it is their Religion which inspires them with these motions, and
persuades them this way of proceeding is just and reasonable, is to impute to
their Religion a thing which will render it odious, and of which I believe it is
no wise guilty; for how many persons do we see who are no less Roman Catholics
than these Gentlemen, who speak and write as well as they, and yet do not use
their way of proceeding. If I have attributed their affected animosity to the
desire they have of freeing themselves from all suspicions that they held
intelligence with us, what is there in all this which may justly offend them.
Have not these suspicions been made public, and have we not seen Books Printed
whose Titles declared more than bare suspicions? This is a thing which I did
not invent at leisure, neither one of my conjectures, nor a possible Romance,
nor a particular secret which I have imprudently divulged, but a matter of fact
which others besides my self have published, and which is known by every body.
Is Mr. Arnaud offended at my imputing to him the desire of clearing himself
from this suspicion? I wish with all my heart this were the occasion of his
wrath, neither would I complain in this case, to be its sacrifice. But I am
afraid that in turning things on this side, I shall pull on my self a new
quarrel more terrible than the first. What reason has he then to be angry? We
are the only sufferers in all this, we suffer in the suspicion, we suffer in
the justification, we suffer in the manner of the justification. But God give
us grace to suffer patiently, and we hope he will not refuse us that of
persevering in our duty to him, and pursuing to the last truth with love, till
we arrive at his Kingdom, where we shall find rest after our labors, and where
our reproach will be turned into glory.

AND here I shall finish this Chapter and Book, and entreat Mr. Arnaud not to
take any thing ill which I have said to him, and to consider that I maintain my
Cause, a Cause of whose Goodness and Justice I cannot in the least doubt. Let
him not think I have been set on work by a spirit of contention, I naturally
hate it, and several persons of Honor and Probity know I engaged in this
Controversy much against my will, my temper inclining me rather to live
retired and quiet. Neither let him think I thought of diminishing in any sort
the Reputation which he has acquired in the world. I take it as a great honor
to be found in the lists with him; and as to his person, whatsoever sharpness
he has used toward me, he shall always find me respecting his ingenious
qualifications. If he be displeased to find himself deceived in the great hopes
which he conceived touching the Greeks, Armenians, and other Eastern Churches,
this will show him he must not always judge of things from their first
appearances. That which deceived him is, that he has taken for the true Greek
Church a Party of Greeks which has been a long time a forming and which the
rest call (...), which is to say, those who are in their hearts and opinions
Latins, although outwardly professors of the Greek Rites, and live amongst the
rest in the same Communion. 'Twas this Party who for so long a time opposed
Meletus the Patriarch of Alexandria, and Cyril his Successor, afterward
Patriarch of Constantinople, and who in fine overwhelmed Cyril by the
assistance of the Court of Rome, as I have elsewhere said that Allatius himself
has acknowledged, and as I proved in the 12th. Chapter of the said Book. Since
this great Victory which was followed by the promotion of Cyril of Beroe the
Jesuits Disciple, and a great favorer of the Latins, to the Patriarchate of
Constantinople, I do not doubt but this Party has mightily strengthened it
self, and that several amongst 'em have declared themselves more loudly and
openly than they did before. In effect 'twas about this time that a certain
Greek of this Party called Meletus Syrigus wrote a Catechism which was signed
in the two pretended condemnations of Cyril Lucar, the one under Cyril of
Beroe, and the other under Parthenius, with this Title (...), which is to say,
An Orthodox Confession of the Catholic Apostolical and Eastern Church, in
which he asserts the conversion of the substances of Bread and Wine into those
of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, with the subsistence of accidents
without a subject, and uses the very term of (...). If Mr. Arnaud has meant by
the Greek Church the persons of that Party, I have already declared to him, and
again tell him that I have not disputed against him. We do not pretend to
dispute the Conquests of the Missions and Seminaries, let him peaceably enjoy
'em, we mean only the true Greeks, who retain the Doctrine and ancient
expressions of their Church. And as to those, we are certain of two things, the
one that they hold not the Transubstantiation of the Latins, which I believe I
have clearly proved; and the other that they alone ought to be called the true
Greek Church, although the contrary Party were the most prevalent, and possessed
the Patriarchates. Mr. Arnaud himself has told us that these Seats are disposed
of by the sovereign authority of the Turks to those that have most money, and
we know moreover the great care that has been taken to establish the Roman
Doctrins in these Countries, through the Neglect and Ignorance of the Prelates,
Monks, and People, whether by instructing their Children, or gaining the
Bishops, or filling the Churches with the Scholars of Seminaries, and other
like means which I have described at large in my second Book. Mr. Arnaud
perhaps will answer that he likewise maintains on his side, that this Party
which teaches Transubstantiation is the true Greek Church, and the other but a
Cabal of Cyril's Disciples. I answer, that to decide this question, we need
only examine which of these two Parties retains the Doctrine and Expressions of
the ancient Greeks; for that which has this Character must be esteemed the true
Greek Church, and not that which has received novelties unknown to their
Fathers. Now we have clearly showed that the conversion of Substances,
Transubstantiation, and the Real Presence, are Doctrins and Expressions, of
which the Greeks of former Ages have had no knowledge; whence it follows that
the Party which admits these Doctrins and Expressions, are a parcel of
Innovators which must not be regarded as if they were the true Greek Church.
Let Mr. Arnaud, and those who read this Dispute, always remember that the first
Proposition of the Author of the Perpetuity is that in the 11th. Century at the
time of Berenger's condemnation, the Greeks held the Real Presence and
Transubstantiation, that this is the time which he chose, and termed his fixed
point, to prove from hence that these Doctrins were of the first establishment
of Religion; and consequently perpetual in the Church. Which I desire may be
carefully observed to prevent another illusion, which may be offered us, by
transferring the question of the Greeks of that time to the Greeks at this, and
to hinder Mr. Arnaud and others from triumphing over us when it shall happen
that the Missions and Seminaries, and all the rest of the intrigues which are
made use of shall devour the whole Land of Greece. For in this case the
advantage drawn hence against us will be of no value; 'twill neither hence
follow, that the Doctrins in question have been perplexed in the Church, nor
that the Greek Church held 'em in the time of Berenger's condemnation; and what
I say touching the Greeks, I say likewise touching the other Eastern Churches
over which the Roman Church extends its Missions and Care as well as the Greeks.

AS to what remains, let not Mr. Arnaud be offended that in the refutation of
his Book in general, I have every where showed the little justice and solidity
of his reasonings, and especially in the refutation of his first, sixth, and
tenth Book. I acknowledge he has wrote with much Wit, Elegancy, and polite
Language, and attribute to the defect of his subject, whatsoever I have noted
to be amiss, either in his Proofs, or Answers: but it is very true, the world
never saw so many illusions and such great weakness, in a work of this nature;
and all that I could do was to use great condescentions, in following him every
where to set him strait. I have only now to beseech Almighty God to bless this
my Labor, and as he has given me Grace to undertake and finish it, so he will
make it turn to his Glory and the Churches Edification. AMEN.

AN ANSWER TO THE DISSERTATION Which is at the end of Mr. Arnaud's Book,
Touching the Book of the Body and Blood of our Lord, Published under the name
of BERTRAM, AND OF THE Authority of John Scot, or Erigenus.

floral arrangement

LONDON: Printed by M. C. for Richard Royston, Bookseller to the King's most
Excellent Majesty. 1683.

Advertisement.
THOSE that shall cast their eyes on this Answer, will be at first apt to think
these Critical Questions belong only to Scholars. Whereas we have here several
important matters of fact, which are in a manner necessary to the full
understanding of the Controversy of the Eucharist. The Church of Rome pretends
we have forsaken the Ancient Faith, and that Berenger was one of the first who
taught our Doctrine in the beginning of the 11th. Century. We on the contrary
maintain it is the Roman Church that has departed from the Ancient Belief; and
that 'twas Paschasus Ratbert, who in the beginning of the 9th. Century taught
the Real Presence, and the Substantial Conversion. And to this in short may he
reduced the whole Controversy which was between Mr. Claude and Mr. Arnaud.

Mr. Claude has strenuously and clearly showed that as many Authors as were of
any Repute im the 9th. Century, have opposed the Doctrine of Paschasus; and that
consequently Paschasus must be respected as a real Innovator. Now amongst these
Writers, Mr. Claude produces John Scot, or Erigenus, and Bertram, or Ratram a
Religious of Corby, two of the greatest Personages of that Age, and shows they
wrote both of 'em against the Novelties which Paschasus had broached; that one
of 'em Dedicated his Book to Charles the Bald, King of France, and the other
likewise wrote his by the same King's Order. That the first having lived some
time in this Prince's Court, died at last in England in great reputation for
his holiness of Life; that the other was always esteemed and reverenced as the
Defender of the Church, which seems to be decisive in our favor.

Mr. Arnaud on his side, finding himself touched to the quick by the consequence
of these Proofs, has used his last and greatest Endeavors to overthrow or
weaken 'em. And for this purpose has published at the end of his Book two
Dissertations, the one under his own name, and the other under the name of a
Religious of St. Genevieve, whose name is not mentioned. In the first, which is
under the name of the Religious, he does two things; for first, he endeavors
to persuade that the Book of the Body and Blood of our Lord is not in effect
Ratram' s, but John Scot' s: And in the second place he endeavors to decry
John Scot, and deprive him of all Esteem and Authority. In the other
Dissertation, Mr. Arnaud pretends that whosoever was the Author of this Book,
Mr. Claude has not rightly comprehended the sense of it, and that this Book
does not combat the Doctrine of Paschasus. And thus Mr. Arnaud pretends to
discharge himself of Mr. Claude' s proof, so that to take away from him this
last subterfuge, and re-establish this part of Mr. Claude' s proof, it is
necessary to show clearly that the little Book of our Lords Body and Blood, is
in effect Ratram' s, and that this Book is directly opposite to the Doctrine of
Paschasus, and that John Scot is an Author whose Testimony is of great weight
and authority: which is what I have undertaken to do in this Answer: And I hope
these kind of Elucidations will not be deemed unprofitable, or unpleasant.
Moreover, I did not think my self obliged to enter into a particular
Examination of the second Dissertation touching Bertram' s Book, because the
History which I make of this Book, the judgment which those of the Church of
Rome have made of it at several times, with what Mr. Claude alleges concerning
it in the 11th. Chapter of his sixth Book, are sufficient to show clearly that
this Author has directly combated the Doctrine of Paschasus, without offering to
tire the Readers with troublesome repetitions. Moreover, we hope to give the
Public in a short time a translation of Bertram' s Book, which being but a
small Treatise, requires only an hours reading, in which every one may see with
their own eyes what is his true sense, without a more tedious search after it in
Mr. Arnaud' s Arguments, or mine.

AN ANSWER TO THE DISSERTATION Which is at the end of Mr. Arnaud's Book,
Touching the Treatise of Our Lords Body and Blood; Published under the name of
Bertram, and touching the Authority of John Scot, or Erigenus.
THE FIRST PART.
Wherein is showed that the Book of the Body and Blood of our Lord, Published
under the name of Bertram is a work of Ratram a Monk of Corbie, and not of John
Scot.

CHAP. I.
An Account of the several Opinions which the Doctors of the Roman Church have
offered touching this Book, to hinder the advantage which we draw from it.

THE Book of Bertram, of the Body and Blood of our Lord having been Printed at
Cologn in the year 1532. the Doctors of the Roman Church have judged it so
little favorable to 'em, that they have thought themselves necessitated to
deprive it of all its authority, and to cry it down either as an Heretical
Book, or a forged piece, or at least as a Book corrupted by the Protestants.

IN the year 1559. those that were employed by the Council of Trent Book 1. of
Euch. c. 1. Indic. Quirog. Ind. Clem. VIII. Indic. Sandov. An. 1612. Praefat.
in Bibl. Sanct.
for the examining of Books, placed this in the rank of Heretical Authors of
the first Classis, the reading of which ought to be forbidden. Their judgment
was published by Pius IV. and followed by Cardinal Bellarmin and Quiroga, and
by Pope Clement VIII. and Cardinal Sandoval.

SIXTVS of Sienne treats this Book no better in 1566. he tells us it is a
pernicious piece, wrote by Oecolampadus, and published by his Disciples under
the name of Bertram, (an Orthodox Author) to make it the better received.
Possevin the Jesuit, and some others, followed the opinion of Sixtus, and
carried on the same accusation against the Authors of Proleg in appar.
the impression of this Book.

BUT besides that the Bishop of Rochester cited it against Oecolampadus himself
in the year 1526. which is to say, six years before 'twas Printed, the several
Manuscripts which have been since found in Libraries, have Joan. Rosseus.
proleg. in 4. lib. adv. Oecolamp. Artic. 2.
showed that this accusation was unjust and rash, which has obliged the Author
of the Dissertation (which I examine) to leave it, and confess, that this
Impression was true.

IT was without doubt from the same reason that in 1571. the Divines of Indic.
Belgic. voce Bertramus.
Doway took another course than that of the entire proscription of the Book;
Although, say they, we do not much esteem this Book, nor would be troubled were it
wholly lost; but seeing it has been several times Printed, and many have read
it, and its name is become famous by the Prohibition which has been made of it,
the Heretics knowing it has been prohibited by several Catalogues, that
moreover its Author was a Catholic Priest, a Religious of the Convent of
Corbie, beloved* and considered not by Charlemain, but by Charles the Bald,
That this Writing serves for an History of all that time, and that moreover we
suffer in ancient Catholic Authors several Errors, extenuating them, excusing
them, yea often denying 'em by some tergiversation invented expressly, or giving
them a commodious sense when they are urged against us in Disputes which we
have with our Adversaries, we therefore see no reason why Bertram should not
deserve the same kindness from us, and why we should not review and correct
him, cur non eandem recognitionem mereatur Bertramnus, lest the Heretics
should scoffingly tell us we smother Antiquity, and prohibit enquiries into it,
when it is on their side; and therefore we ought not to be troubled that there
seems to be some small matters which favor them, seeing we Catholics handle
Antiquity with so little respect, and destroy Books as soon as ever they appear
contrary to us. We ought likewise to fear lest the Prohibition which has been
made of this Book, should cause its being read with greater greediness, not
only by Heretics, but also by disobedient Catholics, that it be not alleged
in a more odious fashion, and in fine, do more hurt by its being prohibited
than if 'twere permitted.

THUS do the Divines of Doway ingeniously declare their opinion how Books ought
to be dealt with, that do not favor their belief. They would not have
Bertram's Book prohibited, but corrected.

GREGORY of Valence and Nicholas Romoeus follow the sentiment of Lib. 1. de
Praes. Chr. in Euch. c. 2. p. 10.
the Doway Divines, but this expedient is become wholly impossible since there
have been several Manuscripts found in places unsuspected, and that these
Manuscripts appear wholly conformable to the Prints, as we are informed In
Calvini effig. spect. 3. Col. 21. and Spect. 8. col. 72. Book 2. of Euch. Auth.
39. p. 666. and Usher de success. Eccl. c. 2. p. 41.
by Cardinal Perron and several others after him. Thus the Doctors of the Roman
Communion finding 'emselves fallen not only from their hopes of making the world
believe this was a false piece, but also of persuading 'em 'twas corrupted,
have been forced to have recourse to fresh Councils to elude the advantage we
make of it.

THE President Mauguin seeing then on one hand the Book could not Dissert.
Hist. c. 17. p. 134, 135.
be denied to be true, and, acknowledging moreover that this Bertram to whom
it is attributed, is no other than Ratramnus whom he lately mentioned with such
great Elogies, as being the defender of the Doctrine of the Church concerning
Divine Grace, he, I say, believed 'twas best to attempt the justifying him by
any means from the crime of Heresy touching the Eucharist. And for this effect
has bethought himself of maintaining that Ratramnus in the Book in question,
defends the same Doctrine which Paschasus Ratbert defended in that which he
wrote on the same subject; that both one and the other, to wit, Ratramnus and
Paschasus had to deal with the same Heretics, to wit, certain Stercoranists
(who according to Cardinal Perron, appeared in the 9th. Century) that they both
of 'em admirably well agree in defending the Catholic Church; so that there
can be no charge of Heresy brought against Bertram, as they of his Communion
had hitherto done without any reason.

Mr. HERMAN Canon of Beauvais has approved of this sentiment of Mr. Mauguin in
a Letter to Mr. De St. Beuve, Printed in 1652. under the name of Hierom ab
Angelo forti; and it is by this means he endeavors to defend Jansenius his
Disciples against Mr. Desmarests, Professor in Divinity at Groningue, who
argued against Transubstantiation from the authority of this same Ratramnus,
whom the Gentlemen of the Port Royal quoted as one of the most famous Witnesses
of the Belief of the Church against the novelties of Molina.

IT seems also that Mr. De St. Beuve does not disapprove of this opinion of Mr.
Mauguin and Mr. Herman in his Manuscript Treatise of the Eucharist, as we may
collect from the Preface of D' Luc d' Achery, on the second Tome of his
Spicilege. Yet by a strange kind of injustice after the testimony of Cardinal
Du Perron, and others who have seen Bertram's Manuscript, he still suspects it
to have suffered some alteration. Howsoever he would have us remember that
Ratramnus died in the bosom of the Church, and bear with his offensive
expressions. This is the part which these two Gentlemen have taken for the
preservation of Ratramnus his authority, whose testimony is useful to 'em in
other matters.

CELLOT the Jesuit on the contrary, designing in his History of Gottheschalc,
and in his Appendixes, to oppose the sentiments of Mr. Mauguin in the subject
of Grace, and to discredit its Champions, has attackt the person of Ratramnus.
He does indeed acknowledge him for the true Author of the Book of the Body and
Blood of our Lord, but he does all that he is able to discredit it, and bereave
it of all the Authority which these other Gentlemen attribute to it. Howsoever,
he yields it to the Protestants as being for them, and maintains with Possevin,
that although this Book may be read with corrections, yet Pope Clement VIII. has
done well in prohibiting it.

OTHERS of better judgments in the Romish Communion have clearly foreseen that
if what Cellot the Jesuit offers against Ratramnus is of use to him against the
Disciples of Jansenius, and if his way of proceeding be advantageous against
the Adversaries which he had at his back, 'twas not the same in respect of us.
For as fast as he deprived his Adversaries of so famous an Author as Ratramnus,
in decrying him for an Heretic on the subject of the Eucharist, he yielded him
to us without any dispute, and by this means does himself furnish us with a
very authentic Author against Transubstantiation and the Real Presence. They
have believed then that to prevent the falling into this inconveniency, they
must invent some other new means, which on one hand might be less bold, and
more likely than is that of Mr. Mauguin, which cannot reasonably be maintained,
and which on the other would not give us so great advantage as Father Cellot
has given us in placing Ratramnus absolutely on our side.

AND this is what Mr. Marca the deceased Archbishop of Paris has seemed to
have done, when he offered as a new discovery that the Book in question is of
John Scot, or Erigenus. For by means of this opinion he pretended to secure to
Ratramnus his whole authority and reputation, and attribute at the same time to
the Book of the Body and Blood of our Lord, the infamy of an heretical piece,
according to the Decree of the Roman Censurers. We may charge Mr. De Marca with
inconstancy, seeing that in his French Treatise of the Eucharist, which was
published since his death by the Abbot Faget his Cousin-german, he acknowledged
that Bertram and Ratram were but one and the same Author, and that the Book of
the Body and Blood of our Lord is truly of Ratramnus.

HOWSOEVER Mr. De Marca affirms in his Letter to De Luc d' Tome 2. Spicil.
Achery, wrote in 1657. First, That the Book of the Body and Blood of our Lord
is not of Ratramnus, as the learned have thought. Secondly, That it is John's,
surnamed Scot, or Erigenus. Thirdly, That John Scot acknowledging this Book was
contrary to the Doctrine of the Church, published it under the name of
Ratramnus, by a famous Imposture, to give it the more weight. Fourthly, That
this Book is then the same which was condemned in the Council of Verseile by
Leo IX. as Lanfranc reports, and was at length burnt in the Council of Rome
under Nicholas II. in 1059. And thus does he reject his former opinion through
human weakness, from which the greatest Wits are not exempt, and wherein a man
easily falls when it is his interest to be of another mind.

Mr. De Marca well perceived what a troublesome thing it was to the Roman Faith,
to say that Paschasus, which is, as it were, the head of it, according to the
Hypothesis of the Protestants, was opposed by all the learned and famous men
which were then in the Church. He also well foresaw that those who would
reflect on the person of Ratram, would be extremely surpised to see that upon
the contests to which the Doctrine of Paschasus gave birth, Charles the Bald
having consulted Ratram, this great man took part with Paschasus his
Adversaries. He knew likewise that 'twas this same Ratram, who was consulted on
the subject of Grace by the same Charles the Bald, and who showed himself so
zealous for the truth, that he feared not to withstand three times Hincmar his
Archbishop, as Mr. Mauguin has Dissert. Hist. c. 17. p. 135.
observed, That this Ratram was so famous in his time, that after these
bickerings with Hincmar, Hincmar himself and the other French Prelates,
commissioned him to answer in their name the objections of the Greeks in the
dispute which arose between them and the Latins. There was no likelihood of
making such a one pass for an Heretic. Moreover, Mr. Marca could not deny but
that the Book of our Lords Body and Blood ought to be attributed to Ratram,
should we refer our selves to the testimony of Sigebert. He himself calls it
the little Book published by the Protestants, under the name Epist. ad De Luc
d' Ach. T. 2. Spicil.
of Bertram, and attributed to Ratram by Sigebert and Trithemius. He believed
likewise he had gotten a certain proof that since the 9th. Century this Book
bore the title of Ratram, because the anonymous Author published by Cellot,
reckons Ratram one of Paschasus's Adversaries. And Mr. De Marca took this
anonymous Author for an Author of the 9th. Century, as Perron also thought.
What remedy is there to these inconveniences which appear to be of so great
consequence? For, for to take the part of Mr. Mauguin, and to say that the Book
in question contains nothing but what is conformable to the belief of the Roman
Church, is even according to him an unwarrantable assertion.

TO extricate himself out of these perplexities, Mr. Marca believed it best to
maintain that John Scot was the true Author of this Book, that 'twas John Scot
himself that fathered it on Ratram, and that Cellot's anonymous Author being
ignorant of this fact was deceived in what he wrote of it. And this is the
happy invention by which Mr. De Marca thought he might procure great advantages
to his Party. First, He reduces both Paschasus his Adversaries to one, which
already diminishes the number of 'em. Secondly, He delivers Paschasus from the
hands of an adversary who was constantly held for a most Orthodox Divine in his
time. Thirdly, By this means he decries this Book it self by attributing it to
an Author, who in the 9th. Century drew on himself some Censures from the
Councils of Valence and Langres touching the questions of Grace, and whom the
Roman Church condemned in the 11th. at Verceil, and at Rome on the matter of
the Eucharist. Fourthly, He discharges his Church of the reproach of having
condemned in the 11th. Century, and still at this day condemning a Doctrine
which was taught in the 9th. by an Orthodox Author, such as was Ratram. Again,
the name of John Scot has appeared to him very proper for the giving some
color to his discovery, because that in effect John Scot wrote likewise a Book
on the subject of the Eucharist which he dedicated to Charles the Bald, and
that this Book is lost, whether by chance or on purpose, as it has also happened
to others, we cannot guess.

WE may with great likelihood say that Mr. Arnaud and his friends have had the
same interests as Mr. De Marca. But we may also add that they have had a
particular reason which much contributes to make 'em embrace Mr. De Marca's
opinion, and maintain with him that Ratram is not the Author of the Book in
question, but John Scot, or Erigenus. Mr. Claude has Answer to the Perpetuity,
part 3. chapter 1.
showed them in the famous Dispute which they have had, that having once
esteemed Ratram for the Oracle of his time, and for the great defender of the
Orthodox Doctrine of Divine Grace, it is not fair to refuse his testimony now on
the Eucharist, and treat him as an Author of small importance, that this is an
exposing of a man's self plainly to the reproach of injustice and lightness.
They must then deliver themselves at any rate from the importunity of this
Book, and absolutely deny that it is Ratram's. But the way to do it handsomely is
difficult, seeing the Author of the Perpetuity seems to have acknowledged that
Bertram and Ratram were but one and the same person, and that he was the real
Author of the Book in question. To get out of this vexatious suit, a Religious
of S. Genevieve, whose name is not mentioned, opportunely offers himself. He
sends a Dissertation touching John Scot and Bertram, wherein he makes a third
Party between Mr. De Marca and the Author of the Perpetuity, to wit, that the
Book is John Scot's; but an obscure and perplexed piece. Mr. Arnaud adopts this
Dissertation, and publishes it at the end of his Book. So that properly neither
the Author of the Perpetuity retracts, nor Mr. Arnaud who contradicts him; but
an anonymous Religious who gives us his conjectures. And by this means all is
made whole again, and the Confession which the Author of the Perpetuity has
made is no more at farthest than the error of one man.

CHAP. II.
That what the Author of the Dissertation would reform in the Opinion of Mr. De
Marca, does not at all make it the more probable.

THAT which the Author of the Dissertation has changed in the conjecture of
Monsieur De Marca, to make it a little more tolerable, may be reduced to these
three things. First, He will have the supposition of this Book to be made, not
by John Scot himself in the 9th. Century, as Mr. De Marca says, but by
Berenger, or those of his Party toward the end of the 11th. Secondly, He
pretends that in respect of the Title, the supposition has not been made barely
under the name of Ratram; but that those who have made the change have made the
Book pass under the name of Bertram, or that of Bertramnus, or under that of
Ratram, or Intram, or Ratramnus, or perhaps under several of these different
names, but indifferent Copies. Thirdly, He will have it to be in respect of the
sense of the Book but an obscure and perplexed piece, whereas Mr. De. Marca
openly acknowledges it to be heretical, incapable of a good explication, and
justly censured.

BUT we cannot conceive how Mr. De Marca's conjecture will appear more probable
by these new corrections. In effect if it be unjust in Mr. De Marca to accuse
without proof, witnesses, or ground, and even without any probability John Scot
of an imposture so great as this is, what judgment must we make of the
accusation which Mr. Arnaud brings under the name of the Author of the
Dissertation, against Berenger or his followers? Who has revealed to him the
mystery of this supposition which he so historically deals out to us? Where are
the Adversaries of Berenger who have reproached him with this deceit, or those
of his Party? Where are the Manuscripts which help him to this discovery? It Is
apparent there needs a great stock of confidence to form accusations of this
consequence without any proof. For my part I may accuse the Disciples of
Paschasus with more likelihood for having attributed their Masters Books to
names of far greater renown than his. Whilst I write this, I have before me the
Treatise of the Perpetual Virginity of the Holy Virgin, of which in fine we
know Paschasus to be the Author. Yet has this Book passed hitherto for S.
Hildephonsus's, Archbishop of Toledo; and in a Manuscript which I have by me,
it appears that this supposition is made designedly by a Priest of the 10th.
Century, named Gomezan, who pretends that this Book was brought from Spain by a
Bishop called Gotiscalc: and this good man has carried on the supposition so
far as to corrupt the Catalogue of S. Hildephonsus his works, by inserting in
'em these words which are to be found in the Edition of Miroeus as well as in
the Manuscript. He wrote -- a little Book of the Virginity of the Holy Virgin,
against three Infidels. We know likewise that Paschasus his Book touching the
Eucharist, was fathered on the famous Raban, as appears from the Cologn Edition
in 1551. and from the Manuscripts of which the Author of the Dissertation says
he has another of 'em in his hands; although it be certain that Paschasus is the
Author of this Book, and that Raban was of a contrary opinion to Paschasus. But
without such appearance, and without any ground, proof, or Witnesses, we must
be gravely told, that Berenger or his Disciples, who were not convinced nor
accused of any such thing, have fathered on Bertram the Book which was
condemned at Verseil and Rome, and which is in effect John Scots, and that six
hundred years after we must be informed of this pretended supposition, which no
body before ever imagined: what is this but imposing on the Readers credulity.

THE second change which the Author of the Dissertation makes of Mr. De Marca's
sentiment is a mere cavil that has no foundation, as I shall show hereafter. In
effect Mr. De Marca as well before as since his new conjecture, has
acknowledged that Bertram and Ratram are but one and the same.

AND as to what that Author imagins in the third place that Mr. De Marca was
mistaken in his maintaining that Bertram's Book is plainly against
Transubstantiation, and the Real Presence; whereas it ought only to pass for an
obscure and perplexed Writing, it is evident this was to save the Author of the
Perpetuity's reputation. In effect if he had not this consideration, how could
he content himself with barely treating this Book as obscure and perplexed,
seeing he himself supposes that it is John Scots? First, Does he not know that
Scot's Book was condemned by the Synod of Verceil as an Heretical piece.
Secondly, That 'twas so before at Paris by a kind Durand. Troar. de Corp. and
Sang. Chr. part 9. De Praedest. cap. 31. Epist. ad Berenger. in Lanf. oper.
of Synod who censured it in the same terms. Thirdly, That another Council at
Rome caused it to be burnt six years after the Council of Verceil. Fourthly,
That John Scot's Book was composed on this platform, That the Sacrament of the
Altar is not the true Body nor true Blood of our Lord, but only a memorial of
his true Body and Blood, as Hincmar and Ascelin say. Fifthly, That Berenger has
taken the Book of John Scot for an authentic testimony of his Faith, and
Lanfranc also for an avowed adversary of Paschasus. Sixthly, That in the 12th.
Century Cellot's anonymous Author testifies the Author of this Book was
respected as an adversary to Paschasus, in the same manner as he had been in
the preceding Century. Seventhly, That supposing Bertram's Book be John Scot's,
whatsoever I now mentioned must be referred to him. Eighthly, That in effect
Bertram's Book was attributed to Oecolampadius. Ninthly, That it was proscribed
by I know not how many expurgatory Indexes. Tenthly, That the Divines of Doway
and others with 'em, not being able to admit the Doctrine, have affirmed it has
been altered. In fine, that the Author of the Dissertation himself acknowledges
that Berenger or his Disciples considered this Book as a Buckler for 'em, which
'twas their interest to preserve at the expense of the greatest fraud and
treachery.

DARE the Author of the Dissertation say that Hincmar has understood the
sentiment of John Scot better than John Scot himself, that the Councils of the
11th. Century have rashly condemned a Writing which at most was but an obscure
and perplexed one? That Pope Leo IX. Nicholas II. and the 113 Bishops which
constrained Berenger to burn John Scot's Book were deceived in it, that
Berenger nor his Adversaries, nor his Disciples, have not comprehended what
made for 'em or against 'em during several years Dispute, and that in fine the
12th. Century remained in as great an ignorance? I wonder how the Author of the
Dissertation, or Mr. Arnaud can speak of this Book as they do; which is to say,
that it is obscure and perplexed, in supposing John Scot to be the Author of
it. I can scarcely believe that if these Gentlemen do satisfy themselves, they
can also satisfy the ingenuous of their own party that have read it. But that
I may handle more fully this point, I intend to establish clearly two things,
First, That this Book of the Body and Blood of our Lord published under the
name of Bertram, is in effect Ratram's, and not John Scot's. Secondly, That the
authority of this Book will not cease to be very considerable, supposing John
Scot were the Author of it. I hope I shall commodiously reduce under these two
heads, whatsoever the Author has treated of greatest importance in his
Dissertation.

CHAP. III.
That Ratram is the Author of the Book of our Lords Body and Blood, published
under the name of Bertram.

TO confirm this truth, I shall first bring as convincing proofs as can be
brought for these kind of Facts. Secondly, I shall produce the acknowledgment
of the most learned Romanists who have acknowledged this verity, even since
some of 'em have questioned it. Lastly, I shall show that this is not a
discovery which Usher first made, and that whatsoever the Author of the
Dissertation brings against that Prelates proofs cannot overthrow them. See
here the proofs.

FIRST, Sigebert a Monk of Gemblou, attributes in his Catalogue of
Ecclesiastical Writers the Book of our Lords Body and Blood to the Author of
the Book of Predestination: Now this Book of Predestination is acknowledged to
be Ratram's. And in effect although Suffridus Petrus, who caused Sigebert's
Catalogue to be Printed, has inserted the name of Bertram in his Edition, he
does himself remark, that two Manuscripts, one of the Abbey of Gemblou, the
other of the Priory of Vauvert, had distinctly the name of Ratram, and not that
of Bertram. This testimony of Sigebert is considerable for three reasons.
First, Because he was one of the most inquisitive Historians of his time, as
appears by his Chronicle. Secondly, Because he did not write his Catalogue till
he had spent the greatest part of his life in the reading of the Authors of
which he speaks in his Catalogue. Thirdly, Because that having lived a great
while in the 11th. Century (for he died but in the year 1113.) he had a
particular knowledge of what passed in the Disputes between Berenger and his
Adversaries, and the Authors which were alleged on either hand.

AS Trithemius in his Catalogue has followed Sigebert, excepting that he spoke
more particularly of the Author of the Book of the Body and Blood of our Lord,
and of Predestination; it is plain that although it has likewise the name of
Bertram, or Bertramnus, he designed Ratramnus, and that the rather, that it is
undeniable: First, That there was no Author of Bertram's name in the 9th.
Century. Secondly, That the Elogies which he gives to Bertram are suitable only
to Ratramnus, by the consent of all learned men, That 'twould be a wonderful
thing, for neither Trithemius nor Sigebert to mention a word of Ratramnus, one
of the most famous Authors of the 9th. Century.

SECONDLY, an anonymous Author, who apparently wrote since Algerus, which is to
say, about the year 1140. formally attributes to Ratram to have wrote a
Treatise of the Body and Blood of our Lord against the sentiments of Paschasus
Ratbert, and dedicated it to the French King Charles the Bald. Now this is what
agrees precisely with the Book which bears the name of Bertram. For first, he
directly decides against the Doctrine of Paschasus, although he does not name him.
Secondly, It is dedicated to King Charles. Thirdly, The arguments which the
anonymous Author relates as being common to Raban and Ratram, are sound in the
Book published under the name of Bertram.

THIRDLY, The style and Hypothesis of this Book of Bertram are wholly the same
with those of other Writings of Ratram, as I shall make appear. But before we
come to this, behold another proof which alone is sufficient to decide our
question.

FOURTHLY, There are Manuscripts of the Book of the Body and Blood of our Lord,
which bear the same name of Ratram. First, Those that in 1532. caused this Book
to be Printed at Cologn, expressly observe, that they preferred the name of
Bertram before any other name of the same Author, which appeared to them less
known. Let the Reader know, say they, that although the name of this Author is to
be met with elsewhere expressed in another manner, yet this name (to wit of
Bertram) being most common and familiar, ought to be preferred before any
other. This other name can be none but that of Ratramnus, which appeared to
them less known than that of Bertram, only because that in 1531. which is to
say, a year before the Edition of the Book of the Body and Blood of our Lord,
the Catalogue of the Ecclesiastical Writers of Trithemius was published at
Cologn it self, and therein mention made of this Author under the name of
Bertram, and not under that of Ratram. Secondly, The Divines of Doway had
without question some Manuscripts of the Book of Our Lords Body and Blood under
the name of Ratramnus, without which they could not say of Bertram, what they
have said. Thirdly, Cardinal Perron attests he saw at In Indic. (...) voce
Bertram (...) lib. 2. de (...) Aut. 39. p. ^. 6.
Mr. Le Fevre's the Prince's Tutor, an ancient Manuscript of the Book of the
Body and Blood of our Lord, under the name of Ratramnus.

THESE proofs be convincing to rational men; the only thing which has raised
any scruple is the name of Bertram, which some Transcribers, and those that
have published it from these Copies, have put in, instead of the true name,
which was Ratramnus: but this signifies little. For first, it is certain that
Bertram's Book was written in the 9th. Century, in which time there was no
Author named Bertram: so that this must needs be a corrupted name through the
ignorance of some Transcribers. It is then fitting to attribute this Book to
one of the Authors of those times whose name comes nearest to that of Bertram.
Now it is certain there is none which comes nearer than Ratram. Theophilus
Raynaud the Jesuit has acknowledged this truth. How easy has it been, says he,
to confound Bertram and Ratram in so great Erotem, page 132, 133.
an affinity and resemblance of names. We may alledg two causes of this
confusion which are very probable: First, 'Twas the custom to give the name
Beatus to illustrious men in the Church, instead of Sanctus, which has been
since affectedly given 'em, of which there are thousands of instances in
Manuscripts and Printed Books. It Is then very likely that some Transcribers
finding in Manuscripts the Title of this Book, B. Ratrami, or Be. Ratrami,
which signifies Beati Ratramni, they have imprudently joined all these Letters,
and made thereof but one name. Thus in the Edition of Aldus, instead of reading
P. Cornutus, which signifies Publius Cornutus, they have joined the Letters of
the Manuscript which should be separate, whereof they have made the barbarous
name of Phornutus. Secondly, It is likely that the conformity of the letter B
with the Letter R which in the ancient Impressions and Manuscripts, differ only
in one stroke, may have given way to this Error. The likeness of Capital
Letters has produced like changes, the Author of the Dissertation himself tells
us that in two Manuscripts of the Abbey of S. Victor, the Transcribers have
written Babanus instead of Si^ medit Tho. Waldensis, an. 1521. Paris. Labbe de
Script. p. 205. T. 2.
Rabanus. And thus do we read in some Manuscripts of Haimon of Halberstat,
Raymo for Haymo.

SECONDLY, It is certain that in respect of the Book it self, there are none of
the Authors of the 9th. Century to whom we can attribute this Book but to
Ratram. This Book supposes in its Preface that there happened a terrible division
between the Subjects of Charles the Bald touching the Eucharist; and that this
Prince according to his Piety, searching the means to reduce to the purity of
the Faith those that had changed it, engaged the Author of the Book of our
Lords Body and Blood to tell him his thoughts on this subject. Now this time is
exactly that wherein Ratram lived; and the esteem which Charles the Bald shows
this Author, is precisely the same which he paid to Ratram, in an occasion like
this. For his Subjects being divided on the matter of Grace and Predestination,
he consulted Ratramnus on this difference, and showed how greatly he valued his
judgment in Theological Questions.

ALL these reasons taken together do so well prove that the Book of the Body
and Blood of our Lord is of Ratramnus, that those who have not considered 'em
all, have yet yielded to the evidence of those they were acquainted with. We
may moreover say, that if they have not been explained, they have been at least
acknowledged before Usher by the Divines of Doway, whether they have seen
Manuscripts of the Book of the Body and Blood of our Lord, which bore the name
of Ratram, as it is likely they did, or believed with Raynaud, that this
corruption of the name of Bertram did not hinder but that Ratram must be
acknowledged to be the Author of it. In effect, whence could they divine these
three things, First, That Bertram was a Monk of Corby as well as a Priest,
Trithemius and Sigebert having never said so, and the Title of the Book bearing
Presbyteri, and not Monachi. Secondly, That this Book was not dedicated to
Charlemain, but to Charles the Bald, although the Edition runs Ad Carolum magnum.
Thirdly, That the Author was a Catholic. Is not this a fair acknowledgment
that Bertram is no other than Ratram an Author in whom these three things meet;
if we compare the Title of the Book with what Authors say, that have spoken of
this Religious. This is the judgment of the Divines of Doway, whom Usher has
only followed.

AFTER the Divines of Doway and Bishop Usher, who discovered this truth more
distinctly, Mr. De Marca was one of the first who lent his hand to it, as
appears from his Treatise in French of the Eucharist wrote before the year
1640. and published by Monsieur the Abbot Faget his Cousin. Theophilus Raynaud
the Jesuit has since likewise followed the same sentiment Erotem, p 132.
Dissert. Hist. p. 134.
in his Treatise of good and bad Books. Mr. Mauguin acknowledges it likewise in
his famous defenses of Grace, wherein he has been followed by Mr. Hermon a
Canon of Beauvais, under the Title of HIERONYMVS AB ANGELO FORYI. Cellot the
Jesuit agrees in this point with Mr. Epist. 3. S. xxiii. and seq. opp ad hist.
Goth. p. 569. col. 2.
Herman and Mr. Mauguin, although he elsewhere opposes the later in several
things. De Luc d' Achery and Mr. De S. Beuve, have equally testified they were
of the same opinion, the one in his Preface on the first Tome of his Spicilege,
the other in his Manuscript Lectures on the Eucharist.

IT IS true that since the late conjecture of Mr. De Marca became public, to
wit that John Scot is the Author of the Work of our Lords Body and Blood, and
not Ratram, De Luc seems to yield to this novelty, and has Praefat. in T. 2.
Spicil. Part 3. c. 5. T. 1. de Script. Eccl. p. 53. and T. 2. p. 06. Triumph of
the Euchar. p. 18, 63, 66, 68, 94, 95, 96, 97.
since been followed by the Author of the Perpetuity who speaks of it in a
doubtful manner, and by the Author of the Dissertation which I examine. But a
while after the learned Jesuit Labbeus opposed this conjecture of Mr. De Marca
as handsomely as he could in a Book which he dedicated to him. For in this Book
he takes indifferently Bertram and Ratram for one and the same Author. Mr.
Pavillon also ingenuously acknowledges in his Book against Mr. Daille that
Ratram and Bertram are but one and the same person, citing always Ratram of the
Body and Blood of our Lord. The famous Presence of Jesus Christ in the
Sacrament, book 5. chapter 2. p. 264.
Jesuit Nouet against Mr. Claude shows in this matter the same sincerity as Mr.
Pavillon, and Mr. Arbusti has followed them in his declaration.

HOWSOEVER it be, after the reasons which I have alleged, I believe I may
affirm with all these learned men of the Church of Rome, that Bertram and
Ratram are but one and the same Author. It only then remains that I refute in a
few words what the Author of the Dissertation offers most considerable against
some of these reasons.

TO one of these reasons, viz. that the Religious of Corby being named Artic.
2. of the Dissert. on John Scot.
Ratram, and Cellot's anonymous Author saying that Ratram wrote a Book of the
Body and Blood of our Lord; the Book of the Body and Blood of our Lord, known
under the name of Bertram, is then Ratram's: to this reason, I say, our Author
answers, that although Cellot caused the name of Ratramnus to be Printed in the
two places of his Anonymous, wherein are mentioned Paschasus his Adversaries;
yet it is not thus found in two Manuscripts of the Abbey of S. Victor: but in the
first there is Intramus, and in the second Ratramnus, Cellot having caused the
name of Ratramnus to be Printed contrary to what the Manuscripts bear.

BUT this answer is not sufficient. First, Cellot has caused his Anonymous to
be Printed from Father Sirmond's Copy, who had taken it from a Manuscript of
Corby, and not from the Manuscripts of the Abbey of S. Victor. Secondly, These
two Manuscripts which are apparently false, are not so considerable as the
Manuscripts of the Anonymous, mentioned by Usher and others, which have all of
'em the name of Ratramnus, nor as the Manuscript De Success. Eccles. p. 39. c.
2. Du Perron, Book 2 Auth. 39. p 666.
of the Book of the Body and Blood of our Lord which bears the name of
Ratramnus, nor as the Manuscripts of the Catalogue of Sigebert, of which we
have spoken. The Intram of the Manuscripts of the Abbey of S. Victor, is the
Transcribers fault, who has disfigured the name of Ratramnus, just as his
Babanus is the famous Raban.

TO another reason drawn from Sigebert, who makes the Author of the De Success.
Eccl. c. 2.
Book of Predestination, to wit Ratramnus, the Author of the Book of the Body
and Blood of our Lord, and of whom in effect two Manuscripts represent the name
of Ratramus, instead of Bertramus: to this reason, I say, the Author answers,
First, That the work of Bertram of Predestination is different from that of
Ratramnus, because that according to Trithemius the work of Bertram contained
only one Book, and was not dedicated to Charles the Bald, whereas that of
Ratram is dedicated to him, and contains two Books. Secondly, That all the
Editions of Sigebert having constantly the name of Bertram, we may believe that
a fault has slipped into the Manuscripts of Gemblou, and of Vauvert, where we
have the name of Ratramnus.

BUT these two Answers are not satisfactory: As to the first, Trithemius as
well as Sigebert, says positively in two places that the Book of Bertram of
Predestination is dedicated to Charles the Bald, and brings such reasons for
the proof of what he says, that there is no way to avoid the force of his
testimony. Secondly, Either our Author supposes that Trithemius saw a Treatise
of Predestination under the name of Bertram which contained only one Book, or
he will have him not to have seen it, as he believes that Trithemius has not
seen the Book of our Lords Body and Blood. If Trithemius has seen this Treatise
of Predestination, what is become of it since Trithemius his time? How comes it
to pass no body ever heard of it, but this our Author? If Trithemius never saw
it, why will our Author give credit to his testimony, when the question
concerns this Book of Predestination, and yet will not have us believe what he
says of the Book of the Body and Blood of our Lord. Thirdly, Our Author abuses
the passage of Trithemius, Trithemius has followed Sigebert, and by librum
seems to understand opus a work, without having respect to the number of the
parts of which it is composed; unless we will suppose that one number has
escaped the Printer, and that instead of these words de Predestinatione j. we
should read de Predestinatione jj. which is very possible, and of which there
are an hundred examples in the Catalogue of Trithemius now in question.

OUR Author's second Answer is something worse than the first. I know but two
Editions of Sigebert, that of Suffridus Petrus, and that of Miroeus, which in
my opinion has been published from that of Suffridus, Now as far as one can
judge of 'em, the Manuscripts of Gemblou and Vauvert ought to be preferred to
these Editions, because the Manuscript of Gemblou perhaps is the original of
Sigebert's own hand, who wrote and died at Gemblou. We know very well how great
a difference there is between the Edition of the Chronicle of Sigebert by
Miroeus from a Manuscript of Gemblou, and the other Editions published from
Manuscripts See Labb. de Script. Eccles. in Sigiber.
which have been corrupted. But supposing this were not Sigebert's own
Handwriting, it is certain the Monks of an Abbey know best the hands of
Transcribers who have preceded them in the same place. It is likely then that
this Manuscript was more correct than those to be met with elsewhere. This
Manuscript of Gemblou is moreover confirmed by the Manuscript of the Priory of
Vauvert, and in fine by the Manuscripts of the Book of the Body and Blood of
our Lord, which bear the name of Ratramnus, as I have represented.

OUR Author acquits himself not much better in another Argument which one may
draw from this, that in the Book of the Birth of Christ, Ratramnus defends the
same Doctrine which is taught in the Book of the Body and Blood of our Lord. He
tells us that Bishop Usher is he that has made this judgment on the Book of the
Birth of Christ; but that this Treatise being at present public, this
conjecture of Usher can only serve to discover the insincerity of this
Protestant, because there is not to be found one word of the mystery of the
Eucharist in the Book of the Birth of Jesus Christ. He adds hereunto other
things, which do not belong to our subject, and which I do not refute as I
might, lest I turn aside the Readers mind from the point in hand.

BUT he is to blame in accusing Bishop Usher of deceit. For what he says of
this Book de Nativitate Christi, is comprehended in a Parenthesis, and there is
neither affectation nor heat in producing it. It appears that this is a new
discovery which he made since he wrote his Treatise of the Succession and State
of the Christian Churches, wherein this remark had been proper. When he made
this observation on the Book of the Birth of Jesus Christ, he handled a quite
different subject, to wit, the History of Gotthescalc. The Manuscripts which he
cites, were not in his hands alone, neither did he suppress them: he carefully
denotes the places where they were, and they may be easily found out. After
all, says he, we are so far from reading the Doctrine of Bertram in the Book of
the Birth of Christ, that we find not one word of the mystery of the Eucharist
therein. Supposing this be true? must therefore Bishop Usher be an Impostor
unworthy of credit? That Prelate only says that the same Doctrine is to be found
in the Book of the Birth of Jesus Christ, which is in that of the Body and
Blood of our Lord. He does not make a particular mention of the Eucharist. But
if he meant so, we need only cast our eyes on some places of this Book of the
Birth of Jesus Christ, to approve of his judgment. We know that the Book of the
Body and Blood of our Lord, combating the substantial Presence of the Body of
Jesus Christ in the Eucharist, rejects likewise as an absurdity, the opinion
which asserts that the Body of Jesus Christ may be in several places, and the
Book of the Birth of Jesus Christ distinctly asserts that the Body of Jesus
Christ, is so determined by its nature to be in one Tom. 1. Spicil. p. 323,
324. c. 3.
place, that it is impossible for it to be in two places at once; although our Lord
is every where in respect of his Divinity. And thus does it combat the natural
consequences of Paschasus his opinion, which certainly suffices to justify
Usher if he respected this matter.

AS to the reason which we draw from the conformity which there is between the
Book of the Body and Blood of our Lord, and the works of Ratram, the Author
answers that this conjecture might have some force were the question, whether
the Book of the Body and Blood of our Lord was written by Ratram, or
Oecolampadius; but at present when it is doubted whether it be the work of
Ratram, or of some other Author of the same Century, it is useless, most
Authors of the 9th. Century finishing or beginning their Books, with
acknowledgments of their own weakness and inabilities, like to those which are
to be met with in the undoubted Writings of Ratram, and in that of Bertram, for
which he alleges some examples taken out of two Treatises of John Scot.

BUT he pitifully eludes this reason. It is taken from the whole style and
genius of the Book of the Body and Blood of our Lord, compared with the style
and genius of the works of Ratram, and not from some sentences which seem
conformable therein. Cellot and Mr. Claude were of this opinion. And certainly
th'Inscriptions of the Books are alike; the Book of Predestination is adscribed
Domino glorioso proecellentissimo principi Carolo, T. 1. Mauguin, p. 29.
Microp. p. 512. T. 1. Maug. p. 109.
Ratramnus, and that of the Body and Blood of our Lord begins Gloriose
Princips; whereas John Scot calls Charles Seniorem. He is treated with the
Title of Magnificent in Ratram's Book of Predestination, and in that of the
Body and Blood of our Lord in like manner. Ratram being engaged by the Kings
Command to write of Predestination, shows great modesty in obeying; which also
appears in the Book of the Body and Blood of our Lord. Ratram commends the
King's Piety for his enquiries into Religion, and submits to his Censures. All
which is seen in the Book of the Body and Blood of our Lord. Ratram follows the
holy Fathers with such zeal, that in the first Book of Predestination, he
brings into every line almost the sayings of S. Augustine, Prosper, Salvien,
Gregory, upon which he makes reflections. And thus does he likewise in the
second, wherein he only cites Orthodox Authors; and the same method he uses in
the second part of the Book of the Body and Blood. There can be nothing more
regular than the method of T. 1. Maug. p. 30.
Ratram in his Books of Predestination, he descends to the foundation, and
divides his whole subject into two questions: we find the same regularity
Microp p. 513, 514. T. 1. Maug. p 61. T. 1. Maug. p. 13.
in the Book of the Body and Blood of our Lord: the recapitulations are in a
manner the same. We see therein the same modesty in not naming those against
whom he wrote, in conserving the glorious quality of the Moderator of Charles
the Bald: we meet with the same thing in the Book of the Body and Blood of our
Lord.

WE might confirm the same truth by comparing the Treatise of the Body and
Blood of our Lord with the other works of Ratram, were that trouble any way
necessary. But I believe this is sufficient to persuade those who weigh things.

IT is certain that our Author produces a reason to show that Ratram is not the
Author of the Book of the Body and Blood of our Lord. He draws it from the
silence of Hincmar. This silence, says he, discovers so evidently the injustice
which has been done to Ratram in attributing the Book of Bertram to him, that
supposing we had no other proofs to justify him, this here will be more than
sufficient to take away all suspicions which within these few years have been
entertained touching his integrity in the Faith. There is no likelihood, if we
believe our Author, that Hincmar, who on one hand was animated against Ratram,
and wrote against him a great Book concerning Predestination, and this
expression Trina Deitas; and who on the other condemned as an error and novelty
contrary to the Faith the Opinion of John Scot, who said, that the Eucharist
was not our Lords true Body, but only its figure and memorial, would not have
reproached Ratram on this subject, had he believed him the Author of this Book
which goes under the name of Bertram, seeing this Book yielded occasion enough
to a passionate enemy, as Hincmar was, to charge him with this Heresy.

BUT this reflection is but a silly one. First, from one word which Hincmar has
uttered against John Scot in favor of Paschasus, we must not conclude that
Hincmar was at full liberty to write against Ratramnus, and t'encounter him as
an Heretic. Secondly, I do not see why Hincmar should be so mightily
transported against Ratram, who spoke without heat, and mentioned not any of
those against whom he wrote. If Hincmar was transported against Ratram on
another subject, it does not hence follow he must be always in the like passion
on all subjects which he had to debate with this Religious. Thirdly, This our
Author supposes without reason that Hincmar was in a condition to insult over
Ratram on the question of the Eucharist, as he did in that of Predestination,
and there is herein a great deal of difference. When Hincmar was so greatly
transported against Ratram, 'twas because he had the Council of Cressy on his
side, 'twas because Maug. Dissert. Hist. p. 141.
John Scot declared himself for him against Gothescalc and Ratram; 'twas
because the famous Raban had prejudicated in his favor in a Council held at
Mayence in 848. but there was nothing like this in the question of the
Eucharist. John Scot had declared himself against the sentiments of Paschasus;
the King knew it, and kept him in his Palace, which was a sufficient prejudice
against Hincmar. The famous Raban consulted by Heribold Bishop of Auxerre and
Arch-Chaplain, that is to say, great Almoner, had clearly taken part against
the sentiments of the same Paschasus; and the learned Church of Lions who had
persecuted John Scot, whilst he defended the opinions of Hincmar touching
Predestination, ceased molesting him when he combated the sentiments of
Paschasus on the Doctrine of the Eucharist. Fourthly, Our Author supposes with
the same rashness that Hincmar believed this Controversy to be as important as
it is at this day, which is contrary to all probability. For, First, Hincmar
contents himself with criticizing on the opinion of John Scot in very soft
terms, he does not call it Heresy, but novelty of words, whereas Raban and
Hincmar termed the opinion of Gotthescalc on the Divine Grace, Heresy, and
Schism. Secondly, If we come to compare what Hincmar says against Ratram on the
trina Deitas, shall we not find that what he says against John Scot contains
nothing so outrageous? Hincmar was a friend of Raban's who wrote a Letter to
Egilon Vide Dissert. Hist. Maug. p. 357, 358. Penit. cap. 33.
Abbot of Prom, and afterward Archbishop of Sens, against the Doctrine of
Paschasus: he was a friend of this Raban who had opposed him in his answer to
Heribold, published by Stewart. Hincmar always mentions Heribold T. 1. Maug. p.
21.
with a great deal of respect, even after his death, although Heribold was so far
from being of Paschasus his opinion, that in the later ages, the name of
Heriboldiens was given to the Disciples of Berenger, as we find in the Writings
of Tho. Waldensis. Fifthly, If this silence of Hincmar proves T. 2. de Sacra.
c. 61.
that Ratram did not write the Book of the Body and Blood of our Lord, because
Hincmar would have reproached him with it, what judgment must we make of this
Authors affirming that John Scot wrote this Book of Bertram's, although the Church
of Lions which wrote so fiercely against him, has not reproached him with it?
Why did not also Prudentius do it in his Treatise against Hincmar and Pardulus?
Was not this the ready way to decry these two Bishops, to reproach them that
they made use of the Pen of a professed enemy to the Real Presence and
Transubstantiation? Why did Nicholas the first suffer this Heresy growing in
the bosom of Charles the Bald, without warning this Prince of it? That same
Nicholas who concerned himself so much in the affairs on this side the
Mountains, and used all means to inform himself of 'em? Nicholas the first
shall bestir himself in the affair of Rothadus of Soissons in that of Hincmar
of Laon, where the point was only about Discipline, and remain unconcerned in
the business of John Scot, although he erred in the Eucharist. He shall take
notice of the affairs of Ebbon of Reims, and those whom he had ordained, and
not take any notice of a question agitated at the Court of Charles the Bald, in
which this Prince did interest himself? He shall know that Raban had opposed
the Real Presence by public Writings, that he to whom Raban wrote was become
Archbishop of Sens, that an Arch-Chaplain had erred in this matter, and all
this without being concerned? The fault which our Author commits in this
reflection on the silence of Hincmar, proceeds from his not minding two things;
the one is that, we must not always ground our selves on peoples proposing
their sentiments in advantageous terms, and speaking the opinion of their
adversaries with disdain and contempt. This is particularly the style of
Hincmar in every malter he treats of, as it has been already observed by Mr.
Mauguin and Mr. De la Motte, which cannot be unknown to our Author, Dissert.
Hist. p. 357, 358. Apol. for the Holy Fathers, part 5. p. 297.
For example, he always treats Gotthescalc as an Heretic, although it be believed
at Port Royal, that Gotthescalc defended only S. Austin's Doctrine on the matter
of Grace.

THE other is, that our Author has conceived that the censure of Hincmar
against John Scot imports that Hincmar believed the Real Presence with its
consequences, as the Adoration, the Sacrifice, etc. which has made him judge
that Hincmar must respect the opinion of John Scot as a detestable Heresy. Now
it is certain that the consequences of the Real Presence were then unknown to
the whole Earth, and were not received into the Latin Church till some Ages
after Hincmar. But this last remark respects the main of the question which
does not belong to me to handle.

CHAP. IV.
A Refutation of what the Author of the Dissertation offers to persuade that
the Book of the Body and Blood of our Lord, Published under the Name of Bertram
is of John Scot.

HAVING hitherto firmly enough established that the Book of our Lords Body and
Blood is of Ratram, I might pass by whatsoever the Author of the Dissertation
alleges to fortify the Conjecture of Mr. De Marca; and truly seeing that
before Mr. De Marca, no man of learning, nor any of Berenger's enemies, either
in the 11th. Century, or in the following, made this discovery; seeing that the
Author of the Perpetuity of the Faith entertained at first the opinion of Mr.
De Marca with mistrust, that he might handsomely leave it, if he were forced: It
thereupon seems I have right to despise whatsoever our Author alleges to make
the world believe that the Book of Bertram is the Book of John Scot under a
foreign Title. Nevertheless I will show that the proofs which he offers have no
solidity.

THESE proofs are, 1. That the Book of Bertram is entirely conformable Art. 3.
of the Dissert. on John Scot.
to what we read in ancient Writers concerning that of John Scot. 2. That the
proper character of John Scot is therein to be met with. But at bottom he
establishes neither one nor the other.

AS to the first, our Author relates a passage of Ascelin in a Letter to Ibid.
sect. 1.
Berenger, whence he believes one may gather, that the work of John Scot
contained only one Book, and that small enough: that a man cannot presently
perceive in John Scots Book what was his opinion on the mystery of the
Eucharist; that maugre the dissimulations of John Scot, yet Ascelin found
therein his whole design was to persuade the Readers that what is Consecrated
on the Altars is not truly the Body and Blood of our Lord; that to compass his
drift John Scot made use of several passages of the Fathers, and at the end of
each passage added some gloss to bring the sense of 'em to his purpose; that
amongst others, John Scot recited at length an Orison of S. Gregory, which
begins with these words, Perficiant in nobis, and having trifled with some
places of S. Ambrose, S. Jerome, and S. Austin, whom he principally made use of,
as Berenger insinuates, he forms his conclusion in these terms, Specie geruntur
ista non veritate. And these are the things which as our Author thinks agree
with Bertram's Book.

BUT these reflections which our Author pretends one may also make on the Book
of Bertram, are either uneflectual for his design, or want a foundation. 1.
Nothing hinders that two works touching the Eucharist may have been short
enough to be equally treated as small Books. 2. I have showed that our Author
is mistaken. when he calls Bertram's Book an obscure and intricate piece. Even
Ascelin does not scruple to treat John Scot as an Heretic by reason of his
sentiment on the Eucharist; and our Author has not well enough comprehended the
Text of Ascelin. 3. Two Authors who hold the same opinion should likewise aim
at the same mark. They must if they are endued with common sense, from the same
reflections in substance on the passages of the Fathers which they would have
to serve their designs. These two Characters then are too general and wide. And
for the two last considerations, 1. Who doubts that two Authors, one of whom
has apparently read the Book of the other, as Ratram may have read that of John
Scot, may not cite the same authorities? Ratram and Raban have done it, as we
are informed by the Anonymous of Cellot. 2. It Is not true Berenger has
insinuated that John Scot cited principally S. Ambrose, S. Jerome, and S.
Austin. Berenger says John Scot cannot be respected as an Heretic, without
throwing this ignominy on these Fathers and several others. But he does not say
that John Scot cited particularly these three holy Doctors, and should he have
said it, this character would be too general, there having been scarcely any of
the Authors of the 9th. Century, who have not affected to follow chiefly these
three Doctors. 3. Our Author ought not to propose as a character of identity,
that Bertram has drawn the same conclusion from the Orison Perficiant in nobis,
as John Scot has done: for to speak properly, this conclusion, Specie geruntur
ista non veritate, is not of Bertram, nor of John Scot, but the Text it self of
the Prayer which bears, Vt quoe nunc specie gerimus, veritate capiamus: now it
is apparent that they were equally obliged to conserve these terms in their
conclusion, and that they could neither of 'em do it, in a more natural manner
than in forming it thus, Specie gerunter ista non veritate. We must also
observe, and that as Ascelin relates, that John Scot cited this Orison under
the name of S. Gregory, whereas Bertram cites it as the common Service of the
Church, and that how great soever the conformity has been between the
conclusion of these Authors in respect of the sense and words, it is not so
great in respect of the construction of 'em. Bertram having these words, In
specie geruntur ista non in veritate, and John Scot these, Specie geruntur ista
non in veritate, which proves that these are two different Authors.

THE second witness which our Author produces is Berenger, who informs us that
the Book of John Scot was wrote at the entreaty of a King of France, and that
this King was Charlemain. Our Author pretends that these two particulars are to
be met with in the Book of Bertram, which is dedicated to Charlemain, and was
written by his order.

BUT these conformities conclude nothing; not the first, because 'twas very
possible that Charles the Bald had at the same time obliged two learned men to
write on the same subject; one who dwelt in his Palace, to wit, John Scot, and
the other whose name was so illustrious in his Kingdom, that he had already
obliged him to write on the questions of Predestination, to wit, Ratramnus.
This Character is too general. Not the second, for it does not seem that the
Book of our Lords Body and Blood, nor that of John Scot of the Eucharist, were
inscribed, Ad Carolum magnum Imperatorem, but only, Ad Carolum Regem, which is
what one may recollect from Sigebert, from the Abbot Trithemius, from John
Bishop of Rochester, and the De Script. Eccl. catai. c. 95. Catal. fol. 57.
Prolog. in lib 4. adv. Oecol. Indic. Belg.
Censurers of Doway, in reference to the Book of Bertram, whose Author they
place under the time of Lothairius, and Charles the Bald, although the Book of
Bertram has no mark of time, whereas without doubt they would have placed him
under the Reign of Charlemain, had the Manuscripts for title, Ad Carolum magnum
Imperatorem. And for that of John Scot, it is to be believed that it having
been written at the same time, and having an Inscription almost alike, Berenger
is mistaken in applying to Charlemain Sigeb, Catol. c. 85. and 99. De Script.
Eccl. fol. 53. and 55. Praefat. gener. in vit. Sanct. c. 4. sect. 7. Labbe de
Script. Eccl. T. 2. p. 820. and seq.
what ought to be referred to Charles the Bald. At least it is by a mistake of
this nature that Sigebert has placed Vsuard and Hincmar under the Reign of
Charlemain; wherein Sigebert has been followed by Trithemius, although both one
and the other have written under Charles the Bald, as all the world
acknowledges in respect of Hincmar, and as Bollandus and Labbeus acknowledge in
respect of Vsuard.

BUT supposing that the Book of John Scot was inscribed Ad Carolum Magnum
Imperatorem, as is at this day that of Bertram in the Impressions, how will it
hence follow that these two Books are but one and the same? Because, says our
Author, if we suppose that this Title is equally false, it is very difficult for
chance to produce the same falsity in two different Books, which in other
respects had so great resemblance. And if it be pretended that the Title is
true, it will be moreover very strange for the fancy of two different persons
to meet in giving it this Title.

THIS difficulty is a small one, we do not say that Ratram and John Scot have
given the Title of Charlemain to Charles the Bald, but affirm it not to be so
strange a thing, that Berenger having attributed to Charlemain what ought to be
applied to Charles the Bald, those that came after should refer to Charlemain a
like Title, this Prince passing for a lover of Theological learning, as having
been the restorer of it: The examples which I alleged prove the thing
possible, seeing they prove it to have happened. Berenger then is no more
favorable to our Author than Ascelin was.

AS to Durand of Troarn, I see moreover less reason why our Author Lib. de
Corp. and Sang. Dom. part 9.
should produce what Durand has said of the Council of Paris, wherein the Book
of John Scot was condemned, Damnatis Berengarii complicibus cum codice Joannis
Scoti ex quo ea quoe damnabantur sumpta videbantur, concilio soluto discessum
est: For if it be true, as our Author will have it, that by this way of
speaking Durand has insinuated that although in the Council of Paris John Scot's
Book was condemned, yet was it not so evident a matter, that the Book of John
Scot contains the sentiments of Berenger, which, as our Author believes, agrees
likewise with the Book of Bertram, which he treats as obscure and perplexed,
there can be nothing thence concluded but what will be to the disadvantage of
this Council, wherein was condemned for heretical, what only ought to be
esteemed obscure.

BUT seeing our Author designed to speak of the pretended obscurity of John
Scot's Writings, methinks he ought not to join to the place of Durand that of
Lanfranc, who reproaches Berenger, that as soon as the Council assembled at
Rome knew that by his highly praising the Book of John Scot, and blaming that
of Paschasus, Berenger had deviated from the Faith of the Church, he was thrown
out from the Communion of the Faithful; for it is not credible, the Council
would have been so severe against the perplexed style of John Scot, even to the
condemning his Book to the flames, had not his Book been apparently written
against Paschasus. And truly how could this be at first so understood both at
Paris, at Verceil, and at Rome as that in the sense of these Councils, to
praise Paschasus was properly to condemn John Scot?

OUR Author pretends in the last place, that seeing Lanfranc, Berenger, and
Ascelin, and the rest of the Writers of the 11th. Century, mention only John
Scot when they speak of the adversaries of Paschasus and their condemnation,
one must conclude that from the time of Lanfranc and Berenger, there was no
other Book known which appeared contrary to the Doctrine of Paschasus but that
of John Scot.

BUT the silence of these Authors is no more favorable to him than their
testimonies. In effect, supposing that in the 11th. Century there did not
appear any other Book against Paschasus but John Scot's, which cannot be
affirmed without rashness and injustice, considering the care which has been
taken to conceal from us whatsoever might inform us in this point; it does not
follow John Scot's Book and Bertram's be one and the same. By this reason must
the Epistle of Raban to Egilon, and his answer to Heribold Bishop of Auxerre,
wherein he has opposed the sentiments of Paschasus, be the Book of John Scot.
For there was no mention of these Writings of Raban, in the time of Berenger,
Lanfranc and Ascelin.

MOREOVER, our Author himself refutes his own opinion when he urges the silence
of these Authors; for it appears by the testimony of Lanfranc, Berenger, and
Ascelin, that Paschasus and John Scot were regarded as the two principal men in
this Dispute: it is then very likely that the Book of John Scot was directly
written against Paschasus: Paschasus was therein either named, or at least
apparently meant, which is not so in the Writings of Bertram, who handles
matters in a less polemical manner, and never names Paschasus, nor seems to
give the least hint of him, which has apparently tended to its preservation.
And this is what I had to remark on the first proof of our Author.

TO establish the second, to wit, that the proper character of the style of
Bertram is the same as that of John Scot, our Author pretends that the several
Article 3. of the Dissert. on John Scot.
judgments of knowing persons of the Roman Communion and of our own, touching
the Doctrine of Bertram's Book, are testimonies evident enough of the proper
character of his genius, that is to say, of a genius naturally confused and
perplexed, or dissimulative, which fears to discover clearly its thoughts on
the subject which it treats of, and affects to contradict it self the more
dexterously to insinuate its own sentiment, and avoid censures. He assures us
afterward that this character appears with greater clearness in John Scot's
Dialogue of Natures, and in his Book of Predestination; whence he concludes
that we must not doubt but the Book of Bertram is John Scot's. It is in the
same respect after our Author had alleged some instances of the contradictions
of John Scot, and judged uncharitably that they proceeded not from a perplexed
and confused head, seeing that when he will he most clearly explains his
notions without contradicting himself, but that these are only stratagems of a
Philosopher who was more a Pagan than a Christian, he affirms the same may be
found in Bertram's Book, which seems in twenty places to deviate from the
Doctrine of the Real Presence, and which yet seems in as many places to approve
of it, so that a man does not know where to have him.

BUT the two parts of our Authors remark contradict and oppose each other. For
if John Scot had naturally a confused and perplexed mind, how comes it that he
clearly explains his thoughts when he will, and keeps firm when he pleases
without contradicting himself. This is not the character of a confused and
perplexed head. Secondly, We ought not to believe that as soon as an Author
falls into contradiction, which has sometimes happened to the Fathers themselves,
as every body knows, and especially in matters which have perplexed John Scot,
and wherein he has contradicted himself, he then makes use of the stratagems of
a Philosopher that is more a Pagan than a Christian. Thirdly, Our Author
impertinently feigns that Bertram has affected obscurity and ambiguous
expressions. This Bertram, be he who he will, was certainly upheld by King
Charles the Bald, and Heribold the chief person of the Gallican Church was of
his sentiment as well as Raban, and what is more remarkable it appears that he
defended the public Doctrine of the Church. Fourthly, Our Author should not
alledg the judgment of the Centuriators of Magdebourg to show this Book to be
obscure in the judgments of those of our own party. If the Centuriators have
suspected some expressions of Bertram's Book, we know that from 1537. Bulinger
cited it with Elogies. Moreover, that some of the Doctors of the Roman
Communion have mentioned Bertram's Book, as if it made Commentar. in 1 ad Cor.
10. p. 190.
for them. This is purely the effect of this prejudice which has made them
produce the writings of Raban, as if Raban had been of their opinion, although
'twas well known in the 12th. Century that Raban wrote against Paschasus. The
Censurers who condemned Bertram's Book, and who are public persons, are sooner
to be believed than private men.

OUR Author remarks again a second character of the genius of John Scot, which
he believes is in Bertram's Book, to wit, these arguments put in form, this
crowd of Syllogisms and Enthymemes heapt up one upon another; these Maxims, and
these Principles drawn from the Philosophy of Aristotle. For as he shows by the
testimony of S. Prudencius, Bishop of Troy, and Florus, Deacon of the Church of
Lions, this is the way of John Scot in Disputes, he pretends that all this form
of reasoning is to be met with in the Book of the Body and Blood of our Lord,
of which he produces three instances.

BUT this other conformity is as ill grounded as the preceding ones. I confess
that the way of John Scot is very argumentative. One may observe it in his
Books of Predestination, as Prudencius and Florus have reproached him. But I do
not see that because there are some Philosophical Arguments in Bertram's Book,
(our Author produces but three, and those also contained in the same Period) he
must immediately draw this conclusion, therefore the Book of the Body and Blood
of our Lord is John Scot's. Nor yet had Bertram named any where Aristotle,
which John Scot failed not to do, as appears in several places of his
Manuscript Treatise of Natures. But Bertram has not so much as the name of this
Philosopher.

YET seeing our Author puts us upon considering the genius of these Authors,
let us show a little what is the genius of John Scot, and that of Bertram's,
whence it will clearly appear there is nothing so absurd as to make John Scot
Author of the Book of Bertram. Here are some of their Characters.

BERTRAM follows the holy Scriptures and the Fathers, as he protests De Not. l.
1. p. 56. and lib. 4. p. 167.
in the beginning; and John Scot prefers reason before any Authority. He makes
this a Maxim, whence he particularly esteems Philosophy, and sends us at every
moment to the Writings of Aristotle. He does thus in his Treatise of
Predestination, as Prudencius and Florus justly upbraid him.

BERTRAM follows closely his subject without letting it go out of sight; and
John Scot makes frequent Digressions, as we see particularly in his Manuscript
Treatise of Natures.

BERTRAM seems to stick to certain Authors, as S. Hierom, S. Augustine, S.
Fulgencius, Isidor, S. Gregory; and John Scot affects others, as S. Basil, S.
Gregory Nazianzen, whom he confounds with S. Gregory of Nysse, S. Ambrose, the
counterfeit Denis the Areopagite, Boethius, S. Maximus. So that a body may say
one of 'em applied himself to the Latin Fathers, and the other to the Greek
ones, whom he preferred before the Latin ones, as he himself affirms in his
Treatise of Natures.

BERTRAM's Latin style is polite enough for the Age he wrote in, and I find but
one Greek word in his whole Treatise, and which he alleges only because it is
found in a passage of S. Isidor which he cited. Whereas Epist. ad Card. Calv.
in Syll. Epist. Hiber. De Honest. dis. l. 24. c. 11.
John Scot affects a Greek phrase and manner of speaking, and intermixes his
Latin with a great many Greek words, which render his style very singular and
difficult, as it has been observed by Anastasius the Library Keeper, and Petrus
Crinitus.

BERTRAM has no barbarous words, whereas John Scot seems to affect them.

BERTRAM makes use only of Authors known for Orthodox, John T. 1. Maug. ^ 109.
111. Ibid. p. 112, 113.
Scot declares that he will not scruple to borrow Arms from heretical Books.

BERTRAM pertinently cites all along the holy Fathers, whereas the other quotes
them with much less coherence.

BERTRAM has a particular deference for S. Augustine, as may be seen at the end
of the Book of our Lords Body and Blood; whereas John Scot De Nature. l 5. p.
343.
does not so much matter his Authority, but that he often prefers the Greek
Fathers before him, refuting S. Augustine by their Authority.

BERTRAM might have combated the opinion of Paschasus by an infinite number of
Arguments taken from Philosophy, which he does not do; whereas John Scot makes
use every where of Philosophical Arguments even T. 1. Maug. p. 111, 112. 182.
to the mixing of 'em with matters which seem to claim an exemption from 'em.

THAT which distinguishes 'em yet more is, that Bertram delivers himself in a
most plain manner on the verity of the human nature of our Savior, since 'twas
exalted up into glory by the Resurrection. He teaches that his Body was visible
and palpable, whereas John Scot in his Book of Natures defends the
impalpability of our Lords Body; so that one may say, Lib. 2. p. 75, 76. 99.
he fell into the error of Origin on this question.

I might moreover show that John Scot, according to his genius and hypothesis,
must without doubt have written in a quite different manner from what Ratram
has done: and this is a remark which I made on an hundred places in his
Manuscript Dialogue of Nature, when I read it. For he rejects Lib. p. 17, 18.
20, 21, 22, 23, 24. 2^. 30. 35. 37, 38, 39. 42. 46, 47, 50. 56. Lib. 2. p. 76.
Lib. 2. p. 162. 178. Lib. 4. p. 292. 297. 300. 306, 3^7. Lib. 5. p. 343. 345.
348 350. 364.
therein almost all the consequences of Paschasus his Doctrine, in a very
convincing manner, but yet very different from the method of Bertram. Here is
an instance thereof; he maintains from the authority of S. Maximus, that bodies
have no Blood when they are glorified, which does accommodate it self with the
hypothesis of John Damascen, but not with those of the Real Presence and
Transubstantiation, as every body knows. Who doubts but he would have used this
argument on this question? I might produce several others; but since this
matter would carry me off too far, and that I have not the Manuscript by me, I
shall therefore content my self with the remarks which I have made, believing
them sufficient to show, that the genius of John Scot was wholly different from
Bertram's.

CHAP. V.
Other Difficulties which the Author of the Dissertation forms on the Name of
Bertram, Examined.

SEEING that the Book of our Lords Body and Blood is a piece of Ratram's, and
not of John Scot, we shall not be apt to suppose, as the Author of the
Dissertation does, that Berenger or his Disciples first published this Writing
under the name of Bertram. And truly it is a hard matter to know the
commendations which Hildebert Bishop of Man's, and since Arch Bishop of Tours
has given Berenger, and to fall into a suspicion so injurious to the memory of
this great man. Hildebert describes Berenger as a person

Cujus cura sequi naturam, legibus uti
Et mentem vitiis, ora negare dolis.
Virtutes opibus, verum proeponere falso.
A man that follows these Maxims, and those who are taught by him, are far
enough from all manner of deceit. I need only then show that supposing
Bertram's Book were John Scot's, the effect would not cease to be near upon the
same, because John Scot has been a man of great note, and authority in the 9th.
Century. But because our Author imagins that the name of Bertram, under which
this Book has first appeared, proves clearly that it is not Ratram's, it is
fitting before this to consider his Observations,

THE first of which amounts to this, that Sigebert, Trithemius, and Dissert.
Art. 3. sect. 3.
Cellot's Anonymous, which are the only Authors who have spoken of Bertram,
attribute to him no other works, than those of the Body and Blood of our Lord,
and of Predestination, of which, these two first Authors make no mention, in
speaking of John Scot, although it be most certain that John Scot has written two
Books on these same subjects; whence he concludes that Bertram is a fictitious
Author, which at bottom is no other than John Scot. Thus does the Author of the
Dissertation argue.

BUT there is nothing solid in this remark. First, The Book of John Scot of
Predestination is dedicated to Hincmar, and Pardulus; whereas Sigebert remarks
expressly that that of Bertram, or of Ratram, was dedicated to Charles the Bald,
as we see in effect in the Impression of this Book of Ratram, which Mr. Mauguin
has published. Secondly, Trithemius confirms in two places the Text of
Sigebert, although in another place he says also that Bertram's Book of the Body
and Blood of our Lord was dedicated to Charles, which Sigebert was silent in.
Thirdly, It is false that Cellot's Anonymous had the name of Bertram, he has
always Ratram's in the Manuscript of Corbie; and in the two Manuscripts of the
Abbey of S. Victor we find that in one place this Anonymous gives for
adversaries to Paschasus, Rabanus and Intramus, and in the following page
Babanus and Ratramnus, neither in one nor in the other of these two places has
the Transcriber the name of Bertram, which would be strange if the Title which
this Book has had since the 11th. Century were that of Bertram, and not that of
Ratram, as we affirm. Fourthly, It is false that Authors speak but of two
pieces attributed to Bertram: Trithemius says in two places that Bertram De
Script. Eccl. fol. 57. and in chron. Hirsaug.
wrote several other Books. Fifthly, The silence of the Anonymous is
impertinently alleged touching the other works of Bertram, seeing he has not
the name of Bertram, and should he have had the name, his drift would not carry
him to speak of any other Writing of Bertram, but that of the Eucharist.
Sixthly, If Sigebert mentioned not the Book of the Eucharist which John Scot
wrote by the order of Charles the Bald, there can be nothing concluded hence
unless it may be affirmed by the same reason, that his other works, as that of
Natures, have been attributed to other Authors. Seventhly, There is nothing
more natural than to say that Trithemius has comprehended the Books of
Predestination, and of the Eucharist of John Scot, when he says Joannes dictus
Erigena scripsit quoedam alia. Ibidem.


THE second remark of this Author is, that those who speak of Bertram, Dissert.
ibid.
do not know him particularly, nor agree about his true name; that Sigebert who
in some Manuscript Copies calls him Ratram, does not denote the quality he had,
which he is wont to do in speaking of other Authors; that the Abbot Trithemius
who speaks of Bertram in three places, could not say in what Diocese, nor in
what Monastery he made himself so famous, although he always made these kind of
remarks in speaking of the Illustrious men of the order of S. Bennet, so that
there is reason to believe that he too lightly made the Elogium of Bertram,
whose works were apparently unknown to him; in fine, that the Anonymous who
designs the other Authors by their qualities, as Raban, Heribold, Paschasus,
Egilon speaks of Ratram as of an unknown person, Ratramnus quidam, denoting
that he knew nothing of him, but that his name was Ratram, or Intram, as speak
the Manuscripts of the Abbey of S. Victor.

BUT our Author is mistaken in his suppositions. First, It is not true Sigebert
gives constantly to the Writers, of which he speaks, the Ecclesiastical
qualifications they had, the contrary appears from the 84. 91. 93. 94. 103. and
other Chapters of his Catalogue. Secondly, I know not what Trithemius was wont
to do in his second Book of Writers of the Order of S. Bennet, I never saw this
work. Yet the little certainty which I found in the judgment of our Author, on
the custom of Sigebert, makes me believe that he has not judged better of that
of Trithemius. In the main, I am not greatly solicitous whether Trithemius has
seen, or not seen the Writings which he attributes to Bertram. Yet I cannot but
observe here the vanity Hieron. ab ang. Forti Epist. 3. p. 63.
of men's judgments. In 1652. the Elogies which Trithemius gives to Bertram,
oblige Mr. Herman to believe, that the Book of the Body and Blood of our Lord,
is the most Orthodox piece in the world. And in 1669. these same commendations
which Trithemius gives to Bertram, oblige the Author of the Dissertation to
affirm that Trithemius never read it, and so praised Bertram without any
consideration. Thirdly, It seems to me that the manner after which Cellot's
Anonymous has treated Ratram, not knowing him, but by his Book, makes him not
an Author unknown to others. For supposing Ratram were entirely unknown to this
Anonymous, who lived in the 12th. Century, we know that Florus the famous
Deacon of the Guil. Malmsb. A. 883. Sim. Dunelm, p. 148. Math. Westminster. ann. 889.
apud Baron. A. 1118. sect. 29.
Church of Lions was likewise treated no better than a quidam by the Historians
of the 12th. and 13th. Century, and Paschasus himself was so little known by
Gaudefredus the Monk of Claravod, at the end of the 12th. Century, that
Gaudefredus confounds him with Paschasus Deacon of the Roman Church, who lived
about the year 500. Amalarius was very famous in the 9th. Century, and well
known by Lewis the Debonnair, by whose order he See Labb. of Writ Eccles. in
Amalar.
wrote. The Transcribers have corrupted his name in the Catalogue of Sigebert,
and turned it into Attularius; Trithemius speaks of him in his Catalogue under
the name of Hamularius, and after an hundred Disputes he remains still in a
manner unknown. Fourthly, It is surprising enough to see the Author of the
Dissertation attributing to the Authors themselves the faults of the
Transcribers, who have written the name of Ratram. He tells us that Sigebert
gives to Bertram the name of Ratram in some Manuscript Copies, that Trithemius
speaks of him under three different names, of Bertram, of Bertramnus, and of
Bertrannus, that the Anonymous Author calls him Ratramnus, or Intram: I know
not whether he speaks in good earnest, or to deride us: But if he speaks
seriously that those who according to his supposition changed the Title of the
Book of John Scot, made it pass on purpose under these different names in
different Copies 'twould have been good before a conjecture of this kind was
offered, to undertake the confirming of this discovery by the Authority of some
Manuscripts of the Body and Blood of our Lord, wherein might be seen these
different names.

THE last mark of the supposition which the Author of the Dissertation Ibidem.
offers is, that if we will not acknowledge Bertram for a feigned Author, and
the Book of the Body and Blood of our Lord for the work of John Scot, we shall
find our selves forced to admit such strange consequences, and which approach
so near to impossibilities, that the like cannot be paralleled by all Antiquity.

BUT we need only to run through the principal difficulties which our Author
proposes to find that all this is nothing. First, It is not an absurdity to
pretend that in the 9th. Century there were two Authors, one named John Scot,
known of all the world for the Author of the first Translation of the Hierarchy
of the feigned Denis into Latin: The other called Ratramnus, whose name through
the ignorance of Transcribers, was corrupted into that of Bertram, or
Bertramnus, or Bertran, as that of Amalarius has been into Attularius, that of
Aimoinus into Aumoinus, Ammonius and Annonius, under which this Author was
first published at Paris in the year 1514. Secondly, Neither is it any more an
absurdity to say they were both of 'em adversaries to Paschasus, not sercet, as
our Author affirms, but open ones, in writing against his Doctrine. The
Anonymous Author mentions several adversaries of Paschasus, as Raban and
Ratramnus. Thirdly, It is not so monstrous an impossibility to maintain that
Ratramnus and John Scot wrote both of 'em on the subject of the Eucharist, and
on Predestination: There were in their times two Disputes on these subjects,
and in effect we have their two Treatises of Predestination, published by Mr.
Mauguin. We know that in the 11th. Century the Popes burnt John Scot's on the
Eucharist, and without doubt their partisans who suppressed all Berenger's
Books, and those of his Disciples, have likewise exterminated with the greatest
care the Copies of that of John Scot. By good hap that of Ratramnus, who is
mentioned in the 12th. Century, as an adversary to Paschasus, is yet extant,
under the corrupted name of Bertram. Fourthly, Neither is there any absurdity
to conceive that the Writings of these two Authors touching the Eucharist have
been, the one dedicated to King Charles the Bald, and the other composed by his
Order. Ratramnus and John Scot were both of 'em particularly known and esteemed
by this Prince. Ratramnus has written by his Order the Book of Predestination,
and John Scot in obedience to his Commands has translated the Hierarchy of the
pretended Denis, and was always greatly esteemed by him. Fifthly, It is not
absurd to believe that John Scot was obliged to write on the same subject as
Ratramnus; their judgment was so considerable in their time, that Hincmar and
Pardulus, two famous Bishops, obliged John Scot to write on Predestination, and
an Assembly of Bishops obliged Ratramnus to write against the objections of the
Greeks, which Pope Nicholas had sent them. Sixthly, It is an imaginary
difficulty to say they have both of 'em had the fancy to give to Charles the
Bald, the Title of Charlemain. I have showed that they have not done it; but
that Berenger has been mistaken in explaining this Title Ad Carolum Regem: and
that it is very possible those who Printed the Book of Bertram have understood
this Title as Berenger did in a like subject, and in the same dispute.
Seventhly, It is not an impossibility for two Books of the Body and Blood to
contain each of 'em but one Book of a very indifferent size. Eighthly, There is
no more difficulty to believe that two Writers who treat on the same subject
have used the same Witnesses, the same Orison which was said every day in the
Service, than that they have drawn the same conclusions, and in terms perhaps
not absolutely the same, but very near one another. Paschasus bragged in his
Letter to Frudegard, that this Orison was made for him, which caused all his
Adversaries to examine it, and urge the proper terms of it against him, without
changing any thing therein. Neither do I any more believe that after what I
have represented of the genius of these Authors, any body will imagine they were
both of 'em equally addicted to Aristotle's Philosophy, and were both wont to
illustrate the mysteries of Religion by Arguments put in form, by Enthymemes,
by Maxims and Principles drawn from Philosophy: I have showed the difference
which there is between the genius of Bertram and that of John Scot. Tenthly, It
is equally false that neither of 'em dared to discover their minds touching the
Real Presence. Our Author himself will have Bertram's Book to be John Scot's,
and John Scot's Book was burned in a full Council, because it opposes it.
Eleventhly, There is no great matter of wonder that after the question was
moved, and the Book of John Scot burned, there should be more diligent search
made after the Books which respected a Dispute touching which Berenger
maintained that Paschasus gave the occasion by his novelties, and thus the Book
of Ratram has appeared since that of John Scot has disappeared.

IN fine, twelfthly, There are no rational people that will be perplexed with
this imaginary difficulty of the Author of the Dissertation, to wit, that of
one of these Authors, which is Bertram, there should remain nothing that is
certain to posterity, neither in respect of his quality, nor his name, although
his Book has remained, and that the quality of the other, to wit, John Scot,
should be well known, although his Book be lost. It is apparent enough who
Ratramnus was, and that Bertram is but a name corrupted through the ignorance of
the Transcribers. But what I now represented is sufficient to dissipate the
illusion, which the name of Bertram had produced, and all reasonable people
will be fully convinced that Ratram is the Author of the Book of the Body and
Blood of our Lord, and not John Scot. We have only then to show that the
authority of this Book will be of no less weight, supposing John Scot were the
Author of it. For which purpose I have designed the second part of this Answer.

THE SECOND PART.
That the Authority of the Book of the Body and Blood of our Lord, Published
under the Name of Bertram, will be never the less considerable, supposing John
Scot were the Author of it.

CHAP. VI.
That John Scot was in great esteem both in his own, and succeeding Generations.

THERE are so many things which advance the repute of John Scot, that one may
well wonder Mr. Arnaud and the Author of the Dissertation should mention him
with such lessening terms, and persuade themselves, that to diminish the credit
of the Book of the Body and Blood of our Lord, they needed only to attribute it
to John Scot. For he was a person who by his merit had gained the esteem and
affection of Charles the Bald, which is to say, of a judicious Prince, who took
to heart the interests of Religion; as Ratramn praises him in his Book of
Predestination. These two things, says he, exalt your Majesty, in a manner
really illustrious. T. 1. Maug. p. 29.
That you seek after the secrets of the heavenly Wisdom, and burn with
Religious Zeal. And indeed this Prince deserved the Title of Orthodox which
Council. apud Vermer. T. 2. Nov. Bibl. Mss. p. 735.
was given him by a Council held in 869. Henry a Monk of Auxerre praises him
also for his knowledge, and piety, as we see in the Epistle Dedicatory in the
Life of S. Germain of Auxerre, related by Du Chene, and Baronius. But Hist. Fr.
T. 1. p. 470. Annal. 876. sect. 3. 39. T. 3. A. 886. sect. 10, 11.
amongst other things he commends him for having drawn over into France,
Learned Ireland, meaning thereby John Erigena, that is to say, John the Irish
man, according to the Observation of Alford the Jesuit in his English Annals.

HE that wrote the lives of the Bishops of Auxerre, describing the advantages
which Heribald had in his Youth, reckons for a great happiness that he was
brought up under the tuition of John Scot. He applied himself, T. 2. Nov. Bib.
Mss. p. 4^5.
says he, to John Scot who in that time imparted to the Gauls the Rays of his
Wisdom. He was a long time his Disciple, and learned from him the art of
knowing divine and human things, and to judge rightly of good and evil.

THE Authority of John Scot was so considerable in the 9th. Century, that
Hincmar Archbishop of Reims, and Pardulus, Bishop of Laon, who found
themselves engaged in sharp Disputes touching Predestination and Grace with
Gotthescalc, believed they could not do better for their party than to oblige
John Scot to write on these two subjects. He did so in effect, and T. 2. Maug.
132.
although the choice which he made of the worst side, drew on him the censures of
the Councils of Valence and Langres, and that Hincmar himself defended him but
weakly, yet did he keep up his credit, and Charles the Bald set him upon
translating the works which bear the name of Denis the Areopagite.

HIS Reputation maintained it self not only in France, but passed over into
Italy, and Rome it self. Anastasius the Popes Library Keeper gives him
particular Commendations in a Letter which he wrote to Charles the Bald. I
speak, says he, of John Scot, of whom I have heard say, that he is a Saint.
Syll. Epist. Hyber. n. 33. p. 64. and seq.
It is a work of the Spirit of God to have made this man so zealous as well as
eloquent.

WE may likewise here add the kindness which Alfred King of England had for
him, and the Employs which this Prince gave him; but of this I shall discourse
hereafter.

I shall only say that John Scot was in effect, worthy of the esteem and
affection which the world showed him, his Wit was lively and piercing; he was
not only a profound Philosopher, but also very well read in the Fathers, and
especially the Greek ones, which was very rare in the 9th. Century, wherein the
learning of the greatest men was bounded by the knowledge of S. Hierom, S.
Augustine, Gregory the Great, Isidor of Sevil: and their skill lay in copying
out these Authors word for word.

IN fine, we may moreover observe in favor of John Scot, that although his Book
of the Eucharist, was condemned in the Councils of the 11th. Century, yet the
reputation of the Author was perpetuated in the following Ages, as appears from
the authentic Testimonies, which all Historians give him. I shall not relate
here what Ingusphus, William of Malmsbury, Simeon of Durham, Roger de Hoveden,
Matthew of Westminster, and Florent of Worcester have said of him: we may find
this in the Answer to the first Part 3, chapter 3.
Treatise of the Perpetuity.

WE need only add to these testimonies, First, that of the Manuscript of the
Library of S. Victor, which has for Title, Memoriale Historiarum: Tempore eodem
fuit Joannes Scotus vir perspicacis ingenii and mellitoe facundioe qui rogatu
Caroli Calvi jamdudum verbo ad verbum Hierarcham Dionysii de Groeco in Latinum
transtulerat, and post super eundem librum fecit commentum, fecitque librum de
naturoe divisione, and librum de Eucharistia, qui postea lectus est, and
condemnatus in Synodo Vercellensi a Papa Leone celebrata, eodem anno quo
Lanfrandus ab errore Berengarii se purgavit, unde, sicut dicit Lanfrandus, ipse
in fide desipuit. Tandem ivit in Angliam ad Regem Elfredum, and apud
Monasterium Malmsburiense a pueris quos docebat, and a graphiis suis, ut
fertur, perforatus martyr oestimatus est, Secondly, That of Petrus Crinitus, De
honesta Discipl. 14. c 11. Genev. p. 30.
who speaks of him in almost the same terms. Thirdly, That of Naucler, Alfred,
says he, had enriched the College of Oxford, especially with John Scot, as with
a Divine Star, which he drew over into England from France, where he was in
favor with Charles the Bald.

If there needs any thing more to confirm the reputation of our Author, we
shall scarcely find any one to whom there can be given any authority.

IT is true that his Book of the Eucharist was condemned by the Roman Church in
the 11th. Century; but it is remarkable that neither this Book nor its Author
were condemned in the 9th. Century, wherein he lived, and that his adversaries
who were greatly enraged against him, as appears by the Letter of the Church of
Lions, and the terms of the Council of Valence, and which consequently was not
in a condition to pardon him a Heresy on the subject of the holy Sacrament,
yet did not accuse him on this Article. Cellot the Jesuit being not willing to
agree concerning the true reason why in that time they did not reproach John
Scot about the Doctrine of the Eucharist, turns the business into admiration,
and offers a pitiful reason of this silence; I cannot sufficiently wonder, says
he, that leaving Append. ad Hist. Gothesc. p. 583.
the error which John Scot was said to hold touching the Eucharist; these
droans (for thus does he call those of Lions) should only apply themselves to
the subject of Predestination. This shows, adds he, that they did not matter so
much the defending of the Faith, as the ruining the Party of those of Reims;
which is to say of Hincmar and his friends, who had condemned Gotthescalc. But
both his astonishment and reason too would equally vanish, if he would have
taken notice of what every one sees, that the true cause why John Scot was not
condemned in the 9th. Century, but in the 11th. was, that his belief was
conformable to that of the Church of the 9th. Age, and became not otherwise
till afterward when the followers of Paschasus prevailed.

THE Author of the Dissertation has taken another course to fully the Artic. 1.
of his Dissert. o^ John Scot.
same of John Scot's name, and gives a reason why his Book touching the
Eucharist was not condemned in the 9th. Century. He says there is in the
Library of S. Germains des pres two Manuscripts of a Dialogue, entitled, Of
Natures, the Author of which is this same John Scot, and that this Book is full
of Errors. He discourses on these Errors with the greatest art and care, and
draws from 'em these two consequences. 1. That John Scot was a man very likely
to invent Heresies contrary to the Doctrine of the Church of his time. 2. We
must not be astonished that Heresies, having been only tanght by a particular
person, who had no followers, that the Book wherein he taught them should not
be publicly condemned. And this is what he believes the Dialogue of Natures
does invincibly show, because that on one hand it is full of Errors, and on the
other, we do not find it was condemned.

AS to the first, I freely acknowledge this Book is John Scot's, and that there
are Errors in it; but the Author of the Dissertation ought not to conceal that
John Scot did not offer 'em of his own head, but herein only followed the
opinions of several famous Fathers amongst the Greeks and Latins, as S. Basil,
S. Gregory of Nysse, and S. Ambrose, the pretended Denis the Areopagite, and S.
Maximus; which does not hinder but these Fathers have been always in great
veneration in the Church. John Scot cites them on each of these opinions, he
sets down their passages; which made William of Malmsbury to say, That his Book
may profitably serve to resolve difficult questions, provided he be excused in
some things, in which he has wandered from the way of the Latins, by reason of
his following too much the Greeks.

AS to the second consequence there is a great deal of difference between the
Book of John Scot of Natures, and that of the Eucharist of the same Author.
First, The Book of Natures perhaps has not been known but to few persons,
because 'twas wrote at the entreaty of a particular person, to wit of Wolfadus
Canon of Rheims, whereas that which he wrote on the Eucharist must needs have
been public, seeing he wrote by order of Charles the Bald, and in a time
wherein the novelties of Paschasus had excited much clamor in the Church.
Secondly, Although the Book of Natures had been known, the errors which are
therein contained being of the Fathers, whose names are venerable in the
Church, we must not think it strange that they were spared out of respect to
the Fathers, for whom the world has ever had so great a veneration and
condescension, although they have not approved all their sentiments. But supposing
the Church ever believed Transubstantiation, and Real Presence, the error
broached and maintained by John Scot in the Book of the Eucharist contrary to
these two Articles, would have been his only, and not the Fathers, and
consequently nothing would have hindered the world from exercising the greatest
severity against John Scot's Book, and openly condemning it. Thirdly, The
errors which are in the Book of Natures are speculative errors in matters out
of the common road and reach of sense; whereas that of the Book of the
Eucharist would have been a particular error on a Sacrament, which is
continually before the eyes of Christians; for supposing, as I said, the Church
of that time had believed Transubstantiation and the Real Presence, as the
Roman Church believes them at this day, and adored the Sacrament as the proper
Son of God Incarnate, the error of John Scot would have overthrown the Faith
and Rites of all Christians, and would have had as many adversaries as there
are persons in the Church: The King himself, by whose order he wrote, would
have been interess'd to have condemned so pernicious a Book, to avoid the being
suspected that he himself sowed Heresies by the borrowed hand of John Scot. It
is then evident that the two consequences of the Author of the Dissertation are
insufficient to diminish or eface the reputation and authority of John Scot's
name: and thus when the Book which bears the name of Bertram, should be in
effect of John Scot, this Book would not cease to be of great weight and great
authority.

CHAP. VII.
An Examination of what the Author of the Dissertation alleges against the
Employs of John Scot.

THE Author of the Dissertation finding himself disturbed with the several
testimonies which Historians give John Scot, has thought good to fall foul on
'em and maintain these four things: First, That John Scot was neither the
Disciple of Venerable Bede, nor the Companion Art. 4, 5, 6, 7. of his Dissert.
on John Scot.
of Alcuinus, nor the Founder of the University of Paris. Secondly, That he was
not Abbot of Etheling in England. Thirdly, That the History of his Martyrdom is
uncertain. Fourthly, That he has not been put in the rank of Martyrs by the
Authority of the Supreme Prelates, and that his name is not to be found in any
Edition of the Roman Martyrology.

FOR the first of these Articles, I know not why the Author of the Dissertation
should trouble himself about it; seeing Mr. Claude mentioned nothing like it in
his discourse of John Scot. We know that Bid died in Artic. 4.
735. that Alcuinus died in 804, and that John Scot was living in the year 870.
We acknowledge also that John Scot could not be the Founder of the University of
Paris, seeing that this University did not begin till about the middle of the
12th. Century, as all learned men are agreed. Yet can it not be denied but that
those who fell into these mistakes, (to wit, of making John Scot Bede's
Disciple the Companion of Alcuinus, and the Founder of the University of Paris,
by seeing the name of John Scot so famous and renowned amongst Authors) would
advance by the same of his person the Original of the University of Paris,
which helps to establish his Reputation and Authority, and to combat in general
the pretensions of the Author of the Dissertation.

AS to the second Article wherein our Author maintains that John Erigenus was
not Abbot of Aetheling, Mr. Claude contented himself with saying in general,
That he was made in England Abbot of a Monastery of the Royal Foundation.
Ingulphus says the same, and remarks in particular that this Monastery was that
of Aetheling.

SO that here we have at least Mr. Claude's sincerity secured. Harsfield Sect.
9. cap. 12.
and Cellot the Jesuit have related as well as he, the testimony of Ingulphus;
and I know not why he might not make use of it as well as these Authors Append.
ad Hist. Goth. p. 885.
who are of the Roman Church.

I confess it is somewhat difficult to determine precisely whether the testimony
of Ingulphus be absolutely true, when he says Alfred gave the Abbey of Aetheling
to John Scot; for I know there are Authors who deny that John the Abbot of
Aetheling was the same John Scot whom we mean. We will see presently what are
the reasons which the Author of the Dissertation brings to prove that these are
two different persons; yet howsoever, it is true in general Authors agree that
John Scot, the same we speak of, was received very kindly by King Alfred, and
had a very considerable employ in England, when he retired thither; which is
sufficient to keep up his Reputation, and show he was in no sort respected as
an Heretic, who withstood the constant and universal Faith of the Church.

MOREOVER, the reasons which the Author of the Dissertation offers to oppose
the testimony of Ingulphus, who will have John Scot to be Abbot of Aetheling,
are very slight ones, and fall short of convincing or persuading. He agrees
there was one John who was made Abbot of Aetheling, but will have him to be
another than our John Scot. His first proof is, that John Abbot of Aetheling
was of the County of Essex, which is to say, of the County of the Western
Saxons, whereas the other was an Irish man.

BUT this proof is a very weak one; for these terms, Ex Saxonum genere, as
speak Asserus and Roger de Howden, or, Ex antiqua Sazonia oriundum, as speaks
William of Malmsbury, are not inconsistent with the surname of Scot, or
Erigenus; that is to say, Irish man. Nothing can hinder but that he might have
been originally from the County of Essex and an Irish man by the abode which he
made in Ireland. It may happen that our French men have spoken less exact of
the true Country of John Scot, than Asserus has done, who knew him more
particularly. In effect Harsfield Will have John Scot to be surnamed Irish man,
only on the account of the abode which he made in Ireland, where he had been
brought up, but was really an English man, and of the Country of Essex, We know
that the surnames of Countries have been ever given to diverse persons, by
reason of the abode which they made therein. Cicero gives two Countries to
every man, one the Country where he is born, and the other the Country which
has favorably received him. When once this last kind of surnames is become as
proper, one retains 'em till death, and after it; which is not inconsistent
with what may be said moreover of the Country wherein a man is born. And
therefore Ingulphus who first deried the Text of Asserus, did not believe that
for this pretended difference of the name of Irish man, and of the Country of
Essex, a man ought to make two John Scots, the one a Saxon, and the other an
Irish man. Similiter, says he, de veteri Saxonia Joannem cognomento Scotum
accerrimi ingenii Philosophum ad se alliciens, Adelingioe Monasterii sui
constituit Praelatum. When he says, De veteri Saxonia Joannem cognomento
Scotum; he shows sufficiently that there is not according to him any
inconsistency in making him of the Country of Essex, and yet giving him the
surname of Irish; the one designing the Country of his Birth, and the other
that of his Abode. The Author of the Dissertation tells us that Ingulphus has
suffered himself to be imposed on by some Impostor, who was affection'd to John
Scot. What is this but a mere conjecture in the Air, which has neither proof
nor ground, nor any appearance of truth?

THE second proof of our Author is taken from that he pretends John Scot
withdrew into England to avoid the shame which he endured of being reputed an
Heretic in France, whereas John Abbot of Aetheling was sent for over into
England by a messenger from Alfred.

THIS proof is no more conclusive than the rest: For first, Ingulphus
overthrows this pretended occasion of the retreat of John Scot into England, by
saying that Alfred drew him over to him. The first who supposed this cause of
his retreat was Simeon of Durham, or William of Malmsbury, of whom the Author
of the Dissertation says Simeon has borrowed it. Now William of Malmsbury wrote
a long time sine Ingulphus; others have followed Simeon of Durham, without
examining whether what he said was well grounded or not. So that all their
testimonies do reduce themselves to that of one man, posterior to Ingulphus,
and who consequently by all the laws of History cannot be preferred before him.
Secondly, These same Historians who will have the cause of John Scot's retreat
into England to be an effect of the displeasure which he had to be accused of
Heresy by his adversaries, yet do acknowledge that he was drawn over thither by
Alfred, Cujus munificentia illectus, and magisterio ejus, ut ex Scriptis Regis
intellexi, Melduni resedit, says Simeon of Durham, which is to say, that he was
won by the Kings liberality, to be his Tutor. Roger de Howden and Matthew of
Westminster say the same thing in the same terms: so that according to them
these two things do not contradict one another, that John Scot was called into
England by Alfred, and yet came thither through some disgust which his enemies had
given him in France.

THIRDLY, French Historians say also that John Scot was called over into
England by Alfred. Observe here what an ancient Chronicle of France says which
ends in 1137. At the entreaty of Alfred, John Scot returned Hist. Fran. T. 3.
p. 359.
from France, where he was with Charles the Bald. But fourthly, If we suppose
that this John Scot, whom the Historians say was fetched over from France into
England, together with S. Grimbald, by an Ambassador, sent on purpose by Alfred
for him, is different from our John Scot; it cannot be said who he was, Asserus
speaks of him; not as of an obscure person, but as a famous man. The King, says
he, sent beyond Sea into France Ambassadors, to search for Masters, and drew
over Grimbald a Priest and a Monk; he brought over likewise John, who was also
a Priest and a Monk, a man of a great wit, and well versed in all Sciences. Let
us be informed who this famous man was in France, this man that was so well
known, and deserved to be sent for by an Embassage? For we do not any where
find there was in France after the middle of the 9th. Century any other man of
this Character, and name of John, but John Scot. We find indeed mention made of
of Grimbald, that he was a Monk of S. Bertin, who understood Music, but was
far from equalling in Wit and Learning this John Scot, of whom Asserus speaks.
How then came it to pass that there remains no trace of this pretended John,
supposing this was not he.

THE Author of the Dissertation's third foundation is, that John Scot withdrew
from France into England about the year 864. whereas John Scot the Abbot of
Aetheling, companion of S. Grimbald came over there but in 884. But why must
John Scot have passed over from France into England, about the year 864.
Because, says our Author, Nicholas the First, prayed Charles the Bald to send
him speedily John Scot, or at least to suffer him no longer to remain in his
University of Paris, lest he should corrupt it with his Errors. Hinc est quod
dilectioni vestrae vehementer rogantes mandamus, quatenus Apostolatui nostro
Joannem repraesentari faciatis, aut certe Parisius in Studio, cujus jam olim
Capital fuisse perhibetur, morari non sinatis, ne cum tritico sacri eloquii
grana Lolii and Zizaniae miscere dignoscatur; and panem quaerentibus, venenum
porrigat. 'Twas without doubt, adds our Author, after these Letters that John
Scot withdrew into England. Seeing then Pope Nicolas has governed the Church
since the year 858, till 868. We must place the arrival of John Scot into
England about the year 864. that is to say, twenty years before Alfred caused
Grimbald and John to come to him. For Asser assures us this was in the year 884.

THIS reasoning supposes facts which are not proved. First, This fragment of
the Letter of Nicolas I. to Charles the Bald, wherein is mention of John Scot
and the University of Paris, is a piece supposed a great while after the 9th.
Century; for the University of Paris, as I have already observed, began not
before the 12th. Century; and these terms of Studium and of Capital, to express
the University and Rector of it, were not in use in Nicolas I. his time.
Secondly, The Author of the Dissertation informs us that the Letter of
Anastasius the Popes Library Keeper to Charles the Bald, of which we have
already spoken, was written in the year 875. and proves it by a Manuscript of
the Jesuits of Bourges, which bears expressly this date. Now in this Letter
Anastasius gives singular commendations to John Scot, calling him virum per
omnia sanctum; what likelihood is there then, Anastasius would give praises of
this kind to a man who was esteemed at Rome an Heretic, and was obliged for
this reason, and the Popes accusation, to withdraw from the Court of Charles?

OUR Author impertinently supposes from the testimony of Asserus, that John the
Abbot of Aetheling passed not over into England till 884. Had he read Asserus
with a little more reflection, he would have found that although Asserus refers
the sending for of Grimbald and John, to the year 884 yet does he not thereby
intend precisely to fix it to the year 884. Asserus recapitulates on the year
884. the private life of Alfred, since the year 868. which was the year of his
Marriage, omitting several important things that he might not interrupt the
narration of the Wars of this Prince, even as in the year 868. he had
recapitulated whatsoever Alfred had done during his youth. So Asserus does not
say in that year, as he must have done if he would have precisely designed the
year 884. but he says in these times, his temporibus.

THE fourth proof of the Author of the Dissertation is no better than the rest.
He says that Mr. Claude having written that John Scot died in the year 884. or
in the preceding year, he could not be this John whom Alfred the King of
England sent for by reason of his Reputation and Learning, seeing that this
John was not made Abbot till the year 888. or 887. as all Historians agree, and
that he began not his regency at Oxford till the year 886. as we find in the
Annals of the Monastery of Winchester, of which Grimbald was made Abbot at the
same time as John his companion, was of that of Aetheling.

BUT there is no solidity in this proof. First, It is plain one cannot gather
any thing certain from Historians, either touching the year of John Scot's
death, nor that wherein Alfred called Grimbald and John into England. Secondly,
Neither is there any certainty in the Annals of Winchester, which refer to the
year 886. the foundation of the University of Oxford by Grimbald, and John his
companion two years after their arrival in England; for this so great an
antiquity of the University of Oxford is a mere fable, as has been proved by
Bishop Usher: so that whatsoever can be reasonably Antiq. Brit. p. 340, 341,
342.
concluded hence is, that there being nothing certain in all this Chronology,
there can be nothing alleged hence to conclude that John Scot died in the year
883. or 884. And consequently the conjecture of Mr. Claude (who has only in
this respect followed Baronius may be respected as doubtful.) But to conclude
hence that John Scot, and John the Abbot of Aetheling were two different
persons, is very absurd.

AFTER all, two things clearly enough show that this whole criticism of the
Author of the Dissertation, who puts a difference between John Scot and John
the Abbot of Aetheling, is merely imaginary, and that in effect they are but
one and the same person. The first is, That amongst the persons of the 9th.
Century who were in any wise famous in France, we find no mention of this
pretended John, whom Alfred sent for. The other, that it is evident Asserus (who
was Contemporary of John Scot) has made no mention of him, if John Scot were
not the Abbot of Aetheling, which is very strange, seeing it cannot be denied
but John Scot was a most famous man, much respected by Alfred, and consequently
well known to Asserus, who lived in the same Court.

IF we consider these two reasons with an unbiassed mind, I am persuaded they
will be found stronger than all the conjectures of our Author. It is true one
may yet form a difficulty which our Author has not taken notice of, which is,
that Asserus seems to say this John of whom he speaks was Assassinated by his
Monks at Aetheling, whereas William of Malmsbury and the Historians who
followed him, assure us, that John Scot was killed by his Scholars at
Malmsbury, and there interred. But it is certain there could be nothing more
easy than to confound the circumstance of the place wherein John Scot was
assassinated, and take it for another, William of Malmsbury, who is the first
of those who laid the Scene of this Tragedy at Malmsbury, recorded it near 250.
years after it happened. Asserus does not say John Scot died on the spot, and it
will not seem impossible, that having been wounded at Aetheling, he was carried
to Malmsbury, or dying at Aetheling, his body was carried thither, or having
been Abbot of Aetheling and Malmsbury both together, as it was commonly the
custom of that time, for one man to have several Abbeys, this might give
occasion to this difference. Howsoever it be, it is far more reasonable to
conclude from the conformity of the relation of Asserus and William of
Malmsbury touching the main of the event, than from one only History, to make
two by reason of some slight diversity which is between 'em on the circumstance
of the place. And this seems the more likely, because, as I have already said,
we have the formal testimony of Ingulphus an Historian of the 11th. Century,
who assures us that this John the Abbot of Aetheling was no other but John Scot.

CHAP. VIII.
That John Scot was esteemed a Martyr.

IT IS certain the death of John Scot was respected as a kind of Martyrdom, T.
1. Maug. p. 739. Append. p. 585. Aunal. Angl. Ann. 883. sect. 41.
Du Val a Doctor of Sorbon, Cellot, and Alford Jesuits, have maintained this
against the unjust suspicions of Genebrard, and some others. Why then does the
Author of the Dissertation pretend in his 6th. Article, that this Martyrdom is
a thing doubtful.

THERE be two sorts of proofs which confirm the truth of this; the one real,
and the other verbal. The real is a stately Monument which was Guill. Malmsb.
de gest. Reg. Angl. l. 2. c. 4. p. 24.
set up for him in the Church of Malmsbury, and was to be seen there before the
12th. Century with this Inscription.

Clauditur hoc tumulo sanctus Sophista Joannes,
Qui ditatus erat jam vivens dogmate miro,
Martyrio tandem Christi conscendere regnum,
Quo meruit; sancti regnant per soecula cuncta.
William of Malmsbury has well conjectured that these Verses were ancienter
than his time, Scabri quidem, says he, and moderni temporis lima carentes, sed
ab antiquo non ita deformes.

TO this proof we must add the testimony of Gotzelin who has inserted John in
his Catalogue of English Saints, which he made in the beginning of the 12th.
Century, S. Adelmus, and Joannes Sapiens in loco qui dicitur Adesmibirig. Usser
de success. Eccl. c. 2.


WHEREUNTO we may add the testimony of almost all Historians. It Is thus the
continuer of Bid speaks, as also William of Malmsbury, Simeon of Durham, Roger
de Howden, Matthew of Westminster, Helinaud the Monk of Froidmond, the Author
of Memoriale Historiarum (whose passage I have related) Vincent de Beavais,
Antonin Archbishop of Florence, Baronius and several other modern Authors that
have followed them.

TO all which the Author of the Dissertation answers, that he acknowledges the
holiness of this famous John, as well by the Epitaph spoken of by William of
Malmsbury; and the Historians who have written after him, as by the Catalogue
of Gotzlin; but denies this John to be the same John Scot. He pretends then
that William of Malmsbury, who first attributed to John Scot, what agreed only
to another John a Martyr, was to blame in doing it, that the Historians who
followed William of Malmsbury ought not to have followed him, and that in
effect William himself offers wherewithal to refute what he himself says. To
fortify this conjecture he observes that the Martyrdom of John Scot was
unknown to Berenger, and those of his Party, who could not have been ignorant
of it, neither would have failed to take notice of it, especially since the
condemnation of John Scot under Nicolas II. Whence he concludes that the same
of the Martyrdom of John Scot was dispersed up and down by his Disciples, and
that this was not the sentiment of the Church in which John Scot died.

BUT there are few people who will remain satisfied with these conjectures of
our Author. For first, If this John the Martyr of Malmsbury be not John Scot,
who was he then? How comes it people have so universally lost the knowledge of
him, since William of Malmsbury has confounded him with John Scot? Did he live
before John Scot, or since? How could William's mistake cause all England to
lose the knowledge of him? How comes it no body ever discovered the error of
William? Whence is it that William himself could not meet with any thing to
undeceive him, when he sought into the Antiquities of his Convent for the
making his History? It Is very strange that in a matter of fact, a person who
has written at Paris in 1669. should pretend to know better whose the Tomb was
that was seen in the 12th. Century at Malmsbury, than William of Malmsbury, who
lived in this same Convent, and who apparently omitted no enquiries for his
satisfaction.

IT is probable that William was not the first Author who mentioned the
Martyrdom of John Scot. For the continuer of Bid, whose Book was Printed at
Heidelberg in 1587. formally mentions it, and the Author of the Dissertation
believes that he who continued this work of Bid is different from William. I
confess that Vossius has been mistaken in fixing this Author to the year 1080.
seeing it is certain he lived till the beginning of the 12th. Century. But it
does not follow from the error of Vossius that he was posterior to William.
This Continuer clearly denotes that he was Contemporary to Guitmond, now
Guitmond preceded William of Malmsbury; for this latter wrote in 1142. whereas
the other died about the end of the 11th. Century, or at the beginning of the
12th. That if there be found several things alike in this Continuer, and in
William, it is more reasonable to say that William has taken from the
Continuer, than to say the Continuer has taken from William, and that the
rather, because William has enlarged his History farther than the other by
thirty years, which is the natural Character of a later Historian.

BUT supposing William of Malmsbury be the first who has spoken of the
Martyrdom of John Scot, this does but the more confirm the truth of this
History: for writing as he did in the very place, and in the same Convent
wherein what he relates happened, it is just to believe, that in this Narration he
has offered nothing, but what was grounded on authentic Acts, or on a
Tradition which in his time passed for an undeniable truth in this Convent.

IT is to no purpose for the Author of the Dissertation to distinguish what
this William of Malmsbury has taken from the ancient Monuments of his Church,
and what he has added thereunto of his own. He ought not thus to make of his
own head this distinction on an Historian of the 12th. Century, and to tell us
precisely, here is what he has taken from the Monuments of his Church; here is
what he has added thereunto of his own: There was one John that suffered
Martyrdom and was reputed a Saint; this is of the ancient Monuments of the
Church of Malmsbury, but that this John was John Scot, is an addition of
William. This distinction of our Author is bold enough, and was in effect
unknown to Simeon of Durham, to Roger de Howden, to Matthew of Westminster, and
to all those other Historians which I have already denoted, who all certainly
believed, that the Martyrdom of John Scot, related by William of Malmsbury, was
a truth of History which is beyond question.

HIS telling us that William was the first Historian who gave to King Alfred
two Masters of the name of John, the one surnamed the Saxon Abbot of Aetheling,
the other surnamed Scot, and since a Martyr. First, William does not say
formally that this was two different men, John the Saxon, and John Scot, nor
that one was surnamed the Saxon, and the other Scot; he says only in one place,
Joannem ex antiqua Saxonia oriundum: and in another, Joannes Scotus. Neither
must one necessarily conclude from his discourse that he regarded them as two
different men, as will appear if we take notice of what he wrote, and of the
occasion which has obliged him the first time to make mention of this John, as
it were transiently, reserving himself to speak of him more amply afterward,
as he has done. But when we should suppose, that William would distinguish
these two John's, this makes nothing to the establishing what he relates of the
Martyrdom of John Scot's being a fable of his own invention: on the contrary,
this very thing would help to establish, that knowing two John's, and
distinguishing them, he must have better known what ought to be said of both
one and the other. Neither can it be said that he made two John's Tutors of
Alfred; for when he speaks of John who was Abbot of Aetheling, he does not say
that he was the Tutor of Alfred, he says this only under the name of John Scot.

AS to what the Author of the Dissertation has remarked, that Anastasius in his
Letter written to Charles the Bald in 875. seems to speak of John Scot as of a
man already dead; which shows that he was not the Tutor of Alfred, seeing that
this Prince gave not himself to learning till in the year 884. Neither is it
moreover likely that so Religious a Prince would make use of such a man as John
Scot, who was decried as an Heretic driven out of the University of Paris at
the earnest pursuit of Nicolas I. as holding Doctrins contrary to the principal
Fundamentals of Christian Religion.

I answer first, That our Author returns continually to his fabulous History,
as if John Scot could have been driven out in the 9th. Century from the
University of Paris which began only in the 12th. Secondly, It is certain that
Anastasius speaks of Erigenus as of an holy and famous man, Virum, says he, per
omnia sanctum; which does not show that he was thought then unworthy of being
the Kings Tutor, nor that he was decried at Rome for an Heretic. Thirdly,
Seeing that John Scot was very much esteemed by Charles the Bald, he might be
so too by Alfred Son of Aetelwolph, Son in law to Charles the Bald. And in
effect, William of Malmsbury testifies that he had seen the Letters of Alfred,
wherein this Prince treated John Scot with great esteem and affection, Alfredi
munificentia and ministerio usus, ut ex scriptis Regis intellexi, sublimis
Melduni resedit, and this is a mere mockery to make these Letters pass for
fictious ones framed by the friends of John Scot and Berenger. Fourthly, It is
not true that Anastasius speaks positively of John Scot, as of a man already
deceased, and supposing it were, he might think so by reason of his great age,
or some false report of his death. In fine, our Author absurdly supposes that
Alfred did not betake himself to learning till the year 884. he has fallen into
this mistake for want of considering that although Asserus and some of those that
have followed him have attributed to this year what they have said of the Piety
of Alfred, and his applying himself to learning, yet this happens merely from
their recapitulating what happened since the year 868, till 884, as I have
already observed.

NEITHER is there more strength in the Argument which our Author draws from
some terms which William of Malmsbury makes use of in relating the History of
the Martyrdom of John Scot. Hoc tempore creditur fuisse Joannes Scotus (propter
hanc infamiam (credo) taeduit eum Franciae) a pueris quos docebat ut fertur
perforatus, martyr aestimatus est. He pretends that these terms are doubtful,
fears and suspicions, and that these ways of speaking are likely to make one
doubt of the truth of this relation.

BUT all this deserves no answer. First, The Author of the Dissertation has
mixed Simeon of Durham's Text which bears Propter hanc infamiam, etc. with that
of William of Malmsbury, who relates this fact as a thing evidently certain.
And in effect the first term creditur refers to the time wherein John Scot
lived in England. The second credo is added by the Author of the Dissertation,
being not the Text of Simeon of Durham, who says only, Propter hanc infamiam
taeduit eum Franciae, and supposing it were in the Text of Simeon, 'twould only
denote that it was his conjecture that John Scot left France for the
displeasure he had to find himself accused of Heresy; neither do I know
whether taeduit thus uttered, be not an expression too weak for a man whom the
trouble of seeing himself accused of a crime so capital as is that of Heresy
must make to have passed from one Realm to another. The third term ut fertur
denotes only 'twas said that John Scot was stabbed to death with Pen-knifes.
But the fourth, Martyr aestimatus est, does not denote any thing doubtful, and
plainly signifies that he was held for a Martyr, which appears from what
William of Malmsbury adds, Quod sub ambiguo ad injuriam sanctae animae non
dixerim cum celebrem ejus memoriam sepulchrum in sinistro latere altaris and
Epitaphii prodant versus: To build hereon conjectures of the falsity of this
History, is very idle.

IN fine, the Argument which the Author of the Dissertation draws from the
silence of Berenger and his Disciples who never mentioned the History of the
Martyrdom of John Scot, is of no weight. First, We do not know what Berenger
and his Disciples have said, the greatest part of their Writings never coming
to our notice. Secondly, There Is no inconveniency to suppose that the memory of
the Martyrdom of John Scot (happening in a little place, as is Malmsbury, more
than 150 years before the Disputes of Berenger) became not so public in France
that Berenger and his Disciples must needs know it. We know there are scarcely
any remains of the famous Monastery of S. Angilbert, nor is he in the Catalogue
of the Saints, Frustra tamen Angilbertum quaeras, ut and innumeros tutelares
nostros sanctos Syntagm. de Nith.
inter moderna sanctorum syntagmata, said the deceased M. Peteau, Counselor in
the Parliament of Paris. A man may say the same thing of Ingelramnus, or
Angilramnus, who wrote the Book of Images under the name of Charlemain, and who
passed for a Saint. For his name was in fine forgotten. But thirdly, Supposing
Berenger and his Disciples had a particular notice of the Martyrdom and
Holiness of John Scot, all that can be concluded from their silence is, that
oftentimes every thing is not said on a subject which may be said. How many
times have our Authors alleged the Books of Images under the name of
Charlemain, without publishing the quality of Saint which has been given to
this Prince? Has Paschasius the adversary of John Scot been mentioned as a
Saint by Lanfranc, and his other partners in their Disputes against Berenger?
Yet is it certain he was made to pass for one at Corbie, and this circumstance
has been observed by Alanus and Sirmond. But, says the Author of the
Dissertation, Ascelin would not De Euch. p. 1. c. 21. In vita Pasch.
have treated John Scot as an Heretic, he would have put a difference between
his Book and his Person, had he believed he passed for a Martyr and Saint in
the Church. I answer, that this remark concludes nothing, unless that Ascelin
suffered himself to be transported by his passion and prejudice; but Ascelin's
transports do not at all invalidate the credibility of the Martyrdom and
Holiness of John Scot. And as to our Author's remarking that neither does
Ingulphus speak of this Martyrdom; we need only tell him that all Historians do
not say every thing. Ingulphus says but one word of John Scot in treating of
another subject. He denotes none of the circumstances of his life, he relates
only that he was called into England by Alfred, and settled at Aetheling. Yet
is it true that he gives him the Title of a most holy Monk.

IT is then certain that the silence of these Writers can neither diminish the
Artic. 7.
truth of the relation which William of Malmsbury makes touching the Martyrdom
of John Scot, nor the esteem of his Holiness in that Church wherein he lived.

IT is certainly no less vain and irrational for the Author of the Dissertation
to set himself as he has done on criticizing on a passage of Thomas Fuller, and
a testimony of Hector Boethius Deidonan. For supposing that Thomas Fuller and
several with him, were mistaken in saying that the martyrology which makes
mention of John Scot in the 4th. of the Ides of November was Printed at Anvers
in the year 1586. whereas it was Printed in 1583. by the command of Gregory
XIII. supposing 'twere true that this Martyrology was not the Roman, which
neither Fuller, nor Mr. Claude have affirmed, supposing it were moreover true
that Baronius has not taken away the name of John Scot from the Roman
Martyrology: and tho the words of Henry Firtsimon cited by Fuller and Varoeus
were not well understood yet is it certain, First, That Molanus Professor in
Divinity at Louvain, has put John Scot in his Appendix to the Martyrology of
Vsuard published at Anvers in 1583. Secondly, That Mr. De Saussay Bishop of
Toul has likewise set him down in the Martyrology of the Gallican Church, and
that both of 'em thought themselves obliged to follow Deidonan, who says that
John Scot was set down in the Catalogue of Saints by the sacred Authority of
the Popes. Thirdly, It may be that Arnaud Wion saying that the name of John
Scot is to be seen in the Roman Martyrology, has taken that of Vsuard for the
Roman one. And in effect the learned are agreed, that the Martyrology Vide
Vales. append ad Eusebius. Hist.
Vsuard was adopted by the Roman Church, and that there has not been any such
Martyrology as we have since Galesinus and Baronius. Fourthly, Supposing Arnaud
Wion was mistaken in his conjecture, yet is it still certain that he has placed
John Scot in the rank of the Saints of the Order of S. Benet, wherein he has
been followed by the learned Hugo Menard, in the Text of the Martyrology of the
Order of S. Benet, given the public; which he confirms in the first Book of
his Observations on this Ad 4. id. Nov.
Martyrology. Fifthly, Alford the Jesuit has followed Hugh Menard, and has not
sought all these subterfuges of the Author of the Dissertation; for he has
ranked John Scot in the Catalogue of Saints, in his Annals of England, Printed
at Liege in 1663. wherein having mentioned him as a Martyr, A. 884 n. 4. and
indic. Chron.
he acquiesces in the judgment which the Bishop of Toul made of him, who placed
him in the rank of Saints in the Appendixes of his Martyrology.

A TABLE OF AUTHORS Alleged in this Book.
Note, That the first Figure denotes the Part, the second the Book, and the
third the Chapter.
A.
D. Luc d' Achery, Not. ad vitam Lanfranc, 2. 6. 9, 10. Albertin de Sacram.
Euch. lib. 1. c. 30. 2. 5. 11. lib. 2. p. 322. 1. 4. 9. Alcuinus in Joan. lib.
2. 2. 5. 8. in Joan. 6, 2. 5. 9. in Joan. lib. 5. Ibid. in Joan. lib. 6. Ibid.
De Divin. offic. cap. 40. 2. 6. 10. Alger de Sacr. Euchar. lib. 2. c. 7. 2. 6.
9. Allatius de Eccles. Occident. and Orient. perpet. consens. lib. 1. cap. 2.
1. 3. 12. lib. 2. cap. 2. 1. 2. 3. cap. 8. ibid. cap. 9. ibid. cap. 10. ibid.
cap. 11. ibid. cap. 13. 1. 2. 1. cap. 14. 1. 2. 3. cap. 15. ibid. and 1. 4. 6.
cap. 17. 1. 3. 3. lib. 3. cap. 6. 1. 2. 5. cap. 7. 1. 2. 5. cap. 2. 1. 3. 1.
and 1. 3. 4. and 1. 3. 12. and 12. of Book 3. Epist. 2. ad Nitius 1. 3. 5. in
adden. ad lib. de perp. cons. 1. 4. 11. de lib. Eccl. Groec. dissert. 2. 1. 3.
12. 1. 4. 5. In Orthod. Groec. apud Hotting. ibid. De Simeon. 1, 3. 6. Advers.
Chreygth. 1. 3. 9. and alias. Epist. de quor. Groec. opin. 1. 2. 1. Alphonsus a
Castro adv. hoer. lib. 6. hoer. 9. 1. 3. 5. Amalarius Proef. ad lib. de Off.
Ec. 2. 3. 13. lib. 3. de Offic. cap. 25. ibid. cap. 26. ibid. Ambrosius de iis
qui mist. init. 1. 4. 5. 2. 6. 2. iterum in eodem libro and capite. lib. 1. de
Offic. cap. 48. 2. 6. 11. De Sacram. lib. 4. cap. 3. 2. 6. 2. Anastasius
Sinaita in Odego. Christophorus Angelus de stat. and rit. Eccl. Groec. 1. 5. 7.
Arcud. de concord. Eccl. Occid. and Orient. Epist. ded. Tom. 1. p. 231. 241. 2.
5. 1. lib. 2. cap. 2. 1. 3. 12. lib. 3. cap. 2. 1. 3. 1. cap. 6. 1. 3. 6. cap.
9, 1. 3. 4. cap. 10. 1. 3. 5. cap. 11. ibid. 1. 3. 5. and infra. cap. 20. 1. 3,
4. cap. 21. 1. 3. 4. and 3. 7. cap. 33. 1. 3. 5. cap. 55. ibid. cap. 60. 1. 3.
8. Archieraticon Groec. Habert. 1. 3. 5. and 1. 3. 7. Arnaud of frequent
Communion, Part 3. illi. 1. 3. 6. Athanas. disput. in Council. Nic. 1. 3. 4. in
illud si quis dixerit, etc. 2. 5. 8. Athanas. Presb. Bisant. ant. port: 1. 3.
12. August. Epist. 106. 1. 1. 7. in Psalm. 3. 2. 5. 7. in Psalm. 87. 1. 3. 9. 2.
5. 8. in Psalm. 98. ibid. de peccator. merit. and remiss. lib. 1. c. 24. 2. 6.
7. contra Adimant. c. 12. 2. 5. 8. de verb. Dom. Sermon. 49. 1. 3. 9. de verb.
Dom. Sermon. 53. ibid. de verb. Apost. Sermon. 2. 5. 8. Sermon. ad Infant. 2. 5. 7.
and 2. 6. 11. and iter. in eod. cap. de utilit. credend. c. 1. 2. 6. 2. lib. 3.
de Trinit. cap. 4. 2. 6. 2. Sermon. de quarta feria, 2. 6. 2. and iterum in eod.
cap. and libro. Sermon. 12. ex 40. Sirm. 1. 3. 13. contra Faust. l. 13. c. 16. 2.
5. 8. lib. 20. c. 21. 2. 5. 8. d' Avity, Tom. 1. of ancient and modern Heresies
2. 5. 4.
B.
BAlsamon in Canon. Apost. Can. 70. 1. 3. 6. Barlaam Ep. 1. Bibl. Patr. tom. 2.
edit. 4. 1. 4. 4. Baronius ad ann. 847. 2. 6. 11. ad ann. 912. 2. 6. 6. ad ann.
925. ibid. ad ann. 938. ibid. ad ann. 1035. 1. 4. 1. ad ann. 1053. 1. 2. 3. ad
ann. 1095. ibid. ad ann. 1097. 1. 2. 2. ad ann. 1100. 1. 2. 3. ad ann. 1112.
ibid. ad ann. 1118. ibid. ad ann. 1119. ibid. ad ann. 1130. ibid. ad ann. 1177.
1. 2. 4. ad ann. 1179. 1. 4. 6. Basilius in Psalm 14. 2. 5. 8. Beda in Psalm 3.
2. 5. 7. 2. 5. 9. in Psalm 21. ibid. in Psalm 33. ibid. in Genes. cap. 1. p. 2.
in eodem cap. and lib. in Exodus cap. 12. p. 2. ibid. in Sam. cap. 5. p. 2.
ibid. in Sam. l. 1. cap. 12. ibid. in lib. 2. Reg. c. 3. 2. 5. 8. and 5. 9. in
Tob. 2. 5. 8. in Esdr. lib. 2. c. 8. 2. 5. 9. in Job lib. 2. c. 14. 2. 5. 8. in
Prove. lib. 3. c. 31. 2. 5. 9. de Tabern. l. 2. cap. 2. ibid. cap. 3. 2. 5. 8.
in Cant. Canticor. c. 3. 2. 5. 8. in Matthew. 28. 2. 5. 8. in Marc. cap. 13.
ibid. cap. 14. ibid. in Luc. 22. 2. 5. 8. in Luc. 1. cap. 2. ibid. in Joan 6.
ibid. in cap. 6. ad Romans ibid. in 1 Cor. 11. ibid. hom oestiv. de tem. ser.
Sext. 2. 5. 8. iterum ibidem. hom. oestiv. de temp. Dom. 13. 2. 5. 7. Dom. 17.
ibid. Dom. 24. ibid. hom. oestiv. in vig. S. Joan. Bapt. 2. 5. 8. hom. de
Sanctis in Epiph. ibid. in Epist. ad Heb. cap. 7. ibid. Bellarminus l. 1. de
Euch. c. 1. 1. 3. 9. and 2. 5. 10. lib. 1. cap. 5. 2. 5. 11. lib. 3. cap. 13.
1. 3. 13. and 1. 4. 5. de Christianima, l. 4. c. 16. ibid. de Purgator. l. 2.
c. 18. ibid. Bertramus de Cor. and San. Dom. 2. 6. 11. Beson. observe. Book 1.
chapter 3. 1. 2. 1. chapter 39. ibid. chapter 40. ibid. Bessario de Sac. Euch. 1. 3. 3. and
1. 4. 10. Joseph Besson Holy Syria 1. 2. 1. Bibl. Patr. Groec. Lat. tom. 2. 1.
3. 5. Binnius not. in Epist. Innoc. 1. 2. 6. 7. Blondel's illucidations on the
Eucharist, chapter 18. 2. 6. 12. Boucher's Sacred Nosegay, Book 4. chapter 3. 1. 3. 4.
chap. 6, 7. Boulay le Goux in his Voyages 1. 2. 4. Breerwood's Enquiries 2. 5.
2. and in cap. 4. ejusdem libri. Busbequius Embassy 1. 2. 5. Bzovius ad ann.
1318. 2. 5. 4.
C.
CAbasilas Exp. Lit. cap. 30. 1. 4. 8. cap. 32. ibid. cap. 37. 1. 3. 7. cap.
38. 1. 3. 4. cap. 42. 1. 3. 6. cap. 43. ibid. Casaubon. Exercit. in Baron.
Exercit. 16. Art. 58. 1. 1. 5. Catharin. tractat. de verb. quibus conf. 2. 5.
10. Cassander in Liturg. 2. 5. 8. Cajetan in 3. Thom. quoest. 75. Art. 1. 2. 5.
10. Carol. Mag. Ep. ad Alcuin. de Septuages. 2. 5. 9. Caryophil. refut. Catech.
Gerg. 1. 3. 11. Caucus de Groec. recent. Hoer. 1. 2. 1. and 1. 3. 5. and alias.
Cellotius in append. ad histor. Gothescalc. 2. 6. 9. Chifflet. Proef. in Conf.
Alcuin. 1. 3. 6. Claud Taurin. Comment. in Gal. cap. 1. 2. 5. 8. Clemens Alex.
Stromat. l. 3. ibid. Coccius These. Cathol. 2. 4. Codinus de Offic.
Constantinopl. cap. 1. 1. 2. 3. Combefix auctar. tom. 2. Not. ad. Isaac Arm.
Cath. inu. 1. 3. 8. Comment. trium patrum in Cant. Cant. 1. 3. 6. Comonitor.
Apol. Gabr. Sionit. 2. 5. 2. Chrysostom. in Romans hom. 9. 1. 3. 13. hom. 15. 1. 3.
9. hom. 23. 1. 3. 12. in Joan. hom. 44. 1. 3. 13. homil. in Eliam and viduam.
2. 5. 8. De Sacerd. l. 4. 1. 3. 13. and 2. 5. 8. Chrysostom. Epist. ad Coesar. 1.
4. 1. Council. Constantin. in actis Council. Nicoen. 2. 1. 3. 13. Council.
Florent. Sess. 23. 1. 4. 6. Sess. 25. 1. 3. 3. instructione ad Armen. 2. 5. 2.
Council. Lateran. sub Innocent. 3. cap. 1. 1. 3. 2. Council. Tridentin. Sess. 3.
c. 4. ibid. Council. Trosleian in proefat. 2. 6. 6. cap. 3. ibid. in Epilog.
ibid. Cyril Alex. contr. Nest. l. 4. c. 6. 2. 5. 6. in Joan. 6. 57. 1. 3. 13.
apud Victor. Ant. Mss. 1. 1. 4. 7. Cyril Hierosol. Catech. Mist. 1. 2. 5. 8.
Catech. mist. 3. ibid. Catech. mist. 4. 2. 5. 6. Cyril Patr. Constable. Confess.
Fid. 1. 3. 12. Epist. 1. ad Witemb. 1. 4. 5. Epist. 2. ad Witemb. 2. 5. 2. and
alias in eodem capite. Joan. Cottovic itiner. Hieros. and Sir. 1. 2. 1.
D.
DAille right use of the Fathers, 1. 1. 5. and alias in eodem capite. Damascen
lib. Orthod. fid. c. 12. 2. 5. 8. cap. 14. 1. 3. 13. Orat. 1. de imag. 1. 3. 7.
Epist. ad Zachar. 1. 3. 13. Homil. de Corp. and Sang. Dom. ibid. Durand de
Corp. and Sang. Dom. Part 1. 2. 6. 11. a Sancto Portiano in 4 Sent. Part 1.
ibid.
E.
ELias Cretens in Orat. Apol. Greg. Naz. 2. 6. 11. Epiphan. in Anaceph. 1.
ibid. and 2. 5. 6. Ephrem de Antioch apud Phol. Bibl. 1. 3. 13. Eusebius de
Theolog. Eccles. l. 3. cap. 12. 2. 5. 8. Euthymius Panopl. tit. 20. 2. 5. 2.
and ibid. iterum. Commentar. in Matthew. cap. 64 1. 3. 13. Either. and Beat. l. 1.
2. 5. 8.
F.
FAber. Joan. Rel. Moscov. 2. 5. 6. Facund. l. 9. 2. 5. 8. Fancheur on the
Lords Supper, Book 3. chapter 6. 2. 5. 6. Felavius Proefat. in Christ. Ang. 1. 4.
4. Annot. in Christ. Ang. 1. 2. 1. Florus Magister exposit. Miss. 2. 6. 9.
G.
GElasius Papa apud Gratian. Can. Comperimus 2. 6. 7. Adv. Eutychet. and Nest.
2. 5. 2. Gennadius pro Council. Flor. 1. 3. 8. and alias in eodem cap. Germanus
Theor. rer. Eccles. 1. 3. 4. Garcias d' Syl. Embassy 2. 5. 4. Goar Euchol. 1.
2. 1. Relat. of Antony de Gouveau ibid. Guaguin descript. Mosc. 1. 3. 3, Guido
Carmel. de Here Is. ibid. Guillielm. Malms. 2. 6. 6. Guillielm. Tyr. de bello
Sacro 1. 2. 1. Guillielm. de Rubruqui's Voyages ibid. Gregor. Mag. Dial. l. 4.
2. 5. 9. Gregor. Naz. Orat. 4. 1. 3. 3. Gregor. Nyssen Orat. 1. de pauper.
amand. 2. 5. 8. Orat. 2. in illud faciamus hominem ibid. Orat in Baptism. Chr.
1. 3. 13. Orat. Catecht. ibid. Hom. 7. in Cant. Cant. 2. 5. 8. Guitmundus de
ver. Euch. l. 2. 2. 6. 11.
H.
HArmenopolus de Sectis 2. 5. 2. Hay's Voyages 1. 2. 1. Herbert's Voyages ibid.
and 2. 5. 2. Heydanus proefat. ad lib. cui titulus est causa Dei 1. 3. 12.
Hesychius in Levit. 2. 5. 8. Hieronymus Comment. in Gal. 2. 5. 8. and in cap.
9. Comment. in Ep. ad Tit. 1. 1. 7. Comment. in Psalm. 147. 2. 5. 8. and chap.
9. Histor. Gottesc. Cellot in append. 2. 6. 9. History mavelous of the Great
Came. 1. 2. 4. and 2. 5. 2. Histor. Eccles. Hottinger. 1. 3. 4. Honor. Augustod.
de Script. Eccl. 2. 5. 8. Hottinger in Append. Dissert. 8. 1. 3. 12. Hornbech.
Sum. Controv. 1. 3. 7. Humbert contra Nicet. 1. 3. 8. Contra Groecor. calumen.
ibid. and in seq.
I.
JAcobus a vitriaco 1. 2. 1. and 1. 2. 2. and seq. Jarric Hist. of the
East Indies 1. 2. 1. and iterum in eodem cap. and lib. Jeremias Patriarch.
Constable. Resp. ad Vitemb. 1. 3. 13. and 1. 4. 8. and seq. Innocent X. Pap.
Constit. against 5 Proposit. 1. 4. 5. Joannis 11 Epist. Episc. Romans 2. 5. 2.
Irinaeus advers. Here Is. 1. 3. 3. and 1. 3. 13. Isidor Pelus Epist. l. 1. Ep.
136. 1. 3. 4. Epist. 303. 2. 5. 8. Jovius Paulus de Legate. Mosc. 2. 5. 1. and
in seq. Isidor Hispal. Orig. l. 6. c. 19. 2. 5. 8. lib. 7. cap. 2. 5. 9.
Comment. in Genesis c. 1. 1. ibid. cap. 23. ibid. in Exodus cap. 23. ibid. in lib
1. Reg. c. 20. 2. 5. 2. in lib. 2 Reg. c. 3. 2. 5. 8. allegor. veter. Testam.
2. 5. 9. de Offic. Eccles. l. 1. c. 15. ibid. lib. 1. cap. 18. 1. 5. 8.
Sententiar. l. 1. c. 14. ibid.
L.
LAnfranc de Cor. and San. Do. 1. 4. 4. and 2. 6. 8. Lazieius de Relig. Armen.
2. 5. 2. Leontius Bizantin advers. Nestor. and Eutych. 2. 5. 6. Letter of an
Ecclesiastic to one of his Friends, 2. 6. 5. Letters of strange Countries to
the procurer of the Missions 1. 2. 1. and bid. and 2. 5. 2. Loirs Voyages 1. 2.
1. and 1. 2. 4. and ibid. Liber Cathol. Sermon. apud Voloch. 2. 6. 11.
Lugdunensis Eccles. de tenend. verit. Script. 2. 6. 11. Stephen de Lusignan
History of Cyprus 1. 2. 2.
M.
MAldonat in Joan. 6. 2. 6. 7. Manuelis Patriar. Resp. 1. 3. 8. Macarius, hom.
34. 1. 3. 3. Hom. 44. ibid. Matthew. Paris in Henric. III. 1. 2. 3. Mauguin
Dissert. 2. 6. 8. Menard Pre^at. in lib. Sacram. Gregor. 2. 5. 7. Method
pacifick of Father Maimbourg, 2. 6. 1. Metrophanes Critop. confess. Eccles.
Orient. 1. 3. 3. Resp. ad quest. 1. 3. 11. Respons. Meletii Metropolit. Ephesians.
ad interr. ibid. Missa sive Can. univers. Aeth. 2. 5. 6. Missa Christianor.
apud Indos. ibid. Montconis Voyages 1. 2. 1. Morinus his Exercit. 9. de Diacon.
cap. 1. 2. 5. 8.
N.
NIcephor. Hist. Eccles. lib. 18. cap. 48. 2. 5. 2. cap. 52. 2. 5. 6. cap. 53.
1. 2. 2. Nicetas Pectorat. cont. Latin. 1. 3. 8. and ibid. Nicet. Choon annal.
lib. 3. Nicolas de Nicolai's Voyages 1. 3. 10. Nicolaus Methon. advers. dub. 1.
3. 13. Nicephor. Patr. Constable. apud Allat. ibid. Nicon. Epist. de pessima
pessim. Armenor Rel. 1. 1. 1. Nouet. Presence of Christ in the Sacram 1. 6. 5.
O.
OCham Quodl. 4. quest. 35. 1. 3. 9. Oecumen. in 1 Pet. c. 2. 1. 3. 8. in 1
Cor. 10. 1. 6. 2. Office of the H. Sacram. 1. 6. 3. Olearius Voyage of Moscov.
2. 5. 9. Origin Comment. in Matthew. 15. 2. 5. 6. in Matthew. hom. 35. 2. 5. 8. in
Matthew. hom. 1. ibid. in Matthew. hom. 7. 2. 5. 8. in Job, lib. 3. 1. 1. 7. contr.
Celsum, lib. 5. ibid. Hom. 2. in diverse. 1. 5. 3.
P.
PAchymer. hist. lib. 2. c. 15. 1. 2. 3. cap. 16. ibid. lib. 3. cap. 1. ibid.
cap. 18. p. 1. 1. 2. 4. cap. 13. ibid. cap. 21. ibid. cap. 23. ibid. lib. 5.
cap. 12. ibid. lib. 4. cap. 6. 1. 2. 3. cap. 17. ibid. cap. 24. ibid. and 1. 4.
5. Pallad. Histor. Lausiac. 1. 4. 7. and 2. 5. 8. Pasch. Ratb. in Matthew. cap.
26. 1. 4. 7. and 2. 6. 8. Proefat. in lib. de Corp. and Sang. ibid. De Corp.
and Sang. Dom. cap. 2. 2. 6. h. and 2. 6. 9. cap. 3. ibid. Epist. ad Frudeg. 3.
6. 6. and 2. 6. 8. Pavillons triumph of the Euch. 2. 6. 5. Perron of the
Eucharist, Book 2. chap. 13. 2. 5. 2. Petav. Ration. temper. Part 1. lib. 8.
cap. 13. 1. 2. 3. cap. 18. 1. 1. 4. cap. 21. 1. 2. 3. lib. 9. cap. 7. 1. 4. 5.
Petrus de Alliaco in 4. senten. quoest. 6. art. 4. 1. 4. 5. Photius de Synod.
1. 3. 7. Voyages of Petro della Valle 1. 2. 1. Voyages of John Plan Carpin..1
2. 4. Polidor Virgil Hist. Angl. l. 6. 1. 6. 6. Port Royal and Geneve agreed 2.
6. 12. Posserin de reb. Moscov. 1. 2. 1. and seq. Postel de Republ. Turks 1. 3.
10. Poulets Relation of the Levant, Part 2. chap. 20. 1. 2. 5. chapter 28. 1. 2. 1.
Bibliot. Select. l. 5. 1. 3. 10. and alias. Bibliot. Select. l. 6. 1. 2. 1.
Parateolus Elench, hoeret. 1. 3. 5. Professio Fid. a Groecis faciend. apud
Posserin. 1. 3. 10. Professio Fid. a Saracen. faciend. 1. 3. 13. and 1. 4. 8.
R.
RAban de instit. Cler. c. 31. 2. 6. 11. Poenit. cap. 33. 2. 5. 8. and alias.
Raynaldus Annal. Eccles. ad ann. 1199. 1. 2. 4. ad ann. 1233. ibid. 1237. ibid.
1245. 1. 2. 4. 1246. ibid. 1247. 1. 2. 4. 1253. ibid. 1256. 1. 2. 3. 1261.
ibid. 1262. 1. 2. 4. 1263. ibid. 1264. ibid. 1267. 1. 2. 4. 1276. ibid. 1277.
ibid. 1278. ibid. 1288. ibid. 1289. 2. 5. 6. 1299. 1. 2. 4. 1318. 1. 2. 4, 5.
1338. 1. 2. 5. 1341. 2. 5. 2. ibid. and cap. 3. 1346. 2. 5. 3. 1350. 2. 5. 3.
1351. ibid. 1366. 1. 2. 5. 1370. 1. 2. 3. ib. 1442. 2. 5. 6. 1445. 1. 2. 4. and
2. 5. 6. 1514. 1. 2. 4. and 1. 3. 5. 1515. 1. 2. 4. 1519. ibid. Richard's
Relation of the Isle of S. Erinis 1. 2. 1. chapter 4, 5. and Book 3. chapter 5. 7. 8.
10. Relation of the Voyage of Mr. de Berite, 1. 2. 4. Relation of the Embassies
of the Earl of Carlisle 2. 5. 1. Relation of the Missions and Voyages of French
Bishops 2. 5. 2. Remarks on the request of M. the Archbishop of Minbrun 1. 3.
1. Remarks on the 18. Tome of the Annals of Odoricus Raynaldus, page 1. Pref.
Rivels Letter to M. Sarran 1. 3. 12. Roger of the H. Land 1. 2. 1. ibid. chapter 4.
Ross his View of Religions 2. 5. 4. Rubruqui's Voyages 1. 2. 4. Responsum ad
petitionem allat. Regi. 2. 6. 12. Remig. Altisiodor. Comment. in 1 Cor. 10. 2.
6. 10. in cap. 11. ibid. in Exposit. Canon. ibid. in cap. 10. ad Hebr. ibid.
Rupert in Joan. l. 6. 1. 4. 5. in Exodus l. 2. cap. 10. ibid. in Mat. cap. 10.
2. 5. 8. de Divin. Offic. l. 2. c. 2. 2. 6. 10.
S.
SAcranus Relig. Ruthen. 1. 3. 3. Book 3. chapter 7, 8, 10. and 2. 5. 1. Scarga
Errores Moscov. 1. 3. 3. and chapter 7. and chapter 10. Saligniaco Itiner. Ter. Sanc.
2. 5. 2. Sedulius opera Pasch. l. 5. c. 13. 2. 5. 8. Seiolach Epist. ad Velser.
2. 5. 6. Stephani jun. Vita 1. 3. 7. Simeon Thessalon. de Templ. 1. 3. 4. and
chapter 6. Sigismund. Comm. rer. Mosc. 1. 3. 7. and chapter 8, 9. and 2. 5. 1.
Spondanus Annal. Eccles. ad annum 439. 2. 5. 2. ad ann. 1524. 1. 2. 2. 1531. 1.
2. 4. 1561. 1. 2. 1. 1584. 1. 2. 5. 1600. 1. 1. 5. Stochovius Voyages 1. 2. 4,
5. Sylv. Cathemer. 1. 3. 13. Sigebert de Script. Eccl. c. 17. 2. 6. 2.
Spiceleg. Tom. 6. de gestis Abbat Lobb. 2. 6. 2. Syropulus Histor. Council.
Florent. Sect. 2. 1. 2. 3. Sect. 3. 1. 2. 1. and 4. 6. Sect. 4. 1. 3. 10. Sect.
5. 1. 3. 12 Sect. 10. 1. 4. 6.
T.
TErtullian de jejunio, c. 1. 1. 1. 7. cap. 2. ibid. De Resurr. carn. c. 37. 2.
5. 8. De Baptismo ibid. Theodorus Abucara Dial. 22. 1. 3. 13. Theodoret Dial.
1. 1. 3. 13. Dial. 2. 2. 5. 2. Theodor. Epitom. 1. 3. 13. Theophil. Alix.
Epist. Pasch. ibid. Theophilact in Matthew. 1. 4. 7. in Marc. 14. 1. 3. 13. in
Joan. 6. ibid. and Book 4. c. 7. and p. 2. chapter 3. in Joan. 2. 5. 8. Theodor
Graphus 1. 3. 13. Theorianus dial. adv. Arm. 2. 5. 2. Thevenot's Voyages 1. 2.
1. and chapter 4. 5. and Book 3. chapter 7. 2. 5. 6. Thomas Aquinas sum. 3. part.
quoest 75. art. 2. 2. 5. 1. Thom. a Jesu de procurand. salut. omnium gent. 1.
3. 7. and 12. and Book 4. chapter 3. and chapter 5, 6. Part 2. Book 5. chapter 1, 2, 4, ^.
Thomas Valdens. Tom. 2. c. 19. 2. 6. 11. cap. 30. 2. 5. 4. cap. 52. 2. 6. 11.
Tatianus Diatessar. 2. 6. 2. Turco Grecia 1. 4. 5. Tractatus contr. Groecos 1.
3. 8.
V.
VIncent le Blanc Voyages 1. 2. 1. Voyages of Villamont 1. 2. 4. and Book 4.
chapter 5. Valafridus Strabo de reb. Eccl. 2. 5. 8. Valerianus Hom 7. ibid. Victor
Antiochenus Comment in Marc. Mss. 1. 3. 13. Vigilius contr. Eutychet. l. 5. 2.
5. 2.
Z.
ZOnar in Canon Council. in trullo, can. 32. 1. 3. 9. Zonar Epist. ad calcem,
tom. 6. Cyril Alex. ibid.
The end of the Table of Authors.
A TABLE OF THE Chief Matters contained in this BOOK.
Note, That the Figure immediately after the matter denotes the Part, the other
at the end of the Line the Page.
A.
ABridgments, their right use, 1. 31 Abyssins ignorant, 1. 70 Abyssins
superstitious, 1. 71 Adoration, according to the Greeks and Latins, is either
subaltern, or sovereign, or relative, or absolute, or inward, or outward, 1.
153 Adoration of the Eucharist, the question of it must be considered as a
means to clear up that of Transubstantiation, and not as a consequence, 1. 156
Adoration of the Eucharist double, according to Mr. Arnaud, voluntary and
ritual, 1. 160 The Greeks adore not the Sacrament with a sovereign and absolute
Adoration, as the Latins do, 1. 153. and seq. The Greeks do not practice any of
those things which the Latins do to show that they Adore the Sacrament with a
sovereign adoration 164 The Greeks justify the relative Adoration of Images by
the example of the Adoration of the Eucharist 166 The Greeks place the
Adoration of the Eucharist in the same rank with that of the Cross, Temples,
and sacred Vestments 166 Abraham Echellensis a decryed Author unworthy of
credit, 2. 14 Accidents, their existence without a subject, not taught by the
Greeks, 1. 186 Alexis Comenius the Greek Emperor favors the Latin Religion, 1.
183 Ambassadors of England and Holland justified in the business of Cyril,
against the unjust accusations of Mr. Arnaud, 1. 205 Armenians believe that
Jesus Christ was man only in appearance, 2. 17 Armenians are real Eutychians,
2. 19 Armenians extreme ignorant, 1. 68 Armenians very superstitious, 2. 72
Armenians reject expressly Transubstantiation and the Real Presence, 2. 26
Armenians believe that the Sacrament is the Body of Jesus Christ in sign or
resemblance, 2. 26 Armenians pretend to renounce their Opinions to cheat the
Latins, 2. 34 Armenians, an account of their Opinions taken by Pope Benedict
XII, 2. 29 What signified the Amen which the Communicants answered, 2. 141 Mr.
Arnaud seems to prefer the reputation of the Treatise of the Perpetuity before
the interests of the Roman Church, 1. 6 Mr. Arnaud censures what he does
himself. 1. 7 Mr. Arnaud leaves the method of the Author of the Perpetuity and
his pretension, 1. 26 Mr. Arnaud produces nothing that is formal on the Greeks
part of Transubstantiation, 1. 118 Mr. Arnaud cites the testimony of Latinis'd
Greeks, 1. 263 Mr. Arnaud quotes doubtful Authors, 1. 263 Mr. Arnaud produces
the testimonies of false Greeks, Scholars of the Seminary at Rome, 1. 265 Mr.
Arnaud is obliged to prove his Thesis touching the Greeks by positive
Arguments, whereas we may prove ours by negative ones, 1. 277 Mr. Arnaud
contradicts himself, 1. 315 Mr. Arnaud opposes himself, and treats himself as
ridiculous, 1. 317 Mr. Arnaud overthrows the argument which those of the Church
of Rome draw from these words, My Flesh is meat indeed, 2. 77 Mr. Arnaud does
himself overthrow with one blow the greatest part of his Book, 2 ibid. Mr.
Arnaud's discourse favors the Sociniens, 2. 114 Mr. Arnaud's Defenses weak
against my complaints, 2. 260 Mr. Arnaud's personal complaints and accusations
unjust, 2. 264 Mr. Arnaud and the Author of the Perpetuity's expressions
disadvantagious to Christian Religion in general, 2. 268 Mr. Arnaud and his
friends suspected to be of intelligence with us, 2. ibid. Mr. Arnaud's negative
Arguments taken single, overthrow one another, 1. 293 Articles whereon the
Greeks and Latins disagree, and yet do not dispute thereon, 1. 279 Mr.
Aubertin's Book the first occasion of this dispute, 1. 10 Mr. Aubertin's Book,
whereof it consists, 1. 12 Mr. Aubertin's Book has been indirectly assaulted,
1. 13
B.
BRead of the Eucharist considered by the Greeks in two times, or on the
Prothesis, or on the Altar, 1. 216 Bread is changed into the Body of Jesus
Christ, according to the Greeks, 1. 216 Bread, in what manner changed, God only
knows, say the Greeks, 1. ibid. Bread, change thereof into the Body of Jesus
Christ may be understood in two manners, 1. 217 Bread and Wine are joined to
the Divinity according to the Greeks, 1. 220 Bread is made the Body of Jesus
Christ by way of augmentation, according to the Greeks, 1. 227
C.
CAsaubon, a man of an unsettled mind, and of no great judgment, 1. 93
Centuriators of Magdebourg are not witnesses to be alleged in this
Controversy, 1. 38 Centuries, all of 'em must be traced in beginning from the
Apostles in a search of Tradition, 2. 100 Century 10. mixed with two Doctrins,
to wit, that of Paschasus, and that of Bertram, 2. 175 Century 10. very
ignorant, 2. 178 Century 10. very confused, 2. 180 Change happened touching the
point of the Adoration of Images, 2. 192 Changes insensible happened either
amongst the Greeks, or amongst the Latins, 2. 195 Christians of the East very
ignorant, 1. 67 Christians of S. John very ignorant, 1. ibid. Church is called
the Body of Jesus Christ, the Real Body, etc. 2. 74 Commerce frequent between
the Greeks and the Latins, since the 11th. Century, 1. 27 Council of
Constantinople taught the Eucharist was a substance of Bread, 1. 347 Council of
Nice II. unjustly arrogated the Title of Universal, 1. 356 Council of Nice II.
in what sense denied the Bread was an Image, 1. 340 Council of Nice II. in what
sense meant the Bread was properly the Body of Jesus Christ, 1. 339 Council of
Constantinople, why it called the Eucharist an Image that was not deceitful, 1.
352 Council of Constantinople, in what sense it said our Savior Christ chose
in the Eucharist, a matter which had not any tracts of humane likeness, lest
Idolatry should be introduced, etc, 1. 353 Council of Rome under Nicolas II.
did not formally establish Transubstantiation, 1. 245 Council of Florence held
on politic respects by both sides, 1. 297 Council of Florence, in which the
Greeks would no more dispute, 1. 300 Council of Florence, in which the Greeks
assist against their wills, 1. ibid. Council of Florence, in which the reunion
was made in general terms, 1. 127 Concomitance not taught by the Greeks, 1. 186
Conjunction of Bread with the Body of Jesus Christ, taught by some in the 9th.
Century, 2. 233 Constantin Monomaq. Greek Emperor favors the Pope against
Cerularius, 1. 180 Coptics extreme ignorant, 1. 68 Coptics superstitious, 1. 71
Coptics do not hold Transubstantiation, nor the Real Presence, 2. 54 Custom of
Communicating under both kinds, that of giving the Communion to little
Children, and that of Fasting till the Evening have been changed, 2. 190
Croisado's for the Holy Land in the 11th. and 12th. Centuries, 1. 74 Cyril
Patriarch of Constantinople had the Latins and the false Greeks for his
enemies, 1. 206 Cyril ever beloved by his Church, 1. 207 Cyril's Confession not
contrary to the Faith of the Greek Church, 1. 208
D.
DEceased, according to the Greeks receive the same as the Living in the
Eucharist, 1. 151 Decisions of Councils prescribe not against truth Preface.
Decisions of Councils are considerable when conformable to Scripture ibid.
Deoduin Bishop of Liege imputes to Berenger, 1. 245 Differences and Agreement
between the Latins and the Greeks on the point of the Eucharist, 1. 233
Differences and Agreements between the Greeks and us on the same point, 1. 236
Difference between the difficulties in the common mysteries of Christianity and
those in Transubstantiation, 1. 188 Difficulties of Transubstantiation fall
naturally in the mind, 1. 189 Difference between not believing the Real
Presence, and believing the Real Absence, 2. 128 Difference between the example
of an Angel appearing under the form of a Man, and the Body of Jesus Christ in
the Eucharist under the form of Bread, 2. 148 Doctrine of the Latin Church in
the eighth Century, 2. 89
E.
EMissaries of the Romish Seminary sent into Greece to receive Orders there
from Schismatic Bishops, 1, 205 Emissaries make use of Schools to insinuate
the Roman Religion, 1. 99 Emissaries o'respread the East since the 11th.
Century, 1. 90 Emperors Greek have labored to introduce the Latin Religion
into Greece, 1. 81 Enthusiasms made in favor of Mr. Arnaud's Book, 1. 47. 61
Emissaries sent expressly to establish the honor of the Sacrament, 1. 79
Eucharist necessary to little Children, according to S. Austin, and the whole
ancient Church, 1. 58 Eucharist breaks the Fast, according to the Greeks, 1.
253 Eucharist buried by the Greeks, or thrown into Wells, and thrown on the
ground, 1. 172 Emissaries prevail by Money, 1. 98 Emissaries gain the Bishops,
1. 97 Eutychiens say our Savior was man only in appearance, 2. 16 Et, is often
explicative and taken for that is to say, 1. 224 Ethiopians believe neither
Transubstantiation, nor the Real Presence, 2. 54 Expressions general capable of
several particular senses, 1. 119 Expressions of the Greeks on other Subjects,
are like to those on the Eucharist, 1. 129 Eucharist according to the Greeks
consists of Bread and Holy Spirit, 1. 218.
F.
FAthers, according to Father Nouet are a Forest, Preface. Fathers must not be
the Rule of our Faith, 1. 10 Fathers against Transubstantiation, 1. 40 Fathers
have wrote several things inconsistent with Transubstantiation, 1. 40 Fathers,
in what manner they explain themselves when they design the nature of the
Sacrament, 2. 92 Feast of God rejected by the Greeks, 1. 165 Formulary of the
reunion between the Latins and the Greeks, different in Greek from the Latin,
1. 249
G.
GEorgiens very ignorant, 1. 68 Greeks very ignorant, 1. 64 Greeks Bishops
leave their Flocks to the Emissaries for Money, 1. 98 Greeks superstitious, 1.
72 Greeks much degenerated in their manners, 1. 63 Greeks entreat the
assistance of the Latins, 1. 74. and seq. Greeks have always flattered the
Popes with the hope of their reunion, 1. 81 Greeks of two sorts, the one
united to the Roman Church, the others not united, 1. 109. and seq. Greeks
reunited out of this Dispute, 1. 110 Greeks Schismatics of two sorts, the one
more rigid, the others less, 1. 87 Greeks do not believe the Real Presence of
the Latins, 1. 112. 234 Greeks reject the term of Transubstantiation, 1. 114
Greek Apostat cenjured for putting into his Catechism the word
Transubstantiation, 1. 115 Greeks must use the term of (...), if they believe
the substantial conversion, 1. 115. and seq. Greeks in their reunion have
changed the terms of the Latins, 1. 224 and seq. Greeks of the Council of
Florence held not Transubstantiation, 1. 127 Greeks Proselytes of the Latins
express themselves differently when converted, 1. 128 Greeks only receive the
seven first Councils 1. 122 Greeks say our Savior is present in the Book of
the Gospel, 1. 131 Greeks speak of the Bread and Wine before the Consecration
in the same manner as aster, 1. 131 Greeks prostrate themselves to the Bread
and Wine before they be consecrated, 1. 132 Greeks make several Particles 132
Greeks call the Particles of the Body of the Virgin, the Body of S. Nicolas,
etc. 1. 131 Greeks join the small particles with the great ones, 1. 131 Greeks
say that these Particles participate of our Lord's Body and Blood, 1 136 Greeks
only establish a spiritual Communion with Jesus Christ, 1. 148 Greeks disputing
on the Azyms, suppose the Eucharist to be real Bread, 1. 169 Greeks neglect the
substance of the Sacrament, 1. 172 Greeks teach not the necessary consequences
of Transubstantiation, nor the Real Presence, 1. 185 Greeks do not believe
there is made any impression of the physical form of the Body of Jesus Christ on
the Bread, 1. 231 Greeks prostrate themselves before the Book of the Gospel, 1.
158 Greeks explain these words, This is my Body, in a sense of virtue, 1. 307
Greeks reject the Apochrypha, 1. 280 Greeks have nothing determinate amongst
'em touching the state of Souls after death, 1. 209 Greeks in their reunion at
Florence and elsewhere with the Latins never pretended to receive their
Doctrine, 1. 287 Greeks little solicitous about affairs of Religion, 1. 287
Greek Bishops love not disputes, 1. 287 Greeks contented with maintaining their
Doctrins without condemning those of the Latins, 1. 287
I.
JAcobits believe that Jesus Christ was man only in appearance, 2. 17 Jacobits
believe not Transubstantiation nor the Real Presence, 2. 54 Jacobits reject
Auricular Confession, 1. 282 John le Fevre a fabulous Author, 2. 9 John the
Parisian maintained in the 14th. Century that Transubstantiation was not an
Article of Faith, 1. 288 Jesus Christ alone, not the Priest, gives in the
Communion his Body and his Blood, 1. 148 Jesus Christ preached his Gospel to
the damned, according to the Greeks, 1. 280 Infallibility of the Roman Church
is a thing of which the ordinary sort of people cannot assure themselves, 1. 29
Infallibility of the Roman Church overthrown by the Author of the Perpetuity,
1. 53 Infallibility popular is a Principle to be proved, 1. 54 Infallibility
double, 1. 55 Invocation of Saints rejected by the Greeks in one sense, 1. 203
Judgment of the Faculty of Paris on the affair of John the Parisian, 1. 289
K.
Knowledge distinct is taken in two senses, 2. 168 Knowledge distinct, and
popular knowledge are not the same, 2. 170 Knowledge distinct, and knowledge
popular are not the same, 2. ibid.
L.
LAnguage double of Mr. Arnaud on the subject of the Eucharist, refuted, 1.
347. and seq. Latins establish Latin Bishops in Palestin, and drive out the
Greek ones, 1. 75 Latins constrain the Greeks to embrace their Religion, 1. 77
Latins fill Greece with Inquisitors, 1. 78 Latins have done all they could to
introduce Transubstantiation amongst the Eastern people, 1. 106 Latins in the
reunion at the Florentin Council leave their usual expressions 127 Latins
greatly perplexed touching the nourishment which our bodies receive in the
Eucharist, 1. 187 Latins cause their Greek Proselytes to profess the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, 1. ibid. Latins have never disputed with the Greeks about
their general expressions, 1. 290 Latins dreaded by the Greeks, 1. 285 Legates
Excommunicate the Patriarch of Constantinople, 1. 82 Liturgies, Greek, denote
the Bread to be made the Body of Jesus Christ in sanctification, 1. 140
Liturgies, Greek, commonly term the Eucharist Bread, 1. 141 Liturgies, Greek,
direct Prayers to our Savior in Heaven after the Consecration of the Bread, 1.
142 Liturgies contain not one clause which denotes the substantial Presence, 1.
142
M.
MAronits believe neither Transubstantiation nor the Real Presence before their
union to the Church of Rome, 2. 52 Maronits very ignorant, 1. 69 Manuel
Comnenus Greek Emperor favors the Latins, 1. 83 Matter subsists in the
Eucharist after Consecration, 2. 90 Method, lawful, whereby to examine the
Controversy of the Eucharist, Pref. Methods of Father Maimbourg and Nouet
compared ibid. Method of Mr. Arnaud yields new advantages ibid. Method of the
Perpetuity, four considerations thereon, 1. 5 Method of Controversy ought to
be grounded on Principles either granted by both sides, or well proved ones, 1.
9 Method of prescription of the Author of the Perpetuity fruitless, 1. 26
Method of the Perpetuity, reduces us after many disputes, to begin again, 1. 52
Michael Paripanacius Greek Emperor favors the Roman Church, 1. 82 Paleologus
earnestly labors for a reunion, 1. 84 Moscovits very ignorant, 1. 69
Moscovits have no Preachers, 2. 2 Moscovits very superstitious, 2. ibid.
Moscovits differ in many things from the Greeks, 2. 3
N.
NEstorians very ignorant, 1, 69 Nestorians believe not Transubstantiation,
etc. 2. 50 Nestorians use not Auricular Confession, nor confirmation, 1. 282
Nisetas Pectoratus forced to burn his Book which he wrote against the Latins,
1. 82
O.
ORiental parts o'respread with Monks and Emissaries since the 11th. Century,
1. 90 Ode^born a Lutheran was deceived touching the Adoration which the Greeks
give the Sacrament, 1. 163 Oriental people say that our Savior dipped the Bread
which he gave to Judas to take off its Consecration, 2. 52 Oriental people hold
that the substance of the Eucharist disperses it self immediately over all the
parts of our body, 2. 52 Oriental people say we must read, This is the
Sacrament of my Body, 2. 53
P.
PAisius Ligaridius, what kind of man, 1. 266 Patriarch, Greek, of Jerusalem
Excommunicates every year the Latin Church, 1. 206 Poor are Jesus Christ
himself, 2. 74. and seq. Point fixed of the Author of the Perpetuity,
impossible, etc. 1. 45 Policy hindered the Greeks and the Latins in the Council
of Florence, to treat of Transubstantiation and the Real Presence, and the
Substantial Presence, 1. 197 Paschasius proposes his Doctrine as the Doctrine of
the Church, which was not well understood, 2. 172 Paschasius acts by way of
opposition and contradiction in respect of his Adversaries, 2. 172 Paschasius
taught the substantial Conversion and Real Presence, 2. 198 Paschasius never
vaunted that his Doctrine was that of the Church of his time, 2. 225 Paschasius
endeavors to justify himself from the charge of Enthusiasm and rashness, 2.
210 Paschasius was an Innovator, 2. 214 Paschasius acknowledges that before him
men were ignorant of his Doctrine, 2. 214 Paschasius accused of being a
Visionary, Enthusiast, etc. 2. 219 Paschasius his Adversaries affirm that the
Bread is the Body of Jesus Christ in virtue, 1. 314 Paschasius offers his
Opinion as a Paradox, 2. 224 Paschasius and Bertram contrary, 2. 255 Paschasius
submits his Doctrine to the judgment of Frudegard, 2. 225 Paschasius Author of
the Doctrine of the Real Presence according to Bellarmin and Sirmond, 2. 226
Paschasius defamed by his Adversaries by reason of his Doctrine, 2. 228 Preface
to the Answer of Father Nouet, justified, 2. 269 Proofs negative, opposed
against those of Mr. Arnaud, 1. 272 Proofs of fact cannot be overthrown, etc.
1. 17 Proofs immediate stronger than mediate ones, 1. 17 Proofs which consider
a thing in all respects stronger than those which consider it only in one, 1.
18 Proofs of ones eyes and senses more certain than those of ratiocination, 1.
18 Proofs of fact stronger than those of argumentation applied on the same
fact, 1. 22 Prayers of good people according to the Greeks, help the damned, 1.
279 Proper Body, the meaning of it, applied to the Sacrament, 2. 73 Proper, and
Properly are applied to Subjects wherein there is no propriety of substance, 2.
75 Proper has several significations, 2. 75
Q.
QUestions of right, how they ought to be decided, 1. 9 Questions of fact how
they ought to be decided, 1. ibid. Questions of Faith ought to be decided by
the Scripture, 1. ibid. Questions on the Eucharist, two, the first touching
what we ought to believe of it, and the other touching what has been anciently
held about it, 1. 36 Question touching the Greeks, is not whether they believe
what we believe, but whether they believe what the Roman Church believes, 1.
110 Question of the possibility or impossibility of the change frivolous, 2.
163
R.
RAban and Bertram have not opposed the Stercoranists, 2. 253 Reasonings of the
Author of the Perpetuity, are at most but probabilities, 1. 20 Recapitulation
at the end of the Greek Liturgy, wherein there is nothing said of
Transubstantiation and the Real Presence, 1. 142 Receive Jesus Christ, and to
be sanctified, according to the Greeks is one and the same thing, 1. 149
Receiving Jesus Christ is caused, say the Greeks, only by the good dispositions
of the Soul, 1. 15 Revelation of Jesus Christ to S. Bridget, 1. 79 Rupert's
opinion in the 12th. Century, 1. 288 Russians ignorant, 1. 70 Roman Church
condemns not several Opinions which yet she does not approve, 1. 278
S.
SAcraments ought to be established immediately on the Word of God, Pref.
Sacraments their number, not regulated by the Greeks, 1. 208 Sacrament and
Mystery, what those terms signify in the Writings of the Fathers, 2. 72
Sacrament may be considered, either in opposition to the thing. whereof it is a
Sacrament, or conjoyntly with it, 2. 96 Sacrament in how many senses it may be
said to be truly the Body of Jesus Christ, 2. 79 Samonas a suspected and
doubtful Author, 1. 264 Scaliger's Colloquies, 1. 38 Sanctification of the
Bread compared to the Dye which Wool takes, 1. 194 Seminaries for the Eastern
People at Rome and elsewhere, 1. 103 Seminaries, the advantages which the Roman
Church receive thence, 1. 104 Sense, its language not contrary to that of Faith
on the subject of the Eucharist, 2. 67 Sense, its language literal, and without
a figure: 2. 67 Sentiment real, of the Greeks touching the change which happens
in the Eucharist, 1. 218 Sense metaphorical of a proposition to be often
received, 2. 111 Sense first and natural of these propositions, The Bread is
the Body of Jesus Christ, etc. is the Sacramental one, 2. 157 Sense natural of
Propositions is determined by the matter in question, 2. 158 Sense of our
Saviors words perplexed by the Schoolmen, and Casuists of the Roman Church, 2.
101 Sense of our Savior's words cannot be found out by the common people in
the consent of all Churches, 2. 99 Sense particular, cannot be attributed to
persons, who explain themselves only in geoeral terms, 2. 123 Signs take their
names from the things which they signify, 2. 73 Synods of Cyril de Beroa and
Parthenius against Cyril, supposed pieces, etc. 1. 210 Silence of the Greeks,
from whence Mr. Arnaud takes his argument, has neither evidence, certainty, nor
necessity, 1. 277 Silence of the Greeks concludes nothing, 1. 278 Sociniens
interessed against the Fathers, 1. 39 Stercoranists who they were, 2. 246
Stercoranists could not believe the Substantial Presence, 2. 248 Supplement
which Mr. Arnaud pretends one should make to the expressions of the Fathers is
absurd, 2. 68 Suppositions of what use in a dispute, 1. 4 Supposition which Mr.
Arnaud makes, that the Real Presence was believed in the 7th. 8th. and 9th.
Centuries is unreasonable and captious, 2. 63 Suppose we ought that in the 7th.
8th. and 9th. Centuries, neither Transubstantiation nor the Real Presence was
held, 2. 64
T.
TErms metaphorical which use has made proper, 2. 11 Terms true and Truly are
applied to several things, 2. 76 Theophylact's passages explained, 1. 309
Translator and a Paraphrasist their difference, 1. 359 Treatise of the
Perpetuity is a real mass of difficulties, 1. 36 Transubstantiation and the
Real Presence, considered in a Church wherein they are held, 1. 41
Transubstantiation is the precise determination of the manner of the change of
the Bread, 1. 120 Transubstantiation is not a speculative Doctrine, 1. ibid.
Transmutatur and Transubstantiatur are not synonimous terms, 1. 124
Transubstantiation nor the Real Presence were the points which first separated
the Greeks, 1. 245 Transubstantiation was not believed by several before the
Council of Constance, 1. 288 Treatise of the Perpetuity very proper for persons
that are curious and lazy, 1. 45 Treatise of the Perpetuity illusory in what it
promises, 1. ibid. Turks favor those who gave them most Money, 1. 105
V.
VIrtue, Bread changed into the virtue of the Body of Jesus Christ according to
the Greeks, 1. 233 Version of the New Testament of Mons, etc, 1. 145 Vicq. Fort
Translator of Herbert's Voyages, 2 41 Voyagers do not say that the Moscovites
believe Transubstantiation.
W.
WIttembogard one of the chief of the Arminian party, 1. 39 Wicked in the sense
of the Greeks receive not the Body of Jesus Christ, 1. 146 Word of the Gospel
is truly the Body of Jesus Christ, 2. 78 Word of the Gospel more truly the Body
of Jesus Christ than the Eucharist, 2 78. Words of Jesus Christ carry not our
minds to the Real Presence by a primary idea, 2. 113
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PART I.
PAge 7. read as already mentioned, for as I already mentioned, p. 9 l. 4. r.
the for that, p. 12. l. ult. r. their for these, p. 34. l. 1. r. of for which,
p. 38. l. 1. r person for persons, p. 38. l. 45. r manners for manner, p. 39.
l. 13. r. Critic for a Critic, p. 46. l. 23. r. an for any, p. 57. l. 1. r.
self for selfs, p. 90. l. 5. r. than for but, p. 95. l. 4. r. are no for yet
no, p. 97. l. 1. r. although schismatical for although the Schismatical, p. 11^. l.
25. r. we shall see by for we shall by, l. 30. r. and which for and that which,
p. 124. l. 40. r. Latins say for Latins says, p. 158. l. ult. r. his not
inserting the Greek for forasmuch as he has not, p. 165. l. 1. r. which is for
which most, 181. l. 26. r. rational for national, p. 203. l. r. wood for word,
p. 210 l. 1. r. signs for sign, p. 223. l. 29. r. pursue for puruse, p. 225. l.
24. r. expression for expressions, p. 243. l. 1. dele Preface, p. 153 l. 10. r.
those that held, p. 365. l. 7. r. was not printed, p. 274. l. 14. r. and yet
taste, p. 279. l. 17. r. silence on the rest for silence the rest, p. 291. l.
23. r. became not angry for became angry, p. 336. l. 35. r. only the Divinity,
p. 330. l. 22. r. colors really for colors are really.

PART II.
Page 6. at bottom of the page, r. and for where, p. 27. l. 11. r. Romanists
persecuted for that persecuted, p. 47. l 31. r. the union for of the union.

The Printer to the Reader.
THE absence of the Translator, and his inconvenient distance from London has
occasioned some lesser Escapes in the Impression of this Book; The Printer
thinks it the best instance of Pardon if his Escapes be not laid on the
Translator, and he hopes they are no greater than an ordinary Understanding may
amend, and a little Charity may forgive.

R. Royston.

ADVERTISEMENT.
RItes of Funeral Ancient and Modern, in use through the known World. Written
Originally in French by the Ingenious Monsieur Muret. To which is added, A
Vindication of Christianity against Paganism. All Translated into English by P.
Lorrain. London, Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to his Sacred Majesty, at
the Angel in Amen-Corner, 1683.

The Contents of the said Book.
THE Funeral Rites of the Egyptians. Grecians. Romans. Persians. Turks.
Chinese. Americans. Of some Islanders. Of the Tartars. Living Sepulchers.
Fiery Sepulchers. Water-Burials. Airy Obsequies. Burials above Ground. The
Funeral Rites of the Ancient Jews. Modern Jews. Schismatics. Christians. A
Discourse concerning the Right of Burial, and Laws on that behalf.
THE END.

