Viou here his Shadow whose Laborious Quill
By Sacred Chemistry does Balm Distill
To Calm ye Persecuting Spirits Rage
And mix Delight with Profitt in each Page
Walter Binneman sculp



A Looking-glass FOR PERSECUTORS; CONTAINING Multitudes of EXAMPLES of God's
Severe, but Righteous JUDGMENTS, upon bloody and merciless Haters of his
Children in all Times, from the beginning of the World to this present Age.
COLLECTED Out of the Sacred Scriptures, and other Ecclesiastical Writers, both
Ancient and Modern.

By Sam. Clarke, Minister.

God judges the Righteous, and God is angry with the wicked every Day: If he
turn not, he will whet his Sword: He has bent his Bow, and made it ready: He
has also prepared for him the Instruments of Death: He ordains his Arrows
against the Persecutors,

Psalm. 7. 11, 12, 13. London, Printed for William Miller, at the Sign of the
Gilded Acorn, near the little North Door in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1674.

TO THE Christian Reader.
I Know well that this is a very tender Subject about which I am now writing.
For,

-- The Ancients made
Divine Revenge to be a Child of Night,
Shut to the Earth, but ope' to Heavens sight.
There are two sorts of Persons which err about the Judgments of God: The one
of such who will not take any notice of them, be they never so plain and
conspicuous. Of such the Prophet complains, Esaias 26. 11. Lord, when thy Hand is
lifted up, they will not see: but they shall see. These are stupid, and
blockish Persons: For (says the Prophet, verse 9.) When thy Judgments are in
the Earth, the Inhabitants of the World will (or at least should) learn
Righteousness. The other sort are of such as are too Critical, and censorious
in judging of God's Providential Dispensations, as if they were punishments for
sin, when God has other excellent ends in them: This was the fault of Christ's
Disciples, John 9. 2. When they saw a man that was blind from his Birth: Master
( say they) Who did sin? This Man, or his Parents, that he was born blind? To
whom our Savior answered, Neither has this Man sinned, nor his Parents: But
that the Works of God should be made manifest in him.

But notwithstanding these Errors, both on the Right and Left Hand, there must
be an humble, sober, and prudent taking notice of God's Judgments that we may
make a right construction of them. The Apostle St. Paul, having recorded the
dreadful Examples of God's wrath upon the sinful Israelites in the Wilderness
(1 Cor. 10. 5. etc.) concludes ( verse 11.) Now all these things happened unto
them for Ensamples: And they are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends
of the World are come. God himself also has appointed the recording and
observation of such Judgments, That all Israel may hear, and fear, and do no
more any such wickedness, Deuteronomy. 13. 11.

Obj. But do we not often see, that great and violent Persecutors live long,
and prosper in the World, as if they rather merited a reward, than procured
God's wrath against them for it?

Ans. It Is true. 1. God's Judgments upon many Persecutors are more spiritual,
and so less conspicuous, and visible to the eye of the World: As when God gives
them up to blindness of mind, hardness of heart, a cauterized conscience, and a
reprobate sense, which of all other Judgments are the most dreadful, Hos. 4. 17.

2. All the while they escape with impunity, they are but treasuring up wrath
against the Day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous Judgment of God, Romans
2. 5. For it is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them
that trouble and persecute his People, 2 These. 1. 6. Hence, Job 31. 3. Is not
destruction to the wicked? And a strange punishment to the workers of iniquity?
God does record and register such wicked men's sins against the Day of Judgment.
He writes them in a Book with a Pen of Iron, and the Point of a Diamond, Jer.
17. 1. He seals them up in a Bag, Job 14. 17. As a Clerk of the Assizes seals
up the Indictments, and at the Assizes opens his Bag, and produces them, Deuteronomy.
32. 34.

Yet God in all Ages has taken some of these Persecutors, and hung them up in
Chains, as Spectacles of his wrath, for a warning unto others. And howsoever
such, by reason of God's patience and forbearance, may dream of impunity; yet
let them know that Judgments are never nearer than when they are least feared.
A great Calm is many times the forerunner of a Storm, when men cry Peace,
Peace, then comes sudden and swift destruction, 1 These. 5. 3. When Agag said in
his Heart, Surely the bitterness of Death is past* then came Samuel and hewed
him in pieces. When the Old World was eating, drinking, buying, building,
Persecuting, and snorting in security; then came the Flood, and destroyed them:
When men be at case in Sion, there is a Woe denounced against them, Amos 6. 1.
to the 8. When men look at Judgments as a far off, then God will defer no
longer, Ezekiel. 12. 27. 28. When the Philistines met together to be merry and to
sport themselves with Sampson, ( whose eyes they had put out) he brought the
House upon their Heads, and slew them all.

Now God executes Judgments upon some wicked Persecutors; but these are but
Praeludia futuri Judicii, Tokens and forerunners of that Great and General
Judgment. Some are now punished (says one) as the Old World, Sodom, Egypt,
Jerusalem, etc. that we may know that there is a Providence taking notice of
all: Yet all are not punished, that we may know there is a Judgment to come, to
which the wicked are reserved, 2 Pet. 2. 10. Here God's way is in the Clouds,
we see not the reason of many things, but then his Justice and Righteousness
shall be gloriously apparent to all the World, Rev. 2. 5. Here they live
longest, many times, that deserve not to live at all, Job 21. 7. The Israelites
are oppressed whilst the Egyptians live at ease. Good David is in want, and
persecuted, whilst wicked Nabal abounds. Sion is often Captive to Babylon: But
there is another Day, and another reckoning, when all shall be set to Rights:
When the Righteous shall rejoice, and the wicked shall mourn, Esaias 65. 13, 14.
God will not always suffer his Jewels to be trampled in the Dirt under the
feet of Pride and Malice; but he will vindicate the injuries that are now done
unto them, Luke 18. 7. Now men curse, but Christ will then receive such, with a
Come ye Blessed of my Father, etc. Matthew. 25. 34.

O how singularly foolish than are you, that seek to root out, and to rid the
Saints out of the World, as the Heathen Emperors did. These resemble the Stag
in the Emblem, that fed upon the Leaves, which hid him from the Hunter. And
Sampson- like, by pulling down the Pillars, they bring the House upon their own
Heads.

But I will enlarge no further. If (through God's Blessing) this little Book
may prove useful to the deterring of wicked and malevolent spirits from all
kinds of Persecution, though but in Words and Gestures, Esaias 57. 3, 4. and to
the encouraging of the Godly Persecuted, to bear their sufferings meekly,
referring their cause wholly unto God, who says, Vengeance is mine; I will
repay, says the Lord, Romans 12. 19. I have mine end,

Who am Thy Friend and Servant to thy Faith Sam. Clarke.
From my Study in Hammersmith, April 14. 1674.
God's Judgments UPON PERSECUTORS Recorded in the Books of the Old Testament.
THe first Persecutor and Murderer was the Devil, as our Savior Christ
testifies* John 8. 44. He was a Murderer from the Beginning: He murdered the
Souls (the most Noble and Divine part) of our First Parents, and in them of all
their Posterity, had not God (of his infinite goodness and mercy) made a Balsom
of the Blood of Christ, for the healing of that deadly wound. See the Devil's
punishment for it, Genesis 3. 15.

2. The two first men that were born into the World were Cain and Abel; and
long they had not lived together before Cain, when they were in the Field
together, rose up against his Brother Abel, and slew him, Genesis 4. 8. And
wherefore slew he him? Because his own works were evil, and his Brothers
Righteous, 1 John 3. 12. But the righteous God would not suffer him to go away
with impunity. For says God to him, Genesis 4. 12. When thou tillest the Ground,
it shall not henceforth yield unto thee her strength. A Fugitive and a Vagabond
shall thou be in the Earth; In which condition he suffered many Thousand Deaths
(by reason of his Horrors and terrors of Conscience) before he came to die, as
is implied, verse 14. From thy Face shall I be hid, and I shall be a Fugitive
and a Vagabond in the Earth, and it shall come to pass that every one that
finds me shall slay me.

3. Though the Scripture mentions particularly no other Persecution before the
Flood, yet Genesis 6. 11. It Is said, The Earth was corrupt before God, and the
Earth was filled with Violence: which Violence certainly was chiefly practiced
by the wicked Cainites against the Church of God: For which Sin (among others)
God brought that General Deluge which destroyed them all, Genesis 6. 13. God said
unto Noah: The end of all Flesh is come before me: For the Earth is filled with
violence through them: And behold I will destroy them with the Earth.

4. When the world was reduced to a very small number, yet then had Satan a
wicked Ham to persecute and mock his godly aged Father; for which he was
cursed, and his Posterity doomed to bondage and servitude, Genesis 19. 25, 26, 27.
Cursed be Canaan: A Servant of Servants shall he be to his Brethren, etc.

5. In holy Abraham's Family there was a Persecuting Ishmael, as the Apostle
Paul testifies, Gal. 4. 29. He that was born after the flesh persecuted him
that was born after the Spirit: But though he was Abraham's Son, God would not
suffer this Sin to go unpunished: For, verse 30. -- What says the Scripture?
Cast out the Bondwoman and her Son: For the Son of the Bondwoman shall not be
Heir with the Son of the Freewoman. And sure it was no small punishment to be
cast out of the Church of God, and not to be suffered to partake of the
Blessings promised thereunto.

6. When the Church of God, the Children of Israel were in Egypt, they were
Persecuted by Pharaoh King of Egypt, and his People, who set over them
Taskmasters to afflict them with their burdens, Exodus 1. 11. thinking thereby
to eat them up and wear them out: And when that prevailed not, they made them
serve with rigor, and they made their Lives bitter with hard Bondage in Mortar,
and in Brick, and in all manner of Service in the Field: all the Service
wherein they made them serve, was with rigor, verse 13. 14. And when yet they
still multiplied, the King commanded the Midwives, Siphra and Puah, when they
did the Office of a Midwife to the Hebrew women, and saw them upon the Stools,
if they were delivered of a Son, they should presently kill him, verse 15. 16.
And when these Midwives neglected his commands, he charged all his People that
every Son that was born to the Israelites, should be cast into the River Nilus,
verse 22.

7. And when God sent Moses into Egypt to deliver his People out of the House
of Bondage, Pharaoh raged more against them: He caused Straw to be taken from
them, and yet the number of Bricks to be continued; and when that task was not
done, the Officers of the Children of Israel were cruelly beaten, Exodus 5. 14.
But the Justice of God slept not all this while: They had shed the Blood of the
People of God, and God turned all their Waters into Blood: They had killed all
the Males of the Israelites, and God's destroying Angel killed all their
firstborn: They had drowned Multitudes in the River, and Pharaoh and his Army
were all drowned in the Red Sea.

Poena venit gravior quo mage sora venit.
Justice though slowly, yet does surely tread,
And strikes with Iron though she walks with Lead.
8. Saul the first King of Israel was a cruel Persecutor of David, and the
Priests of the Lord; of whom (upon a false suggestion) he slew fourscore and
five Persons that did wear a linen Ephod; and not satisfied with their Blood,
he went to Nob, the City of the Priests, and smote it with the Edg of the
Sword, both Men and Women, Children and Sucklings, and Oxen, and Asses, and
Sheep, 1 Samuel 22. 18, 19. But see the end: His Country being invaded by the
Philistines, he goes to the Witch of Endor, where he complained to the Devil in
Samuel's Mantle, that God had forsaken him when he was sore distressed by the
Philistines, and answered him no more, neither by Prophets, nor by Dreams, 1 Samuel 28. 15. And a few days after, when he had lived to see his Army routed,
three of his Sons slain, and himself sorely wounded, in despair he fell upon
his own Sword, and died, 1 Samuel 31. 1, 2, 3, 4.

9. Asa (though a good King) being reproved by the Prophet Hanani, for relying
upon the King of Syria, and not upon the Lord his God, was wrath with him, and
put him in Prison, and oppressed some of the People at the same time, 2 Chronicles.
16. 7, 10. But God would not suffer this Sin to go unpunished: For, verse 12.
He was diseased in his Feet (probably of the Gout,) and his disease was
exceeding great, which in the end took away his Life.

10. King Ahab persecuted the Prophet Micaiah, who dealt plainly and faithfully
with him, and sent him to Amon the Governor of the City, and to Joash the
King's Son, saying, Put this fellow in the Prison, and feed him with Bread of
affliction, and with water of affliction, until I return in Peace, 2 Chronicles. 18.
26. But notwithstanding all his Policy in disguising himself, he was slain in
that Battle, verse 33. 34.

11. Jesabel his Wife slew the Prophets of the Lord, 1 Kings 18. 13. and
persecuted Elijah: But Jehu being made King when he was come to Jezreel,
Jezabel painted her Face, and tired her Head, and looking out to Jehu said, Had
Zimri peace that slew his Master? Jehu seeing her, commanded her to be thrown
down out of the window, which was accordingly done by some of her own Servants;
By the fall she was slain, and trampled under Horses feet, and her Body was
torn, and devoured by Dogs, 2 Kings 9. 30, 33, 35.

12. Manasse persecuted the Ancient and Noble Prophet Isaiah, (who probably was
of the Royal Blood) for his free reproofs for all his wickedness, who thereupon
caused him to be sawn in sunder with a wooden Saw (as Josephus says:) But not
long after the Lord brought upon him the Captains of the Host of the King of
Assyria, who took Manasse among the Thorns, and bound him in Fetters, and
carried him to Babylon, where he was cast into a Dungeon, 2 Chronicles. 33. 11.

13. The wicked Jews grievously persecuted the Prophet Jeremiah: First, they
smote him with the Tongue, Jerem. 18. 18. Come, say they, Let us devise devises
against Jeremiah -- Come and let us smite him with the Tongue, and let us not
give heed to any of his Words. Afterward Pashur the Priest, smote him, and put
him in the Stocks; whereupon Jeremiah denounced this Judgment against him: The
Lord has not called thy Name Pashur, but Magormissabib. For thus says the
Lord, I will make thee a terror to thy self, and to all thy Friends, and they
shall fall by the Sword of their Enemies, and their Eyes shall hehold it. --
And thou Pashur and all that are in thine House shall go into Captivity, and
thou shall come to Babylon, and their thou shall die, Jerem. 20. 2, 3, 4, 6.
Which grievous threatenings were without all question performed.

14. After this the Priests, and the Prophets, and all the People took
Jeremiah, and said, Thou shall surely die, Jer. 26. 8. To whom Jeremiah said,
As for me, Behold, I am in your Hand: Do with me as seems good unto you: But
know ye for certain, that if you put me to death, ye shall surely bring
innocent Blood upon your self, and upon this City, and upon the Inhabitants
thereof, etc. verse 14, 15.

15. When Jerusalem was besieged by Nebuchadnezzar's Army, King Zedekiah caused
Jeremiah to be cast into Prison for foretelling the destruction of Jerusalem,
and the Captivity of Zedekiah, Jer. 32. 2, 3. etc. But God suffered him not to
go unpunished. For not long after, the City (according to Jeremiah's Prophecy)
was taken, and Zedekiah was, in his flight, overtaken, and carried to the King
of Babylon, who slew his Sons before his eyes, and that that dreadful sight
might be the last thing that he should ever see he immediately put out his eyes,
and bound him with Chains, and carried him to Babylon, Jer. 39. 5, 6, 7. And
Zedekiah's Princes, and Nobles, who had smitten Jeremiah, and put him into
Prison, Jer. 37. 15. and did afterward cast him into a Dungeon, where he did
stick in the mire, Jer. 38. 6. When the City was taken, they also being
over-taken, were carried to the King of Babylon, who slew them all, Jerem. 38.
6.

16. Afterward when the People were carried into Captivity, Jeremiah being
(according to his own desire) left in the Land of Juda, he with the rest of the
People, was carried perforce by Johanan, and some other wicked Captains into
Egypt, unto whom he foretold that they should their perish by the Sword, and by
the Famine, and by the Pestilence, for which plain and faithful dealing, they
stoned him to Death (as Josephus reports:) But it was not long before
Nebuchadnezzar came, and overcame the Egyptians, and plundered the Country, at
which time those Predictions of Jeremy were fulfilled upon his Persecuting
Enemies, Jerem. 43. 6, 7. and 44. 11, 12. etc.

17. And that the destruction of Jerusalem, and the Babylonish Captivity (which
continued seventy Years) was in a special manner inflicted upon them for their
crying sin of persecuting the Ministers and People of God, appears plainly, 2 Chronicles. 16. 17. Where it is said: They mocked the Messengers of God, and
despised his words, and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose
against his People, till there was no remedy. Therefore he brought upon them
the King of the Chaldees, who slew their young men with the Sword in the House
of their Sanctuary, and had no compassion upon Young Man, or Maiden, Old Man,
or him that stooped for Age, etc.

18. During the Captivity, Haman the Agagite (a deadly Enemy to the Church and
People of God) had got a Decree from King Ahasuerus, upon a certain Day to
destroy, to kill, and to cause to perish all Jews both Young and Old, little
Children and Womon, and to take the spoil of them for a prey, Esther 3. 13. But
God wonderfully defeated this design, preserved his People, and turned the
Mischief intended against them, upon their Enemies Pates. For this wicked Haman
was himself hanged upon the Gallows, fifty Cubits high, which he had prepared
for Mordecay, Esther 7. 9. His ten Sons also were slain, Esther 9. 10. And all
others that rose up against them.

19. Sometime after the return of the Jews from the Babylonish Captivity,
Antiochus Epiphanes, or the Vile rather, was a cruel and merciless Persecutor
of the Godly among them: But being in straits for want of money, he went into
Persia to gather up some: And being there, he heard that in a wealthy City,
called Elymais, there was a very Rich Temple dedicated to Diana: Thither
therefore he went, and besieged it; But the Inhabitants, sallying out, drove
him away with great shame and loss: And when he came back to Babylon he heard
of the overthrow of his Captains and Armies in Judaea: Which News (together
with his late defeat) so wrought upon him, that he fell sick, and finding no
hope of recovery, he called his most familiar Friends unto him, and told them
that his Disease was violent and desperate, and that he was justly Plagued by
God, with this grievous Sickness, for that he had tormented the People of the
Jews, destroyed their Temple and committed horrible Sacrilege, and for
contemning the Majesty of of God: But now he Vowed, that if it would please the
Lord to receive him, he would become a Jew, and do many great things for the
People of God: As also that he would go through all the known World to declare
the power of God: Notwithstanding which (the Lord knowing his Hypocrisy)
continued to plague him after a very grievous and terrible manner. For he had a
remediless and incessant pain in his Bowels, and intolerable torments in all
his inward parts. His Body bred abundance of Worms, which continually crawled
out of the same: Yea, he so rotted above ground, that whole flakes of flesh
fell from his Body, which was accompanied with such an intolerable stink that
none were able to come near him, neither could he himself endure the same,
which forced him to say, It is meet to submit to God, and for man which is
mortal, not to set himself in competition with God. Thus this vile Person, who
formerly in a proud and insolent manner had Protested that he would make
Jerusalem a common burying place, and the Streets thereof to run with the blood
of God's People, by God's just Judgment ended his life in extreme misery in a
Strange Land, upon the Mountains of Parata, near Babylon.

20. Probably under him it was that the Saints endured most of those
Persecutions which are mentioned by the Apostle in that little Book of Martyrs,
Heb. 11. 36, 37, 38. Others had trial of cruel mockings, and scourgings; yea,
moreover of Bonds, and imprisonment. They were stoned: they were sawn asunder;
were tempted; were slain with the Sword: They wandered about in Sheepskins, and
Goatskins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented: Of whom the World was not
worthy: They wandered in Deserts, and Mountains, and in Dens, and Caves of the
Earth.

Of God's Judgments upon Persecutors under the New Testament.
Herod, surnamed the Great, hearing by the Wise men that came out of the East,
that there was one, who was born King of the Jews, and being informed by the
Chief Priests and the Scribes that the place of his Birth should be Bethlem of
Judah, he sent forth his Soldiers, and (to make sure work) he slew all the
Children that were in Bethlem, and in all the Coasts thereof, from two years
old and under, hoping thereby to have destroyed Christ. But presently after,
the Lord gave him over to a Spirit of Frenzy, that he slew Maryamne, his
Beloved Wife, and his Children (which made Augustus Caesar say, That it was
better to be Herod's Dog than his Son) and his nearest Kinsfolk, and familiar
Friends. And shortly after, God's terrible Judgment fell upon him by a grievous
Disease, which was a slack and slow Fire in his inward parts: He had also a
greedy and Dog like appetite after Food, which yet was insatiable: He had also
a rotting in his Bowels, and a grievous Flux in his Fundament: A moist and
running humor in his Feet, and the like Malady vexed him about his Bladder: His
Privy Members putrified, engendring abundance of Worms, which continually
crawled and swarmed out of the same. He had a short and a stinking Breath, with
a great pain in breathing: And through all the parts of his Body such a violent
Cramp, as no human strength was able to endure. Yet longing after Life, he sent
for Physicians from all parts, by whose advice he went to the hot Baths at
Calliroe: But finding no ease by the use thereof, and his torments still
increasing, he endeavored to lay violent Hands upon himself, had he not been
prevented by his Friends about him; and so at last (having had some foretastes
of the torments of Hell) in extreme anguish he ended his wretched Life.

22. Herod the Less, surnamed Antipas, having married the Daughter of Aretas,
King of Arabia, after a while, put her away, and took Herodias, who had
forsaken her Husband Philip, Herod's Brother: For which Incestuous, and
Adulterous Marriage, John the Baptist plainly reproved him, saying, It is not
lawful for thee to have her, Matthew. 14. 4. Hereupon, at the instigation of
Herodias, he first cast John into Prison, and afterward cut off his Head. But
the Lord suffered not this wicked Murder to go long unpunished: For Aretas,
raising an Army against Herod, for his ignominious dealing with his Daughter,
in a pitched Battle, wholly overthrew him, and cut off his whole Host. And not
long after Herod falling into disgrace with Augustus, the Roman Emperor, he,
together with his Incestuous Herodias, were banished to Vienne in France, where
they ended their wretched lives with much shame and misery.

23. After this there arose a third Herod, surnamed Agrippa, who (not taking
warning by his Predecessors calamities) fell to Persecuting the Church of
Christ, and conventing James the Brother of John, before him, he condemned him
to be beheaded: And seeing the Death of James pleased the Jews, he took Peter
also, and delivered him to four Quaternians of Soldiers to keep him in Prison,
intending after the Passover to put him to Death, Acts 12. 1. etc. But neither
did this Bloody Persecuting Herod escape any better than his Predecessors had
done: For upon a great Festival day, he being arraied in glittering and Royal
Apparel, Sat upon his Throne, and made an Oration to the People, which being
ended, the People gave a shout, saying, It is the Voice of a God, and not of a
Man: Whereupon the Angel of God's Immutability smote him, and he was eaten of
Worms, and gave up the Ghost, in the fifty fourth year of his Age, and the
Seventh of his Reign under Claudius Caesar.

24. Now the Sins of the Jews being ripe, especially that heinous Sin of
Persecuting the Prophets, and Messengers of God; cried aloud for Judgment
(according as Christ had foretold them) Matthew. 23. 34, 35, 36. etc. Behold
(says he) I send unto you Prophets, and Wise men, and Scribes, and some of
them you shall kill and crucify, and some of them ye shall scourge in your
Synagogues, and persecute them from City to City, that upon you may come all
the righteous Blood shed upon the Earth from the Blood of the Righteous Abel,
unto the Blood of Zacharias, Son of Barachias, whom ye slew between the Temple
and the Altar: Verily I say unto you all these things shall come upon this
Generation. And that you may know more particularly what those Judgments were,
our Savior Christ sets them down, Matthew. 23, 38. Your House is left unto you
desolate: And more plainly, Chap. 24. 21, 22. Then shall be great Tribulation,
such as was not from the beginning of the World to this time: No, nor ever
shall be: And except those Days should be shortened, their should no Flesh (to
wit, of the Jews) be saved: But for the Elects sake those Days shall be
shortened.

25. These Predictions of our Savior were fulfilled by the Roman Armies under
Vespasian, and Titus his Son: For besides the Afflictions which befell them in
diverse other Countries, being tossed up and down by the Roman Deputies, there
were slain in Caesarea twenty thousand in one day: At Alexandria fifty Thousand
another Day: At Zabulon and Joppa eight Thousand and four Hundred: At Damascus
ten Thousand had their Throats cut. In the Siege of Jerusalem, they were so
miserably pinched with Famine, that Oxen's Dung was accounted good meat: Others
fed upon old Leather, and some Women boiled their own Children, and did eat
them. Many hoping to save their Lives by flying to the Romans, had their Bowels
ripped up, to search for Gold and Jewels in their Stomachs and Guts: Two Thousand
of them thus perished in one Night. Ninty seven Thousand of them were taken
Prisoners (besides what fell under the Sword) when Jerusalem was taken by
Storm, and eleven Hundred Thousand perished by the Sword, Famine, and
Pestilence, during the Siege, and at the taking of the City. Some of the
Prisoners were carried to Rome to grace their Triumph: Others were slain in
diverse Places at the Conquerors Will: Some were torn in pieces and devoured by
wild Beasts: Others were compelled to march in Troops against their Fellows,
and to kill one another to make the Spectators sport. The Relics of this
wretched People were dispersed into all Nations under Heaven, having no
Magistrates of their own to protect them; but were, and still are altogether at
the will and discretion of the Lords of those Countries where they sojourn: So
that no Nation under Heaven is so vile and contemtible as the Jews.

26. Yet here was not an end of their misery: For in the Reign of the Emperor
Trojan, these wretched People rebelled against the Romans in Egypt and Cyprus,
and falling upon the Inhabitants, used unheardof cruelties toward them;
whereupon Trajan sent against them Martius Turbo, who slew many Thousands of
them. And fearing lest the Jews in Mesopotamia should break forth into the like
Outrages, he commanded Lucius Quintus to destroy them utterly, who so
diligently executed his Will, that the Emperor, to recompense his service, made
him President of Judaea. Dion.

27. After him Adrian the Emperor sent Severus his General against these
wretched Jews, who (by reason of their multitude) would not try it out in a
pitched Battle, but proceeding more warily, and taking his opportunities, he by
degrees, took fifty of their Strong Castles, razed nine Hundred and fourscore
of their best Towns, and slew five Hundred and eighty Thousand of them: Besides
multitudes that perished by Famine, Diseases and Fire, so that almost all Judea
was made desolate: He also by an Edict prohibited the Jews from coming near to
Jerusalem, or from any high place to look toward the same. Dion.

28. Salmaticensis testifies that this Adrian destroyed twice as many Jews as
Moses brought out of Egypt. That he razed Jerusalem, and not far from it, built
another City, which after his own Name he called Aelia, and over the Gates of
it he placed Statues of Swine, which were faithful Porters to prohibit the
Superstitious Jews from entrance.

29. St. Hierom tells us, that in his time, on that Day wherein Jerusalem was
taken by the Romans, you might see decrepit women, and old ragged Women, and
old ragged men, and many wretched People (but pitied of none) with blubbered
cheeks, black Arms, dishivelled Hair, howling, and lamenting for the
desolations of their Sanctuary, in their Bodies and Habits, bearing and wearing
the sad Characters of Divine Vengeance, of whom also the Soldiers exacted their
Fees for granting them liberty of farther weeping: So that they who formerly
sold the Blood of Christ and his Members, were then fain to buy their own Tears.

Gods Judgments on Persecutors during the ten Primitive Persecutions under the
Heathen Emperors.
30. Nero (that monster of men) that raised the first bloody Persecution
against the Christians, caused them to be clad in the skins of wild Beasts, and
torn in pieces with Dogs: Others he Crucified: Of some he made Bone-fires to
light him in his Night-sports. In brief, such horrible cruelties he used
against them, as made them to be pitied of their very Enemies. But God at last
found out this wretched Persecutor. For being adjudged by the Roman Senate to
be an Enemy to mankind, he was condemned to be whipped to Death; To avoid which
shameful end, he cut his own throat.

31. Domitian the Author of the second Persecution against the Christians, grew
to that prodigious height of Pride, that he would be adored as a God: But God
raised up his own household Servants against him, who (by the consent of his
Wife) slew him with Daggers in his privy Chamber. His Body was buried without
honor: His memory accursed to all Posterities, and his Arms, and Ensigns were
thrown down and defaced.

32. Trajan, though a prudent Prince, and good civil Magistrate, yet by the
instigation of Satan and his Instruments, raised the third Persecution against
the Church: For which the vengeance of God, and his heavy hand fell upon him.
For first he fell into a grievous Palsy: then lost the use of his Senses: and
lastly fell into a Dropsy, and dyed in great anguish and misery.

33. Adrian, who raised the fourth Persecution, causing ten thousand Christians
to be crucified in Armenia, and afterward stirred up a hot and cruel
Persecution against them in other places, was stricken by God with an issue of
blood from his Lungs which exceedingly disquieted and weakened him: Then he
fell into a Consumption of the Lungs, which he spat out continually: And in the
mean time he was afflicted with an insatiable Dropsy, whereupon, finding
himself so variously tormented, he would have taken Poison; or cut his throat
with a Knife: But his Friends preventing him, he was forced to die a lingering
and painful Death.

34. Marcus Antonius Verus, who continued the fourth Persecution, exercising
exceeding great cruelties against the Christians in all parts of his Empire,
especially at Lions, and Viene in Dalphine: For which cause, the Lord struck
him with a grievous Apoplexy, of which, after he had lain speechless three
days, he dyed.

35. Comodus the Emperor, who continued also this fourth Persecution against
the Christians, was given over to such abominable wickedness, that he kept
three hundred Concubines, and as many boys for unnatural and delectable uses:
and for his cruelty was poisoned by his Friend Marcia, which caused him to fall
into extreme and deadly vomiting, in which he was slain by Narcissus, one of
his Chamberlains.

36. Severus, the Author of the fifth Persecution, never prospered after he
began the same, but fell into diverse calamities: And at length was stricken by
God with such an extreme pain through all the parts of his Body, that being in
misery therewith, he would fain have poisoned himself; but being prevented by
his Friends, he dyed a languishing and painful death.

37. Under him, Claudius Herminianus, Governor of Cappadocia (out of hatred to
his wife who was a Christian) extremely persecuted, and afflicted many of Gods
children: he was stricken by God with a Pestilential Carbuncle, and had Vermin
bred in his bowels which devoured him alive, after a most horrible manner,
which extorted a confession from him, that those Plagues fell justly upon him
for his persecuting the Christians.

38. Maximianus the Empreor, who raised the sixth Persecution against the
people of God, especially against the Pastors of the Church, was himself
together with his Son slain by his own Soldiers.

39. Decius who raised the seventh Persecution, laboring by all means utterly
to destroy the Church of Christ, exercising all the cruelty and torments that
the wit of man could invent against them. For this cause God raised up the
Scythians against him, who in a bloody battle, routed and overthrew his Army,
and himself, and Son were cruelly slain: or as others say, to avoid falling
into his Enemies hands, he leaped his horse into a Whirlpit, after which his
body was never found.

40. Presently after the death of this Tyrant, a grievous Plague and Pestilence
fell upon the bloody persecuting Gentiles in every of the Roman Provinces,
which lasting ten years together, made such havoc among them, as is horrible
to hear, and almost incredible to believe. And it was observed, that where the
Emperors Edicts had been put in Execution with most severity, there it raged
most, insomuch that many places became utterly desolate.

41. Gallus the Emperor who continued the seventh Persecution, was himself with
his Son slain by one of his own Captains.

42. Valerian the Emperor, in the beginning of his Reign was very mild toward
the Christians: But afterward (being stirred up by the Devil and his
Instruments) proved a terrible Persecutor of them in all his Dominions: But not
long after, he was overthrown by the Persians in a bloody Battle; wherein
himself was taken Prisoner, being seventy years old, and made so vile a slave,
that Sapores the King of Persia, used his back as a Block whereby to mount on
Horseback, and afterward he caused him to be flayed alive, and powdered with
Salt, so that he dyed in cruel torments. Eusebius.

43. Claudius a President, and one of his Ministers of cruelty, was possessed
by the Devil, and so grievously tormented, that biting off his tongue in small
bits, he dyed miserably. This was the eighth Persecution.

44. Aurelian who raised the ninth Persecution, being about to send out an
Edict for renewing the Persecution against the Christians, as he was about to
sign it, a Thunderbolt fell at his Feet, which so terrified him, that for the
present he forbore: But afterward, renewing it again, God stirred up his
Servants to cut his throat. Niceph. Eutropius.

45. Dioclesian the Author of the tenth Persecution, First used all Politic
ways to cause all the Christians in his Armies to renounce their Faith. Then by
Proclamation he commanded all their Churches to be beaten down; their Bibles to
be burnt, or torn in pieces: That all Christians in any Office should be
ejected: That Christian Bondmen who would forsake their Profession should be
made free: But when, notwithstanding this, he saw that the number of Christians
still increased, being satiated with blood, he resigned, and gave over the
Empire: But shortly after God struck him with diverse and strange diseases: His
house was burnt down by Lightning from Heaven: And himself was so affrighted
with a dreadful Thunder that he ran mad, and killed himself. Ruffinus.

46. Maximinian also, his Fellow-Emperor raged exceeding cruelly, and
outragiously against the Christians. For when twenty thousand of them, upon a
Solemn Festival Day, were assembled in a Temple at Nicomedia, to serve God, he
caused it to be environed with some Bands of Soldiers, to be set on fire, and
to be burnt with all that was in it. And a City of Christians in Phrygia,
taking it after a long Siege, he caused it to be burnt, and razed to the
ground, with all that were in it. But shortly after God struck him with a
grievous and incurable Disease, wherein Vermin bred abundantly in his Body,
which was accompanied with such an horrible stink, that, not being able to
endure it, he hanged himself.

47. Maximinus that next succeeded in the Eastern Empire, was a cruel and
implacable Persecutor of the Saints. For which God struck him with an uncoth
and loathsome Disease. In his Privy Members there grew a sudden putrefaction,
and at the bottom of the same there arose a botchy corrupt Bile, with a Fistula
consuming and eating up his Entrails, out of which came swarming and
innumerable company of Lice, which was attended with such a pestiferous stink
as none were able to abide it. And being a corpulent man, all his fat so
putrified, and stank so horribly, that some of his Physicians, not being able
to endure it, he commanded to be slain: and others of them were cruelly put to
death, because they could not cure him. But at last being told that it was Gods
just revenging hand upon him for persecuting his people, he seemed to relent,
and commanded the Persecution to cease: and God was pleased in some measure to
ease him of his grievous torments. But about six months after, he sent forth a
new Proclamation for the utter rooting out of the very name of Christians,
whereupon his disease returned again, and assaulted him in greater extremity
than before; so that his body being all rotten and full of corruption and
worms, he dyed an accursed and miserable Death. Chrysostom says, that the
Apples of his eyes fell out before he dyed.

48. Galerius a chief Instrument of the Persecution under Dioclesian fell into
a grievous Disease: in the nether part of his belly there arose a spreading
sore which consumed his Privy Members, from whence there crawled abundance of
worms, bred of the putrefaction, which neither Chyrurgeons, nor Physicians
could cure. This made him to acknowledge that it was a just hand of God upon
him for his cruelty to the Christians, and so he dyed miserable* or as others
write, he flew himself. Languets Chron.

49. Licinius the Eastern Emperor, a bloody and merciless Enemy to the
Christians, was in two great Battles overthrown by Constantine the Great, and
slain by his Soldiers.

50. Antiochus, who passed sentence upon Agapetus, a godly young man, that was
but fifteen years old, fell down suddenly as he sat upon the Seat of
Judicature, crying out, that all his bowels burned within him, and so he dyed
in great torment.

61. Mamuca, a Saracen, being a cruel Persecutor of the people of God, like
unto Pharaoh, met also with the like stroke of Gods vengeance. For as he was
returning by Sea, with his Army in a hundred Ships, from the slaughter of the
Christians, God sent such a Storm upon them, that few or none of them escaped
drowning. Paulus Diaconus. Lib. 3. c. 12.

Julian, surnamed The Apostate, was first a Christian, yet afterward became a
Heathen, and proved one of the most dangerous and deadly Persecutors that ever
the Christian Church had. First, he began to undermine the Christian Religion
by Policy, and afterward proceeded to downright blows, letting loose the
Gentiles, and his Governors upon the Christians, wherein neither Arian, nor
Orthodox is spared from Imprisonment, Banishment, Tortures, and what not? And
when complaints were made hereof to the Emperor, he answered, That their
Religion taught them to bear all patiently. He would not endure that Christians
children should be trained up in humane Learning, because he saw the Christians
did beat the Gentiles with their own weapons, and made Philosophy an Instrument
to serve Divinity: He took away the Ministers maintenance, thereby destroying
not so much Presbiters, as the Presbytery. But whilst he was thus busy
against the Church: he was called to an expedition against the Persians:
whereupon he made a solemn Protestation, that when he returned from this war,
he would utterly root out Christianity, and so proceeding in his journey, he
beat the Enemy to a confused retreat; whereupon, that he might pursue them with
the more speed, he threw off his Armor, but as he was posting on, he was met by
a Dart, or arrow that pierced through his arm, and entered into his side, and
whilst he endeavored with the other hand to draw it out, he received another
wound, and thereupon fell from his horse, and receiving his blood, gushing from
his wound into his hands, he threw it up into the Air, saying, vicisti
Galilaee, vicisti: O thou Galilaean (so he called Christ in scorn) thou have
overcome me: and Nazianzen says, that his body was carried away in a tempest,
without Lamentation, and without Burial.

Gods Judgments upon persecuting Heretics.
53. Arius the first great disturber of the peace of the Christian Church, was
sent for by Constantine the Great, who asked him what the matter was that
wherever he went, still tumults and slaughters followed him. And whether he
did really agree with the Nicene Faith? Arius did professedly avow that he did
full agree thereto. The Emperor commanded him to set the same down in writing
under his hand, which he did in the Emperors presence. Then the Emperor
required his Oath to manifest that he was real in the same: and he readily
made Oath, that what he had written, was according to the truth, and that it
was his real Judgment and Opinion. The Emperor now having his Subscription and
Oath, was satisfied, and would have him first to communicate with the Orthodox
Church at Constantinople, that he might be the better qualified for Communion
with the Church at Alexandria, where Athanasius had mightily opposed him: and
accordingly he wrote to Alexander the Bishop of Constantinople to receive Arius
into Communion.

54. Alexander, laying aside all further Disputes (by which hitherto he had
mightily opposed the Arian Party) betook himself wholly to Prayer, wherein he
continued fervently for diverse days and nights: but more especially that next
day before the Lords Day, wherein Arius was to be admitted to the Sacrament:
the Sum of which Prayer was this,

It must needs be thus, O Lord, that Arius must communicate with this People to
morrow. Let thy Servant, O Lord, now depart in peace, and never see that day:
and destroy not thou the Righteous with the Wicked: But if thou will spare thy
Church, (as thou will spare it) remember the words of Eusebius (an Arian
Bishop) and give not over thine inheritance to destruction and contempt, and
take Arius out of the way, lest he being admitted into Communion, Heresy
should seem also to be received into Communion with the Truth, and wickedness
be accounted Godliness.

This Eusebius, Bishop of Nicomedia at Constantinople had now the whole conduct
of the matter concerning Arius, and sent word to Alexander that unless he would
receive Arius into Communion, he would banish him from Constantinople, and put
another into his place that should do the Work. But Eusebius for all his
threats, missed his expectation. For the Lords Day being come, Arius with the
Emperors Authority, marched forth in State out of the Emperors Hall, with
Eusebius and other Bishops in his train: and passing along the Streets in Pomp
(a strange manner of address to the Sacrament) came to the common Market Place,
where a sudden fear fell upon him, and therewithal, he was surprised with a
Flux, which enforced him to retire into a House appointed for such a purpose,
and there suddenly his Speech failed him: his Excrements and Blood ran out, his
Belly brake, his Guts fell out, and his Spleen and Liver followed. The people
staying long in expectation of him, and he not coming, they entered the house,
and found the sad Spectacle of him lying dead in that manner.

Constantius, one of the sons of Constantine was himself an Arian, and a great
favourer of diverse Arian Bishops, by whom (by his Countenance and Authority)
the Orthodox Christians were grievously persecuted. And thus this Emperor, who
would be styled Eternal Emperor, and yet would not allow Christ to be Eternal
God, and instead of being exceeding Great, became odious to all good men, was
abhorred by his own Soldiers: and lastly was loathed by himself; he saw his
Honor buried before he dyed: became a tormentor to himself by jealousies,
fears and vexations, and these brought on a Fear, which soon put a period to
his life.

55. In the Reign of Julian, one George an Arian Bishop of Alexandria, having
raged exceedingly against the Orthodox: yet would also show his zeal against
the Heathen Temples, which did so vex and exasperate the Gentiles, that they,
taking advantage of Julian's coming to the Crown, rose in a tumult, and seized
upon Bishop George, tied him to a Camels tail, and dragged him through the
streets of Alexandria, and then they burnt both Bishop and Camel in one fire.
And thus God rendered to this Heretical Bishop a recompense for all his
villainies, and outrages done to the Orthodox.

56. Valence, another Arian Emperor, was a great countenancer and encourager of
the Heresy, and a Persecutor of the Orthodox; insomuch as when Athanasius was
dead in Alexandria, the Persecution broke in like a Torrent, so that no man
could stand before it: The Orthodox Churches both in City and Country were
swallowed up, and destroyed by it. Yet this Flood stopped not there, but brake
(as it were) out of the world into the wilderness among the Monks, where this
Persecution raged most of all, till the Heathen Goths paid the Debt of the
people of God, by the death of the Emperor Valence, somewhat like that of
Julian, saving that after his wounds received in the Battle, with much ado he
got into a town for succor, wherein, together with the whole town, he was by
the pursuing Goths burnt alive.

57. Another Constantine, a Monothelite, being a cruel Persecutor of the
Orthodox, was slain by one of his own servants as he was washing himself in a
Bath. Hist. Magd.

Gensericus, an Arian King of the Vandals, used a great deal of cruelty against
the Orthodox; and in the end, he was possessed by an evil Spirit, and dyed
miserably. P. Melan. Chron.

58. Hunricus, a Son to a King of the Vandals, being an Arian, was a merciless
Persecutor of the Orthodox, banishing five thousand of them at one time, among
whom, some of them being unable to travel, he caused cords to be tied to their
legs, and to drag them through stony and rough places, whereby many of them
perished. But not long after, God struck him with venomous Biles all over his
Body, and in the end he was consumed by Lice. H. Magd.

Anastasius the Emperor, a Patron of the Eutychian Heresy, was a bloody
Persecutor of godly Christians, and was slain by a Thunderbolt.

59. Arcadius the Emperor, having by the persuasion of Eudoxia, his Empress,
who was a violent Arian, banished Chrysostom from Constantinople: the very next
night there was such a terrible Earthquake, that the Emperor and all the people
being extremely frighted, sent one Post after another to fetch him back again.

60. Theodoricus, an Arian King of the Goths, persecuted the sound Christians
with all rigor and hostility, among whom he slew two noble Senators, Symmachus,
and Boethius; But not long after the Lord stroke him with madness: And as he was
sitting at his Table, he had the head of a great Fish set before him, which he
imagined to be the head of Symachus, whom he had slain, and thereupon he fell
into such fear and astonishment, that he soon after dyed. Evagri.

61. Ehe Arian Vandals in Africa were cruel Persecutors of the Orthodox,
whereupon Justinian the Emperor sent against them his brave General Belizarius,
who overthrew them in several Battles, took Gilimer their King prisoner, and
wholly subverted the Empire of the Vandals in Africa, after they had reigned
there by the space of ninety years, wherein, for the most part they had been
merciless Persecutors of the true Christians.

Gods Judgments upon Popish Persecutors.
62. About the year 1488 some Popish Bishops in Bohemia, stirred up the Queen,
who was then great with child, to move the King Uladislaus, severely to punish
the Piccards, as the godly Christians were then called: and the Queen much
pleased her self in thinking what grateful Spectacles she should have, when she
should see some of them burnt, others beheaded, and others drowned in the
River: But it pleased God that before she could see it effected, she fell in
travel, and could by no means be delivered of her burden; whereupon the
Physicians advised that the child should be cut out of her womb, which being
done accordingly, the child lived, but the mother dyed.

63. Two years after, the Bishops by their importunity prevailed with the King
to use sharp remedies against those growing evils, as they called them:
whereupon an Edict was drawn up, that all the Piccards in the Kingdom, without
distinction of Age, Sex, or Quality should be slain. This was brought to the
Assembly of States, then met at Prague, to be confirmed by them. Many of the
Nobles opposed it; but by the subtilty of the Chancellor, and his Associats, it
was at last agreed upon by the major part: and the Chancellor as he returned
homeward from the Parliament, visited a Nobleman of his acquaintance, and told
him with much joy, what they had resolved upon. The Nobleman had a Servant
standing by, who was a great favourer of the Brethren, he asked him, how he
liked this Decree? The Servant answered, that sure all parties were not agreed.
The Chancellor, suspecting some secret Treachery, asked him, who durst oppose
the States of the Kingdom? The Servant answered, There is one in Heaven, who,
if he were not present at your Counsels, you have consulted but in vain. The
Chancellor replied, thou Knave, thou shall find that, as well as the rest: And
so, rising up in a fury, immediately a Carbuncle arose upon his Foot, which
turned to a disease called Ignis Sacer, whereby he dyed in much misery.

64. Another who was a great stickler in promoting this Decree, in his return
homewards, as he was alighting out of his Chariot to make water, struck his
Member on a sharp Nail that was in the Boot, whereby, as he went forward, he
drew out his Entrails, and not long after gave up the Ghost.

Also one Dr. Austin, who by slanderous Libels had stirred up the King to this
Persecution, dyed suddenly as he sat at Supper.

65. Another Nobleman who promoted the aforesaid Decree, as he was a hunting,
his Horse threw him, and his own Arrow ran into his Thigh, and came out at his
Loins, whereby he dyed a very painful death. And many others of them met with
the like Judgments from God, whereupon it grew into a Proverb: If you be a
weary of your Life, attempt something aganst the Piccards, and you shall not
escape a year to an end.

66. The year after two German Tradesmen were apprehended at Prague, and by the
Monks there, were accused of Lutheranism, for which they were condemned and
burnt: But one of their chief Persecutors, who wished that all the Piccards
were hanged, burned, or beheaded by his hands' it pleased God that all these
evils befell himself: For, being exceedingly in debt, for very vexation, he
hanged himself: And when his friends had buried him privately, the common
people, hearing of it, dig'd up his carcass, and threw it away, which, by the
Magistrates command, was ordered to be burnt: But when the Wood was consumed.
and the Body only scorched, his head was by one stricken off.

67. As John Huss was going to Constance, there was one Stanislaus Znoma, a
Bohemian, who, as he was traveling toward the Council to accuse him, was
stricken by God with a deadly Impostume whereof he dyed in his journey.

This Huss though he had the Emperors safe conduct, was condemned and burnt
there: Shortly after whose Death the Bohemians rose in Arms under their
undaunted General Zisca, and had admirable successes against the Emperor, and
Popish Party. For they maintained war against the Emperor Sigismund by the
space of seventeen years together, wherein he spent an infinite Treasure, lost
many brave Armies, and gallant men. And during these wars a thousand
Monasteries were overthrown and destroyed, many stately Castles demolished, and
Cities plundered and burnt, which was Gods just revenging hand upon him for his
perfidiousness.

68. In the late Bohemian Persecution, one Dr. Knapper, a great. Persecutor of
the godly Protestants, was slain by conspiracy of his own wife, who was an
Adulteress; for which she was hanged.

69. Another of those Persecutors vomited out his ungodly Soul together with
his Blood.

70. Another ran mad, and threw himself down from his own house, and so roaring
fearfully, breathed his last.

71. Another shot himself dead with his own Pistol.

72. Another ran mad, and withal fell into so loathsome a disease, that none
could endure his stink, and at last he was choked in vomiting up of abundance
of Blood.

73. Another was seized with a strange Disease, wherein his Body turned as
black as a coal, and he uttered his speech like the barking of a Dog, and
within the space of three Days, dyed in terrible pains.

74. Another by the breaking of a great Gun was torn all to pieces.

75. Another was taken with a terrible Disease in the Throat, so that his
Tongue rotted in his Mouth, and many holes were eaten in his Throat, by which
both Food, and Physic came forth, so that he dyed in much misery.

76. Ladislaus King of Bohemia, together with diverse other Popish Princes had
conspired together, utterly to root out the Protestants in that Kingdom, which
should have been put in execution at the time of the Kings marriage: But a
little before, in the middle of his great preparations, he fell sick, and
within the space of six and thirty hours, he dyed of a pestilent sore in his
Groin.

77. In France, Minerius Governor of Provence was sent with an Army by the
King against those ancient Christians, the Waldenses, who used much cruelty
against them, burning some, killing others, driving others into Woods, and
Mountains, whereby they perished of Famine, and depopulated whole Towns and
Villages. Not long after the Lord smote him with a terrible Disease, so that he
felt like a burning fire within him from the Navel upward: and his lower parts
rotted and were consumed with Vermin, which mortification was attended with a
grievous stink: he had also a profusion of Blood instead of his Urine, and in
those extreme Torments, he ended his wretched Life.

78. Simon Monfort, Earl of Leicester, was a cruel Persecutor of the godly
Albingenses under the King of France, and by the instigation of the Pope; But
as he was besieging some of them in Tholous, his head was stricken off by a
Stone, which a woman let fly out of an Engine.

79. Lewis, King of France, besieging Avignion, a City of the Albingenses,
vowed that he would never depart till he had taken it: But suddenly after, God
sent a dreadful Pestilence into his Army, which daily wasted great numbers of
his men: and the King himself was forced to quarter at a distance in an Abbey,
to avoid the infection, where shortly after he dyed out of his wits.

80. Truchetus an old expert Captain was employed by the Duke of Savoy against
the Waldenses, who were a naked and unarmed people: But whilst he was
prosecuting of them, he was first sore wounded with Stones, and afterward,
slain with his own sword by a poor Shepherd, who was keeping Cattle in the
Field.

81. The Lord of Revest, Chief President of the Parliament at Aix in France,
put many godly Persons to death: but shortly after, himself was put out of his
Office, and was stricken by God with such an horrible Disease as made him run
mad, that none of his Friends durst come near him, and so he perished miserably.

82. After him succeeded in his Office one Bartholomew Cassinaeus, who proved
also a pestilent Persecutor, whom the Lord struck with a fearful and sudden
Death.

83. Johannes de Roma, a Monk was a bloody and implacable Persecutor of the
Waldenses. His manner was to fill Boots with boiling Oil and put their Legs
into them, tying them backward over a Form, their Legs hanging down over a soft
fire, and afterward cruelly to put them to Death, and seized upon their Goods.
But not long after his own Servants robbed him of those ill-gotten Goods: and he
fell into a horrible Disease unknown to any Phisician; the pains and torments
whereof did so incessantly vex him, that he could, by no means have one minutes
rest, neither could any endure to come near him by reason of his horrible
stink. His body was full of Sores and Ulcers, which swarmed with Vermin, so
that rotting, his flesh fell of by piecemeal. In which torment he often cried
out, O! who will deliver me, who will kill me, and deliver me out of these
intolerable torments? and so languishing in anguish and despair, he ended his
cursed Life.

84. John Martin, another great enemy to the Waldenses, used to boast every
where that he would slit the nose of one of their chief Ministers: but before
he could effect it, a Wolf meeting him, bit off his Nose, whereupon he ran mad,
and died miserably.

85. The Cardinal of Lorrain, a principal Pillar of the House of Guise, a
crafty and cruel Persecutor of the people of God, as he was coming from Rome
with a purpose of stirring up the Kings of France and Poland utterly to root
out the Protestants in their Dominions: It pleased God to work so* wonderfully
for his peoples safety, that by the way he fell mad at Avignion, and dyed in
the Flower of his youth. At the instant of whose Death, there fell out such a
dreadful Tempest as made all to be amazed at it.

86. Bellemont, a Counselor of the Parliament of Provence, was so hasty to
condemn the poor people of God, that he went not from the Judgment Hall from
Morning till Night, causing his Dinners to be brought to him. But whilst he
was so busy in this way of Persecution, there began a little Sore to rise upon
his Foot, which quickly grew red, and full of pain, and so increased the first
day, that by Judgment of Chyrurgeons, there was no hope of cure but by cutting
off his Foot, which he refusing, they used all other means they could devise,
yet the second day the whole Leg was infected, and the third day his whole
Thigh, and the fourth day his whole Body, upon which day he dyed. His dead Body
was all over parched as if it had been roasted by a fire.

87. A Judge of the City of Aix, who was a great Persecutor of the Protestants,
drowned himself in the River.

A chief Judge, who was a principal Instrument in condemning the Waldenses in
Merindol, and Cabriers, died suddenly, not living to see his bloody Sentence
executed.

88. John Cranequin, a Lawyer of Bourges, who was a great Informer against the
People of God, to bring them into the cruel Inquisition, was stricken by God
with a mavelous strange Frenzy, so that whatever he saw seemed to him to be
crawling Serpents: And having in vain used all sorts of Medicines, yea, and
wicked Sorcery too, at length was quite bereaved of his Senses, and so ended
his wretched Life in much misery.

89. Chancellor Prat, who put up the first Bill in the Parliament of France,
against those of that Religion, and gave out the first Commissions for the
putting of them to death; dyed himself not long after, fearfully swearing, and
blaspheming the name of God, and had his Stomach gnawn in pieces by worms in a
strange manner.

90. John Morin, a mighty Enemy to the Professors of the Truth, who made it his
whole business to apprehend and accuse them, dyed himself in most grievous, and
horrible torments.

91. The Chancellor Oliver, who had been himself a Professor of the truth,
apostatizing from the same, was restored to his Office, in which he spared not
to shed much innocent Blood: But whilst he was thus busied* a fearful Judgment
befell him (as was foretold by some of those Innocents whom he condemned) for
falling into extreme terrors of Conscience, he betook himself to his bed,
sighing and sobing without intermission, and breathing forth murmurings against
God; yea, his horrors were so violent that he shaked the Bed under him, as if a
young man with all his Strength had done it. And a certain Cardinal coming to
visit him, he could not endure his sight, crying out, that it was that Cardinal
that had brought him to Damnation. He continued long under these dreadful
torments, and dyed at last in despairing fear and anguish.

92. Poncher, Archbishop of Tours, who condemned many godly persons to the
Fire, was himself seized upon with a fire from God; which, beginning at his
heel, could by no means be cured, till one Member after another being cut off,
he dyed in much misery.

93. An Austin Friar called Lambert, a Dr. and Prior in the City of Lieg, and
one of the bloody Inquisitors, as he was one day preaching bitterly against the
Protestants, was stricken speechless, and being carried out of his Pulpit into
his Cloister, he was shortly after found drowned in a Ditch.

94, Augustine Marlorat, a Learned, painful, and holy Preacher in Roan, was
condemned to be hanged, and drawn on a Hurdle to the place of execution: The
Constable of France loaded him with a thousand reproaches and outrages, as also
did Monsieur Monbrun, the Constables son, who shortly after was slain in the
battle of Dreux: Also one Villibon gave him a switch with a wand, adding many
reproachful speeches therewith, which Marlorat bore with admirable patience and
meekness: And when he was executed and dead, the malice of his Adversaries
rested not there: For one of the Soldiers struck on his Legs with his Sword:
But speedy vengeance from God pursued his Persecntors: For the Popish Captain
that apprehended him was slain within three weeks after, by the basest Soldier
in all his Company: And two of his Judges dyed very strangely soon after;
namely, the President of the Parliament, by a flux of blood, which could by no
art, nor means be stopped: The other being a Counselor, voided his Urine at
his Fundament, which was accompanied with such an intolerable stink, that none
could endure to come near him. Villebon also who switched him, sped no better.
For a while after the Marshal Vielle Ville, coming to Roan about public
Affairs, invited Villebon to dinner, and in discourse, lamenting the miseries
of that City, he exhorted him to reform many abuses, seeing he was the Kings
Lieutenant there. Villebon took this so ill, that he said, If any man dare tax
me for not behaving my self as I ought in my place, I would tell him to his
face that he lied. These words he repeated over so often, that the Marshal
being much urged, struck at him with his Sword, with such violence, that, had
he not received the blow with his Arm, his head had been clest to the Teeth.
Thus for the present he escaped with the loss of that hand wherewith he had
stricken Marlorat in so disgraceful a manner at the place of Execution.

95. A young Gentlewoman of about three and twenty years old, came from
Gascoine to Paris, to join her-self to the Protestant Church there: And after a
while, she among others, was apprehended, imprisoned, and condemned to be
burnt, which she endured with admirable patience and constancy, but presently
two of them that bore witness against her, falling out, the one slew the other
with a knife.

96. Gharles Cominck who had been a Friar in the City of Gaunt, after his
conversion, was apprehended, and condemned, but after his execution, one of his
greatest Adversaries, who had a chief hand in his Death, fell into such
grievous horrors and terrors of Conscience, that he dyed within a few days.

97. Dr. Aegidio, a godly Preacher in Sevil, being brought into the
Inquisition, and used miserably by them, before they proceeded to condemn him,
it pleased God, that three of the Inquisitors, who were his greatest
adversaries, dyed, by which good Providence, he was released, and lived some
years after.

98. The Emperor Ferdinand the second, was a great Persecutor of the
Protestants in Bohemia and Germany, who after his Victory over Frederick,
Prince Palatine, and the Bohemian States, made it his work to root out the
Protestant Religion in those Countries, and turned them into a very shambles of
Blood, sparing neither Age, Sex, nor Rank that refused to abjure the Truth. But
whilst he was in his full Carier, God brought in against him a contemptible
people [the Swedes,] under whose Swords most of those bloody wretches fell; who
were the Bohemian Scourges, so that much of Germany, and of the Emperors
Country was a very Aceldama, a Field of Blood. The Emperor's great Army,
consisting of twenty four thousand, that had given Laws to Germany for many
years together, and were looked upon as so many Captains by reason of their
long practice and experience, was broken in the plain Field. And the Emperor
himself being broken with breach upon breach, was forced to such terms as the
Enemies could be drawn to.

Examples of Gods Judgments upon Popish Persecutors in England, and Scotland.
99. Sir Thomas Moor, and Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, who were great
Persecutors of the Protestants in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, were
themselves not long after condemned for Treason, and beheaded.

100. Philips, who betrayed Mr. Tindal to the Emperors Secretary, fell into a
grievous Disease, and was caten up of Lice.

101. Pavier, The Town Clerk of London, a cruel Enemy to the true Professors of
the Gospel, swore a great Oath, that if he thought the King would set forth the
Scriptures in English, rather than he would live to see it, he would cut his
own Throat. But he brake Promise (says the Author) for instead thereof he
hanged himself.

Foxford, Chancellor to Stokesley, Bishop of London, a bloody Persecutor, and
the common Butcher of Gods Saints, dyed suddenly, sitting in his Chair, his
Belly breaking, and his Guts falling out before him.

102. Rockwood, who was a great stirrer up of the Persecution against Gods
people in Calis, suddenly fell sick, staring, raging, and crying out, All to
late: For I have maliciously sought the Death of many godly Persons, and that
against mine own Conscience: and therefore all to late; All to late: and thus
he continued unto his end.

103. The under Marshal also, who at the same time was a Persecutor, fell down
dead in the Council Chamber, and never spoke word after.

104. Adam Damlip, a godly Preacher in Calis, was falsely accused of Treason,
for which he was condemned, and executed; and when he would have purged
himself, Sir Ralph Ellerker would not suffer him to speak, but commanded him to
be carried away to execution, saying, That he would not depart till he saw the
Traitors heart out: But shortly after, in a skirmish against the French, this
Ellerker was slain, and after they had stripped him naked, they cut off his
Privy Members, and pulled out his Heart, which they did not to any other of the
slain.

105. Dr. Story, a Bloody Persecutor in Queen Marys Days, when Queen Elizabeth
came to the Crown, could not forbear to curse her daily in his Grace at Board;
for which traiterous practice he was deservedly hanged.

106. John Twiford, a furious Papist, that used to set up Stakes for them that
were burnt in Smithfield, dyed, rotting above ground, so that none could endure
to come near unto him by reason of his horrible stink.

107. William Gardener, an English Merchant, being present in Lisbon at the
marriage of the King of Portugal's Son with the King of Spain's Daughter, and
seeing the abominable Idolatry then used in the presence of the King; and of
all the States there assembled, he stepped to the Cardinal, who was celebrating
of Mass, and plucked the Cake out of his hand, and trampled it under his Feet,
and overthrew the Chalice: For which, by most exquisite torments in a horrible
manner they put him to death by degrees, and then burned him, a Spark of whose
Fire, was driven by the wind a great way into one of the Kings Ships lying in
the Haven, and quite consumed it: and within half a year after the new married
Prince dyed; and the year after the King himself dyed also.

108. Cardinal Woolsey, after much opposition against the Light of the Gospel
which brake forth in his time, and much cruelty used against the Professors of
it, fell into disgrace with King Henry the Eighth, who sent for him up out of
Yorkshire, and in his journey (suspecting the issue) he took such a strong
Purge, as his rotten Body not being able to bear, he dyed at the Abbey of
Lecester. His dead Body was as black as Pitch, and so heavy that six men could
scarcely bear it, and it stank so intollerably that they were fain to hasten
the Burial of it in the Night, at which time there was such an hiddeous
Tempest, as blew out all the Torches, and the Storm was accomponied with such a
stink, that they were glad to throw him into his Grave, and so to leave him.

109. Judge Morgan who passed Sentence of Condemnation upon the incomparable
Lady Jane Dudley, shortly after ran mad, and in his raving fits, cried out
continually to have the Lady Jane taken away from him, and so he continued till
he dyed.

110. Morgan, Bishop of S. David's in Wales, who condemned the Blessed Martyr
Mr. Ferrar, and unjustly usurped his Bishopric, not long after was stricken by
God in a most strange manner. For his food would not go down, but pick up
again, sometimes at his Mouth, sometimes blown out at his Nose, most horrible
to behold: and thus he continued a Spectacle of Gods displeasure, till he dyed.

111. Mr. Leyson also who was Sheriff at the burning of Mr. Ferrar, having
fetched away his Cattle, and put them into his own Grounds, diverse of them
would never eat any meat, but continued bellowing and roaring till they dyed.

112. Dr. Duning, Chancellor of Norwich, who was a Bloody Persecutor in the
Reign of Queen Mary, was stricken suddenly as he sat in his Chair, and dyed.

113. Berry, Commissary of Norfolk, another Bloody Persecutor, as he was
walking with one of his Concubines, fell down suddenly with a heavy groan, and
never stirred after.

114. A persecuting Suffragan of Dover, having been with Cardinal Pool for his
Blessing, coming out of the Cardinal's Chamber, fell down the stairs, and brake
his Neck.

115. Bishop Thornton, another cruel Persecutor, as he was looking upon his men
at Bowls upon a Sahbath-Day, fell suddenly into a Palsy, and being carried to
his Bed, and willed to remember the Lord: yea, (said he) So I do: and my Lord
Cardinal too: and so he dyed.

116. Dr. Jeffery, Chancellor of Salisbury; a wretched Persecutor, who had
appointed to call before him ninety godly Persons, and to examine them by
Inquisition, the Day before, as he was looking upon his Buildings, fell down
suddenly and dyed.

117. Thomas Blaver, a Privy Counselor to the King of Scots, was a great
Persecutor of the Faithful in that Land: But being by God struck with sickness,
he fell into Despair, crying out That he was damned, and a Castaway: That he
was damned without remedy. In which miserable condition he dyed without any
sign of true repentance.

118. Henry, Archbishop of Mentz, a godly, and religious man, was accused as
being guilty of Heresy to the Pope, who sent two of his Cardinals to examine
the matter: and they most unjustly deposed him, and cast him out of his place,
whereupon he said unto them: If I should from your unjust Sentence appeal unto
the Pope, it is like I should find no redress from him; wherefore I appeal to
the Lord Jesus Christ, that just and righteous Judge of all the world, and cite
you to answer me before his Judgment Seat, for this unjust act of yours. To
which they scoffingly answered, Go you first, we will follow after. Not long
after this, the good Archbishop dyed, which, when the Cardinals heard of, they
said jestingly one to another: Behold, he is now gone before, and we must
follow after according to our Promise. And indeed shortly after they both dyed
upon one day. The one, sitting upon a Jakes voided out his Entrails: The other,
gnawing his own Fingers, and having made himself deformed with devouring
himself; he dyed miserably.

119. About the year 1507. there was at Chipping Sadbury a godly woman
convented before the Chancellor [Dr. Whittington] by whom she was condemned to
be burnt. And against the day of her Execution, multitudes of people flocked to
the Town, and among the rest, Dr. Whittington came to see her burnt. At the
same time there was a Butcher in another part of the Town that was killing a
Bull: But the Butcher, somewhat missing his blow, the Bull broke loose just as
the people were coming from seeing the Execution of the Martyr: The people,
seeing the Bull coming, divided themselves, and made a lane for him to pass
through, the Bull went through, without hurting, man, woman, or child, till he
came to the place where the Chancellor was, against whom he ran very
furiously, and with his Horns, hitting him on the Belly, ran through it, and
tearing out his Guts with his Horns, trailed them about the Streets, to the
great astonishment of all that beheld it.

120. At the burning of Alexander Goug, and Alice Driver, Martyrs, there was
one Bate, a Barber, that was a very busy man about burning them: but presently
after Gods severe Judgment fell upon him, so that within three or four weeks
after, he dyed in much misery.

121. In the Reign of Queen Mary, one of the Sheriffs of London, called Mr.
Woodrose, used Mr. Bradford very churlishly at the time of his Execution, as he
had dealt with Mr. Rogers before. He used also to laugh, and make himself sport
at the sufferings of these innocent persons, and used to beat away the people
who were desirous to shake them by the hand before their Death: but the Lord
(who usually punishes such bloody Persecutors) shortly after struck him with
lameness upon one side, that he could never after turn him in his Bed. He had
also a Dog-like Appetite, that could never be satisfied with Food: and in this
misery he continued by the space of eight years, even till he dyed.

122. Adam Foster of Mendlesham in Suffolk, was apprehended by one Thomas
Mouse, and George Rivet for not coming to Mass, and by them was carried before
Sir John Tyrel, who sent him to the Bishop of Norwich. But it pleased God that
Mouse, was immediately after stricken with a grievous disease, whereof he
shortly after dyed: And Rivet (not warned thereby, but) persevering in his
persecuting ways, had a great swelling that rose in his Legs, which grievously
vexed, and tormented him; and at last, falling into a fearful Disease, he dyed
miserably, and in so impatient a manner, as terrified all that heard thereof.

123. George Eagles, Martyr, who was hanged at Chelmesford in Fssex, was cut
down before he was dead, and sadly mangled by one William Swallow, Bailiff of
Chelmesford: His Body being opened, they pulled out his heart, and quartered
him, and set up his Quarters in several places. But shortly after, Gods
terrible Judgments fell upon this Swallow, so that his Hair fell from his Head,
his Eyes were so closed that he could scarce see, the Nails fell off from his
Fingers and Toes, and a Leprosy overspread his whole Body, and his Estate so
melted away that he fell into Beggary, and dyed in much misery.

124, William Seaman, Thomas Carman, and Thomas Hudson were apprehended in
Norfolk: Their Persecutor was Sir John Tyrel, who commanded his Servants to
search for Seaman: One of their names was Robert Baldwin, a Neighbor to
Seaman, and one in whom he put much confidence. Yet this treacherous person (to
gratify his Mr.) searched Seamans house in the Night, and finding him at home,
carried him Prisoner to his Master. As they went in the way a strange Light
fell from Heaven betwixt them: After which, this Baldwin, though then in the
Flower of his Age, never enjoyed good day, but pined away till he dyed.

125. Mr. William Brown, Minister of Little-Stanham in Suffolk, for preaching
boldly, and faithfully against the Mass, was persecuted by on Robert
Bloomsield, Constable there. But the terrible hand of God fell upon him, both
by Sickness, and Consumption of his Estate, so that, being rich before, he
became poor. His Wife also, and his Son dyed of pining Sickness. And though he
thought to repair his Estate, by marrying a rich Widow, yet God still blowed
upon it. His Body also was full of Botches and Sores, and being thus afflicted
in Body, and impoverished in his Estate, he dyed in misery.

126. There was in Lancashire, one Justice Leland, who was a great Persecutor
of the godly in those parts: He one day as he was sitting in his Chair, and
discoursing with his friends, fell down suddenly and dyed, never so much as
once stirring after.

127. Ralph Lardin, the Betrayer of George Eagles aforementioned, was himself
arraigned, condemned, and hanged. As he stood at the Bar, he said publicly,
This is justly fallen upon me for betraying the Blood of that just and holy man,
George Eagles, who, through my means was condemned, and I sold his life for a
little money.

128. Mr. Swingfield, a Deputy in Thames Street, hearing that Mrs. Angel, a
Midwife, and a gracious woman, was at a Gentlewomans Labor in Crooked-Lane,
taking three others with him, he beset the House, and apprehended her, and
carried her unto some of Bishop Bonner's Officers, who put her into Lollards
Tower. This Mrs. Angel was great with child, and by reason of the fright, and a
fall which she caught at her apprehension, she fell into Labor the next day,
and was delivered in Prison, having no woman with her, to help her in her
extremity. But within ten weeks after, Deputy Swingfield, and all the other
three that came with him to assist him, all of them dyed.

129. There was one Burton, the Bailiff of Crowland in Lincolnshire, who in
King Edward the Sixth's time, was a seemingly zealous Protestant: But when
Queen Mary came to the Crown, he soon turned Papist, and endeavored to stir up
his Neighbors to introduce the Mass. They, not being forward in it, the
Sabbath following this Burton went to the Church, and when the Curate was
beginning to read the English Service, Burton went to him, saying, Sirrah, will
you not say Mass? Buckle your self to it, you Knave, or by Gods Blood, I will
sheath my Dagger in your Shoulders. The poor Curate, being affrighted herewith,
betook himself to read Mass: But shortly after, as this Burton, with one of his
Neighbors, rode together upon the Fenbank, a Crow, (with her usual Note) flew
over his head, and voiding her Excrements, it fell on his Nose, and ran down
upon his Beard, and stank so horribly as set him a vomiting in a most violent
manner: whereupon, hasting home, he betook himself to his Bed, but could eat
nothing: And the Stink, and vomiting still continuing, with fearful Oaths and
Execrations, he cursed the Crow for thus poisoning of him; and so continued in
extreme torments till he dyed.

130. There was one James Abbes burnt at Bury for Religion: As he went to the
Stake, some poor people met him, begging his Alms, and because he had no money
to give them, he plucked of his Apparel, to his very shirt, and distributed it
among them, exhorting them to be strong in the Lord: and (as faithful followers
of Jesus Chlist) to stand steadfast in the truth of the Gospel, which, (said he)
with Gods assistance, I will now, in your sight, seal with my Blood. Whilst he
was thus exhorting them, there came one of the Sheriffs men, who, hearing what
he said, cried out to the people most blasphemously, saying, Good People,
believe him not, for it is Heresy that he speaks. And as Abbes continued his
godly Exhortations, so this wicked wretch belched out his blasphemous
Exclamations, till they came to the Stake. As soon as the Fire was kindled.
Gods fearful vengeance fell upon this wicked wretch; who, immediately, in all
the peoples sight, fell distracted, wherewith (a little before) he had charged
this Blessed Servant of Jesus Christ: And in a furious manner, pulling off his
clothes, he said, Thus did James Abbes, the true Servant of God, who is saved,
but I am damned. And so he ran about the Town, still crying out, James Abbes
was a good man, and is saved, but I am damned, Hereupon his Master caused him
to be bound, clothed, and kept in a dark room, but as soon as the company was
departed he tore off his cloths, still raging, and crying out, James Abbes was
the true Servant of God, and is saved, but I am damned: And thus he continued
till he dyed.

131. One Dale, a Promoter and Persecutor in Queen Marys days, was eaten up by
Lice, and dyed miserably.

Alexander, the Keeper of Newgate, a merciless Enemy to those that lay there
for Religion, and who used to go to Bishop Bonner, and his Officers, crying
out, Rid my Prison: Rid my Prison: I am too much pestered with these Heretics:
By Gods just Judgment he fell into a grievous Disease: His Body was so much
swollen that he was more like a Monster than a man, and his Entrails so rotted
that none could endure the stink of him. And his Son James, to whom he left a
great Estate, soon consumed it, saying in a jeering manner, ill gotten, ill
spent. At last, as he went through Newgate-Market, he fell down suddenly and
dyed.

132. Also John Peter, Alexander's Son in Law, was an horrible Blasphemer, and
used upon every occasion to say, If it be not so, I pray God, I may rot before
I dye. He was also very cruel to the poor Servants of God in Prison. And God
paid him home in his own coin: For according to his Imprecation, his Body
rottted away by piecemeal till he dyed.

133. One Lever of Brightwel in Barkshire,, jeeringly said, That he saw that
illfavoured Knave. Latimer, when he was burned at Oxford: and that he had Teeth
like an Horse: But the Lord suffered not this profane scoff to go unpunished.
For about that very same Hour wherein Lever spoke those words, his Son hanged
himself.

134. All ages have cause to admire, and adore the Exemplary Judgments of God
poured out upon Stephen Gardener, Bishop of Winchester, in Queen Marys days;
who upon the day wherein Reverend Latimer, and Learned Ridley were to be burnt
at Oxford, (though some great Peers came to dine with him that day, yet) would
not sit down to dinner, till one of his Servants about four a Clock in the
Afternoon, coming Post from Oxford, brought word that Execution was done upon
them. Then did he have to Dinner, and was very merry, but ere he had eaten many
bits, a sudden stroke of Gods hand fell upon him, so that he was carried
immediately to his Bed, in which he continued for fifteen days in intolerable
anguish and torments, rotting above ground, during all which time he could void
nothing that he received, neither by Stool, nor Urine, his Tongue also hung out
of his mouth swollen, and black, and so he languished and pined away in great
anguish and misery.

135. King James the Fifth of Scotland, by the instigation of the Popish
Clergy, was a great Persecutor of the Truth that then brake forth in that
Kingdom: and for that end he gave Commission to Sir James Hamilton, natural
Brother to the Earl of Arran, who was his Treasurer, to call, and convent all
that were suspected of Heresy, and to inflict upon them the punishment, which,
after trial, they should be found to deserve: In Execution of which Commissiion
he was most fierce and cruel, not sparing some that were of his near Kindred.
But when he was in his greatest height, and made it his work to suppress the
Gospel, one of his own Friends, whom he pursued upon the account of Religion,
accused him of Treason, and notwithstanding the mediation of the Popish Clergy
for him, as their greatest Patron, he was arraigned, condemned, executed, and
quartered in the streets of Edenburg.

This King James also was heard to say, that none of that way should expect any
favor at his hands, nay, nor his own Sons if they should be found guilty. But
shortly after, War breaking forth with England, he found his Nobility averse to
those Incursions which he intended to make into England, which much vexed him.
These thoughts, and some fearful Visions which he had by Night, terrified him
exceedingly. For at Linlithgow, on a night as he slept, it seemed to him that
Thomas Scot, Justice Clerk, came unto him, with a company of Devils, crying, Woe
worth the day that ever I knew thee, or thy Service: For serving thee against
God and his Servants, I am now adjudged to Hell torments. Hereupon awaking, he
called for Lights, and told his Servants what he had heard and seen. The next
morrow, by the light of day, news was brought him of the death of the said
Justice Clerk, which fell out just at the same time when the King had this
Vision, and almost in the same manner: For he dyed in great horror, often
reiterating those words, By the righteous Judgment of God, I am condemned. And
this manner of his death, answering so exactly to the Kings Dream made it the
more terrible.

The King also had another Dream in the same place a few nights after, which
did more affright him. Whilst he lay sleeping, he thought that Sir James
Hamilton aforesaid, came unto him with a naked Sword in his Hand, and therewith
cut off both his Arms; threatening to return within a short time, and to
deprive him of his life. With this he awaked, and as he lay musing what this
Dream should import, news was brought him of the death of his two Sons, James,
and Arthur, the one dying at S. Andrews, the other at Strivling, at one and the
very same hour. The next year, which was 1542. being overwhelmed with grief, he
dyed at Falkland in the two and thirtieth year of his Age. A little before he
dyed, word was brought him that his Queen was delivered of a Daughter;
whereupon he brake forth into a Passion, saying: It came with a Lass, (meaning
the Crown) and will go with a Lass. Fie upon it.

136. One Friar Campbell in Scotland did bitterly rail upon that man of God,
Mr. Patrick Hamilton whilst he was burning at S. Andrews: to whom Mr. Hamilton
said with much earnestness: Thou wicked man, thou know the contrary, and
have sometime made a Profession of the truth: I appeal thee to answer it before
the Judgment Seat of Christ: A few days after Campbel fell sick, and in great
horror of Conscience dyed distracted.

137. Anno 1568. There was in Breda one Peter Coulogue, a godly man, who, by
his Popish Adversaries was cast into Prison, and his Maidservant daily carried
him his Food, confirming and comforting him out of the word of God as well as
she was able; for which they imprisoned her also. Not long after Peter was put
to the torment of the Rack, which he endured patiently. After him the Maid was
fetched to be racked, whereupon, she said; My Masters, wherefrre will ye put me
to this torture, seeing I have no way offended you? If it be for my Faith-sake,
ye need not torment me: For, as I was never ashamed to make a Confession
thereof, no more will I now be at this present before you; but will if you
please freely show you my mind therein. Yet for all this they would have her to
the Rack: whereupon she again said, If I must needs suffer this pain, pray you
give me leave to call upon my God first. This they assented to; and whilst she
was fervently pouring out her Soul unto God by Prayer, one of the Commissioners
was surprised with such fear and terror that he fell into a swoon, out of which
he could never be recovered, by which means the poor Maid escaped racking.

138. In the Reign of King Henry the Second of France, there was a godly Tailor
condemned to be burnt for Religion, and some about the King would needs
persuade him to be present, and to see the Execution himself: And God gave the
Tailor such strength and conrage in the fire as astonished the King to behold
it: And the poor Tailor, having espied the King in a window where he sat,
fixed his Eyes so steadfastly upon him, as they were never off, and the King was
thereby constrained to leave the window, and to retire into his Chamber, and
was so affected therewith, that he confessed the shadow of the Tailor followed
him whither soever he went, and for many Nights after he was so terrified with
the Apparitions of the Tailor, that he protested with an Oath, that he would
never hear, nor see any more of those Lutherans burned.

139. In the late Rebellion, and Persecution of Ireland, John Nicholson, and
Anne his wife were received into the Protection of one Fitz-Patrick, who would
have persuaded them to change their Religion and to go to Mass: But they
professed that before they would do that, they would dye upon the Swords point.
Then he labored to prevail with the woman to burn her Bible, but she said,
that before she would do it, she would dye the death: whereupon the Sabbath
morning following, they were both of them cruelly murdered: But he that acted
that villainy, was so tormented in Conscience: and dogged with their
Apparitions, that he pined away and dyed.

140. In the late Irish Massacre, wherein the bloody Papists spared none of
what Age, Sex, or quality soever; O! how visibly did the Judgments of God
follow them? And for that savage Bloodshed, gave them Blood to drink in great
measure: For Mac-Guir Mac-Mahun, and Sir Philem Oneal, being taken Prisoners,
were publicly executed. Most of the rest were consumed by the Sword, either in
their own Country, or in Foreign parts, and their spirits were generally so
debased, and their courage emasculated, that a few English, or Scottish
Soldiers would chase multitudes of them; and Gods Judgments did so eminently
follow them, that within a few years most of that cruel Generation were rooted
out.

Of Gods Judgments upon Persecutors in Germany, Spain, and France.
141. The Electoral House of Saxony, upon the devesting of that brave and pious
Prince John Frederick, the true Heir, by the Emperor Charles the Fifth, and the
investing the younger House to usurp that Honor, has ever since proved a
greater Friend to the Popish Party, than to the purer Church of the French, and
Helvetick Confession. Maurice that usurped the Duchy and Electorate, upon the
captivating of the said John Frederick, his Cousin, first ruined the Princes of
the Smalcaldick Union, to which himself had subscribed; and then (casting an
ambitious eye upon the Empire it self:) broke his Faith with the Emperor that
had raised him; and having patched up the defection by the help of Ferdinand of
Austria, King of Bohemia (afterward Emperor) he lastly perished by a violent
death in a pitched Battle fought against his Fellow-Protestants. A just
Judgment of God upon him.

142. Charles the Fifth, having obtained the Empire by the help and moneys of
our King Henry the Eighth, was the most potent Emperor that ever Germany had as
long as he maintained the peace of Religion: But having yielded to the Popes
instigations, and prospered a while in his intended extirpation of the Truth,
he found at last by sad experience, what his brave, and valiant General [
Castaldus] had foretold him, that these violent proceedings would in the end
prove fatal to himself: For having first fled away at Midnight, in a cold and
rainy season from Onspurch, for fear of the Protestant Army, he was afterward
(instead of settling his Son Philip in his Imperial Throne, as he had intended)
forced to surrender the Empire to his Brother Ferdinand, who diverse years
before had entered into a secret League with the Protestant Princes of Germany,
and so having lived a few years in a despised, and disconsolate condition, he
at last ended his life most ingloriously in a Monastery.

143. His Son Philip the Second, King of Spain, the most inveterate Enemy of
the Gospel that ever lived, did not only erect Shambles for Gods Saints in most
of his large Dominions, by his bloody Inquisitors, but still aided the Rebels
in France, England, and Ireland against their lawful Sovereigns, and plotted to
invade all other Protestant Dominions in Christendom, so at last by one general
Carriage of them all, he and his holy Father the Pope, might have shared the
Christian World by a double Monarchy, of the Church and Empire between them.
But did this bloody Prince prosper in these his ambitious and cruel Designs?
Nothing less. For what got he by his invading France by Land, and England, and
Ireland by Sea, and by his large Pensions conferred upon the Traitors and
secret Enemies of either States? Truly nothing. For having wasted about thirty
millions of Money upon those fruitless Designs; and not gained a Foot of Land
in any of those Realms, but the loss of a great part of the seventeen
Provinces, with whom, having broken his Oath solemnly sworn to them in his
Inauguration, they (by the Aid of England and France) freed themselves from his
unjust Oppression and Tyranny.

Neither did the Divine Justice suffer him so to escape, but raised a Fire in
his own House. For whereas he had Issue by his first Wife Mary, the Daughter of
John the Third, King of Portugal, one only Son, called Charles (a Prince of
admirable towardliness) He (during the Life of our Queen Mary, his second Wife)
treated a Marriage for his Son with Elizabeth, the eldest Daughter of Henry the
Second, King of France; during which Treaty, our Queen Mary dying, he himself
married her who was designed for his Son (a Lady of admirable Beauty and
Parts:) They often in private, never forgetting their old affections, lamented
their unhappy loss each of other. The Son also detested his Fathers cruelty,
and butchery by the merciless Inquisitors! This so enraged his jealous Father,
that he imprisoned him, and delivered him over into the Inquisitors Hands, by
whom he was condemned, Anno Christi, 1568. and a few days after he sent to him
to choose his own Death, who in a warm Bath caused his Veins to be opened, and
so dyed. A while after (though she was great with child) he caused his Queen to
drink a Cup of poison, which soon dispatched her.

144. King Philip's fourth Wife was Anne, the Daughter of Mary, the Empress,
his own natural Sister, by whom he had Issue Ferdinand and James* both cut off
by Death in their Infancy, and Philip, who being the only surviving Issue of
this incestuous match, succeeded his Father in his Dominions, but not
altogether in his cruelties.

145. Rodulph the Second, Emperor of Germany, not following the steps of the
wise Maximilian his Father, but of the aforesaid Philip his Brother in Law,
sought by all secret and hostile means to enervate, and root out Religion in
the Empire: What got he by it, but to have Gods curse denounced in Scripture
fulfilled upon him? That the elder should serve the younger. For Mathias the
Archduke of Austria, raising an Army in the year 1608. and joining his Forces
with those of the oppressed Protestant in Bohemia, hemmed up his Brother Rodulph
in Prague, got the Kingdom of Hungary from him in present possession, and the
Empire in reversion, leaving him nothing but the complement of Majesty, which
he did not long survive, and could never revenge that affront.

146. We need not look into ancient Histories of Gods Judgments upon Heathen
persecuting Emperors: we may see the sad successes of the Princes of the house
of Valois in France. King Henry the Second of France was meanly married to
Katherine de Medices (the Niece of Pope Clement the Seventh) during the Life of
the Dolphin his elder Brother, who was afterward poisoned. And Francis the
first, his Father deceasing, he succeeded, and swayd the French Scepter for
diverse years, with much Tranquillity and happiness, till (loathing the Coiture
of his Queen, unfit indeed for a Princes bed) he grew highly enamoured on
Piciavia of Valence, a woman of exquisite Beauty, and good extraction, with
whom he long after lived in continual Adultery, and was by her enticed to
persecute and slay the Protestants, Anno Ghristi 1553. that so by the
confiscation of their Lands and Goods, she might enrich her self, and her
Kindred. This Persecution put a Period to all his former Victories, and the
next year was followed with the loss of the City of Seins in Italy to the
Spaniard: The Death of the old gallant General Leo Strozzi by a base hand, and
the overthrow of his French Army by James de Medices.

147. Anno Christi 1556. The violence of persecution was again renewed against
the Protestants, and the very next year after (as before) God again gave up the
French Army to the slaughter of the Spaniards and Dutch at the Siege and Battle
of S. Quintins, in which were above three thousand slain upon the place, and
many of them men of note, and soon after the Town was taken by Storm: Also
Annas Duke de Memorancy himself, the Constable of France: The Marshal of S.
Andrew: the Duke of Longevile, Gaspar de Coligne, Earl of Castilion and Admiral
of France, and a number others of the great Peers were all taken Prisoners. In
sum, the loss and slaughter was so great, and fatal to the French, as it
well-near equalled that Victory obtained by the Duke of Bourbon at the Battle
of Pavia in Italy against Francis the first, his Father. Yet Henry the Second
still shut his eyes against the cause of these losses, and having his heart
cauterized by his Lusts, he not only caused the godly to be committed to the
Flames, but himself would needs be a Spectator of their Torments as a pleasing
sight, and had combined with Philip King of Spain, his new Son in Law, for the
utter ruin and final subversion of Geneva.

Nay, but a few hours before his Death, Anno 1559. Lodovick Faber, and Annas
Burgus, two Senators of Paris, because they had spoken a little freely in
defense of the innocence and piety of the Protestants in the open Senate, were
cast into Prison by his special Command, in the Bastile of the same City, by
Gabriel Earl of Mongomery, one of the Captains of his Guard. And the
persecution of all others of the same Profession grew so hot and furious: when
the King June the nine and twentieth, the same year, running at Tilt with the
very same Earl of Mongomery, and near the very Bastile where the said Senators
were Prisoners, was struck with a splinter of Mongomery's Spear, through the
Eye into his Brain, and never had the happiness to speak one word after, though
he survived the wound a few days; Nor to acknowledge his former Lust and
Cruelty.

148. And if we farther look to Gods Hand that followed this Prince in his
Posterity, it will yet seem the greater miracle. For of five Sons that he had,
all save one dyed without lawful Issue to survive them, ad three of them by
violent Deaths, and in his Posterity ended the Valetian Line, the Crown
thereupon devolving to the Royal Branch of Cleremont, commonly called Bourbon,
whom his Sons had most bitterly hated and persecuted. And of all his five
Daughters, three dyed issueless, and the eldest (the Queen of Spain
aforementioned) that had Issue was cut off by poison. Nay, his very Bastard
Son, Henry of Engolism, a great Actor in the Parisian Massacre, perished also
by the stab of Philip Altovit, a Florentine, his old and mortal Enemy, Anno
Christi 1586. during the Reign of Henry the Third, his Brother.

149. Charles the Ninth (third Son of the said Henry the Second) who succeeded
his Brother Francis the Second, Anno Christi 1560. had he continued his Reign
with as much Mercy and Wilsdom as he began it, when he followed the grave and
seasonable advise of Michael Hospitalius, his Chancellor, probably he had lived
more virtuously and dyed less miserably. But he had scarce reigned two years in
Peace and Plenty, when Katherine de Medices, his Mother (desiring to get the
Regency into her own Hands by raising combustions in the Kingdom) persuaded
this her Son to revive those Persecutions against the Protestants which his
Father had begun. She also reconciled Her self to Charles Lorainer, Duke of
Guise, whom a little before she had feared and hated, being a secret Enemy to
Lewis de Cleremont, Prince of Conde. He and the Marshal of S. Andrew having
gained Annas Momorancy, Constable of France to their party, they all conspired
together for the ruin of the Truth. The Protestants in the mean time, seeing
the King in his minority, held (as it were) captivated by this Triumvirate,
took up Arms by the Queen-Mothers own instigation, to maintain the Kings Edict
of Pacification, which was published Anno Christi 1561. commonly called, The
Edict of January.

The year following, by the instigation of the said Triumvirate, not only the
Queen Mother, but Anthony de Cleremont, King of Navar also (who yet dyed a
Protestant) was drawn on to assail those of the Religion with open force, they
in the mean time filling the Queen-Mothers ear with these vain Flatteries, that
she should soon see the utter ruin of all the Heretics in France: From which
time that goodly, rich, peaceable, and flourishing Kingdom, for almost forty
years together (some short pauses excepted) was filled with Cruelties, Ravages,
Ravishments, Murders, Battles, Fires, Slaughters, and all other calamities
that attend a civil War: In the end of all which, the Protestants being
increased in their strength and numbers, obtained a more firm and advantageous
peace than ever they had before: whereas those three incendiaries who had been
the Authors of all these miseries, perished within a few years after, by the
just Judgment of God in the very act when they were pursuing the godly party.
For the Marshal of S. Andrew was slain in the Battle of Dreux: Annas de
Momorancy under the very walls of Paris, and Francis Lorainer, Duke of Guise,
was pistoled by John Poltrot whilst he besieged Orleans.

King Charles seeing that by open force he could not eradicate and destroy the
truth, nor root out the Professors of it, about two years before the hellish
Massacre begun at Paris, and prosecuted (to the perpetual infamy of France) in
diverse other Cities, held a secret Council in the Castle of Blois, with
Katherine de Medices, his Mother, Alexander, and Hercules (called also Henry
and Francis) his Brothers, and Henry Lorainer, Heir to the said Duke Francis
aforementioned, by what means they might best draw the Protestants into their
toil to murder and destroy them. The same Council was again held in the house
of Hieronimo de Gondy at S. Clou, and the time and order of the bloody Marriage
Banquet to be served in at the Nuptials of the King of Navar with the Lady
Margaret, the French Kings Sister, almost in the same manner and order as it
was afterward put in execution on Bartholomews Day, Anno Christi 1572. In
which were most inhumanely murdered, of men, women, and children (many also of
them being great and honorable Personages) of either Sex about thirty
thousand. And while the Duke of Guise was prosecuting that most inhumane
Butchery, a Cabinet Council was held in the Queen-Mothers Chamber, whether it
were not necessary that both the Duke, and the rest of his Family who were then
present, should not be dispatched at the same time in that disorderly tumult.

King Charles himself never saw good day after this bloody Massacre, though the
Court-Sycophants had promised him that it should prove the first happy day of
his absolute Monarchy. For though he had been long drenched in Lust (a sin
seldom separated from a Persecutor) by his ordinary Adultery with a mean Wench
of Orleance, of whom he begat Charles of Engolism, afterward Earl of Auvern:
And though he had been trained up by his Mother to see the slaughter of Beasts;
and ever in his Chases had been accustomed to bath his hands in the Blood of
the slain Game (which might have served to stupifie his Conscience, as they did
inflame his fierce and cruel nature, yet) a very stinging remorse in his
Conscience, did ever pursue and haunt him after that merciless slaughter,
brought about, chiefly by his own swearing and forswearing, (by which the King
of Navar, and the Admiral Coligni were deceived) His eyes ever rolled up and
down uncertainly in the Daytime with fear and suspicion, and his sleep was
usually interrupted in the night with dismal Dreams and Apparitions (like our
King Richard the Third of England after he had murdered his two Nephews in the
Tower) Nay, though he survived that Massacre not fully two years, yet had he in
that time plotted the death of the said Henry, Duke of Guise, and the removal
of the Queen Mother, and her Instruments from the Helm of State: But as he, a
little before the Massacre had poisoned that incomparable Princess for Learning
and Piety, Joan, Queen of Navar: So did his Mother, or the Duke of Guise (by
way of prevention, or anticipation) minister to him his fatal sharp Physic, of
which (after many and grievous torments) he deceased upon Whitsunday, Anno
Christi 1574. being not full twenty five years old.

150. The Queen Mother, the Kings two Brethren, the Cardinal, and the Duke of
Guise, that had not only joined with him in his Persecution, but encouraged him
to it, they still survived, and for ought men saw, were firmly settled in Peace
and Prosperity: Though Guise might have taken warning by the Death of Claude,
Duke of Aumal, his Brother, slain with a Musket-Bullet from the walls of
Rochel, as he lay in Siege before it, Anno Christi 1573.

151. Henry his Brother, who succeeded King Charles, was not long before chosen
King of Poland, where he then was; but hearing of the Death of his Brother, he
clandestinly stole away from that Kingdom to return to France. In his return
the good Emperor Maximilian the Second, and the Venetian State, earnestly
advised him to maintain the former Edicts of Pacification inviolably, and not
force the Consciences of men in matters of Religion; Of the same Opinion also
were all his wisest Counselors, who saw plainly that the increasing of the
Protestants was the only means now left under Heaven to draw the Pope and his
Conclave to yield some Reformation of the Church, which it needed exceedingly.
But his Mother advised him by all means to root out the Professors of the truth
by Fire and Sword. And others there were of loose and Atheistical Lives, as
Henry Duke of Guise; Lewis the Cardinal of Guise; Renalt Villoclare (A man,
says the incomparable Monsieur de Thou, fatally preferred to be an attendant
upon this King by his Mother) and diverse others, who persuaded the King to
break the aforesaid Edicts for Pacification, and never to sheath his Sword till
he had utterly ruined all the Protestants in France: And the King, being of a
weak, and degenerate Spirit, the House of Guise (being the Arch-enemies of the
Gospel) became at length so potent, and triumphed so notoriously over the
impotency of the King, that at last they forced him to seek to those very
Protestants for support, against whom he had taken a Solemn Oath for their
utter destruction.

Infinite almost were the Treasures which he spent upon his Minions and
Pleasures (His expenses upon his Dogs only, amounted in those times to twenty
thousand pounds yearly at the least) but most was exhausted in the prosecution
of his Wars against the Protestants.

152. Guise, and his Faction now grown strong, and assured of support from King
Philip the Second of Spain, after he had expelled his King out of Paris, and
heaped a world of other insolent affronts upon him, was drawn by him, Anno
Christi 1588. to the Assembly then held at Blois. He came thither with his
Brother Lewis Lorainer, Cardinal of Guise, and Charles, Prince of Ionvile, his
Son, upon the same Royal Assurance of safety, with which Charles the Ninth, had
(by his advise) deceived the Protestants before the abhorred Massacre in the
year 1572. But during this Assembly this Duke of Guise was slain, against the
Public Faith given him, not only within the Castle of Blois, but in that very
room, wherein sixteen years before he had advised the bloody Massacre of Paris
to be executed. Two circumstances also do add much horror to the punishment it
self: One was that he was but newly risen from the bed of his adulterate Lust,
having not been able before this night, to conquer the chastity of a
Gentlewoman that waited on the Queen Mother: and therefore was so eager in
reaping the fruits of his long Siege, that he came not to the Council Chamber,
till he was often sent for, and even then scarcely ready: The other was in the
manner of his first wound, which was given him in his Throat, and immediately
caused the Blood so abundantly to stream out of his Mouth, as he never had time
so much as to call upon God for mercy or forgiveness, but spent his last minute
in endeavoring to revenge himself upon his Murderers.

153. A while after the Cardinal of Guise, his Brother (who had been a great
Gamester at Cards and Dice; perished also in the same Castle of Blois by a
violent Death. Katherine de Medices, the Queen Mother, who had been the chief
cause for thirty years together of the shedding of so much innocent Blood,
being present at the same time in the said Castle, stormed secretly that so
great an action should be entered into, and effected without her advice: And
when she heard that Charles Lorainer, Duke of Main was escaped, (being the
younger Brother to the murdered Duke of Guise) she presaged to the King her
Son, the sad Issue of that rash attempt, which he (as it seems) interpreting to
be rather the expression of her wishes than her fears; and having by many woeful
experiences, seen the effects of her revengful Italian Spirit, took a course to
pacify her wrath: For not long after, she there ended her unhappy Life, by
poison (says Elias Reusner) in the same Castle also, where she held the first
secret and bloody Council for the execution of the aforesaid bloody Massacre.
Francis her youngest Son dyed before her, June the tenth, Anno 1584. in the one
and thirtieth year of his Age, of a violent poison, probably ministered to him
by some of the Hispaniolized Guisards, so that it caused very much Blood to
issue out of his Body in several places, the sight of which purple streams
might well call upon him to remember with what inhumane Pride he trampled upon
the bloody streets of Paris in the great slaughter committed upon Gods Saints
and Martyrs about twelve years before.

154. There now only remained Henry the Third, the French King, alive, of all
the first contrivers, and principal Executioners of that inhumane Massacre,
which no Age, no Time, no Action of the most Barbarous Nations of the world
could ever parallel, till that horrid Massacre of the bloody Irish upon the
English Protestants in the year 1641. October 23. wherein above one hundred and
fifty thousand perished in one of the four Provinces of that Kingdom, after the
most savage and barbarous manner that ever was read of.

155. Charles Lorainer, Duke of Main was presently upon the death of his
Brother made General of the Holy League, (as they styled it) And Paris it self,
and in a manner all the Popish Cities beyond the Loi^ giving up their Names and
Forces to that Faction, supported from Rome by Pope Sixtus the Fifth, and from
Spain by Philip the Second.

156. When the King saw that neither his acting the Monk with the Flagellators,
nor his playing the Devil against the Prostants, could secure him from a speedy
ruin by the violent hands of Rebels; He sent to the victorious King of Navar
(his Brother in Law) and to the Protestant Army, before whose known valor the
Popish Forces hastened back from the Loyer to the Seine; Henry the Third
pursued them, and pitched his Royal Pavilion at S. Clou, not far from the Gates
of Paris. But his former cruelties, and persecutions of the godly, were
doubtless the hindrances of his new expected Victories, and the Divine
Providence so ordered it that in the very place where the last resolution was
taken by himself, his Mother, his Brethren, and others for the speedy Execution
of that brutish Massacre, about seventeen years before, nay in the very same
House of Jerome de Gondy, and in the very same Room and Chamber (says John de
Serres) was murdered by James Clement, a Jesuited Monk, Anno Christi 1589. and
in the nine and thirtieth year of his Age.

This Assasination was promoted by Pope Sixtus the Fifth, by the seditious
Sermons of Jesuits, Priests, and Friars, and by the persecution of Katherine
Mary, Duchess of Mompensier, Sister of the slain Duke of Guise, who was so
horribly transported with malice against the Protestants, and with desire of
revenge upon the King, as she prostitued her Body to that Jesuited Goat, to
encourage him the more to that horrid murder, and by that means to stupify and
harden his Soul by his filthy Lust, that it might not startle at any other
wickedness whatsoever. Yet as this King some Months before his Death had
altered his former bloody resolution against the Protestants; so did the Divine
Providence at his Death afford him some hours of Repentance, after the bloody
knife had been sheathed in his Belly; in which time he acknowledged his sin,
and his error in having been so long miss-lead by his ambitious and malicious
Counselors, and his sin in having persecuted his Protestant Subjects, and for
having enforced the Conscience of many to submit to Popery against the known
Truth by threats and cruelty.

157. Our Queen Mary began her Reign with the breach of her Public Faith.. For
whereas the Crown was set upon her head by the Gentry and Commons of Suffolk,
(although they knew her to be a Papist (which shows that the godly Protestants,
whatsoever is suggested to the contrary by Lustful, Profane, and Popishly
affected Persons, are the best Subjects that any Sovereign can be happy in) yet
she, in one of her first Acts of Council, took order for their restraint, long
before the Mass and Latin Service were generally received in London, and
caused that Diocese to taste the sharpest Inquisition, and Persecution that
raged during her Reign, which was happily shortened by her Husbands contemning
her Person, and her Enemies conquering her Dominions, neither of which she had
power either to recover, or revenge: So that though she dyed not by any outward
violence, yet was her end as inglorious and miserable, as her Reign had been
turbulent and bloody. She might have taken warning by the sudden, and immature
Death of King James the Fifth of Scotland, her Cousin German, who, raising a
persecution there, against his Loyal and innocent Subjects that were
Protestants, Anno Christi 1539. burning some, exiling, and imprisoning others,
and forcing many to blaspheme, in abjuring the known truth; and all by advice
and procurement of James Beaton, Archbishop of S. Andrews, and David Beaton,
Abbot of Arbroth, his Brother, never saw good day after: For two brave young
Princes his Sons, were the year following, cut off by untimely ends in their
Cradles: Wars to his great disadvantage and loss were raised between him and
our King Henry the Eighth, his Uncle, and all things fell out so cross to his
haughty and vast mind as that it hastened his Death, which fell out Anno
Christi 1542. See more of him before.

Many also are the Examples of Gods severe, but righteous Judgments of God upon
Popish persecuting Prelates, whereof you have store of instances in my two
Martyrologies, and in my two Vollumes of Examples. I shall content my self for
the present with two or three, which though briefly set down there, yet here
more largely.

158. Thomas Arundal, Archbishop of Canterbury, having been the successful
Traitor, by the help of his Reverend Follow-Bishops, to estabish Henry the
Fourth in the Throne of King Richard the Second, his Liege Lord, and Cousin
German, pressed the new King (whose broken Title needed the supportments of his
Prelates) to use his temporal Sword for the destruction of the Disciples of
John Wickliff, whose numbers at that time were so increased that they even
filled the Kingdom: The King assented. and having by their cruel instigation,
shed the blood of many of Gods Saints, his Reign proved neither long nor
prosperous.

159. King Henry the Fifth. his Son, a brave and marshal Prince, succeeding
him, the Protestants began to meet more publicly, and to profess the Truth
more openly than before. The Archbishop thereupon renews his former Suit to
the Son, as he had before successfully pressed upon the Father. In particular,
he first aimed at the destruction of Sir John Oldcastle (See his Life in my
second Volume of Lives) who had most affronted him. He, by reason of his great
Alliances, and the favor of his King, who called him His Knight, might have
expected exemption from their Tyranny: But they prevailed with the King (as
says Archbishop Parker) Rex virum clarum, sibique familiarissimum,
Episcoporum potestati, and carnisioinae permisit: The King gave up this famous
man, and who was dear to himself, to the power, and destruction of the Bishops:
And yet it pleased God that he outlived this persecuting Arch-Prelate two years
at least. For the Archbishop having murdered many godly Saints in King Henry
the Fourths time, and being a great stickler in state affairs, having long
before procured himself to be made Lord Chancellor of England, and lastly (in
a Synod held by himself at Rochester) having forbidden the reading of the
Scriptures in English, and limited Preachers, under an heavy censure, what they
should treat of in the Pulpit, was soon cut off himself by the immediate hand
of God, after he had condemned that warlike Kinght, Sir John Old-Castle, Lord
Cobham, before he could see him executed. For his Tongue was so swollen, and
benumbed that he could neither swallow, nor speak, some days before his Death:
It being (says one) the just Judgment of God upon him (and may be a warning to
all other wicked Popish Prelates) that as he had muzled up the mouths of
Preachers, and kept the Scriptures from the knowledge of the people, being
their spiritual food. So he should neither be able to swallow nor speak, from
that very minute that this Judgment fell upon him, and so he dyed within a few
days after, in great torment, and extremity, by a languishing silence and
famishment.

A later Example we have in the admirable punishment of James Beton,
Archbishop of S. Andrews in Scotland, who was also a member of the purpurated
Conclave at Rome. He had for diverse years been an inveterate Enemy to the
Gospel, and the Professors of it in that Kingdom under King James the Fifth:
And after his Death, taking the advantage of the infancy of the Princess Mary,
the Hereditary Queen of that Realm, he thought it a work worthy of himself, to
double die his Purple Robes in the Blood of the Saints: And to make a full and
clear way for that his sanguinary Project, he forged a Will of the deceased
King, whereby he was established the chief Regent there, during the young
Ladies incapacity to Reign: From which yet, his false play being discovered, he
was removed, and for a while imprisoned: Yet was he no sooner delivered, but he
presently endeavored to raise a new and a fatal war between England and
Scotland, and to root out the Professors of the Truth by a violent and bloody
Persecution. And among others whom he cited, imprisoned, or exiled in the year
1545. he seized upon Mr. George Wiseheart (a very eloquent and learned
Preacher) who by the Latin writers of that age is called Sophocardius, and
contrary to their own Popish Canons, adjudged him to present death himself,
which is never done, except by the hellish Inquisition of Spain, but by
delivering the Martyrs into the power of the Civil-Magistrate; And in his Court
before the Castle of S. Andrews, caused that bloody Sentence to be executed,
the said Mr. Wiseheart being first strangled, and his Body afterward burnt to
Ashes; The Cardinal in the mean time had a Chamber prepared for him, with
Carpets and Cushions in the Windows, out of which he was a Triumphant Spectator
of this godly man's Martyrdom: From which window he departed, not more
delighted, than (as himself thought) secured; and presently he began to fortify
his Castle against all Assaults.

But Gods Judgment from Eternity awarded against him, for this later, as well
as former cruelties exercised upon his faithful Servants, slep'd not. For
within a few weeks after, the Cardinal having falsified his Promise to the Lord
Norman Lesly, Son of the Earl of Rothsay, a zealous Romanist; He upon the
thirteenth day of May, the same year, with about fourteen resolute Gentlemen in
his company, entered the said Castle of S. Andrews, where the Cardinal lay
(having had a whore with him all that night) and having first assured himself
of all within, and the Gates without, he slew the bloody Prelate by his
Bedside without Law or Justice, who had but a little before, most unjustly
condemned and murdered the aforesaid Mr. Wiseheart, and being willing to
expose the dead Carcass of that cruel Persecutor (all weltring and besmeared
with blood) unto the view of the People (who abhorred his Butcheries, and
rejoiced at his fall) casually they laid it along, to be seen of all men in
that very window, out of which a little before, leaning at his ease upon rich
Cushions, he had proudly beheld the death of that precious Martyr.

161. Its very observable which Historians take notice of, that generally the
greatest Persecutors are most drenched in the sin of uncleanness, and
Epicurism. What was Escovedo, that great Instrument of the King of Spain's
cruelties against the Evangelical Party in the Low Countries, but a a very Lump
of Lust, which in the end proved fatal to him?

162. Peter Espinac, A Bishop of Lions in France, was a great Persecutor, and
one that lived in incest with his own Sister.

163. John Archbishop of S. Andrews in Scotland, spent the greatest part of
the Revenues of his See, and the seizure of the Protestants Estates (whose
mortal Enemy he was) upon his Whores and Revellings.

164. The Cardinal of Granvels Veneries were so manifest and numerous, as when
Anno Christi 1574. the Kingdom of Tunis, and the strong Fort of Gulette
(formerly esteemed impregnable) were won by the Turks; the Spaniards made a
jest of it, and said openly, That the Cardinals Breeches, had occasioned that
loss, meaning thereby, that King Philip the Second, relying chiefly upon his
advice in that, and in most of the rest of his important affairs, the Cardinals
Lusts so took him up, that he had not leisure to advise the King for the best.

165. Cardinal Beton (aforementioned) wallowed at home with pollution among his
Harlots, and raged abroad with the blood and slaughter of the innocent Servants
of Christ.

166. In that Hellish Massacre on S. Bartholomew's Day, in Paris it self: The
Murderers there, were for the most part, brutish and lustful Soldiers, or
profane Varlets of the scum of the City, and though their Leaders were more
noble, yet less virtuous. The Duke of Guise, and Aumale, Albert, Gondy, Earl of
Rets, Tavanne, and others of them that were bred up in Lust, Revellings, and
all manner of Debaucheries.

167. The next place that came nearest to the cruelties exercised at Paris, was
the City of Lions, where the numbers of the slain and massacred was so great,
that their Bodies being thrown into the river Rhodanus, or Rosne, stained and
corrupted the water, the violence of which stream, carrying them down by heaps
to Tornou, (where the Inhabitants, not knowing what they were, but fearing that
it proceeded from invasion by Enemies, and Robbers, assembled themselves in
Arms together for their mutual defense.) The chief Ringleaders, and Abettors of
which Butchery (Monsieur de Thou, a Papist, yet an incomparable Historian,
confesses) to have been Boidon, Mormieu, and Clou, three of the most wicked,
and vilest Varlets that a Kingdom could harbor; which Boidon was afterward
executed at Clermont in Auvergne: And if Mormieu escaped a shameful end, yet
surely he deserved it as well as his Fellow Persecutor, having before (as
Semanus confesses) procured the murder of his own Father?

At Tholous also, a few days after, a great slaughter of the godly was
committed; not by the better sort of Citizens, or sober, or morally virtuous
Papists; but by one Turry, and a number of other infamous, and lewd persons
like himself, who joined themselves together for the effecting of that bloody
execution.

The like Villainy was perpetrated and done at the great City of Roan in
Normandy, by one Maronie, a most infamous Ruffian, and a great many of other
base Varlets, who flocked to him as to their chief Ringleader.

168. But in none of them were these two hellish sins of Adultery and Blood
more eminently coupled together than in Paygillard, the Master Butcher at
Angiers, who having long continued in the sin of Adultery, was at last enticed
by his Harlot, to murder his own wife.

169. In France, after this barbarous and cruel Massacre, the eighth day of
November following, there appeared a dreadful Comet, concerning which, a
Learned Protestant, presently after published an elaborate Poem, wherein he
presaged, that it was Gods Herald or Messenger to denounce his Judgment quickly
to ensue upon that Kingdom for their late inhumane Butcheries. These Verses
were scarcely come abroad, when there suddenly broke out in Poictou, a new,
dreadful, and before unknown Disease, commonly called the PoictovinChollick,
which miserably wasted that goodly Kingdom for above thirty years after. This
Disease was accompanied with many extreme pains and torments, not only in the
outward Parts of the Body, but also in the inward and Vitals, insomuch as it
drew on diverse horrid Convulsions, and in many, blindness before it killed
them. The strange Original, the hidden nature, and those unparalled torments
which it produced, sometimes resembling the very stabs, and gashes made with
Swords, and Ponyards, gave all impartial judgments just ground to conclude,
that it was the finger of God himself in punishing the merciless Murders of
his Dear Saints.

170. But though the brutish, goatish Papists were so cruel and inhumane, yet
others there were of more moral and moderate Princiciples, who in their very
Souls abhorred and detested those barbarous practices. Monsieur de Thou in his
unparallel'd*History tells us, that himself was about nineteen years old when
that horrible and Hellish Massacre was committed in Paris on S. Bartholomews
Day, which fell out that year on the Lords Day, and did in his very soul abhor
the cruelty and savageness thereof, when in his passage through the streets to
Mattins that Morning, he met with diverse Villains, dragging along the dead
Body of Hierom Grolet, late Governor of Orleance, all weltring with ghastly
wounds in his own Blood: At which sight his Heart relenting, and mourning
inwardly, not daring to shed tears publicly, he hastened home to the House of
Christopher de Thou, his Father, who at that time was the chief President of
the Parliament in Paris, there freely to deplore that execrable Butchery; as
did also the said Christopher, his Father.

171. Vidus Faber Pibratius, John Merviller, Belleureu, all eminent men, with
all the judicious, and morally virtuous Papists in that City, did Christianly
hide, and so preserved many Protestants from a wretchless massacring. Nay,
Arman Guntald, the old Marshal Biron (Father of Charles, Duke of Biron, that
was beheaded in King Henry the Fourth's time) when the Deputies of Rochel came
to him, some few weeks after that bloody Execution, to treat of a peaceable
accommodation of their affairs, he shed many tears in their presence upon his
execrating the Authors of that Cruelty, and acknowledged the great Mercy of God
to him that he neither knew of it, nor had any hand in it.

At the City of Lions also, where the inhumanity of the Murderers almost
equalled that of Paris, Mandelot the Governor there, did his best to have
prevented it, and in his Heart (with many other grave and sober Gitizens of the
Romish Religion) utterly detested it. And when the slaughtered Bodies that were
tumbled into the River of Rosne, were carried down with the stream to Tornou,
Valence, Vienne, and Burg, contiguous to the same River, the Papists there,
generally detested the cruelty thereof: And at Arles, where for want of
Springs, and Ponds they had most use of that River water; yet they so much
abhorred that Butchery, as they would neither drink thereof, nor yet eat any of
the Fish taken therein, for diverse days after: And generally in all Provence,
those of the Romish Religion drew the mangled Bodies out of the water, and with
great humanity interred them.

172. Monsieur Carragie, a Noble Gentleman, who was Governor of the great City
of Roan in Normandy, did likewise oppose the Massacres there to the utmost of
his power. As did also James Benedict Largahaston, the Prime Senator of
Bordeaux, who thereby became himself in danger to have been slain by those
seditious Varlets, who at first had been stirred up to commit those outrages by
the seditious Sermons of a lustful Jesuit, called Eminund Auger.

173. Claudus, Earl of Tend, a Descendant of the illustrious House of Savoy,
Governor of Provence, Monsieur de Gordes, Governor of Daulpbany, Monsieur
Sauteran, Governor of Auvergne, and Francis Duke of Memorancy, absolutely
refused to suffer any Massacres to be committed in such places as were under
any of their Governments: So as the Rochellers in their Declaration set out the
same year, do acknowledge that all such Romanists, who had but any humanity
left in them, did in their Hearts abhor, and with their Mouths detest those
abominable outrages and hellish cruelties.

174. And as the soberer and modester sort of Papists abhorred such
brutishness, so also they dissuaded from the same.

That Noble Gentleman David Hamilton gave this advice to James, Earl of Arran,
then Regent of Scotland Anno 1545. when Cardinal Beton would have persuaded him
to have joined with him in the Persecution and Slaughter of the godly in that
Kingdom: I cannot but wonder, said he, that you should give up the innocent
Servants of God, against whom no Crime, is objected, but the Preaching of the
Gospel, into the hands and power of men most infamous for Lust, Cruelty, and
all other wickedness; which in the mean time those very Enemies of the Truth
themselves cannot deny that the lives of such as profess this Doctrine which
they so hate, are full of integrity and virtue: And therefore although the
profane and bloody Prelates could never be drawn to pity Gods Children, much
less to love them for their piety and innocence (being therein more inhumane
than diverse of the Heathen Emperors themselves, who, upon the information of
the virtuous and harmless deportment of the Christians, by their Governors of
Provinces, caused their Persecutions to be slacked and ceased) Yet diverse
Princes and moderate Pontificians, have been moved by the upright and honest
lives of Gods Children to further their Liberty of Conscience, and to abhor the
cruelties which other Papists have practiced upon them.

175. Maximilian the Emperor, son of Ferdinand the Second, and Francis the
First, the French King were hence persuaded to grant unto their own subjects
freedom of Conscience.

176. The Earl of Egmont, and Horn (though zealous Papists) labored with the
Duchess of Parma, that the Low Country Protestants might be free from Fines,
imprisonments, and all other manner ^f Persecutions in respect of Religion.

177. Under Francis the Second, the French King Anno Christi 1560. by the
excellent and learned speeches of Charles Marillack, Archbishop of Vienne, and
John de Monlu, Bishop of Valence freely spoken before the King himself in
behalf of the French Protestants, all Persecution against them was restrained.
The said Bishop among other particulars, affirming boldly, that a great
increase of the Sectaries proceeded from the ignorance and evil lives of the
Bishops, who having laid aside the care of their Flocks, had, for many years
made it their business to enhanse their Fines, and Rents, and to live
deliciously, and loosely; so as there were sometimes forty of them seen at once
together, wasting their time in Luxury and idleness in Paris: the care of their
Churches being in the mean time turned over to young and ignorant Fellows. And
so the Bishops becoming blind and useless; the Parish Priests also, following
the Example of their Diocesans, were only intent upon spoiling and vexing their
people about their Tithes, but were wholly unskilful and negligent in preaching
to them: And that therefore it was no wonder, though diverse of the Nobility as
well as of the common people, did so readily hearken to new Opinions, and
Doctrines.

The same Counsel, that the Conscience ought not to be forced, nor any to be
persecuted for matters of Religion merely, did Michael Hospitalius, Chancellor
of France, give unto Charles the Ninth, the same year that he succeeded to the
Crown, after the death of the said Francis, his Brother.

178. By these foregoing Examples we may plainly see, that their self-love, and
wallowing in all manner of sensuality, is the great cause of their hatred to
the godly, whose lives and principles oppose their wickedness and errors. The
persecutions of the Arrians against the Orthodox, exceeded the cruelty of the
Heathen Emperors, but this of the Romanists far surpasses and exceeds them
both being joined together.

179. Pope Paul the Third, left this bloody Legacy to his Conclave when he dyed
Anno Christi 1359. (as is testified by Mounsieur de Thou) For having called
diverse of the Cardinals into his Bedchamber, he exhorted them by all means to
continue and maintain the Office of the Inquisition, as the only means left
upon earth to establish the Roman Religion.

180. It may cause wonder in any serious man to consider that amongst the
Turks, Jews, Indians, yea, and the Papists themselves, the most zealous,
strict, and precise in their several Religions, are the most esteemed and
honored; and only in the greater part of the Protestant Churches, the most
knowing and resolute retainer, of the truth, and the most strict and godly in
their lives, are most hated, nicknamed, disgraced, and persecuted: And Grace
which should add a luster to Learning, Riches, Honors, Noble Extraction, and
all other outward endowments, whether natural or acquired, that alone obscures
all the rest, and brings the contempt, not only of great ones, but even of the
scum, and dregs of the multitude upon the persons so qualified.

181. Sir John Oldcastle, Lord Cobham, in the Reign of our King Henry the
Fifth, being convented before Thomas Arundel, Archbishop of Canterbury, and
diverse other lustful and bloody Bishops, spoke thus unto them: Whilst I was,
said he, a Swearer, a Rioter, and every way else vicious, you never reproved
me, nor questioned me: But since I have embraced this despised Doctrine of John
Wickliff, which has taught me how to conquer my Sins, and to lead an honest
and a godly life, now you are enraged against me with malice, and seek my
destruction.

182. The same observation was made by Annas du Bourg, that brave Senator of
Paris Anno Christi 1559. under King Henry the Second of France: That there were
many Adulteries, Perjuries, Oaths, and other infamous offenses daily committed,
and already punishable by the Laws, and yet such as were guilty of all, or any
of those crimes were countenanced and advanced: But against the Professors of
the Truth all cruelty was practiced, who were guilty of no other offense, but
of embracing the truth of the Gospel revealed unto them by the Spirit, and Word
of God, and of discovering, by the same Light, the horrible vices, and errors
of the Popish power that so there might follow an amendment.

183. Experience sufficiently manifests that Persecution has never been a way
to suppress the Truth; and surely its against the Dictates of Charity and
Christianity to enforce the conscience without a full and clear conviction.
This was confessed by King Henry the Third of France (one of the most impotent
Princes (says a learned Gentleman) that ever swayed that Scepter, and the most
inveterate Enemy that ever the Protestants had, having been instructed to hate,
betray, and persecute them, by Katherine de Medices* his bloody Mother, even
from his very cradle,) yet when James Clement, a Jesuited Monk, had sheathed a
knife in his Bowels, and that he saw himself near to the Minute in which he was
to give an account of all his cruelties to the supreme Judge of Heaven and
Earth, he made an effectual speech to the chief Commanders of his Army, being
most of them Papists: wherein he exhorted them to acknowledge and obey the King
of Navar (then a Protestant) as their lawful Sovereign, and the undoubted Heir
of the French Crown: and to know this undoubted truth for the future: That
Religion which is instilled into the Souls of men by God himself, cannot be
forced by man.

184. The same Truth also, and almost in the same words did the Lord Brederode,
and the other Protestants in the Low Countries allege for their just excuse in
their joint Apology, published in the year 1566, and farther added: That if the
Papists did conceive their Religion to be the Truth, they should instead of
Blood, Fines, Imprisonings, and Banishments, take the good, and seasonable
counsel of the Learned Gamaliel, and try a while, whether the Protestants
separation from them, were of God or no. For otherwise, if by force, and
tyranny they should compel them to profess and practice those actions in Gods
Worship, which they accounted abominable; and should also restrain them from
the practice of those Duties toward God, wherein they were convinced the truth
of his Service consisted, their Consciences must needs be shipwrack'd and
undone, and so instead of making them new Converts, they should leave them
Atheists and Libertines.

A TABLE OF THE NAMES OF THE PERSECUTORS, Visibly Plagued by God.
SAtan page 1 Cain page 2 Old World page 2 Ham page 3 Ishmael page 3 Pharaoh
page 4 Saul page 5 Asa page 6 Jesabel page 7 Manasse page 7 Jews, and Pashur
page 8 False Prophets, etc, page 8 Zedekiah, and his Princes page 9 Johanan,
and his Companions. page 9 Haman page 10 Antiochus the Vile page 11 Herod the
Great page 12 Herod the less, or Antipas page 15 Herod Agrippa page 16 Jews
page 17 Nero page 21 Domitian page 21 Adrian page 22 Marcus Antonius Verus page
23 Commodus page 23 Severus page 23 Claudius Herminianus page 24 Maximianus
page 24 Decius page 24 Gallus page 25 Valerian page 25 Claudius page 26
Aurelian page 26 Dioclesian page 26 Maximian page 27 Maximinus page ib.
Galerius page 29 Licinius page 29 Antiochus page ib. Mamuca page ib. Julian
Apostata page 31 Arius page ib. Constantius page 34 George of Alexandria page
35 Valence page ib. Constantine page 36 Gensericus page ib. Hunricus page ib.
Anastasius page ib. Arcadius, and Eudoxia page 37 Theodoricus page ib. Arian
Vandals page ib. Uladislaus and his Queen page 38 Popish Bishops page ib.
Popish Lords page 39 Dr. Austin page 40 Popish Monks page ib. Stumislaus Znoma
page 41 Emperor Sigismund page ib. Doctor Knapper, and some others page 42
Ladislaus King of Bohemia page 43 Minerius page ib. Simon Monfort page 44
Lewis, King of France page ib. Truchetus page ib. Lord of Revest page 45
Bartholomew Cassinaeus page ib. Johannes de Roma page ib. John Martin page 46
Cardinal of Lorain page ib. Bellemont page ib. A Judge of Aix page 47 A chief
Judge page ib: John Craenequin page ib. Chancellor Prat page 48 John Morin
page ib. Chancellor Oliver page ib. Poncher page 49 Lambert a Friar page ib.
Monbrun page 50 Villibon with others page 51 Popish Witnesses page ib. Popish
Informers page 52 Popish Inquisitors page ib. Emperor Ferdinand the Second
page ib. Sir Thomas Moor page 53 Bishop Fisher page ib. Philips page ib. Pavier
page ib. Foxford page 54. Rockwood page ib. An under Marshal page ib. Sir Ralph
Ellerker page 55 Doctor Story page 55 John Twiford page ib. Kings of Spain and
Portugal page 56 Cardinal Woolsey page ib. Judge Morgan page 57 Bishop Morgan
page ib. Mr. Leyson page ib. Doctor Dunning page ib. Commissary Berry page 58 A
Suffragan of Dover page ib. Bishop Thornton page ib. Doctor Jeffery page ib.
Thomas Blaver page ib. Two Cardinals page 59 Doctor Whittington page 60 Bate
page ib. Mr. Woodrose page 61 Thomas Mouse page ib. George Rivet page ib.
William Swallow page 62 Robert Baldwin page 63 Robert Bloomfield page ib.
Justice Leland page 64 Ralph Lardin page ib. Mr. Swingfield page ib. Bailiff
Burton page 65 A Serving man page 66 Dale, a Promoter page 67 Alexander a
Jailor, and his Son page 67 John Peter page 68 Lever page ib. Stepen Gardener
page ib. King James the Fifth of Scotland. page 69 Sir James Hamilton page 70
Friar Campbel page 72 A Popish Persecutor page 73 King Henry the Second of
France page ib. Irish Persecutors page 74 Maurice Duke of Saxony page 75
Charles the fifth Emperor page 76 Philip the Second, King of Spain page 77
Rodulph the Second, Emperor page 79 Henry the Second, King of France page 80
French Persecutors page 8^ Charles the Ninth, King of France page 83 Queen
Mother of France page 84 French Persecutors page 85 Henry the Third, King of
France page 89, 93 Duke of Guise page 90 Cardinal of Guise page 91 Queen Mary
of England page 95 Thomas Arundel page 97, 99 Henry the Fourth, King of England
page 97 James Beaton page 100 Escovedo page 102 Peter Espinac page 103 Cardinal
Granvel page 103 Boidon page 104 Puygillard page 105
ERRATA.
IN the Epistle, page 7. line 16. read they for you. In the Book, p. 8. l. 29.
r. selves for self. p. 12. l. 10. r. recover for receive. p. 16. l 25. r. God
immediately for Gods immutability. p 19. l. 14. r. Trajan for Trojan. p. 21. l.
14. r. causing for caused. p. 27. l. 8. r. Thunderclap for Thunder. p. 29. l.
12. r. miserably for miserable. p. 32 l. 5. r. fully for full p. 34. l. 29. r.
fever for fear. p. 52. l. 1. r. Charles Conink. p. 7. l. 17. r. that so
carnage for carriage. p. 97. l 17. dele God p. 104 l. 9. dele that. p. 110. l.
12. r. when for which. p. 111. l. 16. r. Monluc.

Books Printed for, and sold by William Miller, at the Gilded Acorn, in S.
Paul's Churchyard, near the little North-Door.
JUvenal with Cuts, by Sir Robert Stapylton, Knight, in Large Folio.

Elton on Colossians Folio.

Cradocks Knowledge and Practice, Quarto.

His Principles. Octavo.

Dod on the Lords Prayer. Quarto.

Medice Cura Teipsum, or the Apothecaries Plea against Doctor Christopher
Merret. Quarto.

Richard Ward, his two very useful and compendious Theological Treatises, the
first showing the nature of Wit, Wisdom and Folly. The second describing the
Nature, Use, and Abuse of the Tongue and Speech, whereby principally Wisdom and
Folly are expressed; wherein also are diverse Texts of Scripture, touching the
respective heads explained. Octavo.

Templum Musicum, or the Musical Synopsis. Octavo.

Fettiplace's Christian Monitor, earnestly and compassionately persuading
sinners unto true and timely repentance, by the serious view of the seven
following weighty Considerations. 1. The stupendous love of God unto man in
Christ Jesus. 2. The great danger of Despair, and greater of Presumption. 3.
The sweetness, easiness and pleasantness of the ways of God. 4. Falsehood and
Flattery of the ways of sin. 5. Safe, joyful and blessed state of the
righteous. 6. Dangerous and most deplorable state of the wicked. 7. Shortness
and uncertainty of life, terrors and amazement of an unprepared death, and
eternity of punishments after death. Twelves.


Fettiplace's Souls narrow search for sin. Octavo.

English Dictionary, or Expositor. Twelves.

Complete Bone-setter. Octavo.

The famous Game of Chesse-play. Octavo.

Shelton's Tachygraphia, Latin. Octavo.

Emblems Divine, Moral, Natural and Historical, expressed in Sculpture, and
applied to the several Ages, Occasions and Conditions of man, by a person of
Quality. Octavo.

Clark of Comfort, which Gods children have, or at least earnestly desire and
long after, whilst they are in this world, together with the obstructions of
comfort, and the removal of them. Twelves.

Jeofferies New Years Gift. Twelves.

Divine Examples of Gods severe judgments upon Sabbath Breakers, in their
unlawful sports, collected out of several Divine Subjects, viz. Mr. H. B. Mr.
Beard, and the practice of Piety, a little monument of our present times, etc.

A brief remembrancer, or the right improvement of Christ's Birthday.

A second Sheet of old Mr. Dod's sayings, or another Posie gathered out of Mr.
Dod's Garden.

Hunting for Money, the first part.

The hunting match for money, the second part.

Bishop Hall's Sayings, concerning Travelers, to prevent Popish and debauched
principles.

The whole Duty of Man, containing a practical Table of the ten Commandments,
wherein the sins forbidden, and the Duties commanded, or implied, are clearly
discovered by famous Mr. William Perkins.

At which place you may be furnished with most sorts of bound or stitched
Books; as Acts of Parliament, Proclamations, Speeches, Declarations, Letters,
Orders, Commissions, Articles with other State Matters; as also Books of
Divinity, Church Government, Sermons, and most sorts of Histories, Poetry,
Plays and such like, etc.

Books formerly published by this Author.
Folio.
A General Martyrology containing an Historical Narration of all the chiefest
Persecutions, which have been in the world from the Creation to our present
time; whereunto are annexed the Lives of sundry eminent Divines, and some
others.

An English Martyrology of all the chiefest Persecutions which have been in
England from the first plantation of the Gospel, to the end of Queen Marys
Reign: whereunto are annexed the Lives of sundry eminent Divines.

The first Volume of Cases of Conscience.

A Mirror, or Looking-Glass both for Saints and Sinners, etc. in two Volumes;
with a Geographical Description of all the known World, etc.

Quarto.
The Marrow of Ecclesiastical History contained in four Volumes of Lives.

Diverse other single Lives in Quarto.

Octavo.
The History of Eighty Eight: The Powder Plot: and of the Fall of the House in
Black Friars.

FINIS.

