CONVERSATIONS OF THE Marshall of Clerambault AND THE Chevalier de Mere.

A TREATISE Of great Esteem Amongst the Principal Wits OF FRANCE.

Englished by A. Lovell, M. A.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. for Henry Brom, at the Gun in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1677.

THE PREFACE.
IT is a long time since I have been in the general way of the Crowd, known of
the Marshall Clerambault, without any particular acquaintance with him; But
having removed from Court by reason of his Health, he was about six Months
time at Ipres, where at first he minded nothing but his Health, and
Divertisement. It was my fortune to be in that Country when he came thither,
without any other business, but to spend my time with as much content and ease
as I could. The Marshall had so pleasing a Wit in his Discourse, that none
could weary in hearing of him: And that engaged me to visit him often, where I
had the happiness to be admitted into some share of his Friendship.

He had advice from Court, that his Friends designed for him an Employment so
much the more Honorable and Glorious, that it is chiefly Merit that recommends
Men to such. And because one cannot be too sollicitous how to acquit himself
worthily of a matter of that consequence, he thought upon it often, and under
various pretexts discoursed to me sometimes concerning it.

Not but that he had confidence enough in me to disclose to me his most secret
thoughts; but being as yet uncertain what might be the event of it, he would
not have taken it well that one should have imagined that that was his
expectation, if the thing had not succeeded. I guessed at his design pretty
near, and he himself perceived it. Yet nevertheless when he spoke to me of it,
he always fetched a compass, and used some disguise: For the least Veil or
Covert is of great help to modest persons.

He made reflections on Conquerours, and asked me what I thought was the way
whereby they advanced themselves to be so great Men. If it was Birth, or
Education, or both together, or whether even Fortune had not a hand in it. He
loved Alexander, but admired Caesar; and of those two Men who have born rule in
our times, and whom he knew very well, he esteemed the height and Eminence of
the former, and the Dexterity of the other.

As he was willing to entertain himself about rare Persons, so he freely spoke
his judgment of them; and I observed in all his Discourses, that the King had
the chief place in his thoughts. He was so charmed with that Prince, that he
never spoke of him but with Transport; and the very thought of his air and good
mien filled him with admiration. He told me, that the sight of him alone, was
enough to make one in love with him, (for thus men converse in private) that he
had the most happy nature, and best heart of the world: that notwithstanding of
his young age, he understood what was good and laudable better than he, and
that by a natural Discretion, he had an aversion from counterfeit Generosity,
and that he could not endure the sinistrous Art of Pleasing, nor hurtful
Raillery: that seems to me indeed, a very fair way to fill a Court with
Gentlemen, and to produce a lovely age. The Marshall was a good Judge of all
that I have said; and I perceived by his countenance and the tone of his voice,
that he was in good earnest, and well persuaded of what he spoke. Besides, what
appearance is there, that he would have disguised his sentiments to me, to gain
more favor and esteem at Court? One never makes it his business to get into
credit with those, that never go thither.

From frequent considering of Conquerours and Heroes, and inquiring into and
examining what might make a great Man, or rather what might complete a
Gentleman, for that was his design, we came at length to speak of every thing:
And seeing perfect Generosity appears in Speaking and Doing, we told our
opinions of both: And this commerce lasted until his departure.

After a certain Tenderness which breaths Friendship when Friends separate, and
even after the pleasing Conversation of so many days, (which was so to me at
least) he conjured me to think again of our entertainments, and told me that he
had a great mind to write somewhat concerning them; but that if I would
likewise on my part set hand to it, it would afford us which satisfaction at
our next meeting. I made of them Five or Six Conversations; and as I was about
to have continued, I understood that his Distemper increased daily, and much
about the same time learnt what was befallen him.

We see indeed some in the world who study to learn, and to accomplish
themselves by Reading; but most part desire nothing in it but pleasure, and I
blame them not; I am my self much of the same humor. This I would only desire,
that men would give every thing its due, and that they would consider what may
be done on every subject, and what is to be expected from it. For it is not to
be imagined that any one, let his Genius and Dexterity be what it will, can
write very pleasingly on subjects that aim only at Instruction. In effect, a
long discourse of Truth and Falsehood, Good and Evil, is a kind of
entertainment that tosses the Mind without moving the Heart; and that which
pleases proceeds ordinarily from the contrary: For that end the Heart is to be
moved, and the Mind left in repose, or at least not tormented. And besides,
though men love not to be deceived, they far less love to be undeceived; and
that is possibly one of the principal reasons why the world knows yet so little.

Now as to the profit that may be reaped from these entertainments, few will
believe that they stand in need of such things, to make them more intelligent
or accomplished. Yet the truth is, that the more Wit one has, the more he will
love them, and that there is no more requisite but sound Judgment to understand
them: That which is called (To be Learned) is of no great use here. It is also
true, that the best bred Gentleman, by making serious reflections on them, will
without doubt become more complete and of higher value; and that the most
accomplished Lady cannot employ on them so little time, but that she will
become more agreeable, and consequently more beloved. It is so easy a matter
to be cleared concerning this, that there would be a great deal of Imprudence
to say so, if one were not well assured of it. Having debased my subject on one
side, I extol it on the other, that I may remark in it all that is good and
bad; for I pretend not to praise my self.

In fine, I should never have thought of writing these Conversations, if I had
not believed to have gratified the person that I have spoken of. For besides
that I addict not my self almost to any thing, and that I have no design to
appear in public; I sufficiently know the various opinions of the world, not
to be mistaken in them. The small number, which is commonly the best, is
seldom found to be the stronger; and if I had made it my busines^ to write, it
should have been on other subjects.

Books Printed for and sold by H. Brom, since the dreadful Fire of London
1666, to 1677.
Divinity.
MR. Cumbers's Companion to the Temple, being a Paraphrase on the Common
Prayer. 2 Vol. Bishop Cosen's Devotions. Bishop Taylor's Holy Living and Dying.
Mr. Fowler's Design of Christianity. Dr. Patrick's Witnesses to Christianity.
-- His Advice to a Friend. Holy Anthems of the Church. The Saints Legacies The
Reformed Monastery, or the Love of Jesus. Mr. Farindon's Sermons. Bona's Guide
to Eternity. -- And several sermons at Court. Dr. Duport's Three Sermons on May
29. Nov. 5. Jan. 30.
Histories.
The Life of the great Duke of Espernon, being the History of the Civil Wars of
France, beginning 1598. where D'Avila leaves off, and ending in 1642. by
Charles Cotton Esquire The Commentary of M. Blaiz de Montluc the great Favorite of
France, in which are contained all the Sieges, Battles, Skirmishes, in three
Kings Reigns, by Charles Cotton Esquire Mr. Rycaut's History of Turkey. The History
of the Three last Grand Seigniors. The History of Don Quixot, fol. Bishop
Wilkin's Real Character, fol. Bishop Cosens against Transubstantiation. Dr.
Guidots Hist of Bathe, and of the hot Waters there. The Fair one of Tunis.
Domus Carthusiana, or the History of the most Noble Foundation of the
Charter House in London, with the Life and Death of Thomas Sutton Esquire The
History of the Sevarites, a Nation inhabiting part of the third Continent.
Physic.
Dr. Glisson de Ventriculo and Intestinis. De vita Naturae. Dr. Barbet's
Practice, with Dr. Decker's Notes. Sir Ken. Digby's Excellent Receipts in
Physic, Surgery, and Cookery. The Anatomy of the Elder-tree, with its
approved Virtue.
Miscellanies.
Vossius of the Wind and Seas. Dr. Skinner's Lexicon. The Planters Manuel.
Treatise of Humane Reason. The Complete Gamester. Toleration discussed, by R.
L'Estrange Esquire England's Improvement, by R. Coke Esquire Leyburn's Arith.
Recreations. Geographical Cards describing all parts of the World, and a
Geographical Dictionary.
School-Books.
Screvelius Lexicon, in Quarto. Centum Fabulae, in Octavo. Nolens Voleus, or
you shall make Latin. Radyns Rudimenta Artis Oratoriae. Pools Parnassus. The
Scholars Guide from the Accidence to the University. Erasmus Coll. English.
Lipsius of Constancy, English.
Controversies.
Considerations touching the true way to suppress Popery; to which is added an
Historical account of the Reformation here in England. Lex Talionis, being an
Answer to Naked Truth. The Papists Apology answered. A seasonable Discourse
against Popery. -- The Defense of it. The difference between the Church and
Court of Rome. Take hee^ of both extream^, Popery and Presbytery, by Mr.
Eolein. Dr. Du Moulia against the Lord Castlemain. -- Against Papal Tyranny.
Origo Protes^antium.
THE CONVERSATIONS OF THE Marshall Clerambault AND THE Chevalier de Mere.
The First Conversation.
THE Marshall Clerambault is that which men call a complete Gentleman; one
that thoroughly understands the World. He has divided his time betwixt the
Court and the Army, and there are not many that exceed him, for that natural
Wit which renders a man both accomplished and complasant. Though he has some
impediment in his speech, yet his expression is orderly and graceful; and he
had rather speak than hear, whether it be that he seldom meets with
satisfaction from the discourses of others, or that he is pleased (as men
believe) to make himself admired.

He has been now above two years indisposed, and neither Physicians, who have
in great numbers visited him, nor the Waters of Bourbon have been able to cure
his Distemper. It is a decay that has not at all seized his mind; which was
never more lively, clear, nor (I may say) more brisk and gay: he went with his
Lady for some time to breath a little (as they call it) of his Native Air. But
it rarely happens that a Courtier that falls Sick at Court finds himself better
at his Country House. His Lady took her Journey back for Paris, and the
Marshall came to P... where now for six or seven Months he has spent his time.

Where ever he is, he studies his divertisement, but more to render himself
agreeable in Conversation: and as there is no advantage so small, which tends
not to account in the Hands of a man of parts; the Marshall so improves the
least occasions of Recreation, that he meets everywhere enough to pass his time
with pleasure.

Finding himself one day much better than ordinary, he invited some Ladies to
Dine with him at his House; the Dinner was none of those Feasts, where for most
part men find nothing to their relish; but a choice and delicate entertainment,
even such as heart could wish. Ladies commonly make not long meals, whether it
be that they love not such kinds of excess, or that they mistrust that they may
not be able there to preserve I know not what punctilio's of Modesty, which
beget respect and esteem. So soon as the Company had left the Table, they
betook themselves to their several Recreations, some to Play, and others to
look on: the Marshall who made but a Spectator, after his ordinary manner,
delighted the Company with witty discourses; but Play being of it self a
sufficient employment, and loosers not always delighted with good words, he
would not say too much, and to avoid the occasion which tempts even the most
reserved, he drew aside the Chevalier, and going into another Chamber; you may
easily imagine (said he) that I am very glad to see you; I must tell you
farther, your Company lessens my ilness. And to speak the truth having now
tried a great many Medicines to cure me of a distemper which Melancholy could
do no good upon, I am resolved for the future to use no other but Cheerfulness
and Mirth.

The Chevalier who had no other thoughts but how to divert him, asked him what
kind of Divertisement he was pleased to follow? I had rather (answered the
Marshall) spend with you some time in Conference, than with these Ladies at
Play. For we discourse of certain matters which are not to be learned in the
crowd and commerce of the World. I have never more passionately desire any
thing than to have a little less ignorance; and when I enjoy you in private
methinks I shake it of without study or tedious instruction. I receive deep
impression from the smallest things which you tell me of Socrates, and I hope
that one of these days I may come to cite the divine Plato too, after the
manner of a certain Lady, that has a good Wit, and is much pleased to talk of
every thing.

Wit, (replied the Chevalier) is always a Staple Commodity, and in my judgment
Women themselves cannot have too much of it; but there are many People that
would not have them be knowing neither: or at least that it should so much
appear. And may not this be the same Lady that gave you that Idea of those whom
so pleasingly you imitated the other day? I never saw any thing better
represented, or that better suited my humor: and to speak truth, it is not
enough to have Wit, unless a man have good Nature too and Breeding, to come off
well in such a case.

I agree with you (said the Marshall) that among Persons of good Judgment one
cannot be too well accomplished to hit that knack of pleasing which is to be
desired. Yet because most part of People have not the Understanding so fine and
delicate, it many times happens, that they are tickled and even charmed with a
kind of moods and pieces that are played them, whereof Persons of breeding
would not willingly be the Actors. You know very well that there are a great
many Persons that have a way of pleasing, who notwithstanding cannot gain Love,
nor that men should interest themselves in their concerns. I think no body
should covet such complasantship, but when one as a Gentleman and Person of
Breeding does please, he fails not to win the Heart and Affections, and it is
in that way alone that I should be bery glad to learn the Art.

One cannot be too Witty in a brisk and lively company; yet one should have a
special care not to appear always bent to break Jests, or to quibble; there is
somewhat free and unforced that produces far better effects; nor would I be
too reserved, nor too much affect to be of the small number. When a Person has
reached to a certain pitch of Merit, the open and civil way has great charms
to insinuate Love. For what advantage soever a man may have, he must
notwithstanding comply if he intend to please People.

I have observed some certain Drolleries and Conceits which though current and
in vogue, yet procure no great Honor to such as make use of them: some laugh
at them rather in derision than delight, or otherwise take no notice of them at
all. They laugh at them, (replied the Chevalier) as that Egyptian Queen smiled
at the Complements and Courtship of Anthony. How? answered the Marshall, of
Anthony that was one of Caesar's Generals, and who disputed so long the Empire
with Augustus? Good God the jolly Egyptian! and what had she to say against
him?

The Chevalier having told him that it might have perhaps been some blunt
escape of a man that has always carried Arms: I perceive well, replied the
Marshall, that even in that time there have been pretending she wits, and I
took it for an invention of our days. You like not well then said the
Chevalier, that that Princess was so difficult, and that there was so much
Conduct and Wit required to get into her favor, and yet I imagine that of all
men living you have the least reason to find fault with it; being persuaded
that it would be good for you, if in all Courts where you might be, there were
such nice and delicate Queens; and I am even of the mind that this alone should
make you love her. For when a man humors ill the things he says, or sets upon
the performatce of them amiss; do you not see that a little slight or aversion
does well with Ladies, especially when we do but guess at it?

I am of your mind, said the Marshall, but a certain affected nicety that can
away with nothing but what one has been accustomed and bred to, and rigorously
rejects all that is not rich, and of the newest fashion, seems to me the defect
of a low Spirit and stinted Soul: but to return to the Queen that was so ill to
be pleased, is it not unjust to have a man that has been born amongst Armies
never show any thing of a Soldier, but when he faces his Enemies? Is it
possible that a man can have spent his life in an Army, and that no body should
perceive or take notice of it?

It is not to be contradicted, answered the Chevalier, that War is the noblest
trade in the World; but if we give every thing it is due, a Gentleman has no
trade. For though he may be perfectly skilful in some affairs, and even obliged
to spend his life in the management of it; yet methinks neither the manner of
his carriage, nor his conversation speaks any such thing to appearance; the
reach of his mind estranges him from that, and in all rencounters discovers to
him what is most becoming his person and quality.

How lovely an Idea do you give me! cried the Marshall, and what pleasure do I
take to represent to my self our young Prince with such a frame of Spirit. We
cannot choose a more noble Subject for our entertainment; and as you well know,
few days pass, wherein I do not speak of him. I remember where you and I left
when we were last Interrupted. I then asked you if you were not of the opinion
that he should learn the Language of the ancient Romans; the tongue of so many
brave men, and of so great a number of Emperors.

Besides that, of it is self it is a lovely Language, replied the Chevalier, we
reap a great advantage from the knowledge of it, for the fine things we see
represented therein, in their natural and lively colors, you know very well
that when men speak there is always somewhat of life and sense which is so
naturally linked to their words, that what dexterity soever a man may have to
render it in another tongue, yet it is not in all respects the same: and I am
likewise of the mind that the art which men employ in teaching of it, gives
some Introduction and light to all others, and that by the means thereof we
speak our own Language better, or at least with more exactness, it being
moreover at present the most public and universal Language, the Prince (should
he even become the Arbiter of the World) would be glad to understand what so
many Nations had to say to him, and to give his Answers without an Interpreter.

Is it an easy matter? answered the Marshall; and may one become skilful in it
in a short time? the most necessary part of a Langnage, replied the Chevalier,
costs but little, and is always of great value when attained: but the rarities
which much depend on him that teaches, and on those whom we hear speak it
well, are more difficult: you know what Perfection is given to things by life
touches, and the last hand?

It is likewise my opinion, continued the Chevalier, that the hours of his
tender Infancy should be rightly distributed, for fear of over-burthening, or
putting of him out of conceit with those things which they would have him know,
and that they should at first begin with little exercises, such as his age and
strength can admit of, to render him nimble and active in body: he would
thereby become more healthful, and of a better constitution: so that even his
Divertisements as well as Studies and other lesser employments ought to be in
the most convenient manner diversified. And I believe it were good that the
times of them should not be too regular: For Pleasure it self which daily
presents in an order too equal, easily cloys and becomes a toil.

I imagine that in this tender age, when we may imprint what we please, but not
so easily afterward efface it, special care should be taken that the persons
that are about him be such who are every way accomplished, whose procedure and
presence may not habituate him to any thing which must be forgotten. I would
have such measures descend even to the choice of these Masters that are to
instruct him in the meanest things. Men will not fail to say that this is a
notion: but I am persuaded that in all kinds of exercises whether of Body or
Mind, it is to be wished that they who do therein acquit themselves most
Gentilely, or who understand themselves most best in their way, should bestow
on him somewhat which the most part of Masters are not masters of, and that
sometimes M. D. T. and M. L. P. himself should entertain him with matters of
War, and put him upon the trace of Conquerours. For I am convinced that
whatever may be the birth of any person, he ought to think himself much
honored, in having contributed some thing to a work of this consequence, and
that whatsoever the young Prince may learn, cannot proceed from too Noble a
Master.

It is reported of Caesar that after so many Battles; having traversed to and
fro from Europe to Asia, and from thence into Africa, he lost most of his old
Soldiers, and that he was forced to train up a stock of new ones, teaching
them how to hold the Buckler, to manage the Sword and Spear; do you not believe
that when they learned this from such a Master, the instruction pierced deeper,
even though they were not aware of it?

What is said of lovely persons, answered the Marshall, that all things become
them well, may with more reason be said of Persons of Breeding, and I should
have been very glad to have seen that great Master of the World play the
Fencing-Master. Whatsoever I had observed from so great a man, would have
taught me somewhat that I should have been glad to have remembered. And it is
very true what you just now said, that there is a kind of People whose
Conversation we cannot sufficiently hug; for it is certain that if we see them
often upon what occasion soever it may be, besides the progress and advances we
make in their company, we are seasoned with a sweet odor; as men without
minding it, perfume themselves in walking amongst Jasmins and Orange Trees.

Nothing can be imagined more florid, said the Chevalier, and without flattery,
Sir, you possess a great justness and exactitude of expression. I take my
flight, replied the Marshall, when I am upon the Wing; and I doubted that
would surprise you. You have not surprised me, said the Chevalier, but to fill
me with content; and good thought deserves to be well expressed, and I have not
met with any more pleasing.

I am notwithstanding the man of the World, replied the Marshall, that hunts
least after such flourishes of speech: nor do I love all these ways of
exactitude; that of sense pleases me always, but commonly that of words and
expression seems to me affected, and if I did desire to be eloquent, it should
be in Wit and Thought. A man expresses himself well-enough, when he wants not
matter to speak.

Men say as much as they please, answered the Chevalier, in what concerns the
commerce of the World; we find but too many people who understand that
Language, but for some certain matters which come less in view, and are not so
easily conceived, we find sometime much difficulty to express them as we would.
It is true, to conceive them aright is to be eloquent, what way soever we make
our selves understood: They that think well are never too long nor tedious:
they search for words only to express their thoughts, and others make it their
business rather to speak than to tell their mind.

I observe two sorts of exactitude, which always produce good effects. The one
consists in the taking up a right of things, and understanding of them as they
are in themselves without confounding them together, the least fault that here
we commit either in speech or action, is known; and this depends on Wit and
Understanding.

The other exactitude appears in judging the decorum and knowing the measures
and bounds how far we should proceed, and when we ought to stop: this, which
chiefly proceeds from humor and opinion seems to me more dubious and difficult.

The exactitude of words is not unpleasant when it is without affectation, and
the words do but very seldom gingle and chime: but I dare assure you we cannot
have too much of a certain exactitude and justness of Language, which consists
in employing the aptest ways of speaking to insinuate our thoughts into the
minds of others neither more nor less than we would desire they were.

These kinds of exactitude are always well received, provided we be not to
severe and rigid to others, and that we have in our thoughts that Roman Lady
before whom there was no stumbling; for whilst she urged a brave Gentleman, who
was a little entangled in his discourse; he told her that she was in the right,
but yet very uneasy to rob him of the pleasure of negligence.

We are a great deal more civil with Ladies nowadays, said the Marshall,
than they were in those times, and what they say does not in the least choke
the men of this World: they may venture at all, and particularly if they be
fair. Yet a man of breeding, let his merit be what it will, ought not to have
such confidence; but the more he excells others, the more he ought to be upon
his Guard, not to impose constraint upon them, but to render himself courteous
and civil. For all men naturally fear Masters.

I am much taken with those persons who always show their Wit without the least
offense of any, and I mortally hate such who have Wit for no other end but to
vex and displease: it is well done to avoid the company of these as much as may
be, because such an humor is the product of a proud and evil nature, which
sheds it self upon every thing they do, there are others, who are rather
senseless than malicious, who for the pleasure of a few good words or a jest
let fly at all, without considering what may be the consequences. What profit
can we reap from our Wit, when we know not how to use it to gain love and
esteem? We may withdraw if matters go not as we would have them; but when we
show our selves, our demeanor should be such, that they whom we see, should be
well satisfied with our company, even though we have no love for their persons.
For he that thinks to revenge himself by giving distaste, does himself more
hurt, than those whom he displeases.

I know also others who out of a principle of envy are peevish and uneasy, this
is the fault that most of all offends me, and which shows as much lowness of
heart as shallowness of wit. For if we understand aright what life and fortune
is, we shall incline rather to bewail than envy those whom the World esteems
happy. I have known obscure people, and of very ordinary merit, who would be
though equal to the chief men of the times, and who could by no means endure
the reputation of their betters.

There are others that would willingly indeed be complasant and gain love, but
from whom neither honor nor truth, nor the good of those that hear them can
ever draw any thing, if they cannot hit the right string and make it turn to
their own account: this is not the best side, and I find the World not very
favorable to those who only mind their own Interest, but always well affected
toward such as endeavour-to make persons of merit esteemed.

My Lord Marshall, said the Chevalier, you are a person of wonderful
dexterity; the Question was only of the justness and exactitude of Language, or
of some thing of like nature; you have nevertheless by a sweet and almost
insensible transition slipped into the commerce of the World, and pleasantly
described those who make bad use of their Wit, and who only speak for their own
interest: this shows that you have observed the Court, and that you have a just
pique against corruption in manners.

I shall only add to what you have said, that when we speak, what aim soever we
may have, it is indeed necessary that the design of pleasing go along with it;
but yet this ought not to be our sole and chief end in discourse. Nature
designs only to serve our necessities: and there is nothing in the loveliest
body in the World which conduces not either to life or motion. Feasting and
good Cheer take their rise from the necessity of Eating and Drinking. We must
have Lodging, and from thence it is that men love fair Houses. For at first men
only desire things because they cannot want them, but pleasure comes afterward
as the overplus (to use this word) and as a present which does delight the more
because unexpected.

I do extremely approve that men express their thoughts at what rate soever,
answered the Marshall, and I understand very well what you mean. I believe
that the best way for a man to render himself able and knowing, is not to study
much, but frequently to discourse of matters which unlock the mind. It were
good if I mistake not, to accustom the young Prince to this, and to place some
persons about him, who might instruct him after this manner. As for the Ladies
that are entrusted to be near him, I see no necessity that there should be so
great care taken in choosing of them, and I confess for my own part I should
only pitch upon the most airy and brisk, to keep him merry and in good humor.
For except but a very small number, the most ingenious of them appear to me but
of a short reach, though otherways taking: you know very well that from
certain. Features and charms of the Face, and from the stature of Body there
can be no consequents drawn as to the endowments of the mind: they who know to
distinguish those two are not easily mistaken,

Men will not have Women to be ingenious, said the Chevalier, and I know not
why; unless it be perhaps because they are sufficiently praised upon other
respects, and that they are beautiful. For People are pleased to cut off on the
one side, what they cannot refuse on the other, and if they be forced to
acknowledge that a man is very valiant, they will not allow that he is otherways
accomplished, though perhaps his valor may be less than those other
accomplishments. It seems not to me so rare to see Ladies of good judgment, yea
I find in them a delicateness of Spirit which is not so common to men. I have
even taken notice in many places, and amongst all sorts of conditions, that men
perform not ordinarily what they set about with so good Grace, as Women do; and
that Women understand themselves better than men, in doing things dexterously
and well: whether it be that the advantage of giving content is to them more
natural, or perceiving that to be their chief concernment, they train
themselves thereto from their childhood as to a trade. There are two or three
(if I mistake not) who have begun to disabuse the Court of false Gallantry, and
if there were neither Glory nor Pleasure to get into the favor and good esteem
of Ladies, men would not contrive so many knacks and fetches to give them
content. I say more, a man is never completely a Gentleman, or at least Gallant
and Courtly, but Ladies have had a hand in shaping of him.

I am much obliged to you, said the Marshall, for putting a difference betwixt
the Gentleman and the Gallant, men easily confound them.

It seems to me, said the Chevalier, that the Gallant is the only man in
conversation, and that people find in his carriage certain pleasures, which a
virtuous Gentleman cannot always give; whose concealed advantages are
notwithstanding greater, although he make less show in the eyes of the World.

There is a great difference between them, replied the Marshall, this quality
of a Gallant which takes amongst young people, vanishes as a Flower or Dream;
and I have seen some of these gallant men become the contempt of those very
persons, who had before admired them: but if we love a man because he is a
person of worth and integrity, we love him always, and in that respect time
gains no advantage over him.

I imagine, said the Chevalier, that these Gallants were never in so much
esteem, nor the World so much dazzled with them; but that there was always some
who perceived it very well, that all their luster was but false Gallantry, and
I know not what glittering thing, had a quality to surprise; but true
Gallantry, among persons who understand it, is always well received; it depends
but litte on the advantages of body; nay it happens often that a man whose
misshapen person seems the mistake of Nature, has yet a better grace than
another whose delicate proportion could hardly be flattered by Painting. For it
is not enough to have so fair an outside to become agreeable; the more
important advantage consists in ordering aright the head and heart. Neither is
a man ever truly Gallant without a good Heart, and a competent Wit.

This true Gallantry appears chiefly in that it has the art of giving a
pleasing view to unpleasant matters. For very often that which offends us most,
would not at all trouble us if we took it in the right way. I remember there
were two Friends who went to visit a Lady; he that was worst received, fancied
no way better to gain her Favor than to run down his Friend: the other who
perceived it, instead of falling into passion, or so much as complaining of the
usage; I was very sensible, said he, that you loved me; but never thought you
believed me so deserving a person, as to be esteemed of by a Lady of so great
merit, and who understands the humors of People so well, this opinion of yours
is so much to my advantage that it can never wrong our Friendship.

That appears to me indeed altogether gallant, said the Marshall, and I know
not if what was reported to me of a great Princess, be not very much of the
same strain. One told her that a very honest but somewhat capricious man, found
fault with her Conduct. We have, said she, but too many that flatter us; what
you acquaint me with of that Gentleman, is rather an advice than reproach; it
is not his fault if I be not a little better, and I am therefore obliged to him.

Nothing could be better said, answered the Chevalier, and that clears to me
what I was thinking of. Without doubt that Princess must have been an
extraordinary Person. Good God how happy should we be, if so many things which
pass in the World, were taken in that sense, I imagine, continued the Chevalier
that a Gallant man is nothing else but an honest and virtuous man, a little
more sparkling and gay than ordinary, and who has the dexterity so to demean
himself, that every thing becomes him well: However there is great advantage to
be gained from being able to perform both the one and the other, according as
time and season make it convenient, and I have known persons of worth strangely
puzzled in the company of Ladies, and who knew not by what Bias to insinuate
themselves into their Conversation, although they could have told them matters
of very good sense.

Of good sense! cried the Marshall, and who could let it enter into his head
to employ it so unseasonably? Ladies in such rencounters are never so grave nor
severe, as to mind good sense. They love that gallant address which you know,
gentile and delicate ways, a brisk and sparkling Conversation, an agreeable
complasance, and the rather, if a little flattering; that dexterity, and that
knack which has somewhat of edg and smartness to heat and give them play,
without pinching or putting of them to a plunge; that carriage of the higher
rank that shows it self in all things, that modest assurance, which has
nothing low, nothing malicious, nothing but what speaks a Gentleman.

He that can handsomely acquit himself of all this, may I think do much with
Ladies; and it is the surest way to please them; but likewise the most to be
feared if we want dexterity and good Grace in managing of it. For we must not
forget that the more such things are taking when well performed, the more
distaste they breed when uningenuinly done.

To this might be added, said the Chevalier, that few Persons are born to so
splendid and sparkling a way of carriage, and though one might succeed in it to
perfection, yet the most part of Women do not too much affect it; at least so
much pomp and overdoing would at length cloy them. I perceive that the more
witty, are far better pleased with somewhat more remiss and reserved; and
ordinarily men mistake the mark with them; because they consider not that they
are gained by the same methods, and lost in the same manner as themselves. Men
throw their heart at their head, and tell them at first sight more of love than
probability will suffer them to believe, and oftentimes more than they desire.
They give them not leisure enough to wish that men might love them, and to taste
a certain sweetness which is not to be found but in the progress of love. This
pleasure is to be enjoyed a long time, to beget a love constant and perpetual;
for we are not much satisfied to obtain what we have not much desired, and when
we obtain it so, we accustom our selves to despise it, and commonly never more
esteem it again. But give your self no trouble concerning Ladies for the young
Prince, they will not be wanting when it is time.

As they were thus in discourse, a Messenger came to acquaint them that their
was a dispute in Game amongst the Ladies, who as I told you were at play in
another Chamber, and that they prayed them to decide it. That could not happen
more pat, said the Marshall, and our luck is good at the very nick of time, so
to have fallen on the subject of Ladies: For if we would desire that none of
the Ladies here do grumble, we have need of all that is requisite, to judge
their controversy. Let us pay them the civilities of the house; and let that
employ us for to day. To morrow I expect you, and shall give order that we may
not be interrupted.

The End of the First Conversation.
THE SECOND CONVERSATION.
THE Court life without doubt, affords more friends and acquaintances, than a
private, but of so many friends there are but few who are such as they ought to
be; and for the most part at Court, men neither know nor are intimately known
of any. It is not (as they say) that Courteours have no esteem for any thing,
and that Interest is more their design than the discovery of merit. For humors
and tempers are much the same there as in other places, and every where we meet
with Interest. But being divided amongst so many, they are formal to all, and
give to every one a superficial share according as they value them; and it is
commonly neither for love nor intimacy, that men there contract familiarity.
The Chevalier, who had seen so much of the Marshall in the world, and knew him
sufficiently to be a very gallant person, did not yet find any great miss of
him, then when he had not the opportunity to see him, but having some seven or
eight days enjoyed his conversation in retirement, he could not for the future
live out of his company.

The Chevalier according to their appointment failed not to come next day, and
being there betimes, engaged the Marshall to spend the morning at play, and
prevailed so far that before they left off, they obliged themselves to fall to
it again after dinner. Though he took pleasure to hear the Marshall discourse,
yet he still contrived some invention to take him off from speaking too much.
For though he has no need of too much agitation, yet he grows quickly eager,
and contrary to the practice of most of the World, who dive but little into
things, is excessive in thinking, and speaks often with so much intention of
spirit, and even with so great action as if he were in perfect health.

Their play was only for divertisement; and so ought true friends to use it:
For if high playing destroy not friendship, it may at least somewhat alter and
shake it.

Having played a long time, the Marshall spoke of going into a Meadow by the
side of a little River, which passes by the foot of the Town. And because the
heat was not yet over, he took a turn in the Chamber, and told the Chevalier
that he had been thinking of that Egyptian Queen. Rising this morning, said
he, I took pleasure to smile at that man you told me of, I imagined I saw him
with her, entertaining her with the Carresses and Courtship that Soldiers use
commonly toward Ladies. That which pleased you, said the Chevalier, was that
you have nothing to fear when you meet with any so nice. Not too much of that
neither, replied the Marshall, I should have also some touch of the Army, if I
did not look to it, and some have done me the favor to acquaint me with it.
And indeed to say the truth, I have little learning, and you cannot believe how
much that troubles me, but I hope my Children may live to get more than their
Masters.

Let it not trouble you so much, said the Chevalier, that you have studied so
little, you have lost nothing but a little Latin that you might have learned.
That is a great deal, replied the Marshall, if there were nothing else. But
should not I also have learned the Sciences, whereof my friend X. makes so
great esteem? And as he enlarged himself upon the Conferences that he had held
with his Friend; you speak not, said the Chevalier, like a man without Reading;
what I hear from you is enough to make you admired: and to speak truth, for a
Soldier and great Courtier you are much of a Scholar. The Marshall fell a
laughing, and told him that he knew nothing of Sciences but the name. The
Masters, replied the Chevalier, know not a tittle more. You might have been
taught all in the ordinary manner, with the loss of much time and with great
trouble, and have never been more accomplished or knowing, unless perhaps that
you might have thereby undeceived your self of the false opinion of them.

What you say, answered the Marshall after a little pause, is not without
probability; and you make me reflect how that I have spent whole days with that
man, to hear him discourse of Sciences. I frankly confess that it happened
frequently that I understood him not in the least, and the more he labored to
explain himself, the less intelligible still I found him. To judge of Philosophy
by the notion which he gave me of it, it seemed to me a kind of night, and I
once asked him if obscurity and darkness were not essential to it? this is a
brave beginning indeed, said he to me, I have known some of longer standing
that could not have said so much to purpose. But that I may conceal nothing
from you, men never understand aright all this, unless they be trained to it
from their youth.

Men understand it not the better, said the Chevalier, for having tampered with
it from their Childhood, but are only less surprised with its obscurity. These
blades are accustomed from their infancy to speak of every thing without the
distinct knowledge of any thing. What they say never appears to them obscure or
confused, and the most part fancy that they are very well understood, though it
be impossible to untwist their thoughts.

How comes it to pass then, replied the Marshall, that men profit nothing by
the instructions which the Ancients, and since their times, so many other great
men have given us? I would tell you what I think, answered the Chevalier, did I
not fear to trouble you, for the subject is not very pleasing. And besides,
methinks men should find enough to do to put in practice what they know,
without meddling to prove it, or to teach it to others: and particularly I who
know but very little, why should I undertake to advise? I have slept well last
night, said the Marshall, and we have dined so pleasingly, that no subject can
come amiss to me to day, and therefore I defy you to trouble me. Besides,
there is nothing so dull which by dexterity and wit may not be briskly set off,
and I know you have enough to spare. My Lord Marshall, said the Chevalier, you
are pleased to divert your self. I speak of you, replied the Marshall, as I
would speak of my self, I desire to be without vanity and flattery, and I find
persons of breeding altogether free from both. And though there are occasions
where one may flatter with good grace, yet vanity is always misbecoming, so
that I perceive that men ordinarily slight even the advantages and what else is
good in vain persons. sons. It is well done to hide it, but much better (if
possible) to abandon it. For what care soever one may have to conceal it, there
is still somewhat offensive that insensibly springs from that stock.

I must tell you notwithstanding of this blemish which I fear so much, that
though the hurry of the world, and some little ambition have taken me off from
a speculative life, yet I am wonderfully in love with a certain keen and neat
vivacity of spirit that offers at every thing with good grace. Some have
thought that I had a little spark of this. However, there is nothing whatsoever
men esteem and admire which affects me like that. I must disclose to you the
very secrets of my heart, I am not much wedded to life, and I know how I ought
to consider this world; yet let one be never so much disengaged, if he have
Children, his care and thoughts bend often toward them. I have some to whom
nature is not wanting, and am persuaded that our discourses may be useful. This
it is that makes me speak of so many subjects. And to return again to the
question that I proposed to you, how can it be that men reap so little benefit
from the Sciences, which have been left us by the learned Grecians? you have
often entertained me with Greece, and the smallest hints that you have given me
of it, have exceedingly pleased me. I should be very glad if to day you would
take the pains to guide me through these places of so much fame, and observe to
me on our way what there you may find most considerable. Having said so, he
took a chair and made the Chevalier sit down, who thus began to speak.

Since it is your pleasure, I must tell you that Greece has been the most
agreeable place of abode that could be imagined. The Air of the Country is
thin and pure, but so temperate, that seldom either winter or summer incommode
it. All that was to be desired to make a happy life was there in plenty to be
found. Men were born there with a disposition to all kinds of exercises, and
art easily perfected what nature had so well begun. The Athenian Ladies were
naturally gallant, and for most part rather brown than fair: men found in them
somewhat of edge and life that was pleasing. And as in a dark and still night
there are often seen flashings of lightning, so though their manner of saying
of things was plain and reserved, yet in that still there appeared some
eradiations of wit. It is also reported that the tone of their voice was so
charming, that there needed no more but that alone to fill their hearers with
pleasure. But besides that that Language was delicate and pure, you cannot
conceive how many fine things were said in it; for there were some who besides
the dexterity of body, invented other pleasing knacks. And in no place of the
world was the way of taking or making of love better understood than there.

That Country had the genius of inventing and perfecting of Arts. Painting was
to be seen there in a manner accomplished, full of wit and fancy. They had
always in it somewhat of invention, that did indeed surprise, but more delight
the beholders. What has not been said of the Picture of the Sacrifice of
Iphigenia which none could look on without tears? and of that piece of Roxilana
and Alexander, where with chains of Myrtle and Roses love took hold of that
conqueror and led him captive to the feet of his prisoner? so strange an
adventure held at first men's minds in admiration; but this prisoner appearing
with so excellent and surprising beauty, the least glance that was cast upon it
banished all astonishment at her conquest. There are at this day some of their
Sculptures to be seen that speaks somewhat above human reach. And that Reason
alone, if nothing else, might have excused the Nations of these times for
having adored them.

In Music they had so great skill, that by adjusting and diversifying of
certain sounds they could touch and affect the heart at their pleasure. Have
you never heard how Alexander, amidst the delights of a great Feast, where
nothing but mirth was intended, was so charmed and transported with the Music,
that he ran to his Arms, as if he had seen the enemy? for it had a kind of
violence and enchanting, the secret whereof has not descended to us, at least
that which was more rare in it, is now altogether lost.

Their Eloquence speaks loud enough, though we speak nothing of it, and indeed
who can sufficiently tell what it was, but he that can speak with the same? did
not so many lovely verses that appeared in their natural dress, make the world
believe that it was the Language of the Gods, and that men spoke in Greece as
the Gods speak in Heaven? In a word, from this happy Country have streamed out
into all places the Liberal Sciences, and the Romans themselves who have since
made a great noise in the world, have only excelled in so many things, by
imitating what the Grecians had invented for them.

Being sober and discreet-people, they were naturally much addicted to a quiet
and peaceable life, but for all that still very fit for War. There were always
to be found amongst them Soldiers and Generals, who knew how to fight, and how
to command. And that same Alexander trained up in the Discipline of the
Grecians, with a little money and small Army had so great a heart, as to
attacque the richest and greatest King of the World, and to give him twice an
overthrow, when in open battle he was encompassed with five or six hundred
thousand men.

This young Conqueror who every where pursued glory, had a Master no less
ambitious in his own way; and if the Scholar rendered himself Master of the
World, we may likewise say that the Master what by his parts, and what by the
favor of his Prince, obtained the supremacy in Sciences. He had such parts as
are necessary to make a man accomplished in Society and the concerns of life;
but in some other more hidden knowledges he advanced not so far as some that
went before him.

These were men that placed happiness in knowledge, and yet confessed that they
scarcely knew any thing. Honest and plain dealing persons, who dubiously
handled doubtful matters: and of such things as may be clearly conceived,
though of highest speculation discoursed in a way that favored neither of art
nor study, and yet so natural and plain, that there needed no more but natural
wit at first to understand them. But he whose design was not so much to know,
as to gain the reputation of knowledge, well perceiving that they had the
better of him, and that the true judges of Parts and Sciences would never allow
him the pre-eminence. And being persuaded that a certain small number of
persons, who are dazzled with nothing, and see into the nature and usefulness of
things, would not be favorable to him, he betook himself to win those who were
not so sharp-sighted, and to gain the applause and admiration of the multitude.

For this purpose, knowing well what kind of persons he had to do with, and
what would take with them, he resolved to be positive, to decide absolutely
like a Lawgiver, and to hint that to be his Scholar was enough to make one
Learned. He borrowed inventions from those that were unknown, and scoffed at
others who were in vogue.

Some there are who say that the foundation of his building is not very sure,
and that he lays down principles not only obscure and doubtful, but likewise so
false, and far from probability, that with a very ordinary judgment one may see
the error. However it be, I wish that so great a man had a little more
naturalized Art and Rules; for it seems to me that the ordinary things which
the most silly and ignorant understand when delivered in a natural way, do
puzle even the most ingenious in a rugged and thorny method, and I know not
what too much studied and affected which appears all along in every thing that
we see of his.

What he has said well and is intelligible, may have probably been the cause
that men esteem all the rest where nothing is understood. For he has said good
things, and (which seems to me very strange) they are slighted because
understood. Men are persuaded that the best are always obscure. So that they
are so far from following what is clear and good sense, and shaping and
modelling themselves by the ingenious and learned Greece, that they search for
nothing but false subtileties, and chimerical distinctions. A Master teaches a
Language which he understands not himself, and which he holds of another, who
understood it no better. Hence it is that a young man after ten or twelve years
study knows still nothing, and they who all their life-times apply themselves
to that doctrine, gain no more but greater ignorance, they are found to be so
far out of the rode, that they are not thought worth the speaking to. For the
spirit that is naturally of the best frame, takes from it wrong biasses, and as
soon as one begins to eye things on that side, he sees them no more aright. It
is my observation also, that when one seriously says that any one of that order
is learned, most commonly he is mistaken, and that all that such a one has, is
but I know not what counterfeit yet polished thing, which gives but greater
distaste.

As to Euclide and Archimedes, of whom we have sometimes discoursed, such as
are desirous to perfect themselves in their Science, make always good progress,
what it teaches is as it were past all doubt; and would to God that we could
as certainly learn all that we desire to know. It is good to understand the
genius of that Science, by reason of some dexterity and exactitude that it can
give us, but we must not engage in it too far, it wheadles us out of the
commerce of life, renders us too speculative, and to find out what we seek, and
even to make it understood, we must advance by long demonstrations from line to
line, or from figure to figure, and when we have found it, we acknowledge for
most part that we might have very well spared our pains, and besides that that
method is toylsome, and that it has never been the style of any Court in the
World; it seems to me that whatsoever men say that is ingenious, great, and
necessary leaps into view if it be well expressed.

As the Chevalier had done speaking, the Marshall who had attentively heard,
asked him if that spruce and regular master who marches always in order at the
head of Doctors, had taught that sparkling young Prince such dull and dark
Sciences? there are knowledges, replied the Chevalier, which seem more curious
than necessary, and I do not think that that man who knew well what it is that
places excellent Princes above the ordinary, did much burden him with these. He
designed to make a Hero of this young Prince, as indeed he did, and formed him
upon the mould of Homer's. It is true, that whilst he instructed him in what
concerned him most, he omitted not to discover to him the sublimest things he
knew. I am inclined to say so, because having published some Books of that
nature; Alexander wrote to him a Letter, which sufficiently testifies the
displeasure that he conceived thereupon. Has that Letter, said the Marshall,
been preserved to our times? I should be glad to see if that Prince had in that
also the same genius that made him admired in all other things, and if great
men be always great even in their least actions. You may judge of the Letter,
said the Chevalier, for I remember it, because it is not long, and here it is
word for word.

YOU should not have published to the World so many excellent things which I
have learned from you; for what shall I have for the future above others, if
they know what you have taught me? you have not considered that I had rather be
above men in knowledge and wit, than in all that concerns grandeur and power.


There is the Note, said the Chevalier, and do not you wonder that Alexander in
the midst of his glory and heat of Ambition should have wrote so? Must not he
have had a vast heart and great soul to mind such things, whereof ordinary
conquerors make so little esteem? strange kind of man! said the Marshall, he
aspired to the Supremacy in all things; and who can think after this that: it
was Fortune alone that rendered him so powerful, and that Merit had not the
greatest hand in his advancement?

But to return again to Sciences, I very well conceive that that able Tutor
drove at that which was of greatest concern. Only I think that a great Prince,
and one who is to govern the World, cannot know too many things. I am of your
mind, said the Chevalier, but there is a vast difference between being
instructed like an Artist who would excel in his trade, and being informed of
objects that present without farther design than of knowing what they are, and
avoiding of mistake. This last knowledge though very lovely and useful costs
but little when we meet with those* who hit the mark. What I think chiefly to
be desired in a King, is that he have parts and virtue: in my judgment one
cannot be too accomplished in either of these.

It is likewise true that how happy soever one may be, and what advantage of
body or mind soever he may have; he must essay to be an able and knowing man;
and if it be possible begin with that, without which the rest go but ill; yea
it happens often that men turn their best advantages to their own ruin.
Notwithstanding they do well to conceal their talents, because the generality
of people have not naturally much affection for those who have too much
prudence, but are more favorable to such as seek adventures and hazard all.
Thence it is that so many and especially Ladies, esteem not Caesar so much as
Alexander.

This talent of skill and ability, is a certain dexterity, and somewhat of a
particular genius, that consists in the making good use of what we know and can
perform; but when men know nothing and can do as little, that genius stands
them in no stead. To have then opportunity of employing it, one must gain
credit and instruct himself in such matters as he may stand in need of. They
who have such a kind of spirit love mightily to set themselves off, and catch
their advantages. But they give themselves no great trouble to complete
themselves in any thing: besides, the bustle of the world takes them off from
applying themselves to any one particular thing. So that the most ingenious
persons excel not in all things.

I am of opinion, said the Marshall, that a Prince should apply himself to
History; it discovers to us so many things that one may thereby improve himself
and become knowing, at least in what concerns Society. It is true, said the
Chevalier, that History is of great use if it were only to persuade what we
intend by examples, when the reasons we have to say are but weak, or good ones
cannot be heard. But seeing successes are different, though conjunctures be
much alike; it is hard to ground any solidity on them, and I am apt to believe
that one might be ingenious and knowing without the aid of History. Before ever
there was any sign or trace of it, could not men in the beginning know good and
evil?

Moreover all things possible that one can imagine, are like so many Histories,
if not of the past or present, at least of the time to come: For in that
infinite space of time, and of the world, all that may come to pass finds its
season and place.

Nevertheless as History is a kind of experience, it is certain we may profit
much by it: and the rather because there are some so well done, that though we
know the matter, yet we take pleasure to read the relation. Kings do well to
learn such, yea even to inform themselves of emergents that happen in their own
times, that they may have in their eye what might be done on such occasions,
and not lose the opportunities of action. Care should be chiefly taken with the
young Prince to make him consider that Kings and Emperors who have been
virtuous, besides the glory that thereby they have purchased, have also led a
happy and pleasing life.

But the best time for a walk passes away, and you and I think to take two or
three turns upon the side of the River. Let us go said the Marshall; I had
never thought of it if you had not minded me.

The End of the Second Conversation.
The third Conversation.
THe Chevalier came pretty early to the Mareschal's Lodgings, who was going
abroad, because the morning was still and temperate, and neither too clear nor
too gloomy. The Marshall was all-alone in his Chamber, leaning upon a window
that looked into the Garden; and seeing the Chevalier come in, told him with a
cheerful countenance, That he was much obliged to him, in that he did not
forsake his Friends in their necessities: That he was minded to take the Air by
reason of the fair weather; and that he should be glad to take a walk in so
good Company. The Chevalier made answer, That he was extremely troubled that
the Company was not better. I make no question, replied the Marshall smiling,
because the greatest concern is yours: it is indeed to be wished that one were
of agreeable Conversation, though it were only to entertain himself: for we are
sometimes alone; and when our thoughts then trouble us, we cannot banish them
at our pleasure. That is but too often my case, said the Chevalier; and at this
very instant that I am speaking, I am very glad to be with you, because I find
that if I were alone, I should not be much satisfied with any thing that comes
into my thoughts. You tell me, replied the Marshall, no glad tidings; for
seeing men have commonly some love for themselves, they are very easily
flattered with it: but when one has no contentment in his own thoughts, what
likelihood is there that others should, who most commonly let nothing slip? yet
I will not be so severe: And going toward the Garden, Come on, said he,
speaking still in a cheerful manner, we must not give w^y to Melancholy;
stirring a little revives Vigor and Spirits: However, if the walk wearies us,
we shall find, where we are going, a place to repose in.

There were in that Garden Orange Trees in their full blossom, which delighted
both their smell and sight; and there they made some turns in an Alley,
discoursing on several subjects. Afterward sitting down under the Orange Trees,
Let us now enjoy retirement, said the Marshall; let us taste of the quiet that
it affords us, and entertain our selves in liberty. It seems to me, said the
Chevalier, that one lives more in two days of freedom and leisure, and
perceives better what life is, than in two years of business and the hurry of
affairs: And in my judgment also one sees greater matters in solitude than in
the world, or at least there he better considers them: For what do we see in
the world that is great, unless it be perhaps an Army, the Siege of a Town, or
the Court of a Prince? All these become quickly familiar to us, and appear only
great at our first view; but if we observe the various works of Nature, the
setting of the Sun, a still Night, and the Stars that with so much majesty move
over our heads, we are always surpised with wonders. They who only mind their
fortune, are busied with a little artificial world, which they know very well;
but the great world of Nature is to them unknown.

It is, notwithstanding, this little world, replied the Marshall, that makes
great men, or, to say better, that makes them conspicuous: for such as converse
not in it, let their merit be what it will, die, and are not so much as known
to have lived. Besides, this you must consider, that there are some certain
Princes whom one would willingly see again, though he had never so lately seen
them; and whom the most delightful solitude cannot bring into Oblivion. That
kind of life is to me a Charm; thitherward do I always direct my Prospect: And
that I may not loose sight of one young Prince, I ask you at first, if you
think he should be so delicately and with all that fondness and care which is
commonly used in the Education of persons so tenderly beloved?

I am of the mind, answered the Chevalier, that in this there should be great
regard had to his Constitution. However, I had rather that it were in a way
somewhat hard, than too delicate, provided that it might be without danger. Men
are so much for securing the present, said the Marshall, that they hazard the
future. I have known many undone by too much delicateness: They were so brought
up, that they could not suffer the least hardship or irregularity. They went to
bed and rose constantly at the same hour; and you know the world does not allow
men to be brought up after that manner: So when it happened that they behoved
to change their course of life, they could not so much as two months breath the
air of an Army, but that they died, or became dangerously sick; when on the
other hand, they who betimes had accustomed themselves to every thing, enjoyed
their health there as elsewhere, and sometimes better.

I believe, said the Chevalier, that one can hardly ever shake off the
inconveniences of a breeding so delicate, and that even the mind and heart
may feel the effects of it. And I also think, that it were good if the Prince
could sometimes dispense with all which is termed Pomp and Magnificence, and
find that there is nothing useless and superfluous which grows not necessary
by habit and custom it is not that we must listen to those who murmur so much
against Plenty, and who cannot endure gilding nor rich Furniture. The most part
of such know not what they would say, and others think to gain esteem by
undervaluing what themselves want.

It is well enough known that painted Seelings and Hangings set off with gold,
ease not pain or grief: that men are less subject to vapors when they see only
the verdures of the Fields; and that stately and magnificent Beds make not the
nights seem shorter. We know very well that these Riches signify but little,
and that they may even prove hurtful: Yet the evil is not in having of them,
but in believing our selves to be better men for the enjoyment, and thinking
worse of our selves when we want them. Virtue and Honesty do far surpass these
things; and though one should be stripped of all, and exposed to great
sufferings, he should not thefore think himself more dishonourd, than for being
sick, or of a tender constitution.

You are in the right, said the Marshall, and I think that now and then some
easy attempts might be made with our Prince to give him the knowledge, or at
least the apprehension of some things, with which children do not usually
entertain themselves, and which surpass their ordinary capacity: For though a
child at first understands not what is said to him, in its full extent, yet
that prepares him at some time or other to conceive it. These are like the
little Essays of Reason that never come all together.

I would not have him troubled with vain and airy, nor too high and far-fetcht
subjects. That which is said out of purpose, or is brought from afar, effects
but very little, and only leaves confused impressions. The least occasion that
presents is sufficient, to speak something that hits the point, and is
pleasing: for I think it also of consequence, that endeavors should be used to
breed him and form his spirit in a pleasing and taking way. The pleasure that
one takes in hearing and beholding, makes him likewise delight to be
instructed; and if those who are to be about this Prince, have in their words
and actions good grace, he will therefrom retain at least the way of demeanure,
and of expressing himself. That agreeable manner of communication, if you
consider it, is a matter of no small importance. It is extremely advantageous,
said the Chevalier, and as you have hinted the surest way to attain to it, is
to frequent the company of such as have and use it: for commonly it consists in
matters so delicate and nice, that though we perceive them, hardly can we tell
what they are.

But you have made use of a word [form the spirt] that has much pleased me. I
remember of some good Masters, who taught the Exercises with so great
exactness, that there was nothing wanting, nor over much; not a bit of time
lost, nor the least motion, which did not contribute to Action. These Masters
told me, that if one have once the body formed into a good carriage, the rest
comes easily. It seems to me also, that they who have the spirit formed,
understand all that is said to them; and that afterward they need no more but
good Monitours. When one finds such, and entertains himself with them, he gets
some certain sentiments and views that he could never have learned by himself;
and I know nothing that can so much contribute to the completing of a great
man.

How sensibly do you touch me! cried the Marshall: if in my childhood that it
had been discovered to me, which I have not since perceived but by much
experience and reflection, how much time and trouble should I have spared! how
many things would a Word then spoken to me to purpose have made me comprehend!
how many things should I have know which I know not, nor never shall know
whilst I live! I look back upon so many occasions which I have lost, upon so
many things that I might have done, and whereof I never thought till it was out
of time. And how much do you think I blame my self for the false steps which I
should never have made, if any one had but lent me a hand? for all the world
are guilty of faults, and even the most accomplished; but the grosser are only
perceptible.

As he was thus speaking with much eagerness, My Lord Marshall, said the
Chevalier, we must not be cast down with any thing: life deserves not so much,
as that we should trouble our selves how we spend it. We are just out of the
world when we begin to know it; at least we are pretty forward in our journey,
before we know the best way. Good God! what you say is true, answered the
Marshall; but never tell me that there is a certain period of age required, to
attain to a certain pitch of Knowledge, and that solid Judgment cannot be
purchased, but by long Experience: a child of good parts understands all that
is said to him, when we hit the right way, and accommodate our selves to his
Genius. I agree with you, said the Chevalier; but I would not load him with a
long series of too Methodical instructions. I had rather tell him but little,
and that every document had its effect, praise or blame him according as he
gave occasion for the one or other, and give him the reason of every thing that
is said to him, so that he might be brought at last insensibly to make the
application himself. It is far better to illuminate the Understanding, than to
stuff the Memory; for so, many regular Precepts are forgotten before they can
be made use of. They refer you to a time when some rare thing as they say is to
be seen, but the time is at very great distance.

All that is taught or said to the young Prince, should render him more knowing
and agreeable to day than he was yesterday; and some progress in this should be
continually observed. It were good likewise to accustom him to somewhat of
Freedom and Affability, which makes great Kings loved and esteemed. Affection
produces effects that are particularly useful to him. How true do you say!
cried the Marshall; and what is so necessary to a great Prince, as the quality
of attracting love? I prize it above all, replied the Chevalier; but do not you
think that that greatness of Soul, and that height of Judgment which you know,
contribute much to it? There you hit the main point, said the Marshall; and
therefore so soon as he had learned the Instructions and Rudiments of his
younger years, I should begin to give him new views, enlarge his knowledges,
and give him a hint of every thing. But lest I might mislead him, and mistake
the way in some unknown Country, I should have great care to choose good Guides,
and should be sure of the best.

Children, said the Chevalier, are not commonly speculative; the most part are
active, and set upon play: yet there are some of a temper sullen enough, and
are apt to plod and recollect their own thoughts. It were to be wished that the
young Prince were neither too thoughtful nor too stirring and active. It is the
fittest and best temper to have a little of both, and to be able easily to slip
from the one to the other: For the mind by too much thinking sinks within it
self; and when it dwells there too long, becomes wild, and unapt for society:
And action too much continued without intermission, works only outwardly; and
they that constantly addict themselves thereto, make not any reflections, and
never become great men.

We must meditate upon what we set about though we have but a moment of
leisure; because by pondering and meditating we search means to attain to
Perfection: but when we think to have found such, it is necessary we should put
them in practice, that we may know if they be excellent: for no body can be
assured of that, but by experience. Now if what we imagine likely to succeed in
any thing be but a mere notion, or some project too difficult to be put in
practice, the only way is to try it, and we shall undeceive our selves upon
the spot. Thereby it comes to pass that men daily improve the most absolute and
perfect things they have done.

When I came first to Court, said the Marshall* men were persuaded that there
was no more needful to make a man of breeding, but to dance, run at the Ring,
or something of that nature. Every one took to that exercise which he liked
best, and stuck to it as if it had been his Profession.

Such things are graceful when gentilely performed, yea, even when not at all
practiced, I mean that the body thereby becomes more free and unstinted; which
will appear though one stand still. You know that it is a great advantage to be
a good Actor. Action, said the Chevalier, is a kind of Expression; and as well
chosen words are agreeable, when they express pleasing matters: So all that is
performed by mien and gesture is well received, when it is done with good
grace, and that Wit and Merit appear in it. But we must not deceive our selves;
we are often the Actors of nothing, as well as the Sayers of nothing: Action
has its faults as well as Language; and to become excellent in either, we must
observe what in every subject is like to take.

This quality of a good Actor seems to me very necessary for society: And to
speak A lamode, it is much like that which now adays men call [a good Air.] Yet
a good Air rests not only here, it appears in every thing; and to tell you in
a word what it is, it consists in doing well what one does. Men confound it
with the Knack of Charming, though there be great difference betwixt them. A
good Air shows it self at first blush; it is more regular, and in better order:
The Knack of Charming is more flattering and insinuating; it strikes directly
at the heart, and that by secret ways. A good Air produces more Admiration;
and the Knack of Charming more Love. Young people who are not thoroughly
fashioned, have not for most part a good Air, nor even the Masterpieces of
Charming.

They who love nothing like Discourse, said the Marshall smiling, are much
pleased with such subjects to set off their Wit, and those that hear them have
not easily done with them; but when one understands well what is inquired into,
he says nothing unprofitably, and sound Judgment and Learning does therein
visibly appear.

That we may return to our ancient Courtiers, as the most part of exercises are
but for a certain age, so it happened, that they who only minded them, being
no more young, knew no more wherein to employ themselves.

I would have no body then make Exercises their chief stock: I know very well
they are not to be neglected; but there is still somewhat better. I have indeed
always believed that nothing ought to be so much desired as Wit, and that it is
often ones own fault that he comes short of it. I am likewise, more than ever,
persuaded that it is impossible to miss of that, when one is bred amongst some
sort of persons.

At least, added the Chevalier, a most learned man maintains, that, very near
the matter, all men naturally have the same Spirit; and that the chief
difference proceeds only from the care which is taken of breeding, or the bias
and inclination that it takes to it self. I am not altogether of that opinion,
said the Marshall; the advantages of a happy Nature have the first rank, which
Art coming afterward accomplishes.

As to the Instruction that one takes of himself, it happens but seldom that
the Mind unassisted finds the best ways: and I wonder at some great Princes,
who notwithstanding that in their infancy they were instructed but in a few
things, are nevertheless great men. Most of those that are about them, imagine
that there is no need of so much haste, and that it might wrong their health. I
am very apt to believe that this Conduct is good, provided the consequences be
eyed, and that men call to mind that it would be very dangerous to accustom a
young Prince to want Wit: Means must therefore be sought out to teach them, by
delighting of them, and always to give them some instruction without fatigue.

But to return to those admired Princes, who have attained their
Accomplishments by themselves, I cannot see how Maxims should be grounded upon
so rare instances. I am not of the opinion no more than you, said the
Chevalier, that one should trust to that; and I think the surest way to learn
Breeding, is to betake ones self to persons of Breeding. As the Voice is
improved by Singing, and we learn to use it aright when we practice under a
good Master; so Wit insinuates it self, and is insensibly communicated amongst
persons who have a good frame of Spirit. It is not to be doubled but one may be
improved, when an able man takes him in hand.

It is my judgment, continued the Chevalier, that persons of Parts and Breeding
should not only be well entertained about that Prince* but that likewise care
should be had to find out and invite such, for commonly they make not too
great a bustle, nor offer themselves. They know how to comply with their
fortune; and besides, they are so rare, that he who is so accomplished needs
not fear the too great abundance of others. I do not in all my life remember
that ever I saw so great a number at one time, but that I have still desired to
have seen a greater.

These men say always somewhat that takes, and never do any thing that carries
not on it some mark of Integrity and Breeding. In keeping company with, and
observing of them, one learns not only what he ought to know to make him a
Gentleman, but likewise how to make use of it, even so far as to be silent to
the purpose and with good grace. We see them sometimes without remarking of
them; and they make me call to mind those good Artists that are not so
sollicitous as others, though not so much out of idleness or neglect, as a
certain aversion that most virtuous men have from publishing their own worth.

When I have the fortune to meet with any man, I know how to sift him; and
though I hear him speak good things, and with as good grace as can be desired,
yet for all that I conclude nothing. This is very often but a borrowed style,
and affected personage. I take notice if all come from his own stock, and if
nothing betrays it self: In fine, I look not so much upon what appears to me
regular and polished, as on some certain things that show a deep reach, and
great capacity of mind.

Children covet not always the company of Children; those that are of an
ambitious and bold Spirit, please themselves more with men, especially if they
be of pleasing Conversation. I think the young Prince should be accustomed to
pass his time among such; and can there any more sure and less painful way be
imagined for the Prince to render himself the most accomplished of the world,
than from his childhood to have had the company of such Courtiers?

For as a Child without study learns the Tongue of those whom he hears speak,
and speaks it afterward naturally; he will not fail likewise to take insensibly
the Manners of those that are about him, and whatsoever he acquires that way,
becomes natural to him. That manner of Instruction, said the Marshall, is to
be made use of as much as possibly can be; yet that is not enough to make one
speak well; a little Art and Study must be mingled with it. I grant it, said
the Chevalier, and indeed we cannot have too much of both; but we must chiefly
aim at a kind of Wit which neither books nor learned men can bestow. It seems
to me that such as have it, want neither Art nor Science; and when one has it
not, let him be never so accomplished, in some things, there is most commonly
some unlucky circumstance that quite spoils his best performances.

Since there is no more necessary to complete a Gentleman, but to speak well
and do well, and that the Question is of Speaking well: Though one had learned
all the Secrets of a Language, with so many other things which are taught for
the help of Discourse, it is in truth almost nothing, if he understand no more
but that; for what appearance is there of pleasing and persuading persons of
Breeding, unless we know what may affect them, and by what method to win upon
them? Most part of Masters, if you observe it, speak not a word of this.
Without that knowledge, said the Marshall, it would be very hard to succeed in
it, and particularly in the commerce of Life, where the least false step is
remarked: When we make such an unluckie trip, we cannot get on our legs again
as we would; and I am very well satisfied that it is most important to have that
kind of Wit, and to know the World. Nevertheless, I think that it would be
very difficult, without Art and Rules, to speak well on all Subjects.

That Art, said the Chevalier, is easily learned, and signifies but little, at
least in the way that it is taught. Most part who know it, are not a jot more
able for it; whether it be that the Precepts that have been put into their
heads are not very good, or that they have not been taught how to use them. But
if one did give excellent Instructions, and in teaching of them put them in
practice, without doubt it would prove a great advantage for Speaking well.

As to the Rules that are given us, we must exactly follow those that are in
use; most part of which concern the Purity of Language: and I perceive that a
great many Persons, without studying of them, fail not to put them in practice.
There are other Rules go farther, and are taken from sound Judgment and a long
Experience. The Masters of the Trade having observed some things that have
sometimes succeeded, have therefore believed that from thence they might form
Rules: but they are very often so uncertain, that one should not follow them,
but according as he finds and judges them pertinent; and when he adheres to
them, he should have respect to time and circumstances. So that if any one by
dexterity or chance, should discover something of more worth than all that has
been seen hitherto, we ought to make use of his Invention.

That useful Art which makes men excellent in Discourse, appears always
disguised under a natural show; affects no other Comeliness but that of genuine
and simple Beauty: and though it labor to place its Charms in open view, yet
its chief design is to be hid. You cannot but call to mind those enchanted
Gardens of the Palace of Armidas:

E quel che'l bello, e' l'caro accresce a l'opre,
L'arte che tutto fa nulla si scopre.
In Works, all that is lovely to the eye,
It Is Art that does; but none can it descry.
I take that to be the perfectest Art which is least remarkable: for when
things smell of Art and Study, we may conclude, that they who Say them, have
neither of both, or that they knew not how to use them.

This is the fault of those that speak in such a strain that the best Wit,
without Learning, cannot comprehend them; but if for want of Judgment and
Acquaintance with the World, men do not always understand what is well said,
they have no body to blame but themselves for that.

But this is pretty well for one sitting: If you have a mind to walk any more,
I espy in that Orange-walk an Alley, where you may enjoy the cool. I see then,
said the Marshall, starting up, that our Discourse for to day is ended: Let us
make two or three turns more, and afterward go to Dinner: for if you believe
me, I begin to have a stomach. After Dinner we shall go to M.L.G.'s house, and
there spend the afternoon at Play. No more, I was so well satisfied with our
walk last night, that I intend to take you thither again to morrow, not to the
same place, but to the other side of the River on that rising-bank. I will come
to your Lodgings, and if you be within we shall go together to the Hermitage.

The End of the third Conversation.
The fourth Conversation.
THe Marshall, according to his promise, between four a five in the afternoon,
came and called the Chevalier. The weather was fair, but by reason of the
season of the year somewhat hot. They quickly got the length of the Hermitage,
which is but a mile and a half from the Town. It is a little Cell with a
Chapel and Garden, where they could not enter, because no Hermit lived there,
and the two Monks that used to be there were gone abroad that day. The
Marshall and Chevalier continued their walk a little farther down into a Wood,
whose high and tuffie Trees yielded a shade proof against the Sun, and the
Turff below a Walk like to a Meadow, whose tender Grass begins to peep above
ground.

Having walked a little they stopped under an aged and well-covered Oak; and
being sat down, What shall we say, cried the Marshall, or what shall we not
say? I have passed the night where you left me, said the Chevalier, at Play;
which has made me exceeding dull. I have observed no such thing, replied the
Marshall, in all our Discourse by the way. Now that I am in repose, said the
Chevalier, and that I feel the jolting of the Coach no more, the fresh Air of
this Wood lulls me almost asleep. I am sometime in the same condition as you
are now, answered the Marshall; and when I reflect upon my self in that state,
I fancy that I feel a certain sweetness that is found betwixt sleeping and
waking; when no thoughts take me up, but the thinking that I am pleased: But I
dispense with that commonly for the opportunity of good Company, and that I may
sleep better at night.

You told me on the way, continued the Marshall, that they who express
themselves best, use more Repetitions than others; and that notwithstanding it
is taken for a fault. Is not there some little contradiction in this? I
remember it very well, answered the Chevalier, and I do not think that I am
mistaken: For those that speak well, hit at first upon the best Words and
Phrases, to express their thoughts. And whenas it happ^ns often they are to
touch the same things over again, though they be not ignorant that variety
pleases, yet they cannot easily forsake a better to lay hold of a worse
Expression: when on the other hand, others who are not so nice in their choice,
embrace that which offers first; so that chance furnishes their Language with
variety. And because men are quickly weary of a too much frequented manner-of
speaking, though it be the most proper to give the sense of what it signifies,
they find some fault with it; and they that affect the purity of Language, are
more subject to this than others.

The reason is, because there is good and bad in every thing, yea in Language
it self; which in one sense cannot be too pure: But variety refreshes; and if
the meanest word could find its proper place, one tongue is not so copious as
to reject it.

Some Ladies of admirable parts, and who should use them so as to give every
thing its due, condemn some very good words which we can hardly be without.
Some who use them too often, and commonly to no purpose, have possessed them
with this dislike. But though we ought to submit to the judgment, and even the
prejudices of Ladies, yet I believe we should not do amiss, in some cases, to
refer our selves to the judgment of so many excellent men, who give verdict
without prejudice or whimsey, and have made it their business so long to decide
the Controversies of Language. I am of the same opinion also, said the
Marshall, and it is no matter to be slighted: for the sweetest periods of Life
are spent in Discourse and Conversation: There is little to be done without
speaking; and by experience I am sensible of the great advantage we make when
we do it to purpose. But this in my judgment is of greatest importance, that
we find many occasions where there is need of Art and Wit to gain upon people,
and to convince them that we are in the right. Men are satisfied when they can
indifferently well acquit themselves of what I say; and most part are
persuaded, that if a thing be once well done, it is not worth the while to do
it a little better. It is in this though that perfection consists, and this it
is that distinguishes the excellent from ordinary Artists.

You have fully awaked me, said the Chevalier, with your [a little better]
which appears to me very difficult. But how happy is the man that can reach it!
I am of your mind that it cannot be too much endeavored: for Conversation, it
is the surest way to gain Love; and besides, I perceive that he that is a good
Companion for Gentlemen, is so also for himself; and on that depends the
greatest happiness of this Life.

As to the occasions whereof you speak, when the most ingenious carry commonly
the day, it seems to me that the best means that can be invented for
persuading, are not good, if they be not honest and generous; and that men
should not aspire, like barbarian Princes, to conquer right or wrong; but like
noble Heroes, in such a way as may even be grateful to the subdued.

I can find nothing so lovely, as an upright and sincere heart, it seems to me
the basis of Wisdom; at least I suspect all wicked men as guilty of Folly. It
is impossible to have a great and well-framed Soul, if through the Interests of
the world, yea even the transports of most violent Passions, we espy not what
is laudable and generous, and embrace it.

They who have an upright Heart, have also an upright Judgment, how weak soever
it an upright Judgment, how weak soever it may be: and mind it, some sort of
people, who have so many folds and doubles in their Heart, have never soundness
of Understanding: There is always some false color that gives them false
views; and artifice and tricks demonstrate, that one has not Wit enough to
accomplish his designs by fair and honest courses: the candid and ingenuous
person is the man that takes with Gentlemen. How comely are all the Actions of
Life that spring from so pure a fountain! How are our thoughts and words
thereby imbellished! and how lovely a thing is it to speak well, when that air
is not wanting! It may be by following of this Rule, one may not prove happy in
every thing; and is it your crooked and side-way men that are so? But one may
assure himself at least to purchase the Love and Esteem of those who understand
true worth; and is there any thing greater to be desired?

Whilst the Chevalier discoursed in this manner, he perceived the Marshall
wholly taken up in hearing; and fearing that so serious an attention might do
him prejudice, he endeavored to take him off with some witty and pleasant
digression. The Marshall who perceived it, I see, said he to him, that you
would carefully husband my health, but you do not take the right course; men
must treat people according to their genius, and accommodate themselves to
their inclinations. What diverts the most part, is tedious to me, and good
Sense and Reason never tire me; but particularly such things as may render me
more a Gentleman always delight me. Well then, said the Chevalier, let us go
on; one could not have thought that you had been so serious.

Amongst the singular and rare Persons, of whom I have some Idea, I find some
who have so nobly acquitted themselves of all that they have undertaken, that
none can reflect thereon without admiration. I have also observed others, who
have spoken in so sublime a Style, that it is very hard to imitate them. We
must nevertheless endeavor to watch, yea, and if it be possible, to surpass
both the one and the other. For whether we act or speak, there is nothing but
matters of this rate that deserve Love and Admiration: when the heart and mind
are filled with such Principles, and one does practice them from his Childhood,
from such an one, somewhat rare and exquisite may be expected.

Moreover, let no man trouble himself whether all will be approved of and
followed: It matters not at first if one be not so regular and exact, provided
the way be so noble and lovely, that they who consider it, cannot judge what
progress may be made: a little time and pains bring perfection; and whatever is
handsomely and gracefully begun, Fortune seems pleased in the same manner to
complete.

I know some who speak well, and commit none of those things which men call
faults; but they are still upon the same key: we know what we are to expect
from them: and in my judgment, the thing that we ought most to fear and avoid,
is the having of Masterpieces and things of high price.

It may come to pass, that it is for want of occasion that one-saies nothing
that is excellent, and that the subject will not allow it: and yet I think that
there is no so cross nor unlucky matter which may not be turned to some
agreeable sense, if one could make the best use of his parts. For that which
most times appears to us difficult, and even impossible, is not so so much of
its own nature, as by reason of the want of skill or invention on our parts;
insomuch that one might perform a great many things to admiration, if he had
Wit and Industry enough to discover the ways of action, which though he cannot
fall upon, may nevertheless be found out.

Whilst we are young, we judge of nothing aright; and if it come to pass that
experience, reflections, or the rencontre of some intelligent person give us
other measures, we despise what we have admired, and laugh at our own follies,
when we examine our selves without flattery. But if any one understood the true
value of every thing, do not you think he might have sport enough from those
whom men esteem, or at least who presume to be so? For as to others, who are
satisfied with any thing, or have no great conceit of themselves, they are not
to be laughed at, though in whatsoever they do they be faulty, because they
know very well that all the world may make escapes, and upon that principle
alone they set to work.

Nevertheless, though one may in speaking espy or imagine something better than
what he says, he must not therefore quit a little assurance and confidence of
speaking well and gracefully what he intended. But nothing keeps men at a
greater distance from perfection, than an opinion that they have already
attained it.

It comes into my mind, said the Marshall smiling, that the more accomplished
men are, the better use they may make of our Discourses, and that our
Conversations (if the comparison offend you not) are much like to the
Commentaries of Caesar, from which none but great Soldiers can reap much
advantage. The reason is, because we only touch by the way what offers it self
for making of a Gentleman; and that our Discourse is only adapted for those who
have the same Genius that inspires us; the rest will never make any great
progress. But what do you think? May that Genius be acquired? And if so, by
what means would you begin to instill it into Children? For you must not pretend
at first step to raise them so high.

In breeding of a Child, answered the Chevalier, it were to be desired, that at
first attempts were used to make him love or hate that which deserves this or
that, as much as his tender age does permit, and to fashion and enure him to a
good relish; for I must (if I intend to explain my self) make use of that word,
which is by so many abused. A good relish would make him understand what he
should desire to obtain, and the means to render him therein excellent: So that
if beforehand he had the true sense of good and evil, what he might meet with
in the world, would instruct him without a Governor; and his aversion from
evil things, would serve him instead of a Lesson, to avoid them when they
occurred.

One cannot have too delicate a relish to distinguish real Graces from
counterfeit Charms, and to avoid therein mistake. It is not my meaning, that
one should be like sick Persons, who nauseate and have the mouth out of taste;
but that one should judge aright of every thing that presents, by a certain
kind of perspicacity that is quicker, and sometimes surer than reflections. One
must not for all that severely reject what displeases, nor be too censorious in
reproving: It is better to strive to do aright what another does amiss; the
Life becomes thereby more easy, and the manner of Instruction more pleasing. I
would likewise endeavor that a Young Man should have the Heart and Mind such
as they ought to be: the Mind contrives the means to attain to perfection, and
the Heart is necessary to put in practice what is judged the best: for Virtue
and Honesty is not a mere Speculation, but an active and governing Principle.

We see a great many Children, said the Marshall, who notwithstanding of their
age want not some prudence, and can foresee what may be hurtful to them, and
what may do them good; but that which is called, The having of a good relish,
(for I boggle not at that word no more than you, all manners of expression are
grateful when they are without aff^ctation and properly applied:) that I say,
which is called the having of a good relish, is not to be expected from young
people, if Nature have not been extremely liberal to them, or that great Care
has been had in their Education. I know not whence it proceeds, unless it be
that by a natural Instinct, they set straight on that which appears to them
most necessary, and that other things affect them but little.

You give an excellent reason of it, said the Chevalier, and I observe that it
is very hard for one that is young, not to be surprised with that which has a
luster, and sparkles to the eye. Children are with all imaginable care to be
cured of this, because all of them, even the Children of Princes themselves,
have this in common with the Vulgar, that they are fond of ornament and show;
but people of Breeding and Understanding love not gaudie trifles, which adorn
much, though they be of little value; things that make no great show, and are
of great price, please them; this is observable in all things, even in the
mind and thoughts: For if such kinds of things seem very lovely, and are but
only so in appearance, they give immediately distaste; and those which are
lovely without show, the more they are considered, the more we find them to
our mind: The reason is, because they are beautiful without ornament and
dress, and that from time to time we discover in them secret charms, which were
not at first perceived.

Whence comes it, said the Marshall, that some who express themselves with
good grace upon some certain subjects, are so unlike themselves when they
adventure on other matters? And do you not wonder that that ingenious person,
whom we knew, should have left us such bald Love Letters, who upon all other
subjects wrote so well? How can that be! Does not the same Genius go along in
all? It is indeed the same Genius, answered the Chevalier; but the compleatest
person in the world is never alike proper for all things, and the diversity of
subjects occasion very different effects.

And besides, it is not enough to do a thing well, to understand it; one must
likewise delight, and not weary in it. It is ordinatily to be seen, that good
Masters speak well as to that which concerns their profession; and I imagine
that Love was none of that man's trade, or at least that he never understood it
well. It cannot be said, that it was want of Wit, if his Love Letters be not
comparable to the others, wherein he did excel, for he had sometimes too much;
but that his Wit was wrong employed. When the business is to touch the Heart,
he falls on subtilizing, and melting in Caresses. He wrote to a Lady, with whom
he was passionately in Love, that his Soul was so weak that it wanted strength
to leave him, and that that preserved to him a little life: And to another
also, that that which hindered him from dying, was that therein he should have
pleasure, which in her absence he would not enjoy.

He borrowed these Inventions from the Spaniards, and without doubt the
patterns are good; but he used them out of time. For that gallant and brisk
way, which might be well received in the beginning of a Love, is not therefore
in season in the heat of the fit, when one is never accustomed to trifle and
laugh. And when he speaks seriously, his chief aim is to persuade that he is in
Love; but we should not make too great haste to tell, nor persuade that we
love. it is far better to consider how we may render our Affection acceptable.
For a beautiful Woman easily believes that men love her, and I think she has
reason; but she is not always desirous to be loved; and if it were so, the most
important feat is to bring matters so about, that she might take it well; at
least we should begin that way. I find him very punctual in examinning all the
transactions of his Heart; and to tell you my opinion, he ought to have
remembered, that it is not the nature of violent Passions to reflect upon
themselves. A man that is transported with anger, thinks not that he is in
rage; and when one is overwhelmed in Love, he perceives not himself to be so,
or at least if he take notice of it, he thinks himself then in a natural state
which seems to him unalterable. I observe also that he does so much exaggerate
his cares and despair, that all appears false. It is much better to say but
little, and to give occasion to think of them deeply. Yea most commonly they
should speak themselves without words, and above all, no artificial complaints
should give occasion to suspect the truth of our grief. The Adventure of
Astraea and her Lover, who threw himself into the Lignon -- is simple and
natural: they never told one another such far-fetcht and studied things. Yet
their Love appears not only in their words, but all that is to be observed in
them speaks it, and there is nothing to be seen more charming.

It seems to me moreover, that there is no kind of subject that less admits of
counterfeit ornaments, and that notwithstanding, that man, contrary to his
custom, made sometimes use of them when he wrote of Love: but the thing that
gives chiefly distaste is, that he handles it too openly. The lovely Goddess,
said an ancient Grecian, is no ways pleased, that men should too openly
disclose her Mysteries; and though no body had ever said so, all men see that
there a Veil does well, and that on that subject the expression cannot be too
delicate; witness that Verse,

J'en connois de plus miserables.
Of these more wretched still I know.
I find notwithstanding, said the Marshall, that that man has done wonders
in this kind; which agrees very ill with your opinion of him, that it was the
thing which he least understood: Is there any thing more perfect to be seen,
than what he brings in his Heroine saying? The glory of that, said the
Chevalier, is not all his own: A Lady who furnished him with the design and
invention deserves the greater share. That is the Lady whom he has so well
represented in the person of Zelida: She had the piece for some time in her
hands, before it came to light; what has charmed you is hers, and seeing you
know her, it should not surprise you. There you tell me much, said the
Marshall, and it may be now you think that I have no more at all to be
informed of; but I have still a question to put to you.

What is meant by that mighty Elequence, which (as a great many say) can do
every thing? I have asked this of some who bragged that they knew it, and no
body as yet could ever make me understand it. You ask me a question, answered
the Chevalier, so little known in the world, that there the very word of
Eloquence it self can hardly gain Credit. For it seems to me that no body makes
use of it, but to play on those who are more pleased with fair Sentences than
good Sense.

Men may use it in Raillerie, replied the Marshall: yet there would be too
much Nicety, yea Ignorance, impertinently and out of season to reject it.
Besides, at Court men's discourse is only taken up about what they see; and that
view where every one may easily have an interest, makes every thing pass for
good and current that there is said; but in places of retreat, as this is, if
men do not entertain themselves with certain matters, which make no stir at
Court, they would pass their time very ill.

We are fully agreed, said the Chevalier, and your question well deserves to be
examined; but the most part of things that we weigh more by Opinion than
Reason, are always a little dubious: This is one of them, and so are all those
that concern Gracefulness, and even Beauty it self, though the cause of it be
more visible than that of Gracefulness; if it were put to a question of two
fair and lovely women which were the most taking, or even which were the most
beautiful, it would be hard to decide it, or at least to make it so evident,
that all the world would acquiesce. It may be said on the like occasion, such a
thing works such an effect on me; but I know not how it affects others. This I
premise for my excuse, if I entertain any singular opinion.

This mighty Eloquence seems not to be what it is imagined; men would have it
to dazzle, and be always lofty: for being persuaded that the simple and familiar
Style is low, they also believe that it is not natural to Eloquence to be so.
Thus men have more regard for the decking than the excellence of the thing; not
considering that they should judge of it as of Gold, which the more fine and
pure it is, the more it is esteemed. I am so far contrary to those who would
have Rhetoric always tempestuous and blustering, that I think it had rather
appear without havoc or noise.

As it is most lovely and noble, so it is most difficult and rare: it flows
from a penetrating and exict discerning; but so high and comprehensive, that
there is nothing to be found above or beyond it. It is a bright and lively
flame, whereof by chance we see some glances, even in the least-affected
entertainments.

Though it address it self chiefly to the Mind, and seem to have no other
design but to gain that, yet there it stops not, but even pierces the Heart: It
is true, if one would trouble and disquiet the Soul, he must take a more
sensible way, and tones more animated; but this high Eloquence is not found but
in a height of thoughts. They who acknowledge no more in it but a fine Style, as
they call it, if I mistake not, do not observe the most exquisite part thereof.
Methinks there is need of a great stock of Beauty to bear out great ornaments,
and that men do but seldom mind the matter, where such pompous ways of
speaking have their rank, and are fitly placed. What I now say is but little
regarded, and may very easily escape us; but possibly we shall mind it better
in a subject more sensible and better known.

When Ladies in a great assembly would appear with emulation, you know they
adjust themselves rather to please than dazzle the eye: with some a rich Attire,
with others a more modest dress does well, and ordinarily they affect not
extremities, they covet nothing too dull nor too shining; but hardly can we s^e
two in the same dress, and it is that diversity that adorns the Scene.

Since I am come so far, I fancy that Eloquence which thinks well and speaks
ill, is much like to a beautiful Woman, in a bad or negligent dress; and that
that which is more considerable by the dextrous use of language than the
strength of reason, resembles a Woman of ordinary Beauty, but always dressed
and decked; and that great care works not the greatest charms. But when Wit and
Rhetoric join together, there is Beauty it self and the fullness of delight, to
which nothing is wanting.

I am very much pleased with the Idea that you give me of Eloquence, said the
Marshall; and I conclude from all, that the way to speak well, is to find out
in the subject the best and most agreeable points that therein occur; but that
we must not labor so much to give a shining gloss to the things we say, as to
place them in the order that most befits them.

I would not begin in a way too sparkling; it is indeed to be wished that every
thing we say were good, yea and goodly, according as the subject deserves; but
we must rise to that by degrees: Nature in this, as in all other things, is a
very skilful Mistress. Mark how insensibly she advances, and how the fairest
Day which begins to dawn, has but so little luster, that we are in doubt
whether it be Night or Day. I discover to you all my Sentiments; and if I be
mistaken, or take the one for the other, I hope you will give me notice of it.

To my humor nothing speaks so much a noble and perfect manner of expression,
as to leave some certain things to be comprehended without mentioning of them:
Expression is clear enough, when we understand what another says, though we
understand not at first all that he thinks, and that his Sense reaches further
than his Words.

Men very often use so many subtilities on a subject, that what has been well
said is quite spoiled: when one has hit the right string he does well to rest
there, and pass to other matters: yea, I would even handle them in another way,
because Variety never cloys.

He that speaks must accomodate himself to the capacity of his Hearers. The
greater Parts one may have, the more he should take heed, lest by a high pitch
of thoughts and speaking of things, which most are not accustomed to hear,
though he express himself most clearly, he may lead his hearers to such a
height, as may turn their Brains, and make them giddie. This is a fault though
that may be valued; and it is so rare, that I see no man complain of it, and
that would not be glad to have it. For at worst it is easily a mended.

As to what men call good Words, I believe they depend as much on the subject,
yea often of Chance, as on Wit and Understanding; and that we must stay for
occasion, if we would use them. Men may, I think, dispense with them: For it is
enough to speak like a Gentleman, and upon every subject that presents, to say
what is proper and just: that is, better than good words. Yet men love them,
and I should not at all wonder at it, if they were really good words; but I
admire that Equivocations, which have nothing of that but the appearance,
should have brought in credit some of very ordinary parts. Men now a days
affect to speak, as some time ago they did to paint. For, as you know, there is
always some false chaim, wherewith the world is abused.

That Mode, said the Chevalier, seens to me very ill invented: For, to be heard
with pleasure, we must say matters that men are glad to understand, and speak
them takingly. I fancy that these Picture-makers did neither of the two: one
could not know the most part of those whom they so curiously represented; and
besides, their way of painting was not very good. For there are more sure and
noble ways to make people believe what is remarked in them to be rare and
singular, whether they be extolled or debased, than to draw them as they did to
the smallest Lineament.

Excellent Painters never paint all: they give exercise and play to the
imagination, and leave more to the thoughts, than they discover to sense. That
Grecian, so famous for his Muse and for his Inventions, gives himself no
trouble to describe Helen; he s^ies very little of her Countenance or Body, and
nevertheless he has persuaded all the world, that she was the fairest Woman
that ever was seen.

Tasso, who in other things excelled, had done well to have imitated him; and
when he speaks of the coming of Armida into the Christian Camp, if he had
contented himself to have said in two or three words, That after she appeared
and was heard speak, they would have abandoned all to follow her, and that even
the General, who ought to have been more reserved and less sensible, was
tempted to it; we should, without doubt, have found it more lovely. All that he
musters together of the Charms of Nature and Art, gives not so fine an Idea, as
that which one can frame to himself, wherein men never fail.

The Graces appear but very seldom; and even when they are seen, they are not
willing that men should have a full and open view of them: It is hard to paint
them; and though it could be accomplished, seeing every one looks upon them
with different regards, the piece would never satisfy all men.

But now the Sun sets, Is it not time to retire? Let us go, said the Marshall,
and if you think fit, walk a while, that we may exercise our selves a little
more.

The End of the fourth Conversation.
The fifth Conversation.
THe Marshall received often Letters from Paris, and from Court; and as he
likewise wrote to entertain Correspondence, he sometimes showed the Chevalier
his Letters. I know not why it is, that men imagine that he is not so excellent
this way, as in speaking. I think that his writings speak much a Gentleman, and
are always witty. It is true, Conversation requires not so much of order, and
that it dispenses with a certain kind of exact connection, which is not
observed in discourse. Yet I think, if men observed it without constraint or
affectation, they would speak a great deal better. However, if what is said
independantly and apart be good, and delivered with good grace, it is always
well taken. But commonly what we write should stick and hang together, yet
without any sign of pains or labor. And if any one pretend to do a thing
which men may be pleased to read, it is not enough that every part please by it
self, they must be made for one another, and that with a due proportion.

It is remarked of the Marshall, that he would always sparkle; and though his
chief drist be to please those that have skill that way, yet he slights not the
esteem of others: He is in that like to those Ladies, who cannot abide that any
should escape their charms. Except a little History, or some Relations, and a
small number of Books which he has read, he has studied nothing but the
world, and notwithstanding understands all that is said to him. It happens even
many times, that he improves things upon the hearing of them, and goes farther
than one thought to lead him. What might be expected from a young man of such
parts, who should be educated under good Masters?

The next day after one of the Conversations that they had had together, the
Chevalier came to wait on him. The Marshall after Dinner was retired into his
Chamber, and seeing the Chevalier come in, I have much wished for you here,
said he to him, to have supported me against five or fix very Learned Men, who
might have been pretty good company, if they had had common Sense. Before we
sat down to Table, I set them together by the ears, and now and then put in a
word when it came to my turn; but when I thought that I did most triumph, there
were two of them, if I mistake not, that said to one another there softly, That
they could not conceive what men did find in me so rare. They make me
remember, said the Chevalier, of a very ingenious man whom I knew, that had
read over all Tasso with much attention, without perceiving in it the least Wit
or Pleasingness.

One learns nothing with such kind of men, replied the Marshall; they never
take up things aright, and Nonsense passes with them for very good Sense:
Propose to them what you will that is clear, they think it obscure; besides,
they have a peculiar language which I understand not, and which would be very
ill taken in ordinary Conversation. It happens with them also, that instead of
coming to the knot of the matter, they cut and mangle your question into so
many pieces, that the one makes the other forgotten, so that at length no body
can tell what it was I take a great deal of pleasure to see them rank and
muster in so brave order matters of so small consequence. He that has an exact
Judgment, can easily trace and follow what he hears spoken, or what he says
himself, without so much ado. I love that men in Conversation should covet a
pleasing and grateful Variety, that they pass by side way out of the Road, and
that now and then they mount and raise themselves as occasion will allow.
Although they may wander a little and fly at random, yet they easily find
their way again. We must, if I may be believed, ramble every where, whither our
genius leads us, without other division or distinction but that of a good
Judgment: This way is at least more conform to our Sentiments and Thoughts,
than that so regular method of some, who put every thing under disguise: we see
nothing in it that is genuine, or most commonly that is real. And in the
Education of Children, why should we accustom them to such forced biasses,
which one day they cannot put in practice, without making themselves ridiculous?

Study may do prejudice, added the Chevalier, at least it must not be
pretended that it infallibly makes Masterpieces. Nor does the world either,
said the Marshall, always make such; and particularly they who are only cut
out for the Army, are commonly of no pleasant conversation: it is said to make
amends for that, that they have acquired Honor, as if that put them out of the
reach of every thing; and we may say under the Rose, that there is nothing more
dishonorable, than to be a rugged and ill-bred man. It is much the same as
with some certain grave and severe Women, who think much of themselves, only
because they are wild and untractable: For they loose themselves more, by
setting a value upon themselves for so slight a matter, than if they were as
gentle as they are severe, and in a word, than if they were such as men would
have them to be.

When we judge sincerely, said the Chevalier, we can hardly find any thing
absolutely perfect; but the more exquisite discerning one has, the more he
makes it his honor to be indulgent: and we must not pretend to meet with such
as we would have; we must endeavor to make them such, and especially if we
love them, and be obliged to spend our life with them. For others whom we meet
but by chance, we cannot turn and polish them as we would; we may only
rough-hew them, by telling them what we think convenient; and if they know how
to make use of it, that does at least dispose them to finish the work
themselves.

I no sooner begin to speak, said the Marshall, but you understand me better
than I understand my self; and all that you say to me seems so easy to be
conceived, that I often think that I knew it before you told it me. My thoughts
run always toward my Children, who cannot as yet be without my care; I love
them the more for that; and although there be somewhat in a plentiful estate,
yet there is nothing I wish them so much to have as merit. We discourse
sometimes concerning what we judge most expedient for the Education of a great
Prince; and according to that Model, as near as one can approach it, he may
bring up his Children. For I imagine, that the same Virtue can command when
Fortune calls, which knows how to obey, when Duty so obliges. And the
Chevalier and he being sat down; You say, continued he, that Study may do
prejudice: I would willingly be informed in what manner it is to be used; for I
do not believe that you are of the opinion that it should be absolutely
renounced.

That would be a very odd conceit, said the Chevalier; The best natural Wit of
the world avails but little, if care be not taken to instruct and perfect it:
One never sets himself to any thing as he ought, without being taught; and who
can be persuaded, that to study to do a thing well, which one does amiss, or to
do it better when it is well done, can ever be hurtful? That is to say, for
that end to seek out the best means, and under the best Masters; for so it is
that one should study.

We see how necessary Art and good Masters are for all kinds of Exercises. It
would be very strange if the Body were capable of Instruction, and the Mind
not. What probability is there, that to make a man ride a horse well, Exercise
and Masters should not fail to succeed; and that to learn Virtue and Breeding,
neither of the two should be useful, but rather hurtful?

We seldom find either Body or Mind in the frame that we would desire; but
the defects of Body seem to me the more difficult to be amended: The Mind is
naturally pliable, it may be rectified, provided we take the right course. And
who can doubt, but if any one were as much a Gentleman, as (they say) Pignatel
was a good Riding-Master, he might not make a Gentleman, as well as Pignatel a
Horseman? What is the reason then that it falls out otherways? It is indeed
because when one takes a thing from a bad Master, he learns to do it the wrong
way; and that it is much more difficult to choose good Masters for the Mind,
than for the Body: for the advantages of the Body are far more remarkable and
better known than those of the Mind. It is also because that they who are
capable to be good Tutors, are not always willing to undertake the employment;
and to speak truth, as the world goes, it is no great glory to make profession
of it, though one might be able to discharge it to perfection.

It is certain, that to be accomplished, bred, and agreeable at the rate that
it is to be wished a great Prince were, one cannot know too many things, if so
be he have the dexterity to make use of them, and understands their worth. But
to speak my mind, it is not to be a learned man, to have read much, and to
have learned a vast number of different Opions that establish no certainty: We
know nothing well, but what we distinctly conceive, and what we are able to
demonstrate to the first we meet with, if his apprehension be good. We must not
trust to that which appears to us only through Clouds and Mist, and which we
cannot lay open to the view of another.

Whilst one is young, he learns nothing but some words that give a show of
Learning, when he is good at nothing; and this is not proper for the affairs of
the world. I would have a man know every thing and that yet by the manner of
his speaking none might twit him with Pedantry, or being a Philosopher.

It is always good to be clear-sighted, said the Marshall, and to understand
the world, whether one speak or write; but that which savours of study is
sometimes ill taken. I cannot tell if we should write as we speak, and speak as
we write: many have assured me we should, but I think the ordinary practice is
otherways. It had been more probable, answered the Chevalier, if they had said,
that we must write; as we would speak, and speak as we would write; for seldom
do we either the one or other as we would: that Question, which is not to be
slighted by persons of Parts, may very easily be cleared.

Men write of things which they never deliver in plain discourse, and which are
only composed to be read, as a History or the like: When one sets about that,
or would therein succeed, he must not write as if he were telling a tale in
company: History is more noble and grave; Conversation more free and negligent.
And as there are some things that must only be read, there are some likewise
only made for hearing, as Harangues. If one would judge of the true worth of
these, he must consider what intent they are good for when they are spoken,
since that is their scope. And because Letters are not at all to be spoken;
(for though we read them aloud, that is not called speaking) we should not
write them altogether as we speak. For proof of this, should we meet a person
to whom we had been a writing, though the Letter had been excellent, yet we
should not speak to him the same things that we had written, or at least not in
the same strain. It is nevertheless good when we write, to imagine in some sort
that we are speaking, that we may write nothing but what is natural, and which
we might use in Conversation: And in the same manner when we speak, to persuade
our selves that we write, that nothing may come from us but what is noble, and
which has somewhat of exactitude.

Why is it said, replied the Marshall, that some speak well, but know not how
to write? It is often believed, answered the Chevalier, that some persons do
really speak well, when they do it only in appearance; and that is because men
are dazzled by their Meene, or charmed with the love of their Voice. When one
excels in speaking, he may do the same likewise in writing: though this indeed
requires a little more pains: And I think, that one cannot be able to write
well, and not to speak well. But it happens that those who only apply
themselves to writing, have commonly a more faint and almost smothered strain
in speaking; these men covet too much the sound and harmony: That sweetness of
language which they affect, does piece and piece deprive them of the natural
use of it, which consists in giving to every thing that is said, the movings
that are felt in the heart. For men speak not only to express their Thoughts,
but also their Passions; and these are two things very different.

He that is moved at nothing, is as unfit to speak, as he that thinks nothing.
The Heart has a language as well as the Mind, and the expression of the Heart
often produces the greatest effects. When the Heart is not stirred, though one
may have Wit enough, yet he never strikes home; and when one is passionate, if
Wit be wanting, he makes but a noise, and commonly so out of time, that he had
better hold his peace. The Heart then must have Passions, and the Mind not
only conduct and order them, but likewise make the choice: For as there are
some Thoughts that please, and others that do not, so is the same diversity
likewise to be found in the emotions of the heart, some take, and others are
rejected. You know better than I, that to inspire Joy or Heaviness, and so many
other Passions which sway the world in spite of reason, it is not enough to
know them by experience, we must be touched with them at the instant, at least
as we are with things that we see represented on the Stage.

Whether we would speak, or write well, we must have a great many regards; and
few have that way succeeded. The hardest of all, in my judgment, is to
understand aright what will please, and to have a genius to use it. I say, what
will please, because it is not so easy a matter to be assured of it. For as to
what is pleasing, every one has his Taste; and if you observe it, that which
ordinarily pleases is not so much the fruit of perfection, as of a certain
Temperament, which agrees with our natural Sentiments. It is a kind of
proportion which charms, when we perceive not whence the influence comes; but I
think the true Graces, which affect most, and are always lively, can hardly be
without delicacy, and that great things, as Pomp, and Magnificence, are made
rather for admiration than pleasure. When Beauty it self has so much luster,
it is above our strength, we cannot hear it. Men praise the fair but love the
buxom lasses: The reason is, because men are wearied with long admiration; and
what is only made for that end, disgusts when the wonder is over.

Our chief care must be to think well: the excellence of thinking has so many
advantages above some certain perfections which men hunt after in Art and
Study, that he who thinks best, has always the better of others. I perceive
moreover, that they who have a discerning judgment for things, have it also for
the manner of expressing of them; and that it is the fineness of thought that
produces the quaintness of language. All this depends upon the purchase of
that Spirit, whereof we have so much discoursed; and he that can give it, may
brag that he is an excellent Master.

Matters of Fact and Memory are easily learned; and there are many to be found
who can teach them: But the case is not so with what we call Knowing and
Judging: that is the Masterpiece of the Mind; but especially in what concerns
Dexterity and Invention, Exactitude and Decorum, there are few Masters who do
not give wrong measures which cannot be corrected when one would. And because
the first Emotions of the Heart, and some certain imperceptible impression that
is made on the spirit of a Child, gives him an inclination either to good or
evil, and that for the whole course of his Life; it were to be desired that
nothing were read to the young Prince, but some certain Books that might give
him the Idea, or at least the Sentiment of Perfection, by some passages
delicately touched by a good hand. For sometimes we find things so rightly
hit, that it is impossible to say or think them better: he goes far that is
shaped by such patterns, when by constant custom, and acquainting himself
therewith, all that he says carries the mark and signature of his instructions.

This Language which few can speak, proceeds from an exactitude of Mind, and a
reach of Understanding, that discovers things as in nature they are: Though it
be a natural discretion, yet men continually make some improvement in it, when
they set to it in the right way, and frequent the Conversation of those that
are born with it. But I must still tell you, My Lord Marshall, that they who
lament that they have not followed their Studies in the common Method, have not
thereby lost any thing.

It is no small matter to be able to undeceive our selves of prejudices, and to
know how to give every thing the value it deserves. Now if any man should
discover, or only hint to us, what estimate we ought to make of things, we
should be very much obliged to him. Most part make no account of this, though
it be certain, that without this knowledge men are always fops, or always
erroneous.

I am yet of the opinion, said the Marshall, that in giving the Rules of a
good Life, and instilling the Sentiments necessary to it, a bad Master may do
more mischief. I wonder not at all, that for such as we are, the first that
comes in the way, or offers by chance, is employed; because the consequence is
not great: But for a great Prince, on whom the happiness of the Public must
one day absolutely depend, and according to whose Example, as by the most noble
pattern, so many People are to model themselves, there is nothing that should
be omitted. If in the remotest part of the Indies there were any to be found,
who could discharge the office better than the ablest person at home, I think
he should be sent for; it concerns the breeding of a great King, who is loved
and admired: it concerns the making of him happy, and even all that are to live
under him. For as they are to be obliged to sacrifice their lives for his
glory, it is fair that some part of his good fortune should be scattered
amongst them.

There is no more necessary for all this, said the Chevalier, but to make him a
Gentleman, at least it is the most important. I perceive, said the Marshall,
that that word comprehends almost every thing; but if one should ask me what it
signified, I should find my self very much puzzled to answer. I wonder not,
said the Chevalier; a matter of so great extent has too many various regards
and changes, to be explained in two or three words. They who say that
Generosity consists in living and dying well, change the terms without clearing
the question. Besides, though there were no dying, yet there would be Gentlemen
as much accomplished as now they are. That we may therefore have a distinct
knowledge of it, we may consider it in it self without any respect to what it
is not, and view it in all its aspects.

Tell me, I pray you, what you think of it, replied the Marshall; I should be
very glad to see if you and I entertain the same thoughts about a matter of
that consequence. Since I know, said the Chevalier, that you make it in all
things your guide, and that therefore you must very well know it; I am assured
that if the notion that I have of it be true, it must agree with the thoughts
that you entertain thereof. For perfect Generosity is the same always in all
subjects where it is found, though the difference of time and fortune may make
it differently appear: But under what shape soever it shows it self, it is
always lovely, and that is the principal Character whereby it may be known. For
real charms proceed not from a bare outside, or slight appearance; but from a
great stock of Wit and Worth, that spreads it self upon every thing that we
say, and upon all the Actions of Life.

It seems to me, that it makes a mystery of nothing, and as it avoids
extremities, so it neither covets to be seen, nor to be hid. Its first approach
brings no such luster as to dazzle or surprise: but when we draw near to
consider it, we find that it has so good a grace in managing whatever occurs,
whether good or bad, serious or jocund, that one would say, that all comes
alike to it, and that in every thing it is agreeable: And when it meets with
such cross and disadvantageous parts, which the Graces themselves could not
pleasantly act, it has so much skill as to let them alone.

I find it not at all rigorous, but apt to pardon and excuse; and so far from
making advantage of the misfortune and misery of another, that it is always
ready to aid and succor him: It raises and makes happy all that depend upon
it, as far as fortune will give it leave; and when it is able to do nothing, it
never at least grieves or discourages any; and in this it is cautious, even to
the smallest punctilio's. If it intend to droll, its mirth has no other
design, but to divert the persons themselves that it plays upon: It is never
so much in conceit with it self, but that it is sensible that something may be
done beyond what it performs. It desires no false advantages, but on the
contrary, if occasion do not invite, it leaves us to guess at the thing wherein
it excels.

It is never dazzled by Interest: and if a Gentleman happen to be accused,
though even his Life be in danger, yet he uses not all sorts of reasons to
justify himself; but the little he says makes even his Accusers sorry to have
wronged him. Represent to your self Socrates, or Scipio, or any other of that
flight. We may also observe that such men are above Fortune, or at least that
they are seldom giddie in prosperity; and what calamity so ever may befall
them, they never brag that their Patience and Virtue does not abandon them,
even when we see that they have enough and to spare. I think Generosity give
always good Judgment, though it be very loath to decide; that it prefers choice
to abundance, neatness to rich attire, and things which are little in view, to
those which discover themselves at first fight. Do you not likewise observe,
that it esteems Merit more than Fortune, that it is not subject to prejudices;
that what choaks men of stinted Souls, never surprises it; and that the
opinions of the world hinder it not from understanding the true value of things.

Nor do I think it tied to times or places, but that he who can do so much as
to be a Gentleman in his Cottage, would have been so in all the Courts of the
world. Yet there is a great deal required to make a Gentleman; and though one
may pass for such at the Court of a great Prince, we must not therefore believe
that he is so accomplished as to be every where, and with all sorts of people
so esteemed.

He that would enlarge on this subject, might make a great many observations:
but to conclude, Generosity is observed to leave a dear and pleasing memory
with those who have known it, and to work so upon men, as to make them never
repent that they have obliged it.

After all, there was a Lady of so perfect a Beauty, and of so taking a Wit,
that the most beautiful themselves could not but love her, who asked me what
was meant by a [Gentleman] and a [Gentlewoman]; for the one resembles the
other: And when I had told her all that I thought of it, and that she had spoke
of it to very good purpose, she did indeed confess, that all that was said was
necessary to the constituting of the thing she inquired of; but that there was
still in it somewhat inexplicable, which is better known by seeing the
practice, than hearing a discourse thereof. What she imagined consists in
somewhat noble, which elevates and sets off good qualities, and which issues
only from the Heart and Mind; whereof all the rest is nothing but the equipage
and train.

That Lady, said the Marshall, was extremely nice; for I think you have said
enough as to what concerns a Gentleman, and without exception I approve of all
that you have observed in it, unless it be perhaps, that you say, that to
please is an infallible mark of Generosity: It seems to me that men succeed in
that very often by bad ways, as well as good, and even with greater luster. To
this may be answered, said the Chevalier in two words, that there are some who
understand true worth, and that to please such is a good sign; but that again
there are many more of less discretion, and that to be agreeable to those is no
great matter of reputation.

However, replied the Marshall, if we take the true test of Generosity,
whether by considering it in it self, or in those things which it does and
says, it appears to be paramount and above all, and there is nothing to be seen
so worthy of a great Prince. It is true, said the Chevalier, it is lovely, and
begets respect, though it be reduced to silence, and have nothing to do. But
you have touched the two things that give it luster [Speaking and Doing:] And
that was the thing, as Homer says, that the learned Chiron taught the young
Achilles.

That Master, said the Marshall, must needs have had the right stroke: He bred
a Scholar who has been much talked of in the world; and if we see in him so
little of so high and extraordinary worth, it may well have been the fault of
his Governors. As he made an end of these words, he espied some Players enter,
who came to divert him; and that put an end to the Conversation.

The End of the Fifth Conversation.
The Sixth Conversation.
THE Chevalier came to wait on the Marshall, who had spent the Afternoon at
Play. He entered just as their Play ended, and as the Players retired. The
Marshall who was going abroad, was glad to see him at the very nick of time
when he might take him along with him. And I ask not, said he to him, if you be
a man for a walk; for I know you are pleased to behold the variety and
difference of Colors which appear in the Sky at Sunsetting, and you love
well to breathe the fresh Air of the Evening; but my doubt is only which way we
shall go: the Wood wherein we were the other Evening would please me well; but
we must pass through the Town to go thither, and the way is bad, and I know not
if we shall have time enough. I think, said the Chevalier, it were better to go
down along the Waterside. And this opinion was followed. They went that way as
far as the end of the Meadow, where stopping, because the Coach could get no
farther, they came out, that they might fetch a walk upon the Banks of the
River.

The Marshall loves not to keep long silence; but it is lucky for him, and for
those that converse with him, that there is always pleasure to hear him speak;
and because play had so taken him up, that he had said nothing almost all day,
he fell immediately a discoursing of that, which most touched his heart. After
some discourse on that subject; We must not look upon Kings, said he, with the
same eyes as upon private persons, most of whom have no other design but to
live at their ease; though a Man of Worth and Parts makes it always more his
business so to demean himself, as that he may gain Love and Esteem.

I know what Vainglory is: A Gentleman minds it not, and the wiser despise it;
yet I think that the more of Heart and Spirit one have, the more he esteems
true Honor: and if there be any one who cannot reach that, though he may have
otherways all that heart can desire, his condition notwithstanding is much to
be lamented; at least if he be a man of a generous Soul: For mind it, of all
the affronts that men can receive, those that strike at the Honor are least
pardoned; and when one finds himself touched on that side, there is nothing so
dear to him as its vindication. So to say the truth, it is not commodiousness
of living that makes men so much aspire to great Employments and high Charges;
for ones Life is thereby rendered more painful and unquiet; but it is the hope
that one has to make himself thereby appear deserving.

This notwithstanding in a private person cannot be but of small extent and
short continuance; but Kings are seen of all the world, and Posterity, which
never flatters any, must judge of their merit: Glory is the most lovely part of
their merit: Glory is the most lovely part of their fortune, and their chief
concern. To that have all Heroes and Great Men devoted themselves; and one had
need be able, faithful, and zealous for them, who is to advise and give them
right counsels in that point; and especially he must know wherein true Glory
consists, and by what means it is to be acquired.

It is reported that Parmenio, that great Captain, but who had no other end but
Victory, advised his Master to surprise his Enemies by Stratagem, by reason of
their vast number, and to set upon them under covert of Night: But that Prince,
whose aim was not so much to win a Battle, as to make his Valor admired, would
not fight but by day, being resolved to loose all, both Life and Fortune,
rather than to put his Victory in danger of a blush. The same Parmenio advised
him likewise to divide Asia with the Persians, and to accept of great Treasures
that were offered him for an Accommodation. This Counsel was no better received
than the other; his heart was too imperious to admit of a Rival, and too high
to value Gold and Riches. His Projects tended only to glory, and if he has not
always known the most pure and solid, it is because he was but young, and on
the top of his Fortune; which made him also undertake so many things, that he
could not well see all that he did, and easily transported with Passion.

The least faults that great Princes are guilty of, do sometimes endanger their
Reputation; and if they would believe me, I would put them in mind, often to
consider with themselves in what manner the greatest Kings would behave
themselves, if they were to play their parts.

It is no bad carriage toward a Prince, to advise and counsel him to what is
most Generous, and even most Heroical. We see commonly that he that does so is
most welcome to him; and when we look narrowly into the concerns of life, we
find that in all respects it is at last the best. It seems that Heaven and
Destiny take a particular care of those great Souls that wholly resign
themselves. The bravest commonly prevail, and high Resolution has saved more,
than it has lost. The more that that King, that I was speaking of pursued
Death, the more it fled from him; and if he was wounded, as it is impossible
but he that continually throws himself into danger must sometimes be, yet it
was without the loss either of Life or Victory.

Yet it is not to be wished that the Prince should be so venturous, and that he
knew no other way but this to advance to glory: Though the risque of so
precious a Life should not keep us in continual alarm, yet it seems below the
grandeur of a great Prince to expose himself on every Rencounter. And if you
consider it well, that is not the thing that speaks most the greatness of Soul,
and the contempt of Death. I think it much more gallant to meet it with a
steady and assured pace like Socrates, than to run headlong against it like
Alexander. For this is calmly and without effort to do a most difficult act,
which testifies a more settled and undaunted Resolution.

There are some Sovereigns who are always to be looked upon as grave and sage
Politicians, and that in my mind is not the loveliest garb wherein they might
appear: There is some other thing more noble, that would much better set them
off. And can you imagineany thing more gallant for a young Prince, than Amors
and Arms? That is indeed the subject of pretty Romances, answered the
Chevalier; and when a Reign slips away without Loves or Wars, History will not
have much to say of it. But all Princes are not born to play the parts one of
another; and a Sovereign does always much, when he governs well his States, and
renders his Subjects happy.

I have known Princes, replied the Marshall, who would have been very gallant
men, if in the beginning men had minded their business with them, and if they
had been put in the right way. This primary Education is to them of much
greater importance than to private men; For so soon as they are out from under
the conduct of a Governor, all that comes from them is approved of, at least
in appearance: And no body appears before them, but to please them; because
that although men may love them well, yet they easily incline to love their
Friendship better. Besides, it would be a very imprudent thing, for one to run
the hazard of his Princes displeasure, by admonishing of him as a private man
would his Friends, unless he had given some evidence that he desired it.

In the mean while those that are about them, and are not enslaved to interest,
may find ways secure enough to inform them pleasingly of all that may
contribute to their Glory and Happiness. It is easy, said the Chevalier, to
give good counsel as to what concerns Glory: men know what it is, and how it is
to be acquired; in that all men of good judgment agree: but it is not so as to
Happiness, which depends more on the temper and constitution, than on the
things which we believe do produce it. And to tell truth, one must perfectly
well know a Prince, to be able to assure him of what would render him happy. We
our selves are very often at a loss to know what is proper to give us content.

You have reason, replied the Marshall; but when one has all things as it
were that heart can wish, and that there is no more to be done, but to make a
right choice; methinks with the least assistance it is no hard matter to be
happy: and to say the truth, it is a fair way to it for one to perceive himself
in the first rank amongst the Masters of the world; Fortune can bestow nothing
greater. Consider what pleasure there is in Beneficience: to me there seems
none more pure, hor noble; and this pleasure seems only designed for great
Princes; the more favors they bestow, the more they are in a condition of
bestowing, seeing their Presents that are attended with choice and esteem
support their Grandeur, and render them more powerful. It is not Wealth and
Riches which are chiefly to be expected from Kings, for they may be lavished
away by Prodigality; but Charges and Employments, these are the occasions where
men may give a proof of themselves: And if men of worth be employed in Charges
that are proper for them, they both make themselves conspicuous, and render
their Prince good service.

That which ordinarily they want, is what we plentifully enjoy, that is, the
pleasures which you know, of entertaining our selves freely with those whom we
love, and the liberty of reasoning about some certain advantages wherein
Fortune and Grandeur have no share. The value of Merit, which so much affects
ingenuous hearts, becomes to them insensible at long run, because men in
differently praise whatever they do, without measure or decorum. It is a
gallant and generous Complaisance that must render the life agreeable. And I
cannot conceive how those Princes of the East, who live only amongst Slaves,
can be happy: They have all, and enjoy nothing; they have the fairest Women in
the world, but they are Captives always in prison, without Wit or Love; they
have nothing of that which charms most, nothing free, brisk nor sparkling.

That Amorous Commerce, and that Variety of gallant Adventures, which make men
delight in the Courts of other Princes, and there study to approve themselves
Gentlemen, are altogether unknown to them. All that is amongst them, are but
wild and savage Adventures which no body can love; and I am thinking of what
you just now said, there happens always in these Countries accidents of Love
and War, but they are such, that I could defy Ariosto, Tasso, and even Sapho
himself to turn into a pleasing Romance. If it be happy to live in that manner,
that felicity seems to me very barbarous, and I cannot think that a man of
Sense could envy it. The greatest Pleasures ill managed, and without some
mixture of Wit, or some sentiment of Honor, last but a short while; and this
ought very well to comfort us, if we have not all we desire.

I observe also, that these Princes do more debase than raise themselves, by
affecting a Grandeur which no body disputes them. There is a kind of Civility
accompanied with Majesty, that makes men with pleasure acknowledge some Princes
to be their Masters, which is far more lovely: The more they condescend and
draw near, the more the others stand off, but especially if they be Gentlemen,
who never make the wrong use of any thing.

I think that the greatest men have been always very free and familiar with
their Friends. Caesar at least was so, said the Chevalier, and even with his
Soldiers to that pass, that he took pleasure to repeat their good Words and
Jests; that familiarity, which to speak truth was not unaccompanied, charmed
them: So that when they were to fight for his glory, they met with nothing that
appeared difficult, and valued neither Danger nor Death. If at any time any of
them had been by chance taken Prisoners, and had Life offered them, they
disdainfully refused it, saying, That it belonged to Soldiers of Caesar to
give quarter.

I wonder not then, said the Marshall, that such a Man followed by such
Soldiers, though weaker in number, obtained constantly the Victory: And what I
was saying, that Heaven takes great Souls into its protection, is more apparent
in this Hero, who in so many Battles where he exposed himself in all places,
he never received the least Wound.

Men love, said the Chevalier, Princes of great Design and high Undertakings;
and though Fortune fickle and unconstant (as we know by experience) forsake
their party, yet glory never deserts them. Of this number was Caesar; he had
nothing but what was Noble, and bore a character of Grandeur. He was so brave,
and at the same time so kind, that he would not have spared to have hazarded
his person to succor the meanest of his Soldiers. All that followed his
fortune were dear to him, and he shared with them the glory as well as the
danger; and the gaining of their Love and Esteem was undoubtedly his surest way
to win fifty Battles, without so much as the loss of one.

Some few days before that memorable Fight, where the Germans and those other
Northern People were routed, he had sent Ambassadors to their Prince
Ariovistus, who contrary to the Law of Nations detained them prisoners and put
them in chains. Caesar told them, That he was not more glad of the Victory,
than he was to have them in his arms, and to free them from their irons. But
here is a passage that gives a great mark of his Temper, and of the great
Esteem he was held in.

Curio, one of his Generals, was making war in another corner of the world; he
was a young man of much Courage and little Experience, who had to do with old
Africans accomplished in the trade. This young man being drawn into an Ambush,
and seeing that he could make his own escape, but that he wanted Prudence, or
good Fortune, to save the Troops that Caesar had entrusted him with, chose
rather to die than appear before him: Every word that Caesar utters concerning
his Friend, seems attended with Sighs and Tears. Nor was it either any fear of
hard usage, or of the least harsh check, that made Curio take so desperate a
course; it was a certain sentiment that makes us fear the sight of our Friends,
when they are of so high a merit, and that we know they have no reason to
approve our actions.

Men raise or debase Worth, according as Affection or Hatred sways them, said
the Marshall, and Caesar well understood the way of purchasing Love. I
remember of the banks of Lignon -- where I took so much delight when I was
young, and the answer of the Oracle;

Love, if you would be loved. That is a very sure way, at least if one do it
with good grace. For it is not enough for us obsequiously to court the favor
of People, the chief point is to manage our purpose so dexterously, that the
person whom we love may take it well. The manner of doing, which ought not to
be so considerable, works more than all the rest; and I perceive that thereby
the cunningest are caught as well as the most simple. But I have quite
forgotten where I was.

You need not much trouble your self for that, said the Chevalier; for you
never leave a subject, without leaving men satisfied with what you have said,
besides, a little negligence is very commodious, and there is no living with
those who would be always so regular and exact. But I think you were speaking
of Caesar, and I am considering that the most eloquent man of that time told
him one day, That he had done more than vanquish his Enemies, he had overcome
Victory it self; and that he had placed himself above it, by pardoning those
who would have ruined him. That praise which he so justly deserved, gives me a
great notion of him; but in one thing I am vexed with him, because he called us
Barbarians. It is not I alone that takes that reproach impatiently; it has so
much offended one of our Romance makers, that he has not spared to write, that
Caesar was no great Cavalier. Ha, ha, in faith I am glad at that, said the
Marshall, and he very well deserved it: for what reason could he have so to
treat our Ancestors?

In the mean while, replied the Chevalier, that aspersion which has made you
laugh, is not so idle but that it may be maintained; and not to stand to
examine what it is to be a Cavalier, in the way that we understand it, one is
more a Cavalier at a Princes Court, than in a Commonwealth. I am likewise of
opinion, that the customs and practices of great Towns are not noble; you know
that great men cannot endure them. There is somewhat in the Country natural and
wild, which is still noble, though far different from the nobility of Courts;
because there we see somewhat great and worthy, in its simple natural attire,
without art and dress. Imagine to your self those dark and shady Forests of
Africa, peopled with an infinite number of Lions and other wild beasts, all
that appears to me more noble than the Grand Seignior's Gardens.

What you say, said the Marshall interrupting him, makes me think that it is
not enough when we discourse, or travel, to know whither we would go, nor to
take the right way; but we must endeavor to become pleasing and agreeable in
it.

To return to Caesar: men take him to have been the greatest Man of the world;
and I think to consider him every way, and in all his splendor, they have
reason, as well for the wonders of his Life and Fortune, as the greatness of
his Spirit and Virtue. Is it not he who so long ago has left us the example
and invention of whatever is rare and exquisite in War? But may not we yet a
little better know what kind of man he was? For people speak variously of him.

It is very hard, replied the Chevalier, to give a right judgment of those
whom we have not seen, and who have lived in an age so far from us. But if
there be any man who at so great a distance may be sifted and examined, it is
certainly Caesar. He has done so many things, and his life though various is
so even, that we see always a resemblance in his actions, and may even easily
discover the cause of them. Politicians of his time also observed him, and
freely and openly discanted on his actions. One of the sharpest wits of that
Age, but who was perhaps too much wedded to the Laws of the City and of his
Country, said, That there was never man who understood Justice better, nor any
more unjust than Caesar. This shows on the one hand that he had a great and
discerning judgment, as it is true on the other, that he had no great esteem
for some common and ordinary Virtues.

The Writings that he has left behind him, give a clear proof of his parts,
and manner of proceeding, at least if they be his own; for there is a man of
much reading, that would persuade me that he was not the Author of them. Who
was then? said the Marshall. Acertain unknown person, answered the Chevalier,
yet I believe that it would have been more easy for that same unknown person
to have conquered and made himself Master, than to have written in that strain.
You know that in the matter of Conquests conjunctures can do much: but it must
have been only Caesar who could express himself in that manner; and therein
Chance can have no hand. His Merit and Grandeur is perceived in the least
things he says, not in speaking pompously, for on the contrary his Style is
simple and without ornaments; but in somewhat pure and noble, which flows from
good education and a lofty genius.

These Masters of the world, who are in a manner above the reach of Fortune,
look but indifferently on most part of things which we admire; and because they
are but a little affected with them, do but carlesly discourse of them. In one
place where he gives account that two or three of his Legions were for some
time put into disorder, fighting against Pompey; It is believed, said he, that
Caesar had been utterly undone, if Pompey had known how to win. That Victory
would have decided the Roman Empire: And yet you see how few and very simple
words he imploys on so great an occasion.

Caesar was born with two violent Passions, Ambition and Love, which hurried
him away like two impetuous Torrents: the infinite number of designs which he
hatched from his Infancy to the end of his Life (for he had a very restless
spirit) tended only that way. Not but that he had a great many other Sentiments
(that you understand) which makes men's company desirable and pleasing; since
that to be a Gentleman, as we see Caesar was, one must have a share of all that
can render the Life happy. But these two Passions chiefly swayed him; he was
not very sensibly affected with any thing, but in as much as it might conduce
for the one or other: And though he has been so great in War, yet he loved it
not so much for it self, as for the advantage that he might have thereby to
gain supremacy, and place himself over all.

He was liberal and grateful, fierce, but not revengeful: And that great
Injustice wherewith he was reproached, as the stain of so brave a Life, may be
told in two words; that is, that he who of all the Romans was most proper for
Government, desired by himself alone to manage well, what so many others
discharged ill.

He was moreover tall, of a sweet and well-proportioned stature, and good mien;
dexterous at all the Exercises of Arms, and a good Horseman. He had a white and
thin Skin, a black quick and sparkling Eye: his Voice was strong and piercing;
and had great grace in his Speech: His Constitution was somewhat delicate, as
of most who have such a spirit. Yet they say he got health by neglecting it,
and by much exercise became indefatigable.

In all places he had Amors, at Rome, in Spain, in Greece, and amongst the
Gauls, but in Egypt he was in a manner enchanted; for what did he not for the
Princess of that Country? And further in in Africa, was not he likewise in
love with a Moorish Queen? He addressed himself always to Ladies of the
highest Quality; whether it be that the air of Grandeur adds some grace to
natural Beauty, or that a sentiment of Ambition joined with Love made him look
on Ladies as on Conquests. He coveted it may be a little too much to be spoken
of, and I pretend not to represent him to you as a man without fault; For who
is he that can brag to be free from failings? But I speak of him as of an
admirable Conqueror, and a vast Soul.

In the greatest heat and danger of War, he was alone the Joy and Hopes of his
Army: All believed him so skilful and resolute, that under his Conduct they
despaired of nothing: And a certain Cheerfulness, that sparkled in his Eyes and
Countenance, did comfort them on all occasions. If any were anxious concerning
the events of undertakings, it was only for his sake; and few thought of
surviving him.

He loved fine Clothes, and his Ornaments made him always conspicuous, but
chiefly in the day of Battle. He would have his Soldiers also neat in their
Apparel; and in my judgment it is a great mark that such men have sentiments of
Honor, when they love to be in good equipage, and to take great care of their
Arms. He was not much concerned that they should be tall, and of an
advantageous stature. That indeed, said the Marshall, depends on fancy: we see
but little appearance that such make themselves very remarkable. That great man
was mistaken in nothing; and I wonder, how he could be at the same time a
Prodigy both of Wit and Valor.

I should not be surprised at the extreme Courage of a brutish fellow, who
knows neither Pleasure nor Pain, nor what it is to be Alive or Dead: But for a
man of so sensible and delicate a Temper, and of so subtle and elevated an
Understanding, it seems to me very rare. Indeed that is much, said the
Chevalier; yet we have nothing to wonder at, but the greatness of his Mind:
For though one may find himself very sensible of pain, and that he cannot
accustom himself to die, yet when he has brought his Heart to a steddie pitch
of assurance, which is not hard to be done, he becomes as brave as he would
desire to be; he spares himself if he judge it convenient, and abandons himself
after the same manner. An ordinary Impulse is enough to make one indifferently
resolve upon the one or the other; and Caesar had always Glory before his eyes,
which made him still pursue the most Heroical part. I did not examine him that
way, said the Marshall, and I think you are in the right.

They continued till night upon the waterside, sometimes sitting, sometimes
walking, and always discoursing of a great many matters: but Historians never
tell all.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 2. line 3. and elsewhere for complasant, read complaisant. p. 8. l. 3. r.
arms. p. 14. l. ult. r. too. p. 16. and in several other places for show, r.
show. p. 21. l. 13 leave out (it) p 24. l. 18. r. ungenuinly. p. 62. l. 8. r.
fatigue. p. 74. l. ult. for watch, r. match. p. 101. l. 9. for love. r. tone.
p. 103. l. 4. r. lovely.


