The Cloud Opened; OR, THE English Hero.

By a Loyal and Impartial Pen.

Quam facile fit caecus dux vitae, and obscura lux temporum Historia? Si non
amentiae, rarus est qui non ineptiae litavit. Unicus sit qui Deo and veritati
obtulit. London, Printed A. D. 1670.

The Cloud Opened; OR, THE English Heroes.
ONogylos is an Herb worthy of Asses, a Lactuce like their Lips, rough and
prickly; yet (if Herbalists are to be credited) a Counterpoyson. Adulation,
though smooth as oil, is no Alexipharmick. The tame Beast, a Flatterer, is more
spotted, nor less cruel than the Leopard or a Tiger. And with the gayety of a
Serpent, the rich ma^esing of an Adders skin has no unequal Poison.

In the late Tyranny, (when Reason seemed the most extravagant Freak, and
Religion and Loyalty had the repute of such Grand Malignants, as a Plague might
be supposed to harbor less of Contagion) a Mercenary Trifler would have the
Usurper Oliver, an Olive: sure after an happy Revolution, no one can be master
of more sense than the Clenching Panegyrist, or Voluminous Nothing wanted; as
much a Stranger to Wit, as to our Nation; his Appetite only sharpened
Invention, and the hungry Gut vented Oracles. Where the Scripture on the Rack,
was only taught to patronize Impiety, by making bloody and blasphemous
Confessions; it can be no wonder if Jotham's Parable was forgot by an Exotic
Whiffler, where the Olive could yield no Fatness to usurp, and of a Bramble
only could come the Fire to destroy the Cedars of a Lebanon; such an unhappy
Land, as, made a Forest, was inhabited by wild Beasts.

In an Age of Lying Wonders, where a more than ordinary Antichrist brought Fire
down from Heaven, it could be none of the least of the Miracles, that a Fisher
could by Pagan Worship translate the Brazen Image of a Tyrant into Gold, and
make it equal an hundred Jacobusses or more pure Carolines in value.

A doubly blind Bard first in his own, and (as some fancy) since by Gods
Judgment, would have him equaled by a Kingfisher. But to have had such a King
for his Subject, in whose cause Christianity might seem engaged, sure could not
need the temptation of a Bribe, to him who had not renoune'd the Christian
Profession, though pedantically florid, and less significant Pens, served but
as Foils to his Portraiture and Sufferings: which were only to be taken from
his own Writings.

Virtue, which is content with her own reward, and Loyalty, which expects no
recompense below Heaven, know not how to descend to that truckling and servile
Assentation, which has no better. Hieroglyphick, than the most impure of
Creatures, the sometimes fawning, and at others, snarling and biting Cur.

The Deceased General may merit some grateful Epicediums, above such dismal
Ditties as attend upon Executions, which seem more merciless than the
Extremities of the Law; while the Executioner in meter is more barbarous than
the Hangman. The Muses have little to do with Mars; yet they must not permit a
praiseworthy person to die, if they have any Faith for their Archpriest the
Prince of Lyricks. It is a Tribute due to Allegiance, to commend him whom a
King would honor. Commands (strong as mustard) may seem unnecessary to make
the Nations eyes water into Elegies for his loss, who was the supposed Restorer
of their sight; the blessed Instrument of returning a King, who may be truly
called The Light of our Eyes. Who would not melt by a Compassion (if obdurate
for lesser losses) for the Muses Helicon, what the Poets might call Showers of
Tears, might seem expedient when it is grown so muddy, as it cannot furnish out
so much clear wit as can sprinkle an Hearse. Foolish Versifiers, like to
Schismatical Pulpiteers, by rackt Hyperbolees and tenter'd Allegories, make the
most sober Truths discredited; Folly dispraises those she would commend, and
diminishes Glory, by seeking to multiply it.

Who would not believe that a Fable, which must have all the Heathen Gods
brought into the Scene for the delivery? He who arises early, and praises his
friend aloud, it shall be reputed to him for a curse; if the wisest of men is
to be believed. That a too early and inconsiderate commendation can irritate
Envy and Contradiction, which might have slept, if not awaked by rash and
untimely bauling, may be easily now demonstrated from the Discourses of Folly.

Whether Design or Chance renders more famous, is uncertain. History can
furnish us with a Coward, who by the loss of his head, grew victorious; by a
virtue inherent in the Spurs of Honor, the more generous Beast which is
entitled to want of brains, transporting to noble Achievements. A defect in
the noddle has rendered not a few strangely supereminent, whose excelling
Disposition, like that of an enraged Horse, has qualified for the rushing into
a Battle. The Psalmist will have an Horse a vain thing to save a man: to raise
one to a fair Mount of Honor, some can instance H. B. who for a Knighthood and
Lordship would cry God-a-mercy to his Beast.

Thomas Anello is not the only Example of a brutish valor attaining to a
mushrom grandeur: Nor was the puny Thief Du Val, the first Robber who lay in
state, by pompous folly to be made more inglorious.

The Aerian stalking Nag (on whom the subtle Fowlers of Phanaticism set their
aim to shoot at Game Royal) had his Image ordered to be made by the grand
Boglers at Ceremonies, and Decryers of Superstition; which intended for an
Honor, made him to suffer in effigy for a Traitor; while a freak-inspir'd
Sectary cut off an head equally stupid, with that which he had devoted to the
vain Idol of a Foolish Reformation.

The Protector of Flies, carried in state like to a Pagan Deity, might seem
worshipped by an Heathenish Idolatry; while our Gentiles Schisms fly-blows
having gained wings by the warmth of his bounty, with buzzing acclamations
attended on their Beelzebub.

Zisca would have a Drum made of his skin; and our Glorious Edward would have
his victorious Corpse carried for a terror to his Enemies: but nothing can be
more vain than to take a pleasure in the hovering of those dire vapors above
ground, who might seem to have cleft it for contagion.

Vainly the dead are embalmed with spices, whose lives can contribute no odors
in good works to persume their memories.

The Survivors worship of the dead was the wild Superstition of Heathen. A
commemoration of Saints and Benefactors deceased, has bin neither the
irteligious nor impolitick custom of sober Christians. The honor given to good
men is a tribute rendered to God, who will be honored in his Saints; the
praises of the bad are so many acknowledgments to Satan, who is thus worshipped
in his Images.

The mysterious Riddle of Loyal Grandeur, whom some will have a Parent to his
Mother, and his Fathers Father, a Prince the Father of his Country, the
supererogating Monk, G. D. of Albemarl, may worthily challenge that surviving
honor, by which he seems triumphant over Fate: if not a principal, an adjuvant,
or such a Cause without which our felicity could not be effected; if to vast
Piles of living Honors were superadded mountains of wealth, and after death he
is placed among Kings, who seemed the Restorer of Kingdoms, no wise or good man
can repine, but rather congratulate the felicity of that Age, in which a
Servant esteemed Faithful, found a Master truly Royal. Honor was not made
dishonorable in our Generals superadditional Titles: the achievements of his
Ancestors, if not superior to most, inferior to few Coats of Arms born by our
English Nobility; what might give a supereminence, and Fools will be always the
most apt to blazon, the only blot in the Escutcheon. Honor must be fair
written, even the Fountain of it, a Prince, cannot wash away the blemishes of
his own making.

The Generous Hero who disdained to bring in a King, fettered like a Royal
Slave, or such a Beast as must not be allowd the use of Reason whose Crowning
is in Relation to the making of him a Sacrifice, by not attending to that rigid
zeal, which (inseparable from envy of any greatness which might exceed her own)
would have Kings bound in chains, and their Nobles in fetters of iron; the
intolerable Gives of a Scottish League, by making Princes Parties, can
dethrone, not only level with a Peasant, but equal to a Brute: if giddy Fame
was only constant to this Report, none could think Honor or Riches misplaced
with our General, except such who can believe cruelties exceeding that of the
Goths, Huns and Vandals, conferred on the Preserver of his Country, a recompense
worthy of a Bellizarius. The devouring of a Serpent would be thus thought to
produce a Dragon. Our George might not have seemed to conquer a Monster, but to
have introduced one, in Ingratitude equalling that most monstrous piece of
Barbarism, the mischief brooding Part, which venting nothing but noise and
stench, in the Opinion of Buffoons could be esteemed more honorable than the
Head.

He who restored the Fountain of Honor untainted, none can justly envy a
liberal benefit of the Streams; or who would deny some larger clusters of
Grapes to him, by whose beneficence they seem to have the uninterrupted
enjoyments of their Vines?

Necessity renders the proudest Titles contemptible; when an Emperor became a
Soldier to our Eighth Henry, it might seem a timely magnificence which made a
Princes bounties shine in a Tent, made with cloth of gold: The Prince who
undervalues himself or Benefactors by becoming cheap, his Kingdoms and Armies
rarely want Purchasers.

The Drums must beat, Trumpets sound, and Images of Gold be reared to make the
People fall down and worship: Yet where worldly pelf are the only Motives, wise
men can rather suffer the fiery furnace of affliction, than pay a Devotion to
such foolish Idols.

Speeds Chronicle has a Remarque, That he who thought himself a match for
Princes, the Low Country Prince, or truer King of Gypsies, the Arch-canter and
chief Idol of the Aerians, who patronized holy Hypocrites as sure friends to
Religion, as he was to the most bosom friend, whose neck they could well
contented break, to make way for the espousing of a Whimzy, the great E. of
Leicester, the so much celebrated Favorite living, unmasked by death, could
want a commendation.

Death only makes true Confessions. A little loss of air, (or as much breath as
can furnish out a bubble vanished) leaves the most wind-impostum'd bladder
shrivel'd. What equals all men, lends an impartial view, and unlearns the
mannerly distinctions betwixt a Prince and Peasant. Homer; though the Father of
fictions, may gain a sober belief, while he will have Hare to insult over dead
Lions: but Envy cannot blast just actions, which (as a minor Poet) in the dust
can smell sweet and blossom.

Who undervalued life in his Countries Causes, Lillies and Roses may be said to
spring from the Tomb of a no less renowned Hero, who dared to do as much in the
Sea, as Curtius in the Land, for his Country.

Some will have the first Degree of Revived Loyalty commenced at the Three
Tuns; and can dare publicly to aver, That there is a Knight who being inspired
by the same spirit of Loyal Sack, will swear himself the Author of our so Happy
Restoration, and that Loyalty or Ruin were the only choice left to the General.

The Serpent which gave us the Sting, must afford us the Cure: Some will not be
persuaded that the Juncto which made him a Cipher in Commission, contributed no
vote to their own Ruin, by putting a Period to his, gave a date to their own
supereminent Power; and thus the cunning were caught in their own snare: Yet he
who infatuates the Council of the worldly wise, has the lest returns of Honor
or Praise, where most forgetting God can suppose a Sacrifice due to every
foolish Net.

The Lord F. (anagram'd by Hei! fax fato Mars) if not the greatest, no slender
persuasion will allow, none of the meanest Instruments by rising on the back of
Lambert, and thus to have nobly expiated that brutish Folly, (not to give it a
worse name) which suffered us to be deprived of the best of Princes.

I have bin no infrequent (though for the most part an incredulous) Auditor of
a Baronet who would have the General at his enlargement from the Tower, crave a
benediction from Bishop Wren, and assurd' him, when opportunity was propitious,
he should not be averse to the Royal Service: Neither was this a single
Tradition which he had received from his Loyal Father, but another must be
attendant on it equally irrefragable, a promise to his Loyal Comrades, viz.
never to bear Arms in England against his Prince: This not a few will have most
exactly to be performed; and hence by no action of his Loyalty to be impeached:
What he acted in the first Dutch Engagement, and what was performed in the
Caledonian War, must by a milder gloss be interpreted a Zeal for his Country,
and no disaffection to his King; but the more rigid Censors will not allow him
who wounds in hands and feet no Enemy, though not equally mortal with him who
transpierces the heart.

A superintendent Lord would be a Privado to those proceedings, which might
call the wisest brains into question to imagine: But coming from so
supereminently knowing a Statist, and told in Parliament, he may seem wanting
to all Reason, could be deficient in the belief of our Generals intention for a
Restoration. I have heard a Kinsman and Retainer to his Lordship aver the
sight of the Letter.

Whether O. C. L. etc. have not complemented with vain hopes such as they never
intended should reap any benefit above that of a deluded Imagination, is the
Discourse of no unwary, if none of the wisest Heads.

The Supplement of a Chronicle (which some can think may want a stout Peter
Heylin, who blind, might best guess at dark intrigues) must be incontrollable
to evince the truth of those intents. A Chronicles name passes with some graver
Noddles, for an Authority equalling that which the Vulgar Creed has for a
Ballad, which their Wisdoms conceive as authentic as the Divinest Writ.

There are vast disproportions (if not a Gulf equalling that which separated
the Rich man from an Abraham's bosom) betwixt such who write to give God the
Honor, and those who arrogate Divine Honor to their foolish Imaginations. The
Hero in the Romance must pass strange dangers, encounter Monsters, Magicians,
and Giants in difficulties, be at a precipice for ruin, before Miracles are
called in for his Deliverance.

Caesar who writ Commentaries on his own Actions, though none of the worst,
might not be the truest of Historians. Opinion puts false Spectacles on our
eyes: both self-interest and self-conceit rarely not disease our sights; and
make us resemble Jetericks, who can apprehend no color beside their own.

Some will have it to be numbered among those rarely numerable Infelicities of
Loyalty, to be huff'd by every Braggart, not only out of the Tributes which
should be inseparable from Virtue; but must be ever incapable of Worldly
Compassion, unless lost to that Reason which should difference from Brutes. The
foolish things of this world thus in no Christian sense may seem to confound
the wise; but they who with a grain of Salt, have only a mite of Charity, may
pity, not envy, giddiness advanced to slippery precipices.

Though a Sober Doctor, in the languishing state of the Body Politic, might
not be useless; some will not allow the metamorphos'd Apothecary by the
addition of Honor, lost to one, while he provided sauce with sippets of his
own, to make an harsh parcel of Chronicle be more easily digested. A merry
transformed Chirurgian, who pretends an equal intimacy in transactions about
State Ulcers, (if truth is in wine) might be believed, who would have a
Broomstick with a rag at end of it, to have bin of sufficient efficacy for the
Miracle of a Revolution.

The Phanatick O. (whose name might imply his doctrine fit for lighter grounds)
having bin baffled about a misquoted piece of the Apocalypse, was sarcastically
asked by a Lord, at the Generals Table, whether he was converted out of the
Revelations? to which he boldly replied to the Grandee, equally through all
times giddy, That it was not the Revelation, but the happy Revolution to which
they all owed their Conversions.

That Nature should produce nothing more reserved than our English Hero, will
seem not the least of our Nations Wonders, when some can impute that crime to
him which makes all things more perlucid than glass; and others will have such
not infrequent perturbations impetuously moving in giddy passions, as not to
permit the greatest secrets inconspicuous.

The marrying of a Niece to a Regicides son, might call Loyalty in question,
did we not live in such an Age of Wonders, where nothing can seem strange: some
can cast away, what others can think a foolish pity, on a Lady born of Loyal
Parents, who apprehend not the Mysteries of flesh and blood, or rather those
transcendent ones of the late times.

It is no least piece of Charity (if some may be credited) to believe he never
intended that Restoration, of which he was made an happy Instrument. His own
pristine Loyalty, and that of his untainted Brothers (by consanguinity, not
alliance) might predispose the reimbibing of so long estranged Allegiance: but
many swim with the stream, who dare not oppose an adverse Torrent.

Report will have the E. of L. drolling to have told the D. that he could never
have heartily cursed him in his life except once, and that was when he beat
down the City Gates; to whom he merrily replied, That while he was doing the
work of his Masters, they turned him out of Commission, but he conciev'd
himself to have bin even with them. Ridentem dicere verum, quid vetat? can be
the question of more than a single Horace.

A Person of great and sober Honor, (who rarely could find a Peer, in that
unhappy juncture, either in Estate or loyally engaged Relations) assured with
voice and gesture expressing horror and indignation, that nothing of good could
be expected from this Man, neither by his Agents in Scotland, by homebred or
exotic intelligence, the least glimpse of hopes could arise: but a sudden
Revolution taught a Palinode; he had long expected nothing less from so worthy
a Person. The Shepherd who would be reputed weather-wise, by telling one it
would be fair, and another foul, in all weathers kept his reputation. Our late
times can show no few successful imitators of this trifling Impostor, who to
this foolish craft ow the opinion of their grand wisdoms.

In the so much celebrated March from the North, nigh Dunstable, having an
opportunity of treating some of his Commanders, one of the, a person neither
unsociable, nor of that rigidly morose humor, which is inseparable from
Faction, informed me he could not sufficiently admire at the universal kindness
which they encountered in the March from Scotland. If a King was in the Design,
nothing could be more vain than the peoples imaginations: since neither the
General nor his Followers could think of it without horror; and that I might
relinquish vain and fruitless hopes, thought himself obliged in civility and
conscience to inform of the Oath taken in Scotland, nothing differing from that
which since put out by Phanaticks, I have perused in print, not without a new
impression of horror.

Christianity will induce us to believe, that neither the General nor his Army
were guilty of that Atheistical Policy, which calls God in for a witness to
a^ly. Success instills new thoughts: men have the changes of mind with the
vicissitudes of Fortune. Factions like other Traders enriched by unexpected
returns, disdain all partnership, divide and drive different Interests. How
easily do those speculations which seemed as high as heaven, stoop to the Lure
of every phancy'd profit.

Cromwell though he snatched at a Crown in the Comedy, could not expect to gain
one by the Tragedies acted over three Nations. The E. of Essex who would seem
clear from the suspicion of Treason against Q. E. would not deny that success
might have made a Traitor.

They who feared not man might suppose it in vain to contest with the Deity.
The General and his Army heard in their Expedition the Voice of the People,
like that of God, they found the sinews of war were wanting; and though the
Chains, Gates and Posts of the City were cast down, the spirits of the Citizens
were indejected: who had engaged to restore a Parliament to freedom and honor,
it had bin perjury not to have performed it, though some will have the act a
high violation of Faith, deserted first to relinquish the patched piece of
folly with the Appellative.

The Army introduced no King; but having settled a more rationally supposed
Parliament in freedom, acquiesced in the determinations of their Superiors: and
thus the true Soldiers of King and Parliament finished without their cruel
aid, the War so long protracted by perjury, rapine and blood.

It may seem a cruel piece of Charity to deprive of Christianity, for the
better intitling to Grace and Excellency. Who came at the last hour in the
Gospel, was allotted a reward equalling that of the first comers. Such converts
as are the joy of Angels, should not be the Envy of men.

Some will have the Low Country a Nursery for Soldiers, but the most
unsuccessful Academy for Religion and Loyalty: who exposed their souls and
bodies Mercenaries to in the cause of a Rebellious Commonwealth were vainly
expected good Subjects to a Prince.

Generous persons, are apt to entertain their Title in their beliess, can
suppose our General no ignoble Soldior of Fortune, who fighting long under her
colors, at length attained the giddy Idol for his constant Mistress. He
deserted no Masters, till they deserted him; a Low Country Religion both
obliged him to a Party, and disobliged; when he wanted an exchange for Loyalty,
he exchanged it; and when giddy Patriots of the then espoused Cause, were
returned fairly to take away his Commission, he as honorably relinquished the
deserters of themselves and him.

It is a blasphemy to affirm him a Deity, though we may justly allow him an
Hannibal, a Fabius, an Hercules, a worth equalling, if not superexcelling all
the Ancient Heroes: some foolish Sycophants will entitle to more wisdom, than
God ever entrusted to mere humane Nature; yet while they strive to deifie, make
him the Fool that said in his heart, There is no God. He who can take Oaths,
with an intention to violate them, it must be a strange excess of Charity which
can allow him a God in his Creed.

General Leshly told Potter a Trumpeter, sent to him by the Royal Martyr, That
he would serve his Majesty as faithfully as he had done the Parliament: The
Scot gained an easy belief, and in charity we may believe intended what he
promised; he served them for Money, and for gain (which was his Religion) would
have exposed to sale his Masters. But while a necessitated Prince could not go
the price, a King not to be equaled by Millions, is passed in exchange for Two
hundred thousand pound.

Nothing is more pleasant then the junior story of this Bony Jocky, who ran
away with blithe Jenny, stealing sixteen shillings sterling from an old Mistress
at Edinburgh, to defray charges; yet by temptation of so vast a sum, though
much mowing and many Bearns, she reaped not Matrimony, till her fingers being
as light as her heels, a plundered Portion made up the March which was a muckle
day of joy, as the good Countess told the Right Honorable Lady of Oxford, when
her Husband from a common Soldier had arrived to be a Scotch General, and by
heading a Rebellion, became an Earl, to give a reputation to his future
Villainies. Snakes though warmed in the most Royal bosoms, will requite their
entertainment with a sting. Though Factions may seem to lose their heads, which
are taken off by Honor; yet they are rarely wanting to fresh opportunities for
mischief.

Our generous Champion, when he had espoused Loyalty, and acquired deserved
Honor, by the evil principle of no mercenary spirit, made Conscience a
Prostitute to the lusts of Faction.

Who would wound our Hero in the weakest part, find him there most
impregnable. Honor, Conscience and Gratitude appear in his vindication; and
that cruel necessity which can make batteries on the strongest Resolutions:
none will fancy it brutish sottishness, or that the most daring of men would
be affrighted out of Reason, by an inconsiderate Huffer, the great tie of
Christianity which injoyns satisfaction, and the preserving of a generous
Family, famous through a long series of Ancestors, might be no lesser
inducements to Marriage. If in some things he resembled an Alexander the Great,
in others he exceeded the more victorious Julius Caesar an Husband for all men's
wives; excellent above his famed Ancestor a Fourth Edward, or a Philip, who
surnamed the Good, wanted his Virtue. Our Hero was not captivated by that
which inslaves the proudest Victors; and made him whose labors filled all the
world, ridiculously to truckle to a distaff: in this a more than Hercules, who
by an invincible fortitude, endured a Confinement which might entitle to a
quotidian incountring of Monsters, and not less frequent triumphs over wild
Beasts in Passions.

In requital, if he found a Wise, not rich, she made her self so: some can
fancy the riches accruing to her Husband, and Heir, by this frugal Woman's
means, made the proudest Dowry in three Nations scarce her parallel for a
Match. It was a rare felicity in Ages, when the Parents virtue was the child's
dowry; who neither gain by inheritance nor acquisition, are only reputed
contemptibly poor: where Money answers all things, Riches; where Worth, Virtue
may seem the best portion and most acquirable of perfections.

Though Lycurgus Dogs seem to make an infallible demonstration, they are too
incharitable in their censures, who can believe that no temptation either of
gain or profit, could intervene, in which, with the transformed Cat in the
Fable, the humor of mousing not returned.

It is reported of Theophilus, that he burnt a rich ship of his wives,
disdaining that the covetous folly of a woman should exchange the Title of an
Emperor to that of a Merchant. Some can hope a more cruel Traffic found no
acceptance from our Induperator: others can fear an Harpies Talons laden, were
never an ungrateful Oblation.

He who plucked the Thorns out of the Crown, it is Charity to believe he would
plant no new pricks, or Canaanites resembling them, in his side, whom he had
returned to a Land of Promise.

Who moved in so high a sphere of Glory as our Hero, could not but attract
Clouds of Envy, which by their blacker interposure might vail that luster which
they could not obscure. Envious Folly, the most obnoxious to mistakes, rarely
makes not more bright, what she intends most to darken. A sober scrutenist may
find our General the lest conscious of what the Rabbles Idol, Report, the
Common Liar, broaches from frothing hogsheads, either for advantage or
impairing of Glory. The giddy Strumpet Fame, which is every Idiots Prostitute,
makes no stop betwixt the Extremes of Honor or Infamy: she cherishes that which
we intends to blast by the cold wind of an envious displeasure; and, while
active as fire, she would gratify Grandeur, consumes what she intends only to
inliven by a warmer commendation.

The selling of a Prince was a fatal Prognostic: may the sale of Loyalty be
more propitious. The God of this world did so dazzle foolish eyes, that nothing
was to be seen in the most Execrable Trator, beside unparalled Excellence*
Treason was only a subtle reservedness, or a pious fraud for Royal advantage.
The Mammon of unrightousness was not employed to provide Heavenly places, but
to promote Earthly interests. Some can think the greatest Judas here, might
have found no cause of desperation, where so many Pieces might have entitled to
Honor and Office. Mr. Case may serve out of many Centuries of observations, who
(a constant Servant to his Royal Master through all Changes) proved a Setter of
Olivers, pearch'd high by Mammon, in this last and more happy Revolution
defaming him for disloyalty; to have bin so grand a Virtuoso on Record, as
might evidence to have received no lesser Stipends for annual courses of
Treason.

Though he who makes have to be rich, cannot be innocent; yet who would guess
the greatness of guilt by the vastness of a contracted Treasure, may be
mistaken in their Arithmetic. The Generals Offices of Profit, and Places of
Honor, none can justly deny him; nor a wise man the frugal improvement: his
Retinuo was rather beneficial than chargeable, who put neither to the Expenses
of Wages or Diet.

The Courtiers and his own Servants, who revenge by their tongues the loss
which they have sustained by their teeth, rarely speak well of him, whom they
will have the Author of Board-Wages at Court, and to have saved half in his own
daily allowance: The Poulterers ware, as sacred, must be untoucht, if it met no
maim at his Table, was enjoined, new roasted, to revisit it next day incompany.
All Excesses are equally dangerous: if he observed the truly golden mean to
enrich a Family, it could not be dishonorable. The story of Actaeon may seem no
Fable, where the blood of Families has bin swallowed for their Healths, and
the merciless teeth of a fawning Retinue have devoured their Masters. But among
giddy Reports none can be more incredible, than the menacing of an only child
with disinheriting for expending Five shillings at supper, in which sum a
Capon, a bottle of wine* beer, ale, roots, must be included: though perhaps
wine might lend the only occasion to the Passion, which he who allows to
children, adds fire to fire; and by a fond indulgence contributes to the ruin
of a Name, when debauched Nature, to quench the preternatural heat, renders
them such spunges, as orecharg'd by liquor, serve only to expunge their own and
Ancestors Glory. The Philosopher would have cracked his spleen to have seen
vast piles of muck provided, and the ground left unmanur'd, where nothing could
be wanting that well employed might have rendered it sertil. I knew a Pedant of
so strangely scrupulous a conscience, that he could number it amongst his sins
to make a Boy more learned than his Father, which he could suppose might
unlearn him that duty which has the promise of long life. It must be a larger
portion of knowledge which can edify for perfection: the traders in small
parcels gain only some windy inflations which can puff up; some will not allow
it above a windy distemper, which so long discomposed our body Politic, and
made that duty forgot, which is a just tribute to the Parent of a Country.

Not a few think of learning what Matchiavel says of Religion, That it is an
impediment to great Actions. Blindness begets boldness, and folly must be
entitled to fat and fortunate, or else the plump Schismatic could not gain so
great an Harvest of foolish Ears, which every blast of false doctrine can teach
to bow in compliance to the most pernicious Ignorance.

Folly may be pearch'd high, like the Fablers Crow, yet not secure from a Foxes
Crast: Our schismatical Reynards by provoking fools to cant, make the meat in
their mouths a purchase; or fail not thus to gain themselves food.

Though the General had a mighty spirit (as I heard one phrase it) the Woman
was not so narrow soul'd as her Husband, if of any religion she was a
Presbyterian, in the time of the Plague sent Five pound to a Nonconformist
Sermon-maker; bestowed 12 d. a piece on fifty poor Widows; caused her Son to
send two broad pieces for Plasters, to the goutie Versifier of the Gang, whose
feet were more deservingly nimble for her: Lords honor in the Northern
Expedition: they will not allow him a dragm of charity who cast no mite into
the treasury of the Saints, but we can hope, though a Soldier, he coded not
the Hypocrites trumpets, and the Alms he gave in secret will be rewarded openly.
However, while there are Churches, Colleges, Hospitals, or any public
Monuments of Charity he will be acknowledged a Benefactor, who seemed to rescue
them from the jaws of that sacrilegions Wolf, who would have glibly swallowed
all things facred under the pretense of zeal and reformation.

He could not be ignorant of the six thousand pounds his Wife had intentionally
devoted to an Almshouse, which he made his own act by an Approbation; it may
be imputed to an improved Religion and Loyalty, if he grown wiser by time was a
less zealous Patron of those pernicious House-creepers, who lead silly Females
captive, to whom a Paradise would be displeasing without the taste of
prohibited fruit. If he took no care of what some can call the Household of
Faith, none can deny, worse than an Infidel, by taking no care of his own
Family; what some can call sordidness, if equally considered, may be found a
noble frugality which would not leave so vast a Pudding contemptible for want
of Suet.

Some will affix to a greater Statist then our General, the Maxim on which the
Indians ground the neglect of God, and the worshipping of the Devil: but evil
Council is ever worst to the Councellory; the cunning are rarely not catched in
their own snare; and he who digs a pit for Loyaly may fall so deeply in, as the
most loyal may find no Resurrection.

There are who will not allow the greatest pretenders to Loyalty to have had an
equally obliging nature with that of the Pikes, who devour their own kind last:
where the Proverb will have a Dog loved for his Masters sake, he who could but
snarl and bark in the Cause, and knew never how to fawn on his enemies; to be
be lost to all respect, might call the Grand Monopolizers of Loyalties truth
into question. Many could have been content to have died, that others might
enjoy that sight to whose enjoyment they owed a cruel death. It can be no
Paradox to aver, that sincere Loyalty can never want either a Friend or Reward;
and yet what is most strange, that contradictory assertion may seem equally
true, that to no fucated Loyalists the most wished for of Restaurations, by the
extirpation of more loyal Families, has proved a more fatal enemy then the
War. In a baptismal vow we renounced the World, the Flesh and the Devil:
Engaged in the Royal Cause, we might seem to fight against those three grand
Antagonists; if the younger Brothers in Loyalty, who had wasted their
Patrimonies on the Harlots of Schism, and could be content, like the Swine, to
be fed with the husks of every false doctrine; if the returned Prodigals are
received into favor, why should the elder Brothers repine, having the
assurance of a promise; no wise man would trifle away time to gather Cockles on
the Shore, when he may set sails unto another Country, where are no fickle
joys, hopes, or fears, but an Enge Beat is made the prologue to eternal
Felicity.

Nothing is more comical then to see our Apes of Loyal Grandeur; how stately
are the deportments of foolish Mimicks, till the scrambling for Nuts exposes
ridiculous? Lucretius would have it no lesser pleasure secure on the Shore, to
contemplate afar off men tossed on the Sea: Who will be laden with this worlds
Merchandise are the subjects of Winds and Waves, which seem to sing and sport
in their ruins; they are the objects of a Fools envy, but the Wisemans pity,
who expose frail Barks to encounter all storms.

Some can fancy our Hero, tho Wheel to which we owe all the vicissitudes of
giddie Greatness, say alternately he was an enemy to the two supereminently
Loyal Statists; and will have a third with the loss of Land (which he ever
valued, like to it self, dirt) purchase with a place the delusion of a pleasing
dream.

The Gordian Knot, which none could untie, an Alexander could out, but it is
reported of an angry Lord, E. of P. that being in office, he made it his
business to break wiser heads then his own. Though some praise our Generals
conduct to the making of Hyperboles modest, others will have his headpiece the
worst part of his Armor. Who pretend to be most knowing in those affairs, to
think that Oliver either could fear there, or be ignorant how to remove him
from his command in Scotland, is accounted the most ridiculous part in his
Story: to C. he must have been like one of the Centurions servants; a mutinous
Seaman must have found it true by the experiment of a lost Nose, which to
patch up cost him and Oliver ten Pieces.

Our Hero never wanted resolution, which is the best sword in War. Had his
head been as good as his heart, the Nicknamed Protector told C. Okey, England
would have been too little to have contained a Nol and a Jack; but heads and
hearts holding so unequal a correspondence, the secure Tyrant might domineer
over three distracted Nations. Some, like Chemists, by the advantage of other
men's heads may do miracles, who are useless with their own, not above tunnels
for smoke, yet by fumes inspired, pretend to all things.

Whom not a few have called a delaying Fabius, many can think he would have
fought with a daring Hannibal upon any disadvantage; when neither the odds of
number, nor a contradictorie Commission could hinder from the disadvantageous
engagement with the Dutch. Militemus was an Emperors Motto, let us fight Boys,
our more undaunted Generals; war was his element, and out of it he might seem
like a Fish out of water.

The opinion of the Stoics can animate Turks to brave death in War, and in
place intrepid to converse with the most fatal Contagion. Our Hero by stranger
revolutions might be easily induced to embrace the doctrine of an inevitable
wheel, who could dreadless look down on dangers, fear neither of those Bug-b
ears to Mankind, A Plague, or War, so much a Proselite to the Predestination
principle, as to think it most ridiculous to fly that fate which is unavoidable.

A Knight related to our G. dehorted him from the Belgic War, as having done
already enough for the immortality of a Name. To whom he replied, he was sent
into the world upon an Errand which must be performed, and whether it might end
at the bottom of the Sea, as it was uncertain, so it should not find him
concerned. Some will have our Hero like the Poets Ajax, who disdained to be
vincible by any except himself, and will have it so near the finishing his
errand in the Sea, as Guns were placed to sink so great a weight of Glory.

Who conquered the World could not subdue his Passions: Those mutinying Rebels
can domineer over the reputed Invincible; some will have Thunder and Lightning
in our incensed Hero's breath, and that he was least what he persuaded others
to be (in his journey from the North) of a sedate temper; rather than peace
should be with the Dutch, he said he would never wear a Sword. A more sober
Statesman is reported to have replied, he had rather lay aside his Gown, then
that so unnecessary a War should be commenced; informed him our want of Allies
abroad, and Moneys, Wars Sinews, which can give strength to the most enfeebled
Arms, make firm Friends at home, and assure foreign Alliances; the wise Man
knew, though God and a good Cause makes a great sound, it is the tinkling noise
of coin does the Soldiers business; and however justice is pretended in all
Engagements, it is to Gold, the worlds great Idol, men are content not only to
make the sacrifice of Fools themselves, but even their nearest Relations.

War is not only sweet to them who never tried it, but to such who have reaped
a benefit by it: a soldier can love his Harvest. Some cannot arrive to his
wisdom, who went out of the world with a Thou fool, with full barns he could
have bin contented his soul should have took her ease.

We have had the War, by which the Kingdom is so many Millions in debt; our
Hero in probability might have lost his Sword, and if he had bin a Dutchman,
might have forfeited his Head, which renounced not only Reason, but even
Loyalty, by rashly exceeding of his Commission: Yet the extremity of Law might
thus have proved the supreme injury. If it was Treason in our General (as in
the case of a E of Essex,) it was a venial delinquency; if a Traitor, he was
the best meaning; whose superabundant or zeal or valor concluded of an
Engagement, by the mistaken proposition of the accruing honor and safety to
his Prince and Country, in whose Cause his Noble, though here not best informed
Spirit, could have bin content to have finished an Errand in Waves, the best
Emblems of inconstant Greatness and giddy Fortunes Favors. The method by which
he seemed to restore, he might have secured his Country: here a Fabius, he
might have effected by delays, what he could not by fighting; and have seemed a
double Restorer of this Nation, whose rashness might have entitled the
Demolisher.

It cannot be the lest wisdom not to think to do always the same things.
Empirical, or valor, or medicine, not rarely succesless.

Storms succeed the clearest Sunshine; which a wise man foreseeing, like to the
victorious Charles the Fifth, quits the Stage.

When Cromwell had fell from his Coach, a Consident of his was overhear'd to
complain, that he who had raised, would ruin them, if a timely care was not
taken to prevent the exposure of his wild freaks. Death was a timely friend,
nigh to the end of his wits, was near to the end of his life; and thus finished
what Mazarine called the most fortunate piece of Folly.

Some will have him who could be content to resign his Gown, rather than there
should have bin a War, to be forced to resign because it proved succesless.

Men rarely can be pleased with his company, whose looks may upbraid their
miscarriages. The incensed Rabble, like to Heathen Idols, must have humane
blood for a Sacrifice; though the soolish overflowings of their Galls can be
pacified by no more grateful oblation than that, by which they express all
ills, Ingratitude; seldom not gratified by his Ruin, who might most seek their
Preservation.

Though Strafford was allowed to be no President, yet some will ever propose
him for an Example; and no Act of Oblivion will make us so lost to our
memories, that the most unfortunate Earl will be forgot, who incomparably
loyal, was impeached by such Arch Rebels, as by introducing the Scots, were
guilty of the highest Treason, the most implacable enemy of Traitors fell their
sacrifice.

When putrid members were to be cut off, the body politic was deprived of the
sounder part, which might have secured it from encroaching mischiefs, while an
unparalled Princes clemency, which gave fears to none, and left not the
greatest villainies destitute of hopes, administered in the Grand Statesmans
ruin, if not a just, an unhappy cause of his own untimely period.

The gratifying of the weakest heads, with the loss of the wisest, as a most
bloody, so is rarely not a most succesless Policy.

The Athenians might be thought to have a veneration for an Owl only, who could
estrange Worth by an Ostracism.

Some will have the greatest of English Statists to have perished by their own
weapons. One wise head, like Galba's wit, not ill placed, may exceed in value
not only many Millions of Money, but Armies of Men.

Good intelligence, and bold truth some say could unfix a no undeserving
relation of the Generals, whom nothing, except his displeasure, unrivited from
the greatest office of Trust; in which the Successor may seem not the least of
State Riddles; but mysterious Grandeur is such an Abyss, as Fools will fondly
guess at the depth of that which the Plumets of the most comprehensive reasons
can never fathom.

Some who are incapable of the diviner mysteries, can put themselves to the
troublesome admiration how the extemporary trash of a canting and long winded
Schismatic in a Chamber, can be preparatory to the more sober devotion of the
Chappel-Royal? or how the truly Loyal and religious Grandee's, our incomparable
Converts, can keep Chaplains to assert with paper pellets that schism to which
they must be the greatest strangers, if not estranged to their Allegiance; and
to defile their new honors have not sucked up their old vomits? The Actors on
the worlds Theater, by shifting Cloaks and Beards act different parts, and
interchangeably fill up the Play of life with calamitous scenes of misery, or
ridiculous interludes.

Nothing is more pleasant in our revolutions then to hear the grand enemies of
the Prerogative, and the Lordly Branches, the most confident assertors of the
Privileges which the King and Lords may most justly challenge; and the same
persons formerly could most unjustly impugn: who deprived the Throne of
Supporters will ever stand in need of one to cleave to, and secured by the
Unicorn can be dreadless of the Lion. The least Friends of the loyal Clergy
will ever want the benefit of it in a Psalm of mercy. How appositely is the
Princes Prerogative pleaded in the favor of scism by the Protosticklers of it,
which would allow him none in Religion? And yet thus they can hope a privilege
for such as void both of tenderness and conscience to its Prince, could deny
him a liberty they would have indulged to the meanest Subjects.

There may be no improbable conjecture as well as other Grandees, a confident
ignorance might easily impose on our Hero. The intrusting so valued a body
with such an illiterate quack, as some would have disdained to have made the
Farrier to a beloved or generous Beast, lend no small suspicion; the Patronage
of the Stroaker some will have a too pregnant example.

Age, in it self an invincible disease, might assure no easy conquest of a
concomitant distemper, which might be entitled old: yet twenty years of
superannuation, and twelve of deafness, were esteemed inconsiderable in a
nonagenarian woman, when a wonder-working hand could appear for the recovery,
the Stroaker G. and sent by the General to restore her so long estranged
Hearing.

Simon Magus, Apollonius, Pere grinus Philosophus, Alexander Paphlago, who
appeared with lying wonders to give a disrepute to Primitive Christianity,
could not be more confident then this gracious babe of the Presbyterian
Reformation: while the Puritans accuse the Papists for their holy Maid of Kent,
they forget Elizabeth Barton their Wench in the Wall: As if stroaking could
cicure the wildest Adversaries, every party has been provided by a thus
trifling Impostor.

Men in power should not make themselves conscious by such a brutish
connivence as calls Gods and his Vicegerents Honors into question.

The bold folly of Stroakers may seem a mocking of Majesty, and the intrenching
on that Prerogative, which conferred by a St. Edward the Confessor, and a St.
Lewis, on the Kings of England and France, to cure by touch, must be reputed
sacred, such a Jewel as cannot be alienated from a Crown.

Miracles need not be called into the Scene, where natural causes can be
ascribed: Stronger frictions can cure some intercutaneous Maladies, should the
balsom of a sweating Palm be denied conducive by the effluviums of
wonder-working Atoms.

A Knight, a Relation to the Duke, and Son to the Grandeve Patient of the
Stroaker, gratifying my curiosity with the converse of the Trifler, I heard him
as confidently propose Moses an example for his doing of Miracles, as if he had
been to lead the Jewish Tribes of Pharisaical Presbyterians through a Red Sea
into a Land of Promise: and the Invasion of France being then noised, the
English by a cunning Man might hope the recovery of what they had lost by a
wise Woman. If the Braggar't, or a vouching Comrade were to be believed, the
General was so indear'd by the recovery of his Kinswomans eye, that he would
not allow him a nights absence to gratify the importunity of Relations.

Sinking men will take hold of Reeds. Stroaking, which could hear abominable
superstition and Jesuitical contrivance in the Papists, must give a reparation
to the declining cause of Presbyterians: The wonder-working Lieutenant was the
most affecting discourse of that party, which had he been of a different fancy
for his lying wonders they would have entitled him an Antichrist.

Whom some would have a Candidate for a Cardinals Cap, others will have
Probationer for a Fools, while he could countenance a stroaking Friar to enter
contest with a Prince, and show a Chapel less efficacious for miracles then a
Banqueting House.

It not a little perplexed Sir K. D. and made not a few merry, that an eminent
Churchman with an Honorable Title, and the not disingenious Son of a Grand
Virtuoso, exposed an innocent to danger, and themselves to be ridiculous. The
solemn Pageantry which attended the simple Irish Priests stroaking to wiser
heads of their own profession, seemed a discretion rivalling theirs, who with
Kettles afford their tinckling Charity to the Moon in an Ecclyps.

Who since the Restoration gained to his Right Honorable Title, a blew
Ribband, and in some opinions was entitled to a refined wit, and grand
Politician, the late times report the Patient and Admirer of a stroaking
Lunatic, the unhappy Stroaker, whose disturbed brains for their recovery might
want more drugs then an Anticyra could furnish, which so long deluded the most
active endeavors of Medicine, attended by the severest discipline of Bedlam.

Who can wonder if natures rude draught, a Soldier polished by no Art, imposed
on by proud Ignorance and giddie Fame, might give a Stroakers folly a
Commendamus, where the wisest Heads might have their Judgments called in
question by their hands. Desert is not only unattended on by a Mandamus, but
rarely encounters an unbrib'd Commendation. Empty heads make the greatest
sound, and full purses the most significant noise for Preferment. A Phanatick
Trooper, who might be lost to all knowledge, if he had not plundered it from
Loyalty, whose Library was not above a Barrows Method, and an Almanac, two
Doctors hands required for the granting of a license to practice Physic, he
produced an obsolete Mandamus from the grand Protector of Ignorance, Cromwell,
which in the worst of times had not the confidence to visit Oxford, in the best
durst encounter the most learned Bishop Saunderson, who in vain could resist
it, ten Angels powerfully appearing to his Chancellor, were satisfactory
motives to make by the golden rule of practice a true Licentiate.

The Shcools can make it disputable whether what was intended the greatest
encourager of Virtue, has not been the least acquainted with Merit. Learning
and Loyalty put beyond all dispute, brought to the test, would be rarely found
above in the sees and Mandamus of not a few booted Fishermen for degrees (as
they call them) which are caught by a golden hook. Loosers may have a prating
license: If a few complain, many have cause to praise this golden Age. He must
be wise who is rich, or some whose mercenary spirits can give so glib a
commendation to the most deplorable pieces of Folly, may be questioned for that
wisdom which makes fools and themselves equally fortunate.

Worldly Grandeur, with the not misbecoming attributes of Right Honorable and
Right Worshipful, sometimes can have a too unhappy resemblence to Pagan Idols,
which having eyes and ears, neither hear nor see.

Whose wisdom lies in another man's head (who can be blind and deaf for
interest) may make a comment on that Text, which will have man being in honor
compared to the beasts which perish wathout understanding.

Some will have our English Solomon in pain, to have listened to a Woman for a
Remedy. There are who guess by the touchstone of Physic, whose ignorance might
exceed a Phanaticks Sermon, not the only Emperick who attended our Hero.
France, France, often repeated in the opinion of a Francis, could equal the
titles of an Emperor: to excuse his mistakes, and make a parallel for all
worthies, we may repeat the Soldier, Soldier: Some think they honor most in
making no Soldier, but an uncommission'd and peaceable Spectator to the most
happy of Revolutions.

When the stinking part offensive to most nostrils, had her Presbyterian
appurtenances adjoined, which long laid aside for sweetning, had not deposited
their rankness to clear Noses; One of their prime votes was, that no man should
be capaple of Office, who would not subscribe Rebellion lawful, for by a
necessary illation it is deducible, if a war against the King was just: I have
heard some, not of so ill informed judgments, as to believe the levelling of a
war against a Prince not Treason, yet so loose principl'd in Religion, that
they would assert all Oaths and Subscriptions lawful, which might render
capable of serving the Royal Interest; such tools were as profitable to Loyalty
as the Gnostics to Christianity. He who dares not trust God, in vain may be
credited by man. To play the Devil for God sake has been a common Proverb, but
was never entered for an Article in a sober Belief.

Who could glory in being Confessors, and could think to suffer in the Cause of
God, their King and Country, Martyrdom, Air and Dirt, Life and Fortune, were
contemptible trifles to them, who could propose white Robes in confession and
Purple in their sufferings, which might be Prologues to Crowns and Immortality,
but such who followed deserted Loyalty, as the people our Savior into the
Wilderness for the miracle of Loaves, seeking worldly advantages,, might pawn
their souls for trash, and sin for a morsel of bread.

It is an Atheistical piece of folly to disown Omnipotency, that we may
gratify weak Surmisers.

The custom of swearing and forswearing had in our unhappy Land took away the
sense of perjury: by the no infrequent use of Poison it went into the opinion
of such nutriment as might seem necessary for their constitutions. In a
wilderness of Apes and Monkeys none could dread by an Oath to take in a Spider.

That Oaths may make a Land mourn, we have Religion to assure, and reason to
instruct us: but how they can be the instruments to our rejoicing, may be an
Article of that Creed only which could exchange a Christ for an Adonis, and
make Religion truckle to every darling folly.

In such an Apostacy as might make an unhappy Land sigh, and wonder at her
self so soon turned Leper; Some believe a thundering Legion to have secured our
Theodosius, we received a Charles by the grace of God, not favor of Men. No
quirks nor intrigues of giddie Politicians, but he alone who rules the wheel of
human vicissitudes, produced this happyer Revolution; the best of Physicians,
and no worm'd-brain'd Mountebank of State, subven'd to our distractions; when
the twisting of sand by foolish combinations was found a succesless folly, and
the brainsick hopes of fondest Royalists might pass for phrenzy. God derided
from heaven, and by dividing their Councils, who were enemies to our David
turned the wisdom of our Achitophels into a Rope.

When the Bricks were doubled a Moses came: our Taskmasters grown intolerable,
God raised us up Deliverers. The Stars in their courses, which sought against,
fight for us: the most inauspicious Planets by happier conjunctions, deposit
their malevolence, and seem to have friendly aspects for Loyalty by a more
propitious revolution. Sure this was the Lords doing, and should be mavelous
in our eyes. God scattered the men who took delight in war, and by a bloodless
victory gave us peace: the prayers and tears of a poor and distressed party,
the weapons of the Church militant, prevailed over the loud crying blasphemy
and perjuries of their Enemies.

The war begun from Scotland, a Nation fatal to Princes, a Region of darkness
can give light, and the North infamous for ill, must be celebrated for good,
since from that place, we received the first part of for cure, to which weow'd
the beginning of mischief.

The Lord, who being a General, gave way to a Princes ruin, without which it
could not have been effected, now a private man opens a way for a General which
led for a King's Restoration, without which it might have been vainly hoped.

The Dragons tail, which gave Royalty the fatal wound, cures it by an
Antimonarchical vote; by seeking to introduce a plurality of Generals, brings
in one King.

The Members which an Army secluded, an Army restores. Now better restored to
their senses then to believe a King (though intitl'd to the name of a Solomon)
when he called them all Princes: they could not now fancy the Members Eternal
(who by the loss of that unhappy head, which entrusted with power for its own
ruin, might find themselves mortal:) they could no longer dream of being
Omnipotent, when as a debt due to vengeance for denying the just tribute of
Allegiance, they had encountered the curse of curses, been servants of servants,
and what might be the highest aggravation, enslaved by their own vassals.

An Antesignane of Schism seems a Precursor of Loyalty; he, who by imposing on
factious ears had justly lost his own, now might seem worthy of the reserved
head, which in its lucid intervals could be so beneficially sober.

Loyal Reason was such a miracle from the self contradicting Author, as could
produce a self-denying Ordinance, which might be as instrumental to a happy
Restoration, as that was to the utter extinguishing of faint and glimmering
Loyalty.

The Sampsons, who had been bound and blinded by deceitful Dalilahs, false
Oaths, and foolish Engagements, though with their own dissolution can be
content to pluck down the house of the Philistians so long devoted to the Idols
folly.

A sober Council met; the heart of the Kingdom votes for an Head, that it might
be no longer a senseless Nation: By whose returned command a loyal Body is
legally summoned, which may truly hear Patriots, Restorers, an healing Senate,
Sanctuaries, not slaughter-houses of Innocents, who by contributing religious
and loyal votes have expiated there the cruel follies, where irreligious and
disloyal suffrages changed an happy Land into a field of blood.

The merry Dr. Collins desired his taking of the Covenant might be deferred
till the day of Judgment, when it would be clearly known what became of
Covenanters.

Wise men will suspend rash censures* While the Curtain is drawn the best of
Prophets are but probable Conjecturers.

Nothing of earthly glory has been wanting to grace our Hero, even to the
Apotheosis of an Emperor.

Our Patron George interred, a solemnity was intended to a Tutelar Saint of the
name, which had it been performed, an hot-brained Zealot, who had perused a
Tertullian, or a St. Cyprian de spectaculis, might be more dangerously
troublesome to the discomposure of weak and scrupulous noddles, then the
Polypragmatick Lawyer in his less significant, and more ridiculous misquoting
of them against Stage Plays. That which is not evil in it self may be sometimes
not well advised.

The order of the Garter may defend it self by its Motto, Evil to him who evil
thinks.

Theognis will have Jupiter neither with rain nor without it to please all men.
Neither a close fist nor an open hand can want a misconstruction: What was
wanting to nearest Relations, was conferred on the General, without whom all
might seem unavailable for a Crown.

Wise men can be pleased with the most excellent gratitude, and fools can be
gratified with the gayetie of the sight.

It was the custom of Heathens to destroy the Living under pretense of
honoring the Dead; not a few made close mourners by a civil death, seemed to
follow the corpse of an Usurper.

Some can fancy that an Essex, Ireton, and a Cromwell lay in their beds of
blasphemed honor with more fond State: None are supposed to have equaled his
funeral Pomp inferior alone to that of Princes by a Diadem: The defects of
earth may heaven supply, by changing a fickle Coronet into a never fading Crown.

Mars in most opinions is best pictured reaking in blood. A General rendered
inglorious, if not exposed in the purple of War: To bring in our Hero with the
white Robes of a Confessor, and disengaged from the bloody Camps of a
rebellious Schism to make a Soldier of the Church Militant, which can only
lead to the truly triumphant paths of Glory, if an error is more venial then
by intitling to the crast to bestow on him the prey of Foxes; a great rather
then good renown, unworthy of a Christian Champion, Let Mahometans glory in
praises common to Wolves, Bears and Tigers, who expect in Paradise no pleasure
above those of Goats, by the enjoyment of brutish sensuality.

Foolish Historians, like fond Heralds, make the most savage of Beasts
supporters to the Arms of the highest Grandeur, butcheries and debaucheries the
prime parts in the tragedies of their Heroes; what but named might turn
Christians blood into a congealed cake of Ice, is affixed to the story to make
a more horrible Polyphemus.

Discretion should lay aside the bloody Shirt: The famed Conqueror of the
East, who instead of all the vain pomp of proud funerals, would have a Shirt
carried aloft, in triumph to show how small a portion was left a Saladine after
his mighty acquisitions, surely had a cleanly shift, and no bloody emblem
exposed of humane inconstancy. The cruel piece of duty, which sacrificed a man
to revenge for an injured Father, though some can fancy generous, heroic, and
a prophetic action which first made the Soldier who was to restore the common
Parent, may it ever be forgot, whilst the bloodless conquest for a Countries
Father never wants a grateful Commemoration.

May the bloody Achievements in a Belgic, Irish, Scottish War be ever
silenced, and after so honorable a death be introduced by no puny Historian,
who while he fancies the erecting of Trophies, by accumulating the dangerously
acquired conquests of an Hero, exposes a brutish valor and bafled reason, for
marks of honor by a mistake of objects, affixes indelible notes of infamy.
While the Lion is forgot, may the triumphs of the Lamb be celebrated, who
unlearned us the fierceness of Savages, and by attending to the voice of Peace,
became a Gratioso to a most peaceable Prince on Earth, and has the promise of
the blessing which attends upon Peacemakers, and thus may be entitled a
Favorite to the King of Kings, who disdains not the title of the Prince of
Peace.

It was no cruel victory to which our Hero owed his honors, and three Nations
their preservation. God appeared not in the thunder and lightning of War, but
in the soft whisperings of Peace for the most happy of Restaurations:

The General can never want the Encomium of a Fabius, will be ever entitled by
delays the Restorer: To attribute our Restoration to the Churches Prayers,
though an Heterodox, can be no culpable opinion, which cannot dishonor God by
ascribing all to his mercies, nor the King to have his cause owned by Heaven,
nor the General, by being made an instrument in the hand of the Almighty, when
his own Arm was withered by the loss of strength in a Commission.

The Psalmists Fool, said in his heart there was no God; and he said that all
men were liars: may Wars, Plagues, nor Fires, be the cruel Remembrancers to
instruct that truth which we are so apt to forget, To God only belongs
salvation.

Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but to thy Name be the Glory. Who would rob
God of his Glory on Earth, may fall short of being glorified in Heaven.

To God alone as ever due, be ever Glory, whose Fame only can make an History
Everlasting.
ERRATA.
PAge 3 read Hero, Onogyros, inamelling. P. 4. l. 15. r. out of. p. 11. r.
cause. p. 15. l. 12. not the p, 18. l. 14. omit to. p. 19. l. 16. r. go to. p.
22. l. 2. r. M. his case. p. 24. r. rolls for roots. p. 29. l. 17. for place r.
peace. l. 23. r. predestinarian. p. 34. l. 12. licked. p. 35. 2. r. a for its.
l. 18. leave out and.

FINIS.

