THE Clothiers Complaint: OR REASONS FOR Passing the BILL, Against the
Blackwell-Hall Factors, etc.

Showing it to be a PUBLIC GOOD: Humbly Offered to the PARLIAMENT.

Ad sanitatem gradus est, novisse morbum, Eras. LONDON, Printed for Randal
Tailor, near Stationers' Hall, 1692.

TO endeavor to show how great an influence the Woollen Manufacture has upon
the value of Lands and good payment of Rents in the Country, would be a
needless undertaking to so prudent a Counsel, and but lighting a Candle to the
Sun.

And since the unanswerable Experience of twenty years last past, has manifest
an alteration in those affairs, and that there is an apparent fall in the rates
of Lands in the general; and since it is as evident that the
Woollen-Manufacture is the principal branch of our Trade, and only Staple
Commodity of our English Nation, which gives life and motion to all other
Trades. It can be no needless enquiry to examine, whether there be any
unnecessary Letts sprung up in so long a Tract of Time, which may-either check
or retard the free course of this Master-wheel of our Trade, serving a private
Interest at the expense of the Public.

Or whether the Profit arising out of the Woollen-Manufacture be equally
divided between the Country and the City, as it justly belongs.

I shall wholly confine my self (in this Address) to my own Province in plain
matters of fact, and make it my task to show, that there is a defect in both
these particulars, which now offers to be redrest in our Bill. Wherein, although
my capacity will not reach to the height of the matter, yet it may give some
light, and make way for better Judgment: And herein (being invaded in point of
right) I hope I may depend upon the most favorable construction, being an act
of necessity, and not of choice.

The substance and intent of our Bill being only this.

1. That Blackwell-Hall, the common Market of England for Cloth, shall be
wholly at the liberty of Clothiers, to sell their Cloth to Merchants and
Woollen Drapers, according to ancient Custom. And the Factors of
Blackwell-Hall, who has now got the possession of the said Hall, shall be
dispossessed, and a freedom to Clothiers to send up Servants out of the Country
(under restrictions from buying of Wool, and settled Sallaries) for the
accommodation of the Market, where is appears needful.

2. That all Cloth th^^ is brought to London, shall be ipso facto, sold in this
public Market of Blackwell-Hall, in the proper time already appointed for that
purpose; and as it is now under Obligation to be there entered, and to pay a
certain Duty to the Hall.

3. That all Cloth made of Pi^^^ous and Noyles, or of any worse quality than
Fleece-Wool, shall be made with a distinction, that the Buyer may not be
deceived.

4. That all true Fleece-Wool-Cloth, that is made, shall be marked with the
Letters Crowned.

5. That all long Cloths, of what County soever, shall be made of one limited
length; which is the full import of our Bill.

The design of this Bill being solely a public Good, and that which concerns
the general Interest of the Nation, I hope will be impartially considered by
every generous Englishman, and true Patriot of his Country, whose protection
it justly claims, so far as it has that appearance.

It does indeed immediately concern the Clothiers, by whom, were the matter
left to be decided by a majority, it would be but a short contest: And we
usually say, that he that wears the Shoe knows best where it pincheth: As
general, I think in the sense of the Calamity, as the consult of Mice in the
Fable, but too much of the timorousness of those little Animals, ready to
shrink back, at the difficulty of putting on the Bell, being so far brought
under Dominion.

And although the Clothiers are a considerable number of Men in the Nation, yet
belonging to different Counties, and for the most part engaged in such business
that requires constant attendance, they cannot so well wait upon public
affairs of Parliament, as those that are always together upon the place, to
consult, and have plenty of Money to forward any public Affairs, the command,
as well of their Masters Purses as their own. But if this Bill has the impress
of a public Good upon it, I persuade my self it will not be obstructed with
Shadows.

A long discourse from a bauling Factor, in disguise of a Merchant, in
commendation of Pinion-Cloth, when he himself is sinking in the same bottom,
may be of as little signification to the Public, as from a condemned Person at
Tyburn; it being so well known to be a deceitful sort of Cloth, but possibly a
better subject than the justification of his own practice: Both which may
chance to pass for good reason under the tender affection of a Daughter.

Nor can the York shire Interest, whose Pinion Cloth has of late Years
sheltered it self in imitation of Gloucestershire, and other Fleece-Wool-Cloth,
and unwilling to appear in its own guise, be of any real signification in this
affair, whatsoever instuence they may have upon their Members.

And the least color of opposition from the Merchant may be confirmation
enough to the Country-Gentleman, that the motion comes from the spring of his
own Interest, who be sure would not oppose the Bill, if Cloth thereby was not
like to be the dearer to him.

And I hope the Land-Taxes in the Country at this time may as justly claim a
consideration, as the support of the splendour and gallantry of a Factors Coach
in the City. -- But to proceed to the merit of our Bill.

1. In the first place, we are dispossessed of our right in the common Market
of Blackwell-Hall. The spacious buildings of Blackwel-Hall, equally
accommodated to Trade, were altogether designed for the benefit of Clothiers,
to sell their Cloth to Merchants and Woollen-Drapers; and until about thirty
years last past, so practiced.

By act of Common Council of the City, most Cloth that is brought to London,
must be entered at Blackwell-Hall, and pay a Duty, which must be grounded upon
reason; and that the Clothier shall have an accommodation for his Money: The
soundation Rule of Buying and Selling in this public Market, is, that no
Freeman of the City of London, shall have liberty to sell any Goods there; and
that none but Freemen shall have liberty to buy any Cloth.

This course of Trade is now wholly diverted in the Selling part, and all the
Windows of Blackwell-Hall, that are convenient to show Cloth, are taken up by
Factors, many of which are Freemen, and the Clothier excluded from the Sale of
his own Goods, and dispossessed of his ancient right.

2. In the next place, of the Factors themselves, whose coming into
Blackwell-Hall is well in memory, of about thirty Years standing; they gained
their best footing in the sickness time and fire of London. Mischiefs seldom
come alone. In number about thirty, and very few of this number that has any
just right to the practice they now follow, having served Apprenticeships to
other Trades. For your accommodation (although the number is not great) you may
make choice of a Factor sprung from almost any profession, an Oil man, a Cloth
drawer, a Tobacconist, etc.

The regular Factors, their Apprentices, most of them make a short flourish,
and then break. I think there may be a Factor found in the same place, who has
had three or four Aprentices successively broke. The pleasantness of their
living, exceeds any Trade that I know of; only one morning in a week that
requires their exact attendance: Great leisure the remaining part to settle the
public affairs of the Nation, (having several Apprentices to perform the
laborious parts) in which (being become the chief Master of the
Woollen-Manufacture and such opportunities by insinuating Letters of Commerce)
they have had no small stroke. Quin laniunt mundum tanta est discordia fratrum,
Eversus F by the Interest of S Chipnam.


3. The disposal of a piece of Cloth containing twenty two yards, and in value
Six or Seven Pounds; the Factoridge is four Shillings: All other charge of
Post-Letters, Hallidge, Porteridge, Pressing, etc. to be paid by the Clothier;
which is now brought up very near to the value of the Factoridge. In an account
of the sale of two pieces of Cloth, where the Factoridge was eight Shillings;
the extraordinary charge brought it up to sixteen Shillings six Pence.

In another account of the sale of nine pieces of Cloth, the extraordinary
charge reckoned by the Factor, was twelve Pence a piece more than his
Factoridge; and the Cloth sold twelve Pence a Yard under the Clothier's price
he left them at; both matters of Fact, and to be proved.

The new pressing of Cloth is become an intolerable burden upon the Clothier;
and the returning of Cloth after bought, grown so familiar of late Years, that
there is no certainty in a sale many times in three Weeks or a Month; which
practice has been brought on by the Factor, with many more that at this time
will be too tedious to mention.

The next part of the Factor's profit is out of the Wool that makes the Cloth,
which is usually three Pence a Pound out of the Spanish Wool, and five
Shillings a Pack out of the English Wool; the best part of his gains.

All the Spanish Wool that is brought into London, is generally bought up by
the Factors: What comes into Exeter, they many times get into their Hands, and
has bought a considerable quantity at Bristol, and sold it at three Pence a
Pound profit to their Clothiers, who have lived but ten or fifteen Miles
distant from that place: Matter of Fact, and the certainty of this profit is
admirable.

If they make a bad Debt for the Clothier, it is no rule for the loss of their
Factoridge, a stated case, and always Effects in their hands to make good for
the Wool; and I am satisfied the greatest part of it is paid for with the
Clothiers own Money, having many times considerable credit from the Merchant.
The disposal of it afterward is no less remarkable, where one Bag in five is
not seen by the Clothier before sent down, and the Price entered to his account
when sent; so that the whole of one Factors Profit has been computed at 3000
l. per annum. How far this extraordinary Charge, upon the commanding Commodity
of our English Nation, is consistent with a Public Good, I leave to better
Judgments.

4. But farther, they are become Clothiers as well as Factors; as Brewers
become Maulsters, and have their Agents in all Countries to make Cloth for
them; this chiefly encouraged in conjunction with the Interest of the
Wool-brogger: And here I cannot give a full account of this Affair, without
taking notice of the Packer, who is come in for a share; and indeed an
excellent contrived Platform!

The sale of Cloth in London is wholly in the hands of Factors and Packers, and
the Merchants being possessed, that they have a greater benefit thereby, than
if they bought it of the Clothiers. It has been usual for a considerable
Merchant to leave the buying of four or five hundred Cloths to a considerable
Packer, and take his account made up to his hand; the Packer, being under
several Obligations to the Merchant, in point of his own Trade, will be sure to
be more of his side than the Clothiers, yet not so steady, but that an
immediate Interest may a little bias; as appears by the sudden and prodigious
flights that happen in our days.

The Wool broggers being become the greatest buyers of Wool in England, all
Middlesex, Essex, Kant, and Sussex, being wholly in their hands, and a great
share of other Counties, though nearer to Clothing Pares than to London, the best
way afterward to dispose this Wool, is to such Clodiers that they can command;
but there being no convenience without its inconveniency, too great a hazard in
such a Trade, and a farther convenience in helping of a sorry Commodity, they
come to this agreement with the Factor or Packer, that if either of these can
help them to a Clothier that will take off their Wool, and afterward sell the
Cloth for him, and secure him their Money for the Wool, that they shall have
such a constant Salary, out of every pack of Wool, sent him down; which is
easy enough agreed upon, over a Glass of Wine, being all at London.

The Packer can easily forward the Sale of any Man's Cloth, and will not be
wanting, being continually minded by a certain Interest.

The Factor has so much out of the Wool, and so much Factoridge out of every
Cloth, and he will take care to furnish with Oil, and a little Money Weekly to
pay the Work-People, and the utmost of his endeavors will not be wanting to
keep this Wheel going, and no better shelter for small faults, than a certain
Interest: This practice has so far prevailed, that above a quarter of
Merchants Cloth is made in this Channel, I know not whether mistaken, if I had
said half. This unhappy mischief solely introduced by the separation of the
Merchant and Clothier. And want of Judgment in Cloth, in the Merchant, which
likewise springs from the same cause; whilst Merchants bought their Cloth at
Blackwel-Hall, and examined it at their own Houses, which was the practice of
former time: this maintained Experience and Judgment in Cloth, which is not to
be procured and maintained but by such a frequent use; and for encouragement
herein, our Cloth is a cleanly Commodity, and pleasant to be felt; but, quoth
the Proverb, A Man's own business never dirts his Fingers: And the Apprentice
which had always a hand in pooling the Cloth over the Perch, was hereby bred up
to knowledge in the Cloth Trade, and when he kept the Cash at home, and paid
the Clothier, his hand was full of business, and much under the Master's Eye;
and how many young Men's ruin has been owing to this alteration of Trade? who,
instead thereof, get a habit of Idleness. I shall not specify, but upon
serious reflection it will appear to be a melancholy Thought. And the Cloth
being now wholly managed at Packers Houses, and they sensible enough of their
own Interest, the next set of Merchants will think, that Judgment in Cloth is
no part of the Merchants Trade.

It can be no great credit to be confined to Spectacles in the prime time of a
Man's Age; especially such a sort that are liable to be dazzled by the least
white Mist, which will make a Cloth made of thin hungry Kentish Wool, look with
such a thick body; that it shall exceed a Cloth made of Somersetshire,
Wiltshire, or Hamp shire Wool, which is much of a superior quality. I thought
some time since, that it would be an advantage in the Sale of Cloth, to write
upon it, that it was made of London Wool, finding that sort so much preferred:
And I think, Creed quod habes and habes, has made a greater progress in the
Woollen Manufacture than in Religion.

5. And this leads me to show how this practice has prevailed to the imbasing
of our Cloth. Good Wine, we say, needs no Bush; and before these Factors Days
and Trade came into this Channel, it was a usual Saying, that the Clothier
needed not a Merchant, if his Cloth was good; and the chiefest care was to
maintain a credit in Trade: A Cloth-mark reckoned of a considerable value,
which was the undoubted Interest of the Nation.

The Clothier that made the Cloth, sold it to the Merchant, and heard the
faults of his own Cloth; and forced sometimes, not only to promise amendment
himself, but to go home and tell Joan, to have the Wool better picked, and the
Yarn better Spun.

The Wool was usually bought in the Summer, and a good Stock of Goods seen in
the Clothiers hand, which is a great encouragement to the making of good Cloth;
and Wool held up, in those days to a Price that the former had encouragement.

This great Wheel of Trade, that is now kept going, must go swiftly round
against a Shipping, the Cloths like the Sons of Cadmus, of a nimble Birth; the
Wool sent from London this Week, and returned in Cloth in five or six Weeks,
which is the delight of a Factor, and proportionably as slow, as soon as buying
is over; the alotment of Wool to a Cloth, in the first place, by the Agent in
the Country, is very scanting: To which being added, the condition of it from a
moist Cellar, and bad ways carrying down, great part coming down in the Winter,
must needs afford but a lean Commodity; laid in the Loom nine quarters and an
half wide, which formerly was laid twelve quarters, and as much Cloth dressed by
two Men, as could be done by four, was the Cloth well made, and had its
deserts: No care in the Country, but a quick dispatch to London to the Factors,
and how to make an addition to the small Salary, by putting off all sorts of
Commodities to the Work-People, which is come almost to a general practice in
this way of Trade, possibly five shillings in Money, and fifteen in Commodities.

This brings to Market ten Cloths, with the same Wool that formerly made but
nine, which always keeps a stock at Market, and therein answers the Merchants
end in beating down the Price: And as it affects the Public in the loss of our
Reputation abroad, it likewise immediately concerns us at home in the Price of
Wool. In fifty thousand Cloths that are likely to be sent to Turkey, which
contain in the Water thirty six yards each Cloth, and strained to forty four,
and as great a proportion in breadth (a great disparagement to our Reputation
and mischief to the Public;) there wants six or eight pounds of Wool one Cloth
with the other, to make the same yards of Cloth to the goodness they were of in
former times, when the Clothiers sold their own Cloth: This quantity of Wool
remaining upon the Farmer's hand, which should have been in the same yards of
Cloth, must needs make an odds in the Price of Wool; and had that quantity of
Wool been added to the same yards of Cloth, the Cloth had been double the value
of the said Wool better, in the true merit and service of it; And whatsoever
may be said of new Drapery, and humouring of Markets abroad, otherwise than in
Breadths to answer the Habits of all Countries, I take to be nothing but
private Interest. And that Statute of the Fourth of James the First, Chapter
the Second, holding Cloth to a weight, was very agreeable with the true
Interest of the Nation: the weight of Cloth being duly proportioned to its
length and goodness, according to good advice, especially in low Price
Merchants Cloth; and ought again to be considered how valuable the Reputation
of any Commodity is, to its encouragement abroad, is plainly seen by the single
instance of the Colchester Bays, which carry the Trade in all Parts abroad, by
their due care in preserving the merit and goodness of them; and indeed
Reputation can come from no other ground.

6. But the most material Mischief that the Country suffers under, wholly
introduced by the Factor, is the long credit given with Cloth.

The standard Rule with most Cloth that is Sold, is six Months; which, if paid
in nine, is not thought bad payment, many times not in twelve, sometimes
fifteen.

To support this extorted and prepostrous Credit, and drive Trade round too,
the whole Country is forced to raise its posse Comitatus, and like a string of
Horses in a Team, many times forced to lend their assistances at a dead lift.
The Clothier's Stock, and the utmost of his Credit first goes, then the
Cardmaker, the Weaver, strain their Credit to the utmost: Afterward the
Butcher and the Chandler lend as far as they think safe: And the Farmer strains
his Landlords patience as far as ever he can; and if Michaelmas Rent be cleared
at Lady day, he is a very good Tenant.

In former days, a Clotheir was reckoned to be able to keep one broad Loom well
employed, with fifty pounds, if he bought his Yarn; or if he made his Cloth out
of the Wool, with one hundred pounds, which now is not to be done with three
hundred pounds in this way of Trade; and the Clothier turned his Stock three
times in those days for once now: He Sold his Cloth to the Merchant, and
received his Money, and went out of Town again in two or three days; it was
then thought a reflection upon the Merchant that he dealt with, if he tarried
longer, supposing he waited for his Money. Hou quantum mutatus ab illo! Now
three Weeks waiting upon a Factor or Packer for a little Money, all swallowed
up in the great City, and the Country starved; and this chiefly introduced by
the design of the Factor, to keep the Clothier from buying Wool of the
Merchant, or where he has no advantage by it.

This Credit does not spring from a real want of Money to buy Cloth; there be
many Merchants and Woollen-Drapers that now buy Cloth and make good payment,
that would buy twice as much, and do the like, if the Trade was more in their
hands, which would be the consequence, if the Clothiers sold their own Cloth;
and hereby there would be a greater Stock of Money drawn into the Cloth Trade,
than would be withdrawn by the Factors and Wool-broggers; and whatsoever
Clothier was ingenious at his Trade, he would find more favor hence, if his
Stock was small, than he has now from a Factor.

The Factors by this designed Credit, has carried the Cloth Trade into too
wide a distance (I wish it be brought safe home:) Few old Clothiers knew any
such place as Wapping, where a pair of Shoes may now be worn out a dunning for
the Money of two or three Pieces of Cloth: And indeed, a great shame that the
best Commodity of our English Nation should be thus undervalued.

Whatsoever Commodity is bought by the Merchant besides Cloth, as Tin and Lead,
they meet with good payment, and the Cloth found the easiest place to lean
upon: And no part of the Wollen-Manufacture, that is sold according to the Will
of the Maker, but meets with good payment, Colchester-Bays, Stuffs, Serges,
Perpetuana's, etc.

But here is another Snake in the Grass, lurking in this Credit, which is very
prejudicial to the Country, and possibly little observed; the Clothier's Stock
being got into the Merchant's hand, and no Money to be raised out of any Goods
he has upon hand at Shear-time: The Merchants hereby govern the Clothiers at
that time as they please, and thereby govern the Price of Wool. We always find
it the difficults time to get Money out of the Merchants hand at Shear-time. If
the Clothier had his Money in his own hand, he has several reasons to lay it
out at that time, and this of greater moment than observation, whatsoever
pretense for Credit may be made on the Merchants side, by their long Voyages to
Turkey, the contrary for many years past has appeared, in their deferring their
Shippings, for their advantage in Buying and Selling; nimble Shippings would
make nimble returns, and very much for the good of the Public; and the
inconveniences they found by giving Credit with their Goods in Turkey, has
made positive order against it. And the hazard the Clothier run with his
Estate, in the present management of Trade, is not the least of his
misfortunes; in great part of the Cloth that is sold, he is in two hazards,
besides the Principle, the Factor and Packer, whose Receipt to the Merchant is
a full discharge.

7. And this leads me, humbly to offer a short account of our Calamities from
our broken Factors, omitting the bad Debts that they have been the Authors of,
which are unaccountable. And here could I first summon the Clothiers of
Sheppen-mallet, to give an exact account of their Factor Stroud, and the
unexpected disappointment of their support of old Age, after a laborious Trade:
Or the Creditors of Duncome, to set out the variety of his footsteps, it would
be a melancholy History: Or did I insist upon fresher Instances, I should find
as many Creditors belonging to one broken Factor, as St. Paul received stripes
from the Jews: I cannot but wish their Guilt in the place of his Innocy, and
each Creditor the content of one stripe, according to the Jewish Law; and
farther add, that had the first broken Factor been deservedly Whipped, we had
never had one Factor broke three times, which practice is grown so familiar,
these late years, and so afflicting to careful Traders, I think it deserves
consideration in the general, and a Law wanting in such cases, especially where
there can be no fair account given of misfortunes; it being impossible for a
Factor to break, or meet with any loss, and no more excuse than spending forty
shillings a Week, when his Wages was but twenty. The time would fail me to keep
to particulars herein, and our Losses beyond my Arithmitick: or should I
endeavor to set forth the variety of Abuses that has been practiced in this
way of Trade, their placing bad Debts to Account as they see fit, pretending
Credit sometimes when ready Money received, and the like, it would be too large
a task to enter upon, and, which adds to the Calamity, the mischief is like to
increase with their number, which is like to double every seven years; some of
them having two or three Apprentices. I have given an account of the current
profit of our Factors, and now of another sort, that we parted with to our
loss; we are likewise liable to a third sort, which I think are Latitudinarian
Factors; these will be sure to Cheat as often as they have opportunity. Should a
Clothier die and leave an Estate in one of these Factors hands, and make a
disposal according to his own Judgment, of his Estate, he will be very likely
to make a Wickham's Will; in which particular, we are not without a
considerable instance: And thus much of our Factors.

I come now to the second part of my promise; as likewise to the second part of
our Bill, to show that there is an unequal division of the Profit arising out
of the Woollen Manufacture between the Country and the City.

The growth and perfection of the Woollen-Manufacture being entirely owing to
the Country, and the Shepherds care, the chief spring of our Riches and
Treasure. The King, as Solomon tells us, being Fed by the Field, and the Riches
of Foreign Parts not to be procured and brought home, but by a Value sent
hence, which is wholly comprehended in the Fleece; a fair share of the Profit
arising out of the Woollen-Manufacture, cannot be denied to the Country. And
there can be no equal division of this Profit between the Country and the City,
but by a fair Sale of the Woollen-Manufacture in a public Market, where each
Interest may fairly struggle, as in all Buying and Selling, and be upon equal
ground to the least tittle, which is the nicest part of Trade; discretion and
prudence in timing of Affairs in a Market or Fair, does many times give the
Buyer an advantage, when his occasion is as urgent for the Commodity, as the
Seller for his Money; and Experience shows us, that when there happens the
least disproportion on each side, the Commodity either sinks or rises. In all
Trades the Seller, where the Interest is his own) consults his Reason to make
the most of his Commodity, and for his Government, diligently observes what
demand there is for his Goods: The Buyer on the other hand, uses his Industry
to get as good a penniworth as he can, and observes the Plenty of the
Commodity and number of Chapmen, etc. and between these honest and equal
contests, a full satisfaction on both sides does fairly center; in a little
ebbing and flowing, if a little ground lost before a Shipping, recovered again
when the Shipping comes; And for the just preservation hereof, the care of our
Ancestors has not appeared in any thing more, than that public Markets for
Buying and Selling should be duly preserved, that there should be no
Fore-stalling Commotlities coming to Market, etc. and the strict care of the
City of London, that all Cloth shall be brought to this public Market of
Blackwell-Hall, seems to come from the same consideration.

The Woollen-Manufacture now being so considerable a part of our livelihood in
the Country, and the value of Wool having so great an effect upon the value of
Land, and the Market of Blackwel-Hall, the most considerable Market of England
for our Cloth, there ought to be a fair adjustment of the Rules of this common
Market, between the Country and City, with all imaginable caution, and as
strict an injunction to the performance, that the Seller may be upon equal
ground with the Buyer.

And the ancient Rules of this Market of Blackwel-Hall, settled in former time,
seems to be a fair accommodation between Country and City.

Many of the Clothiers having a considerable Journey of an hundred miles to
this Market, it seems to me to be considered in the timing of the Market,
allowing the first part of the Week for the Journey. This Market to begin upon
Thursday morning eight of the Clock, to continue until eleven of the Clock, and
then shut up, to begin in the Afternoon at two of the Clock, and continue until
four, and then shut up: In like manner, all day upon Friday, and Saturday
morning until eleven of the Clock, then to be locked up, and no more opened
upon any occasion of Trade, until the next Week Market: and no Cloth any where
else in Town to be bought at the first hand, but at Blackwell-Hall; which I
think to be very well proportioned in time between Buyer and Seller: This kept
the Merchant to some dispatch with the Clothier, and he fairly saw what demand
there was for Cloth.

The duty paid at the Hall for the Entry of every Cloth, was, I think, one
Penny a Cloth; and what Cloth was not sold by the Clothier (if he had no mind
to wait another Market, which was very unusual in those days) was placed up in
the Storehouses, which are provided for that purpose, until the Clothier came
up again, or he ordered some other Clothier to act in kindness for him; and I
think, free of all Charge, or at least ought to be; the fatiegue of so tedious
a Journey, and the considerable advantage the City of London make in other
particulars, may fairly deserve the free accommodation of a Market; and the
practice of all Cities and Towns in England confirm the same. A well made piece
of Cloth, brought to its perfection, contains more merit and beauty than to be
exposed to the least inconveniency: and not the least allowance to be made in
this particular, which, I hope, will be fairly adjusted.

I will now give a true and impartial Account, of the present management of the
sale of Cloth, and the practice of this common Market of Blackwell-Hall, to the
best of my knowledge.

All Cloth, according to ancient Custom, is here Entered, and pay a Duty, I
think, one Penny a Cloth, though many times carried directly to Packers Houses,
and what Cloth is continued in the Hall, pay one half penny a Week for each
Piece of Cloth, which is now very considerable, by reason of so many Factors,
who are willing to grace their Standings with as fair a show of choice as they
can, but all of them reckoned to the Clothier, in the upper Hall, where it is
most considerable: The Store Houses of the said Hall are let out to Factors for
their accommodation, at a yearly Rent, some to other purposes, to hold Linen,
Yarn, or the like: What Money arises out of this public Market, by these ways
and means, more than will defray the charge of necessary attendance, is monthly
paid into Christ Church Hospital, being very considerable, and disposed of as
the City Charity; from which Charity, and the considerable difficulty that
arises from the due adjustment of the limits of so many standings of the
Factors, and supplying the vacancies that happen, with all the justice that may
be, amongst so many Pretenders: There are several Governors appointed by the
City, to hear and determine all Occurrences of that nature that happen; and
which is a little remarkable, there are some Factors got up into this
Government, whether in Compliment to the Clothiers, or whether from the
scarcity of such grave qualified Persons, for so weighty a purpose, I know not;
however, I think too great Favorites of the City to be strenuous Contenders for
the true Interest of the Country, in keeping up the Price of Cloth, and from
hence, little appearance of Success at this Court, from any application that
might be made by the Clothiers against the Factors.

But notwithstanding all these creditable and good effects of so considerable
and public a Market, Blackwell-Hall is no more in effect than a Storehouse,
and a place that the command of the City obliges Cloth to be entered at; and
the continuance of the Market from Thursday to Saturday of no more
signification than the preserving an ancient Custom: Here are a considerable
number of Woollen-Drapers upon Thursday morning, to see what fresh Cloth is
come up, or whether any thing new, but under no necessity of the Market, having
been courted the day before with all the fresh Patterns of the Cloth, coming up
by the Factors, a destructive practice to Trade in the general: And upon any
day of the Week, can go to any Factors Hou^e or Store House, and buy what Cloth
they please; nor indeed is the Sale of Cloth to these Woollen-Drapers in this
public Market of any real signification, for they constantly return half the
Cloth that is there bought without giving a reason. This practice encouraged by
a little private Profit (I doubt) that hereby accrues to the Factor, by going
s^ips in the new pressing, a very unequal practice to the Maker; hereby if
their judgment do a little err in the Market, it is certainly rectified by
compare at home, and a consult of Assistants: And a nice distinction in the
true value of Cloth or Wool, is not obtained without diligent observation, and
the Clothier must be at a loss, if his judgment in the least fail him in the
public Market, in his Wool, whilst he has not the fair play of a public
Market to balance it, and the return of Cloth by the Woollen-Draper, after lain
in his Shop a Fortnight or three Weeks, which is now very usual, is very
prejudicial to the Clothier in point of fancy in Color; the Woollen-Draper
hereby informs himself by his Customers that come in, whether the Color will
please or not, and there being a necessity of variety to humor the present
genius of the World, this fancy ought to be decided by single judgment in a
public Market; especially since it is evident, that our Woollen-Cloth, by this
fancy and variety is become more useful; and experience shows us, that a
well-made Piece of true Scarlet, stripped with a good fancy in Black, may give a
challenge to the whole World in the lining of a Chariot, not only for its true
usefulness and service, but equal luster and beauty: And if fancy was ever
regulated by the true Interest of the Nation, it may gain a greater advantage
in Beds: No humor so gay, but here may be variety to answer it; which
inconveniency to the Clothiers (had I not already balanced with the Factors) I
might fairly place to their accounts. And for the Merchants Trade for Turkey,
there is no shadow of that at Blackwell Hall; or if any Merchant incline to buy
Cloth at his own House, so many samples are presently sent in by Factors, that
Plenty makes him Poor, and he knows not which to gratify. A Clothier may now
stand by his Cloth in the best place he can find at Blackwell-Hall, one Market
after another, like an Owl in the Desert, and never see a Merchant, which will
soon enough attract a Kite or an Hawk, a Packer or a Factor, both which are
Birds of Prey, in buying of Cloth to sell it again, and the Clothier wholly
becomes an unconcerned Person in the Sale of his own Goods; as if he came from
some remote part of the World, and could not speak English, and knew not how to
dispose his own time, were it not for some sociable Tabaconist-Shops, whom
Custom, and a little Profit, has made a familiar entertainment; his Spirits
kept up by the hopes of his Factor, who once a day will come to him, and shake
him by the hand, and acquaint him, he is in hopes of a good Chapman, at a
little abatement, and encourage a Compliance; but after all, the Merchant is
gone out of Town for ten days, but doubt not of the full Price when he comes to
Town, and a little Money advanced upon the old account, and Exit.

The Clothier must be at a loss for a Merchant, if the public Market will not
afford him one, and must be beholding to some inferior assistance. The
Merchant would come to the public Market, if he was not satisfied that this
practice of buying of Cloth was more for his profit. And if the Packer and
Factor, who have the Sale of the Cloth, be more of the Merchants side than the
Clothiers, how far may this prevail, by degrees, to the beating down of the
Price of Cloth? The Packer's House, in which there is a greater Trade for
Merchants Cloth, than the public Market of Blackwell-Hall, is only free to
such Merchants as are his friends; supposing some great Packer, of Interest and
Cunning, should get into his hands most of the choicest Cloth of a Country,
which may be easily done, if some considerable Merchants will stick by him, and
they agree together, that this Cloth shall wholly come into their hands; may
not this be some kind of Monopoly; and some Merchants outdo others? I am sure
hereby a few great Packers grow vastly rich and impoverish others. Experience
shows us, that as Trade is now managed, the Merchant never makes any advance in
a dull time of Trade. The Packers many times prevail with their Clothiers to
die Cloth upon their account in the Summer, when there has been a little
prospect of Trade in the Winter; at which time drying is hazardous, in which,
if a miscarriage, it lights upon the Clothier, and the longer time, at last,
for payment, to be procured by the Merchant; and no Citizen but understands the
value of Money, Seven per Cent. to the Exchequer, or otherwise. That which
fooled Bellarmine in Transubstantiation, and he could never get over, is, at
this time made good by some great Packers and Factors: They have the same
Clothiers at work for them in two places at the same time; they work for them
in the Country, with their hands, and in their Closets, by their Tallies, which
is a Substance that equally effects the same end. This great City (were it not
for the support of life,) I think, would like Polyphemus, devour the Country
Homo homini lupus.
. This being the present management of the Sale of our Woollen-Manufacture, in
undeniable matters of Fact, I shall not further insist upon the unequal
division of the Profit between the Country and the City. A blot in Game is no
blot until hit; and if the younger Brother has outwitted the elder --

I come now, in all submission, to the third part of our Bill, the marking of
Pinion-Cloth.

That Cloth made of Pinions and Noyles, is of a worse quality than Cloth made
of perfect Fleece-Wool, admits no dispute, the one being made of the
Holding-Staple of the Wool, the other with the Flocky part of the Wool, that is
separate from the long Staple. The quantity of Pinions that usually arise out
of this long Wool, is about two pound in twelve, in an ordinary way of making
them.

In the next place, when this Pinion-Cloth is made up, and Hot-press'd, the
wariest Buyer is liable to be deceived.

The resolution of former Parliaments, in this particular, may be of some
moment to confirm the reasonableness of it now, as in several Statutes appears,
it was not admitted into Broad-Cloth; and the narrow Cloth to have one black
List, and the other a plain Selvage, as appears by the Statute of King James
the First Anno quarto Jacobi cap. 2.
. The quantity of these Pinions is much increased, as the Trade of Stuffs and
Serges: But if the care of our Ancestors was such, in a less quantity, to
preserve our reputation abroad, the same reason is certainly strengthened by
its increase: But for farther confirmation, I will here insert a particular
Character that I saw of its reputation from Smyrna, which was, That the Levant
Company had better buy up the raskally Pinion-Cloth, and set it on Fire, than
send it thither.

By another public Declaration, from the same place, it appears, that several
Persons that bought quantities of it were undone by it. One Cariboyle, an
Armenian, turned Turk, to have the benefit of the Laws of Turkey, against an
English Merchant that sold him a quantity of it, and recovered one hundred and
eighty Dollars. Albyn's Case.
--

Its reputation abroad, when experienced, farther appears by its shifting at
home, and appearing at Market, like Proteus, in changeable Shapes of all the
Letters of the Alphabet.

And if homo trium nominum, was a character of eminence of old, what must four
and twenty make? -- homo trium literarum to the public.

And that this Cloth may be well suited with Buttons, I cannot but recommend
Bengall-Silk, (the kindness of the East India Company, in return of our
Bullion) being near of a quality for service. The unhappy effects of which
sufficiently appear at this time, when you shall not see one Man in five that
has any Silk upon a Button, a great check to the Woollen-Manufacture.

And I doubt not but Pinion-Cloth has wrought the same effects abroad, put
People, in many places, upon setting up some Fabric of their own.

A deceitful Commodity will soon bring its self out of esteem, and can never
bear up against Experience.

The advantage we got upon the Turks, in the way of Batter at the first, is
known only by private Persons, but the effect more public at home, and the
Cheat, paid to the Silk-man; as much deceit appearing in the opening of a Bail
of Ardass Silk, as there could be in Pinion-Cloth, and conditional Bargains,
for the most part, made in the Commodity.

And how unhappy must the consequence of this be, on both sides, to a Public
Good, when our Cloth is the only proper Commodity for the Turks, and their Silk
altogether as useful to us? And how uneasy must Trade be carried on, when
there is a mistrust and jealousy on both sides, where it cannot well be managed
but by a dependence upon Reputation and Honesty?

Another Argument of advantage to the Public, arises from the greater
consumption of Cloth that would be occasioned hereby. If this Cloth were
marked, and sold according to its merit, the Price of it thereby would be
lessened; and it would come into many hands that cannot now reach the Price of
Cloth, and be avoided by others, that are now deceived by it, and hindered from
good Fleece-Wool Cloth that they expected; and hereby the Price of Good Cloth
would be more advanced than the other lessened, considering the quantity. And
further, if this Cloth was marked, and well known amongst our selves, it would
be sure to be sent abroad on its proper Errand. Should a Merchant send a
quantity of Bays to Russia, his Intellect in Trade would be called in question
in so cold a Climate; and the same, should a well-made Piece of Drab-Cloth, be
sent into Spain. In like manner, Pinion loose Cloth may be much properer in
Spain and Portugal, where it is made into loose Garments, that are not put to
stress, than in Russia, where no Cloth can be too good to support in so frigid
a Climate: And I may confidently affirm, that the decay and loss of that Trade
is very much owing to Pinion bad Cloth; to retrieve which Russia Trade, there
can be no properer undertaking, in pursuance of a Public Good: But this will
be crying stinking Fish abroad. The Golden Rule, we say, is to do as we would
be done by. Should a Gentleman send his Servant into the Market to buy a
Lamprey (a Fish of value) and he should be put upon with a Conger-Eel, and the
Cheat discovered by the Master's Palate, would it not sit uneasy in his
Stomach? or should Compechia or Silvester be sold for Cechinele, being much
alike, it would be a Cheat to the Buyer, although both of them will make a grain
Color, and the Price being proportioned to the merit of each, it can be no
hindrance to either: And why is the Tower mark put upon Plate? Our reputation
abroad, in this particular, is of greater value to the Interest of the Nation,
than at home, contesting there with other Nations. Besides, how many
Imprecations has been powered out upon us, by this occasion to the first,
second, and third Generation, and the name of God blasphemed amongst the Turks,
through us Christians? We read of the Primitive Christians in the Skins of wild
Beasts, but lo! here are wild Beasts in the Skins of Christians, devouring
Turks and Armenians: And how reflecting for an Armenian to turn Turk, and
recover in this manner of a Christian; it has, I think, loudly enough
proclaimed its quality, without a Crier, and proved so snappish a Cur in our
Ware houses abroad, that it is not only our generous Interest, but necessity,
to show its Muzel, and Solomon decides the point, who tells us, That
Righteousness exalts a Nation.

And this brings me gradually to the next part of our Bill, That all Cloth that
is made of perfect Fleece-Wool, shall be marked with the Letters Crowned, which
has a little connection with the last.

It is no less the subject of admiration than pity, and indeed notorious in
fact, that the Woollen-Manufacture, which is (and has always been esteemed)
the Glory of our English Nation, should be thus imbas'd, and become the free
subject of each Makers private Interest.

And whereas, thirty years last past, it was the study and great care, both of
Merchant and Clothier, that the goodness of the Commodity should be preserved
according to its Worthiness: Within this twenty years last past, the current of
Trade has run as violent in the contrary Channel; and that Clothier found the
most encouragement in the Merchants way, that made it the most slight and
deceitful; it is become almost a Cheat in its self, that it may thereby be made
the subject of a greater, in its excessive straining of it; in both which
particulars, we are now arrived to such perfection, that it is but reasonable to
think, that this is the last parcel of Cloth we intend to sell the Turks.

A shame indeed, that such Cloth should be seen abroad, bearing the name of
English.

I have seen Cloth that was sent to Russia, not many years since, that I am
well assured, that a judicious Woollen Draper would not give two shillings a
yard for it, who knew its service. This now being become so general a
Distemper, and experienced in all our Markets abroad, the sole design of this
Article of our Bill, is first to redress the bad making of our Cloth at home,
and then to testify the same abroad by these signal Letters of Reformation,
according to the ancient practice of Edward the Sixth, who commanded the same,
by the Letter E Crowned.

And although, there is nothing proposed in this Bill for Reformation, I hope it
will be added by better judgment; the only offer I can make is the holding
Merchants Cloth to a weight, and preventing the excessive straining of it.

The reputation of any Commodity is no small advantage to the sale of it,
whilst we are in emulation abroad with other Nations: And were our care in
improving the Woollen Manufacture answerable to the benign favor of
Providence, in affording us means and encouragements, we must certainly out
shine the whole World in this excellent Commodity. But the management of the
Woollen-Manufacture, to bring it to its due perfection, requires as great care,
experience, and judgment, as any Commodity in the English Nation; and to have
it undertaken by all sorts, that have not been duly and regularly brought up to
it, is a great discouragement to the Trade it self, and those that are
industrious in it, and brings a great dis-reputation upon the Commodity it
self. These abuses being regulated, we should build upon a sure foundation, and
the very Turks may become sharers in our late deliverance.

And this brings me to the last part of our Bill, that all long Cloth shall be
made of one limited length.

It appears in former Statutes Quarto Jacobi cap. 2.
, that it was as great a Penalty for making Cloth too long as too short.

In the first place, We find it a great ease in Trade, by a customary Sale of
our Merchants Cloth, at so much the whole Cloth, it prevents many
inconveniences in the difficulty of measure, and there can be no preservation
of this, but by the exactest certainty that we can arrive to in our lengths.
And should we once break bounds in this particular, there would be no stop, the
Merchants desire would grow larger than our Timber to make Stocks to mill the
Cloth, and we should only hereby endeavor to supplant each other in Trade, by
giving privately a little farther allowance herein.

And in the next place, many parts of the wages belonging to the Trade, having
a long time been settled at so much by the Cloth, it will come hard upon the
laborious part of the Trade; and it would likewise be too heavy a burden to
our Pack-Horses, in so long a Journey. And I think this grievance wants little
more ground for Reformation, having been already tedious: And thus much for
what particularly relates to our Bill.

Several Objections arise against our Bill, but the most plausible, That it
will ruin all the little Clothiers, if they are forced to come up to sell
small quantities of Cloth.

The making of a less quantity of Cloth than a Bail, which is five Cloths, and
in value thirty five or forty Pounds in the merchants way, is an Obstruction to
the Sale. The Factorage of these is five and twenty Shillings: This being
saved, it will very well bear the charge of the Journey. And Experience shows
us, that few little Clothiers, that now make any Cloth, but do come up with
their Cloth, although they save nothing by their Journey; and there could not be
one Journey in two saved, as it is now managed.

The trial of advantage or loss, to little Clothiers, in this case, must
chiefly depend, between the kindness of the Merchant, and the kindness of the
Factor. If a Merchant buy five Cloths of a little Clothier, and in kindness to
him, order him to make five more as good, and send them up to him, and draw a
Bill upon him for the Money; the kindness of the Merchant in going to
Blackwell-Hall, and ordering the Hall-Keeper to send them in to him, will as
well save a Clothier a Journey as the Factor; and if half the Factorage be
allowed on the Price to the Merchant, it will be felt.

And if Trade was in the old Channel, that Cloth was sold for ready Money, the
little Clothier need not fear the Sale of his Cloth in a time of demand for
Cloth; if he came up in a dull time, a little abatement would always find ready
Money; and if he had his Money, and made but the same quantity of Cloth again,
the Money earned by his Family out of the Cloth would be considerable. And the
Factor can do no more to sell Cloth in a dull time, than the Clothier himself.
But, quoth the Factor, we then lend the Clothier Money: This, by the rule
Solomon, at the first stroke, inverts the order, and puts the Servant in the
Master's place, who tells us, That the Borrower is Servant to the Lender; and
from whence this Money came, I shall not inquire: This smelt a little of the
Cask to the Committee. This kindness is like a Bucket of Water to a dry Pump,
only to set a stream going, which will soon bring the poor Clothier into a
Diabetis. The Money will be sure to be wanting at such a time that his Price
must be beaten down, to procure it, or the Factor become Merchant, which is
worse. What Laocoon observed of the Grecians, may be very serviceable to us in
an offered kindness from a Factor, Timeo Danaos and dona ferentes: Some private
design being at the end of it; and I wholly submit herein to the Experience
that these Clothiers have found.

Many miserable Instances have appeared of late years at the death of those
Clothiers that are in this way of Trade, which would be too tedious to relate;
as in the Case of Arundel and Gardmer, in the County of Gloucester, the one
making eight or ten Cloths a Week, and the other twelve or fourteen, both dying
in this flourishing Trade; the one left not above one hundred Pounds to his own
Relation, and the other never paid his own just Debts in the Country.

Another tumultuous Clamor arises against our Bill, from the Pinion Interest,
pursuing the exact measures of Demetrim, the Silver-smith, foot by foot. Sir,
ye know by this Craft we have our Wealth; our Craft is in danger of being set
at naught; and all the Interest cries out for two hours, Great is Diana of the
Ephesians: In like manner, when Pinion-Cloth was like to be marked in good
earnest.

This narrow-spirited Interest, like a drowning Man, catches at every sprig to
preserve it self. Sir, Its impossible to make course Cloth to hold six
Quarters: This exactness will ruin our Trades that make course Cloth. If this
Bill pass, I must turn off all my Weavers; and in this great tumult and
concourse, mercenary Messengers were dispatched with all Expedition to all
Quarters, with blanck Papers to get Subscriptions to the Factors Petition to
the Parliament; in which hot Enterprise, some of the Undertakers (doubtless
hoping their Wages would rise according to their Subscriptions) persuaded many
of the ignorant Work People, it was to suppress the Blackwell-Hall Factors, and
thereby prevailed.

Learned Tully, who was a true Patriot of his Country, heartily wished, that
every Man's Estate might be proportioned to his good to the Public. Should
Tully's wish prevail, it would make a strange Metamorphosis in our days.

I think now I cannot be thought altogether impertinent in an indifferent Essay
(keeping within the compass of my promise) whilst we are under the sensible
pressures of our own neglect and folly.

Nothing has more impoverished this Nation, than the loss of our Wool into
France, and the extraordinary growth of so many Wool broggers in the City of
London, Southwark, and adjacent places. I think 'em therefore fit to be treated
upon together, from their acquaintance: The lovs of our Wool being an immediate
loss to our selves, and advance to France; the quantity may be better made out
by other hands, but upon all accounts very considerable; the value of our loss
in ordinary Wool, is above the worth of the Wool in the Manufacture; in Worsted
Wool, made into Stockings, fine Stuffs, Druggets, and the like, four or five
times the value of the Wool; the meeting us abroad at Markets with our own
Growth, the encouraging their own Wool, by a mixture of ours, and working so
much cheaper in France, had need of a better Arithmetician for the summing it
up.

The Wool brogger, in being instrumental to the imbasing the Woollen
Manufacture, and losing its reputation abroad; as likewise (if many Men are not
mistaken) in forwarding the former.

The beginning of which growing mischief, (evidently in the Wool brogger, and,
I think, impliedly in the other) I compute from the 20th of King James the
First, where I find a repeal of the good Statute of Edward the Sixth, Anno
quinto, cap. 7. that had continued in force Seventy years: The effect of which,
I think, may be described in the pathetical Complaint of the Poet in a like
case. Fugere pudor, verumque fidesque,
In quorum subiere locum fraudesque dolique
Insidiaeque and vis, and amor sceleratus habendi.
Ovid. The condition of the English Nation (by the Preamble of the Statute of
Edward the Sixth, Anno quinto, cap. 6.) seems to run parallel with our present
times, where it is thus expressed, That many Clothiers, for lack of Knowledge
and Experience, and some of extreme Covetousness, do daily more and more study
rather to make many, than to make good Cloths, having more respect to their
private Commodity and Gain, than the advancement of Truth, and continuance of
the Commodity, in estimation according to the worthiness of it, have, and do
daily, instead of Truth, practice Falsehood; and instead of substantial making
of Cloth, do practice slight and slender making of Cloth, by mingling Fell Wool
and Lambs-Wool, etc. No such thing as Pinions in those days.

After a due care taken in that Statute to preserve the Reputation of the
Woollen-Manufacture, by the best means that could be then thought of,
consulting all Artificers in the Trade, followed the Statute I now mention,
where all Persons were strictly prohibited from buying any Wool, upon a double
Forfeiture of the value of the said Wool, unless they spun it into a Yarn, or
made it into some sort of Manufacture; and no Clothier to have any assistance
in buying of Wool, but by Servants, abiding in his Mansion House, which Statute
was made in those days with a great deal of debate and consideration, as
appears by a remarkable Clause in the said Statute, which is almost singular,
that the King, by his Proclamation, should Dissolve the Act of Parliament.
After five Years Experience, there was an Appeal made to the Parliament, by the
Inhabitants of the Town of Hallifax, where dwelt a considerable number of poor
Traders, that could not buy Horses to fetch in their Wool, but had always been
accustomed to buy small parcels of the Wool-Drivers, and carry it home upon
their heads; and they desired the same liberty again, which, upon particular
consideration, I find, was obtained, but the Statute more strictly confirmed in
the general; and those Wool-drivers of Hallifax were strictly limited to that
Town, upon a double forfeiture of their Wool; as appears by the Statute of
Philip and Mary; Secundo and tertio Phil. and Mariae, cap. 13.

Which is plain demonstration, that they found a benefit to the Public, by
that Statute which afterward continued in force all the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, and to the twentieth of King James, and then Repealed. The
strictness of which Statute, and extraordinary Penalty of Forfeiture of double
the value of the said Wool, and remarkable caution, that the Clothier should
have no assistance in buying of Wool, but by his own immediate Servants, seems
to provide against this double mischief: First the imbasing of our Cloth; Wool
being a Commodity that will shelter more deceit than the wariest Buyer can
discover, as was never better known than at this day.

In the next place, it seems to fence against the Exportation of our Wool.

It Is very evident, that had we no Recetters, we could not be liable to these
French Thieves; no French Man could come and buy Wool openly.

The buying of Wool being strictly confined to the Manufactures, it is unlikely,
upon several considerations, that they should be concerned in this practice;
nay, I think, almost impracticable: First, the remoteness of their living from
the places that are proper for this purpose, as Sussex, and the like, no
Clothing parts being within fifty Miles of it, and thereby incapable of waiting
for seasonable times, for the delivery of it to French Shalops.

In the next place, This Wool must be paid for by French Bills, or by some
French Man living in London: This way is very difficult to be found out, and
adjusted by one that is a Stranger a London; and the practice it self is
directly contrary to the Interest of their own Trades: It is not time ill
spent, when we are sensing against an Enemy, to consider which way we are like
least to be attacked.

How fair now does all this come to hand with these Woolbroggers, living in
London, and adjacent places? They buy up all the Wool that grows fair for the
practice, as Rumney-Marsh, etc. Afterward they pack it up, and leave it at the
Breeders Houses, until conveniences of sending for it: This being ready packed
up, how easy is it to let some part be brought to London, and the other to a
French Shalop: The buying part is in their own way, and can give no mistrust;
the bringing part for London, a shelter to the other for France. Communication
with Frenchmen at London, to adjust opportunities of meeting at an exact time,
and any correspondence in France, by Letters of Commerce without notice, French
Bills which usually come over, at double usance, as well to be managed by them
in point of time, as is possible: And that they have been concerned in this
practice, I think, is evident by the appearance of a double quantity of Wool in
their hands. At the beginning of our French Wars Wool was not cheaper to
encourage it in the Buying part: The dullness of Trade gave opportunities of
trusting greater quantities to their old Traders; and nothing, I think, but a
back door stopped could occasion it.

Here are a considerable Party of Men that flourish like Solomon's Lilies, that
neither toil nor spin, that only get a Profit out of the Wool, and no way
encourage the Woollen-Manufacture; but on the contrary, a Pack of Wool carried
forty Miles backwards and forwards, will not make the more Cloth at the
Journies end, I wish I could say it would not make less. No Farmer that has
long Wool, that is fit for Combing, and short Wool that is fit for Clothing,
but may easily have it divided, either by Clotheir or Comber. And in carrying
on any considerable Trade in the Nation, it seems a fair question to know, What
good to the Public?

By an Artificer at Mouse-Traps, we have a security to our Cheese and Bacon: By
an Ingineer at Pigs-Rings, a check to the mischievous nature of the Swine: By
an Artist at Save-alls, a thristy help to make the most of the Candle: The
Scavenger and Goldfinder are useful in their proper Seasons; but Cui bono,
these Men? their usefulness to the Public is much like that of the Hedgehog;
they wrap themselves up in warm Wool, and prick the Fingers of all their
English Traders.

The true spring of all substantial Commerce, ought to arise from a real
benefit that accrues thereby to the Public, either immediately to our selves,
or which is serviceable to other Parts, and thereby brings home an advantage,
and the undoubted order of the great Creator of the Universe, who did nothing
in vain.

The private engrossing of Commodities, to no other end than to advance the
Price, is only a Private Interest preying upon the Public; and I think the
same reason to prevent Engrossing Materials in Trade, as it is in the concern
of Life; this being but one degree a remoter cause. To instance at present in
Cochinele and Indigo, both which are very material Commodities in the present
course of the Woollen-Manufacture, and both these Commodities lately Engrossed,
and thereby the Prizes very much Inhanc'd. The advantage of this is only to the
Ingrossers.

A pound of Cochinele will make no better a color coming out of their hands,
after advanced ten or fifteen Shillings, than when they took it in: This
extraordinary profit must be made good by the Public; and indeed this Year it
has been an extraordinary check to fine Cloth.

Nay, to come nearer, great part of this private Profit has been made good by
the Officers of our Army, that fight for our security, and the luster of the
Color, weakened by their private Profit. Were the practice of Engrossing
Foreign Commodities nearly considered, it will appear to be an advantage to
Foreign Parts, and a weakening of our selves: When a Foreign Commodity, by this
means, is advanced here, that which follows, the Price is advanced abroad, and
only an encouragement to a dronish Interest at home, that hereby preys upon the
Public, and a Stock that lies lurking for this purpose, kept out of Trade,
where it might do good; which is a Grievance upon the Woollen-Manufacture,
which, I hope, will be Redressed.

The Experience of the Growth of France will, I hope, quicken our Care in the
reviving of the Statute of Edward the Sixth; which for its worth to the public
Good, deserves to be wrote in Letters of Gold; and that the severity of the
Statute against Exportation of Wool will be turned into the full Reward of the
value of the Wool to the Seizer or Discoverer, with the least trouble that can
be contrived: And that any Person or Persons that shall be found aiding or
assisting in the Design of Exportation of Wool, shall be liable to so many
Years Imprisonment: The one (is evident) has not answered its end in a true
meaning; and on the other hand, nothing like a clear Reward to quicken
Diligence.

And for a Proof of the Repeal of the Statute of Edward the Sixth, could the
Gentlemen in Sussex truly inform themselves of the Price of their Wool in the
flourishing time of Queen Elizabeth, and compare it with twenty years last
past, I dare say they would be for having this Statute revived, notwithstanding
their fairness to Exportation: And to argue that if these Wool-Broggers did not
buy their Wool, it would remain upon their Hands unsold, is but short-sighted
Reasoning. If a Clothier in Wiltshire could buy Wool a Farthing in a Pound
cheaper in Sussex than his own County, his love to his County would not sway
that Interest, if he had the free command of his own Stock. And to desire such
Assistance as this in a dull time of Trade (which has always its Ebbings and
Flowings) is no other than the desire of a draught of cold Drink in a High
Fever, which will return with double Vigor the next Fit; and People in such a
heat ought to have some care took of them.

And no need of an Argument to prove the Sway of private Interest, when it
shall openly appear to procure a free Exportation of our Wool, and be willing
freely to part with so valuable a Jewel; whose Intellect must be greatly
informed, did they consider the low condition of the Nation, when our Wool was
carried abroad to be Manufactured, before the days of Edward the Third, when
the Government was chiefly supported by a Duty paid out of our Wool Exported;
and when fourteen pound of Wool was sold here for eighteen-Pence Vicesimo
quinto Hen. 8. ca. 13.
; when the Subjects of Edward I. were so much grieved at the Toll they paid
out of their Wool, of Forty Shillings for every Sack Vicesimo quinto Edw 1. ca.
7.
; and when there was a Subsidy granted to Edward III. of the ninth Fleece, the
ninth Lamb, and the ninth Sheaf, to carry on a War in France Decimo quarto Edw.
3. ca. 20.
. In those days, when our Wool was carried abroad to be Manufactured, and Trade
had brought home no better ways of raising of Money. And the extraordinary care
of Edward the Third to encourage the Manufacturing of it here Decimo quarto
Edw. 3. ca. 5.
, by allowing Cloth-workers of a strange Land more Privilege than his own
Subjects: The increase of which, has plainly increased the Riches of this
Nation, a Jewel of greater Value than rightly understood, according to the
Judgment of Famous Coke, who computes that Nine Parts in Ten of our exported
Commodities do come from the Sheeps Back. The Value of Wool indeed is not
enough understood amongst us, or at least too little considered; a Commodity
capable of being converted to almost any Use, and adapted to the Humor and
Usefulness of hot and cold Climates; and still carrying a true Merit with it,
not only the Bread of the Nation, but, like Sampson's Locks, in it consists our
Strength and Security; our Foreign Trade depending upon the
Woollen-Manufacture, and our Shipping our Bulwarks; and if People are our
Riches, and Forage as well the Support of a War, as the Soldiers that fight
the Battle, both ought jointly to be considered: And that we want People in
this Nation, I think admits no question. I will pass by the Consideration of
the immediate Advantage to our selves in the employment of the laborious part
of the Nation, and thereby affecting the Value of the other Produce of the
Ground, and the Usefulness and Beauty to our selves, in so good and genteel a
Clothing, and only take notice of its kind Effects that it brings us from
abroad.

And first of all, (that Right may take place) from Turkey, by the Honorable
Levant Company, abundance of Raw-Silk, Grograms, Yarn, Cotton-Wool; all which
are useful Commodities, and employ numerous hands here. From Hamburgh, Germany,
and Flanders, all sorts of Linens suitable to all Occasions. From Spain and the
West Indies, our Bullion, Spanish-Wool, Corn, Cochinele. From Russia, Dantzick,
and the East Country, Potashes, Flax, Hemp, useful to our Shipping, all
substantial and needful Commodities; by which the Merchants fetch the Money
from the Nobility and Gentry, in a substantial Circulation of Affairs; not
Humm-Humms, and Mull-Mulls, Callicoes and Muslings for borrowed Bullion. 'Twas
never well with this Nation since we have endeavored so much to make a show
without substance, and built Castles in the Air for Stock-jobbings. And if so
many Advantages to the Nation, and so excellent a crop of Fruit from this fair
Tree, how reflecting is the neglect of it, when the Suckers and useless Scyons
overtop the true Branches, and a seeming Contest between the Sons of the
Bondwoman and the Free?

Nor is it inconsiderable how far the Artificers in the Woollen-Manufacture do
otherwise contribute to the Support of the Government.

These are those good Subjects that chiefly delight in the Society of the
Indian Weed, measuring time by the Pipe; and will sooner suffer a Famine in the
Cupboard than the Box; which in a plenty time of Trade is too good a Shooe-horn
to the Liquid Excise; many of these choosing rather to wear their Hands by hard
Labor than part with their Liquor: An Advantage as well to the Crown as the
Farmer.

And as our Woollen-Manufacture (arising out of the Country) does yield these
good Advantages, and bring us home these necessary Commodities; and likewise
the chief Dependence of our Trade at home, is upon the Consumption of these
Commodities amongst our selves, (little Goods brought to England that is
carried to other Dominions, and an Advantage thereby, as in Holland. I wish I
could say we had all our own at the first Hand: And if I had enough of Father
Latimer's Gravity to make a Wish, it should be confined to the narrow compass
of a Nutmeg, to rub my Toast that was brought to England at the first Hand.)
This must likewise receive its Life, and ebb and flow, according to the Revenue
of our Land: The Streams cannot rise higher than the Fountain: As our Wool
increases, our Trade; as our Trade increases, our People. And what the witty
Cowley proposes in his Agriculture, To have one College in each University
appropriated to the encouragement of Husbandry, has much reason in it: And had
he added the Shepherds Crook to his Plough in the Field Arable, it had
certainly been the proper Arms of England.

The Value of the whole Nation at this time, I dare say, is one fifth part lost
for want of Skill to manure, and Money to Stock it. Ill Husbandry is the
Offspring of Poverty. To find out the true cause of this, the Gentleman must
leave the City, and come to his ancient Mansion House in the Country; where he
will find but Five hundred Sheep upon a Farm, that if manured to the height
would keep Seven.

In short, The City has so drained the Country, that there is not Money enough
left to make the most of Estates. And although we have had a better Advantage
than our Forefathers in the Return of our Money by Bills of Exchange, (a neat
and secure way of doing of Business,) it were better for the Country if they
run the same Hazard that they did. This Practice has brought the Wallet too
much upon one side; the City is cumbersome by its bigness, and the Country
starved.

But I return to the Woollen-Manufacture: out of which there is, upon modest
Computation, One hundred thousand Pounds per Annum, carried away by those
Persons that no way encourage it; who live splendidly, and neither plough nor
sow, which possibly may be their proper part. How valuable this is to a public
Good to have such a dead Weight hanged upon the Master-wheel of our Trade, when
we are in Competition with other Nations, is beyond my Arithmetic, and
doubles, in my Thoughts, as the price of a Horse at a Penny a Nail. Whatsoever
unnecessary Charge we suffer to clog this Commodity, is plainly a hindrance to
the public Good: And if that Duty that is now paid out of our Cloth Exported
was doubled to the Crown some way or other upon Importation, it might be our
Advantage. This is but shooing our Horse with Lead (the Simile being at hand)
that is to run for our Plate.

And here I cannot pass by the Glory of the Aulnage Court without a little
Observation, its large Revenue arising out of the Woollen-Manufacture. This
Court having made fairer Footsteps to Arbitrary Power in the late times, than
the High-Commission-Court could attain to. These Aulnagers first seized Cloth,
then laid Fines, heard their own Causes, and determined; and whatsoever they
imposed was effectual Execution before you had your Goods: nay, their under
Officers made their own Fees: Every Jackdaw and Rooke will steal a Lock from
the poor Sheeps Back to make his Nest easy.

And as the East India Company with their Stock, resolved to have one Cloth go
for two, as Aulnagers, willing enough to have two Cloths, Forrels and all, at
the old Price of one, as Merchants. Caninus appetitu, needs a Physician. These
prevailed two Years, and resolved to carry all before them, (being still
flushed with Success at the Exchequer-Bar;) they seized Forty long Cloths of
one Man's that would not comply with their Arbitrary Proceedings, of the value
of Four hundred Pounds, and kept them almost a Year, the matter in dispute
being only Ten Shillings; and one Cloth might have been Pledge enough, had they
not herein shown their Power and Arbitrary Greatness; the best Warehouse in
Town at this time for Woollen Goods.

All at this Court went current on their sides, being Judge and Jury both: And
where they said the Hares Ears must go for Horns, as in the Creation it was, so
Hats, Stockings, Stuffs, Serges; nay, in our mulish Commodities, the Wool must
bear the Sway, and all summoned to Court, and accordingly appeared. They had
scarce past by the Kitching-Maids Mopps being made of Wool, had not the
sharpness of Joan's Temper scaled 'em, and a liquid Entertainment at the
Summons, and indeed built upon valuable Consideration. Wages without Work is
the way to make Men arbitrary and imperious. Could the Fleece of the Devil be
manufactured, when he was to appear upon the Earth; or Mahomet in the likeness
of a Ram, you may have a Seal at this Office, Ecce iterum Crispinus and est
mihi saepe vocandus Ad parts. Juv.
to show it to be a current Commodity, and one better or other in Four and
twenty, to make a Cloth-mark, was there any thing to be got by it. But this
Subject has been well explained, and I hope we are near a Deliverance.

The last thing I humbly offer (having, I doubt, been too tedious already)
being of great concern to the Public, and a check to the Woollen Manufacture,
was the breaking the Company of Merchant-Adventurers.

It evidently appeared to the Observation of the most considerate makers of
Cloth, that had a dependence upon the Hamburgh Trade, that the breaking of that
Company in former days, was a very deftructive Act to the Clothing Trade; and
from that very time Reputation in the Cloth Trade began to decline; and the
Substantial Credit that had been many Years maintained in a regular fair Trade,
shipping off Cloth constantly twice or three times a Year was soon interlop'd
away.

This was introduced by a great pretense of the Dog in the Manger, and color
of Reformation and Amendment of Trade ( A la mode at that time) which soon
appeared in its true Effects like the rest; and the same Cloth that was sold at
Twelve Pounds per Cloth, was soon brought down to Ten; and since by degrees, to
Nine, matter of Fact and to be proved.

The Clothiers that were prevailed upon (by the great Reformers) to Petition
for it, were gratified in their desire; exactly like the Frogs, who petitioned
to Jupiter for a new King, making a great complaint of the dullness of the Beam
that he first sent them: and to satisfy their desire in the contrary, he sent
them the Stork. The Truth of this Simile is very well remembered at this day, by
the extraordinary Abatements, cheat in measure, only the middle of the Cloth
paid for by some, and enough sharp'd out of the Clothier to maintain the
Interloper Kitchen, as was reckoned in the height of those times. But these
Merchants were in great measure supplanted themselves, in a short time, by
another sort of Merchants that hereby sprung up, that are one degree worse than
the Stork. And could not the Devil appear in any Shape, and only known, they
say, by his Cloven Foot, one could never believe to have met a Factor in this
Station; and yet too true to make a Jest. Here will be large Thongs cut out of
the public Hide! to encourage his Commissions from abroad, and lumping
Pennyworths of Cloth sent out; and let the King beware of his Customs when
Factors sell Nutmegs.

One would have thought it impossible for two such opposite Interests to be
undertaken by the same Hand, (but this difficult point meeting with so great
Integrity and vast Parts, the Delphian Oracle, by the secret whispers of his
Lips,) is kept as upright as Justice it self. But it evidently appears, that
the Man is at great pains to do it, for he is forced to chew all his Words
before he delivers them out, that one Interest may be kept private from the
other; if not, there would be such interferings, that it would be impossible to
be managed: Half Merchant, half Factor, sounds a little old. Let with great
Discretion, the one part in this Case may be serviceable to the other. The
first Letter being dispatched to the Correspondent abroad, to acquaint him (for
his Encouragement) how good a Pennyworth of Cloth he can now send him,
something cheaper than the last. The next Letter falls on course to the
Clothier: Sir, Ireceived your Cloths, and am sorry I can give you no better
Encouragement: Here are such vast quantities of Cloth sent from other Parts,
and they daily under-sell us; so that unless I comply a little, I must be
forced to stand still, and light the Candle. --

It Is almost incredible what thirty or forty Years neglect in Trade may
produce, and what monstrous Shapes by long use may grow familiar, and little
notice took: And the Mysteries of Trade are now thought so deep and abstruse,
like the Rabbis Greek. Non potest leg^ We want some of the Race of
publick-spirited Tully* (...) temporit! Oh mores!

The only knowledge of Interloping, that appears to my observation, (being
wholly a Stranger abroad) is only this, That some Foreigners, either Merchants
or Shopkeepers, living within the limits of the ancient Charter of the
Hamburgh Company, shall have the free liberty of our English Market for what
Cloth they please; as likewise for the Sale of any of their own Country Goods,
at so much per Cent. as they can make their Bargain with some Packer or Factor.
This belief of mine is grounded upon this plain appearance, That these are the
Men that buy the Cloth of us for those Parts; and not above two or three
Hamburgh Merchants that now buy any Cloth: What room there is left at this rate
for the English Merchant, is to me unintelligible; I think, in the same
condition as the ancient Clothing Trade in the Country; Et solamen miseris
socios habuisse doloris, if I may be so familiar with the Expression: But, I
think, both of the practices equally hurtful to the Public: By this means the
support of the Credit of our English Cloth in Holland and Germany, is, in great
measure fallen into the Power of those Foreign Merchants; for as they beat down
the Price by their Agents here, upon the Clothier, and have no strict regard to
the true merit and excellency of our English Cloth. It hereby follows, that our
Cloth is much imbas'd, which is the best means to prefer the Cloth of their
own Nation, and steal the Trade from us.

The Clothiers care in good making of Cloth in former days, was evidently
preserved by the good judgment of the Hamburgh Merchants; and thereby we kept
the Trade from the Dutch and other Nations: The lowest Price of English Cloth
is hereby well known abroad. Nay, these Packers and Factors having got the Sale
of Cloth wholly into their hands (and this found out by Foreign Traders) these
are the fittest Men, upon several Considerations, to be employed. The Packer
has an advantage in his own Trade, and a little Commission will serve; but
these Packers and Factors hereby, being put upon Vying one with another who
shall get the most Commissions; which must be by the best Penniworths. Cloth is
brought one scotch lower than the Merchant himself could do; and, I think, a
very great disgrace to the English Nation, that our blind side is found out by
every --

The quantity of Cloth Exported by the old Company of Merchant-Adventurers,
compared with what has been sent out these late Years in this Channel of
Trade, together with the Price then and now, is both proof and motive to an
establishment of a new Hamburgh Company, and the privileges that the English
Merchants enjoy at the City of Hamburgh, are too great to be slighted.

And if any neglect (in former days) by the Company, in not sending the Cloth,
near enough for the accommodation of the Buyer (which is wisely to be
considered; a Piece of well-made English Cloth not to be sent a begging, and
the value maintained by a wise distance) that fault is very easy to be mended;
Et faelix quem faciunt --

A regular management of Trade, by Companies, is upon several considerations;
The unquestionable Interest of the English Nation, as in keeping up its
grandeur at home; so likewise the Price and Value of our Cloth abroad:
over-stocking of a Market will presently beat down the value of a Commodity;
and this can never be well gaged by private hands. It is true, That public
Companies may make themselves of ill use to the Nation, if they let their
private Interest interlope upon the Public, and endeavor, by the delay of
Shippings, to keep up the Price of Cloth too high abroad, and thereby the
cheaper at home, as likewise, in the effects of Cloth: This will enrich a few,
and impoverish multitudes. The true Interest of the English Nation consists in
a free current of a regular Trade, managed with moderate Profit, and a true
merit in the Commodity to preserve a good Credit abroad, with a vigilant care
at home to encourage the proper effects of those places that are most
servicable to us in taking off our Woollen-Manufacture, by laying a good Duty
upon the Commodities that herein interfere, and are brought home with our
Bullion. As great a mischief as ever, I think, happened to the
Woollen-Manufacture, was the great quantity of Bengal-Silk brought home by the
East India Company; it visibly made such a stop in the Cloth-Trade, that many
poor People were hereby Starved for want of Employment.

And the clearness of this does strangely reflect upon those Turky-Merchants
that send Money to Turkey, to bring home thereby the more Silk; a false step in
that Trade, which, I think, has been wholly occasioned by the loss of our
Credit abroad in our Cloth, and only to help a Lame Dog over the Style: And no
wonder, at the just Complaint of the Farmer, when each Man's Rule in Trade has
been his own choice, and the true Interest of the Nation for this thirty or
forty years, like Pallianurus, who slept at the Helm Gallico somno aut canino.


And thus, I have humbly offered, (in an homespun Style) a true account of the
present management and abuses crept into the Clothing-Trade, without prejudice
or design; wherein, if no redress, it will be a fair removal of the blame;
being very much encouraged hereunto, by the numerous and repeated Acts of
Parliament, made in former days, and the signal care of the
Woollen-Manufacture, by our Ancestors, in minding the highest Rank of our
Council, by the very seats they sat on: And doubt not of your honorable
consideration and distinguishing care of the Country, whereby alone, the Glory
of our English Nation may be advanced, and we may be some eclipse again to the
Great Monarch Lewis le Grand; having, of late years, furnished him with Wings
to fly out of his own Territories, abounding in Pontacque and Nants-Brandy, and
Owl'd out of the Treasure of our Wool, Fullers-Earth, and Timber; our care in
which particulars, will lessen the Glory of France, as well in Peace as War.

FINIS.

