THE Interest of ENGLAND, As it stands with Relation to the Trade of IRELAND,
CONSIDERED; The ARGUMENTS against the BILL, for Prohibiting the Exportation of
Woollen Manufactures from Ireland to Foreign Parts, FAIRLY DISCUSST, And the
Reasonableness and Necessity of Englands restraining her Colonies in all
Matters of Trade, that may be prejudicial to her own Commerce, CLEARLY
DEMONSTRATED.

With short Remarques on a Book, Entitled, Some Thoughts on the BILL depending
before the Right Honorable the House of Lords, for Prohibiting the Exportation
of the Woollen Manufactures of Ireland to Foreign Parts.

LONDON, Printed by John Astwood, at his Printing House behind St. Christophers
Church in Thread-needle-street, the backside of the Royal Exchange. School.

To the Most Honorable, JOHN, Marquess of Normanby, etc.
My Lord,
I Happened to come into the House of Lords at the time when your Lordships
were Hearing Council against the Bill, for the Prohibiting the Exportation of
Woollen Manufactures from Ireland to Foreign Parts; and although I was of the
Opinion, that the Interest of England was fo nearly concerned in that Matter,
as that it would appear at first sight to all disinteressed Persons, that there
was an absolute Necessity of putting a stop to the growth of such a Manufactury
there, which must in its Natural Consequences ravish from us our Principal
Trade, anticipate and divert the Source of our Wealth and Power, and by easy
and (at first) imperceptible degrees, exhaust the very Life and Soul of
England, by drawing away the Working People and Trading Stock: Yet when I came
to Observe, that even the Committing the Bill did admit of a long arguing in
your Honorable House, and was not carried without much Opposition, it brought
me to Consider, that how clear soever it may seem to Men that have been
conversant in the Practice of Trade, yet it must be a Matter of great
Difficulty for your Lordships to determine in such things, where the Judgment
is directed from Information only, since those Informations are generally given
with the greatest partiality: And I know by my own Experience, that any
Impressions received from Persons for whom we have some Favor or Compassion,
are apt to create so strong a prejudging of the Case, that we cannot so easily
discern the reasonableness of the contrary Arguments, or suffer our selves to
be Convinced without the clearest Demonstrations possible. It Is therefore,
because I have thought the Well-being of my Country to depend very much upon
this Case, and that I believe it capable of so plain a Demonstration, that I
have thought it my Duty to endeavor to set this Controversy in so true a
Light, as that it might not be difficult for your Lordships to make a right
Judgment therein.

I have indeed been so far from concerning my self in this Matter hitherto, as
that I have not so much as seen the Bill, and therefore I shall not pretend to
meddle with the Methods taken therein; my Design being only to show the
Necessity there is upon us to stop the progress of such Manufacturys in
Ireland, which directly interfere with those of England; to evince which, I
shall offer a few Propositions, which I take to be so evident, as that they
will admit of no Controversy.

1. That England has no other means of procuring Riches, than by vending a
greater Value of her Commodities in Foreign Markets, than what she expends in
Merchandises imported from abroad.

2. That the far greater Value of the Exportations of England arises from her
Woollen Manufactures.

3. That England has always been able to send as much of her Woollen
Manufacturies abroad, as could be vended in Foreign Markets.

4. That whatsoever Country can afford their Manufacturies cheapest, must
infallibly gain the Trade from that Country that cannot work so cheap.

5. That Ireland is able to make many of the same kinds of Woollen Manufactures
cheaper than England, and therefore will never want a Vent for them in Foreign
Markets.

6. That the whole Quantity of such Manufactures which Ireland shall supply in
Foreign Markets, will hinder the Sale of so much from England, and
consequently the whole Value thereof will be so much clear Loss to England.

7. That whatsoever Number of People shall be employed in this Trade in
Ireland, the same Number of our Manufacturers must sit still in England.

8. That such People to avoid starving at home, will go to Ireland for Work, by
which Means the Woollen Manufactury in Ireland may soon come to be greater than
that in England, and in time the whole Trade would most probably be Established
there, and lost here.

The fatal Consequences that flow from these Premises, are too obvious to need
further Illustration here; but the matter will yet appear more plain, when I
come to answer the Arguments which have been offered against the Bill; To which
I proceed,

1st. That the Government of England have at several times given Encouragement
to the settling a Woolen Manuf^ry in Ireland, and therefore 'twould be very
unreasonable, after they have with great Charge and Difficulty brought the same
to some Perfection, to destroy it at once, and ruin the Undertakers.

I answer, That (supposing this to be true) former times might not see through
all the Inconveniences that might accrue to England by settling a Woollen
Manufactury in Ireland, or perhaps they intended that encouragement only to
capacitate them to make Clothing for themselves, but not to enable them to
interfere with England in its Foreign Trade; for certainly our Ancestors who
prohibited the sending their Woolls to Foreign Parts, never intended to enable
them to send the Manufactures made thereof, which would do us a far greater
Damage. But as England has always shown her Parental Care over all her
Colonies, in being ready to give them all the Encouragement necessary to their
Well Being; so She ought also to Exert her Power in restraining them, when She
finds them Enterprizing any thing that may prove Injurious to her self; and in
this She is justified as well by Reason, as by the Practice of all Nations that
have Planted Colonies. As to the Undertakers, the least Compassion possible is
due to them, because (as they are thought to be Englishmen) they ought not to
have designed their own Interest, so much to the detriment of England, and they
may find out ways enough to employ their Stocks, without iniuring the Public.

2. That it is the Interest of England to Encourage the increase of Riches in
Ireland, that it may be in the better Condition to contribute to its own
Support upon any Exegencies, and lessen the Charge of England.

This is a very true Argument, and will run on all four when rightly applied;
but there is an unhappy Distinction that makes it downright Lame in this Case;
for there is a vast Difference between Ireland's gaining wealth, by any way of
Industry peculiar to themselves and inoffensive to England; and their
incroaching upon that Trade, which is the only way by which England can attract
Riches; for it is plain that all they shall gain thereby, will be a clear Loss
to us, and that 'twere better for us to Maintain them in sitting still, than to
suffer them to work in such a way as must nndo us. This would disable us to
give them the necessary Succors in time of need, and they would hereby cut the
Prop that Supports them.

3. That by putting down this Manufactury, the Poor of Ireland will be
Destitute of Work, many Familys would be Ruined, and an unreasonable Hardship
put upon a Counsry, but just recovering it self after a Destructive War.

It Is Answer enough, since this is but the Beginning of a new Business, to ask
how they lived before? But it is certain, that the Poor of Ireland do subsist
very easily: Lands are very Cheap (perhaps not one A Gentleman who lived in the
County of Kerry, told me, that for about 13. l. per Annum, Rack-Rent, he had
Land enough to keep 50 Head of Black Cattle, and breed more Corn than his
Family could spend.
eighth part of the Value of ours, generally speaking) and Provisions of all
Kinds in great plenty. A Cow or two of ten Shillings Price, and a Potatoe
Garden, will Support a Family, meaning of such as are next to Poverty; but he
that can Rent ten Pound Per Annum, may keep two Dishes of Meat at his Table the
Year round; so that no Body can want a livelihood there, that will but exert
the least Industry; whereas in England, the Working People are very numerous,
Land and Provisions extremely dearer: Many thousands Depend wholly on the
Manufacturies, and cannot live of themselves when they are not employed. This
Manufactury, (meaning that for Transportation) is yet but growing in Ireland,
and few Hands (in Comparison to the multitude that live by it in England) are
yet employed in it; so that the Disappointment cannot at this time be great to
them; but if we should Suffer it to continue longer, the great Encouragement
will make it grow so considerably, as that the effects will soon become so
visible in England, that necessity will compel us to put a stop to it, and then
the Hardship will seem so much the more to the People of Ireland; by how much
the greater numbers have brought themselves to Depend upon that way of Living.
It Is true indeed, that the People of Ireland have endured great Hardships by
the War; but it is as certain, that they have been reestablisht in the quiet
enjoyment of their Lands and Possessions, at a great Expense of the Blood and
Treasure of England; and I believe, if those very Gentlemen of Ireland, that
are now so zealous in soliciting against this Bill, had been told, when they
were under the extremity of the War, that there would be a necessity upon us,
for the securing that Trade from whence we derived our principal Subsistence,
and the Capacity to help them in time of need, to Prohibit their Interfereing
with us in our Woollen Manufactures; they would then have assented to the
reasonableness of it, as a Respect justly due to their Protectors.

4. That the quantities they make are so inconsiderable, as that it cannot hurt
England; that there is no Probability of their increasing the Trade to any
great Degree, and that a great part of the Workmanship there is so dear, as
that they cannot make their Goods much cheaper there than in England.

Every one knows that the greatest Undertakings proceed from small Beginnings,
but that when the first Difficulties are overcome they easily go on, and
increase in a much greater Proportion than the first appearance. Before the
War, they came in four Years, to export in the last Year 11360 pieces, and
since the Reduction of Ireland they are in four Years come to above 4000
pieces, notwithstanding the Hindrances of the War; and it may be remarkt, that
they advanced from 2000 and upward in the Year 1695. to above 4000 in 1696.
Thus much they acknowledge; and these are not short Steps. They can never want
a ready Sale for all they can make, because they Sell cheaper than we; Plenty
of Work will attract Plenty of Workmen, these will take as many Apprentices as
they can Employ; in seven Years the Apprentices will become Masters, and in
three Years more even their Apprentices will become able Workmen; who can doubt
but by that time (or a little longer) their increase (with those also that come
to them from England) will be enough to Manufacture all the Woolls of Ireland.
But I Will suppose for Argument sake, that they make but to the value of One
Hundred Thousand Pounds yearly, and that they would not Sell for more than Ten
Pounds Per Cent. cheaper rhan England usually does: Supposing also, that
England sends abroad the value but of one Million yearly, of Goods of the like
Kind; 'twill be easily granted me, that if any one Offers his Goods cheaper
than the usual Price, that will then become the Market-Price, and every one
else must Sell at the same or Keep his Goods: By this it is plain, that England
must abate 100000 l. out of the the former value of her Million, for the sake
of Ireland's 100000 l. and then she looses another 100000 l. by Ireland's
taking that Money in the Markets, which England should otherwise solely
Furnish: So that it is clear from this Consideration, if no more were to be said
to it; That 'twere more advantageous to England by the one half, to Buy these
Goods and Throw them into the Sea, than to Suffer Ireland to Sell cheaper than
we can in Foreign Markets. But the arguing, that Weaving and some other Parts
of the Workmanship is as dear as in England, is a perfect Fallacy; for besides
that, they only Suggest it without Proof, yet if it were so at the first
attempting such a Manufactury, that could only be occasioned through the
scarcity of Workmen, but would every Year grow cheaper as those Workmen should
increase, and enough is said above, to show that that will be the Infallible
Consequences of an Encouraging Trade; and since I may modestly affirm that
Provisions are not (generally speaking) at above half the Price there, to what
they are in England, and labor holding always in Proportion thereto, it is not
unreasonable to expect that they will in time come to work at least one third
cheaper than we can, and if they should make as much as they can then Sell for
200000 l, that will be equal in Quantity to our 300000 l. and abate so much out
of the Sale of our Million, and then by the Fall in Price, the remaining 700000
l. would yield but 466666 l. So that it is plain, that if Ireland gains Riches
by this Trade, 'twill be at the Expense of impoverishing England. I cannot but
Remark here, that the main Body of the Sollicitors against this Bill, consisted
in Gentlemen, Possessors of Lands in Ireland, who though they may be excused
from having any nice Understanding in a matter of Trade (as this properly is)
yet it seems they have easily learnt, that the flourishing of their new
Manufactury, would cause the Lands of Ireland to rise, to which without Doubt,
it is their Interest to have more reguard, than to the keeping up the value of
the Lands of England, which by this Method of inticeing away its Mouths, would
certainly Fall in value as fast as those in Ireland should rise.

5. That the high Duties payable upon all Woollen Manufactures brought into
England, amount to a prohibition of the Irish; and that if it were intended
that theirs should be brought hither, the Dutises ought to be moderated so, as
to bear but a just proportion to what they can work cheaper.

I will be so free as to acknowledge, that I believe the House of Commons
intended no less by this Bill, than the suppressing all Exporation of Woollen
Manufactures from Ireland, and the utter discouraging the Progress of that
Trade there; but to lay such a Duty as might at present seem equal to the
difference of Workmanship, would utterly defeat that intent: For, as I have
noted before, they may soon come to work so much lower than they now do, as
that they may be able to bring their Goods into England at so small a Duty, and
be encouraged to keep on their Manufactury there, which though by this means it
may not so much prejudice our Foreign Trade, by beating down the Prices; yet
it will have its full effect in taking away the Employment of our
Manufacturers, and drawing them into Ireland; and, as was truly said by their
own Council, would indeed lower the value of the Woollen Goods on the Makers
here: Though by the way, I think that could be no argument in their Favor.
Moreover, what assurance can we have, but that if they are suffered to make
such Goods there, they may ship them for Foreign Parts by stealth, without
paying any Duty at all? The Manufacture being of much less bulk than the Wools,
which they tell us plainly, will be apt to be sent for France, if they be
debarred from working it up there; though I doubt not but that if our
Legislature will exert its Power, it may be smart enough with them to prevent
both.

6. That their Undertaking does not interfere with the main Branch of our
Manufactuary, the Cloathing-Trade, but that they do yet continue to buy great
Quantities of Cloth from us.

This indeed is true at present, but when they shall have considerably
increased the number of their Workmen, and brought their People into the way of
working their Wools, who can doubt but that they will be at that also? their
Contest indeed now is only in relation to what we commonly call the New
Drapery, consisting of Bays, Serges and Stuffs, which makes up a mighty part of
our Exportations, and the Injury they will come to do us therein cannot be less
than what I have before noted; to which I might add, that Ireland affords us
great Quantities of that sort we call long Wool for Combing, of which those
Goods are made, and if they shall work it up themselves, the wanting of that
Supply will be very sensible to us.

These are the most mateaial Objections against the Bill that occur to my
Memory, and I hope I have fairly answered them: But that I may give a full View
of the whole Controversy in its true shape, I will (after the old way of
arguing) represent it by a Simile.

A good old Gentleman, Possessor of great Tracts of Land abounding in plenty of
all things fit for life, but especially in the greatest Quantity of Sheep of
any in his whole Country, happily fell into the way of Manusacturing his Wools,
in which he became so successful as to be able to out do all other People, and
furnish all his Neighbors with the greatest part of what they used; by which
means he was not only capacitated to support a very numerous Family, but also
attracted to himself great Riches, and became equal in Power to most of his
Neighbors; he had settled his eldest Son in a very considerable part of his
Estate at a distance from him, which he had formerly gained by Conquest, giving
him the full Liberty of enjoying all the Product of an abundant Soil, only
reserving this advantage to himself, that what Wool the Son should have to
spare above the Quantity which he should need for the clothing his own Family,
he should be obliged to sell to the Father, and not to any other Person,
because that would extremely injure him in his Woollen Manufactury Business,
which was the main Support of his Estate. The Son lived plentifully, and
flourisht greatly, only the ancient Possessors of the Estate (who were a very
numerous Family) being compelled by the Power of the Father to live in
subjection under him, were apt to take frequent occasions to give him great
disturbance, and by reason of their numbers sometimes prevailed against him;
yet he was always readily assisted by the Father, who never failed by the
strength of his Purse and Power, to subdue his Enemies, and to resettle him in
the quiet Enjoyment of his Estate. The last Insurrection they made was by far
the greatest, because they were assisted by a very potent Neighbor, and it
cost the Father a mighty Sum to quell it. But the Son was no sooner settled in
quiet, but he sets his People to work upon making the same kinds of Woollen
Manufacturies which was the Father's Trade, and sends them to the same Markets
for Sale; the Father is justly offended at this, and foreseeing the great
Injury which the Son's going on in such a Trade would prove to him, resolves to
put a stop to it; the Son complains mightily against this; alleging, that it is
unreasonable to deprive him of such means to enrich himself, and that if he be
denied this way, 'twould become a Temptation to his Tenants and People to sell
the Wools to others; upon which the Father bespeaks him after this manner, Son,
Thou know well that my Charge and Expense is very great, having many other
Children to provide for besides thy self, and that it has cost me vast Sums
to protect thee in the Possession of the Estate which I have given thee, which
is sufficient to give thee a very abundant Subsistence without thy interfering
with me in my peculiar Trade, which thou see is the only way I have to gain
Wealth, and to enable me to support all my Children, of which thou have always
been the most chargeable to me, and yet thou have often been ready to make use
of the advantages which thy profitable Portion has given thee to encroach upon
me, not only in my Woollen, but also in some other parts of my Trade, which I
could not spare thee; and therefore if thou will not have a due Sense of my
Interest, and consider how much thy own is concerned in it, assure thy self
that I will take that care of my own Affairs, as to use my paternal Power to
restrain thee in all such matters of Trade, which I shall find inconsistent
with my well-being. And although I shall always be willing to encourage thee in
any thing that tends not to my own hurt; yet if thou shall not desist from
sending thy Woollen Goods to the Markets, which I have of long time been used
to furnish, I will by my Authority take from thee all thy Woool combers, and
prohibit that any such Trade shall be exercised in thy Family for the future,
thereby to incapacitate thee from making those Commodities, with which thou
can do me so much hurt: And if thou shall not be careful to keep thy People
from selling their Wool to Strangers, I will send Officers to keep an Exact
Registry of all thy Sheep, and secure thy Wool in Warehouses as it is shorn,
that it may not be in thy Power to deal fradulently by me in an Affair which so
nearly concerns me.

I am yet no Enemy to the People of Ireland, and wish them all the Prosperity
that can Consist with the Well Being of England: I own it is our Interest, that
they should grow Rich, but not by such Means as will sooner Impoverish us than
Advance them. I believe it would be a useful Policy, and worth the Care of
England, to Promote any such Manufacturies in Ireland as may not Jar with ours,
whereby the People there may not only Gain Wealth, but even the multitude of
Irish be drawn into a more civilized way of Liveing, which would tame them
faster than any Severities we can use; for a People brought into a settled and
profitable way of Living, would soon come to a better Understanding, than to be
apt to quit their Ease and Profit at every Call of the Turblent Gentry and
their Priests. The Country is every way sit for a Linen Manufactury, and wants
nothing but a Stock to establish it: Private Undertakers are commonly too weak
to strugle with the Difficulties that attend the Beginnings of great
Undertakings, but the mighty Public would easily go through with it: It would
be Money well employed, if the Government of England lent them 100,000 l. to
establish it, and though we may not be in a Condition to do it at present, yet
I hope such a thought may not be forgotten when we can better spare it. The
Objection, that our Neighbor Nations of whom we now buy our Linen would be
offended at it, and refuse to take our Manufactures, I take to be a wrong
Notion: The Alterations and Charges of Trade are not uncommon, and move by
degrees not soon to be observed: If we again buy Linen in France as before the
War, Germany must take less of our Money, yet, as many other Nations deal with
them for it, their Trade will go on, and the many distant Countries from whence
it is brought to the Markets at Hamburgh and Bremen, if they are sensible of
some lessening of their Vent, will scarce reflect directly upon the Cause, or
if they should, such Resentments are not apt to be of any consequence; the
People must have Woollen Clothes, and no Body can furnish them with our sorts
upon equal Terms with us, if we do but manage our Trade as we are able; and
it is evident that People will not easily be diverted from what they have been
used to and like, witness our continuing in the full use of French Goods before
the War, when they had as it were prohibited ours. And though this Caution has
been often urged in Discourses of Trade, yet I never knew one instance of any
Nations being piqued at another to such a degree, as to break off their
Commerce; though I have known several instances of such Occasions given. Some
prevailing reguard, either to the Benefit of the Customs, the Profit of the
Merchants, or the like, is always had; so that Governments seem to be steered
by this Principle, That if they cannot Vend in Trade as much as they would,
they will yet continue to sell what they can, and acquiesce with the
Shopkeepers Rule, That Custom is no Inheritance, if they loose one Chap man,
they get another, and measure not their Trade by Particulars, but in the
general. I have enlarged upon this point even to a Digression, because I was
willing to take this Opportunity to offer my Sentiments upon it, for that I
have upon diverse occasions thought that Argument to have been used rather to
serve a turn, than for any real Weight there was in it, and that I think we
ough^ not to have any consideration of it, in taking the measures which seem
otherwise to be convenient for us.

My Lord,

Your Lordship's extraordinary Understanding in the right Notions of the Trade
of England, your Readiness at all times to espouse its Interest, and the
Condescentions which you have upon some former Occasions shown, in deigning to
receive Information in things of this nature from a Person as inconsiderable as
I am, has given me the Confidence to suggest my Thoughts in this important
Business to your Lordship, and I assure my self that your Lordship will have so
much regard to the Sincerity of my Intentions, as to excuse the Imperfections
of the Performance, and pardon the Boldness of this Address, from

My LORD, Your Lordships most Obedient, Humble Servant.

REMARKS Upon a BOOK, Entitled, Some Thoughts on the BILL depending, etc.
I Had written the foregoing Papers in the Country, and coming to Town to put
them in the Press, I met with a Book, Entitled, Some Thoughts on a Bill
depending before the Honorable House of Lords, etc. And although I am cut
short in time, yet I will bestow a few Remarks upon it; notwithstanding that I
think the main points in Controversy, are sufficiently argued in the
foregoing Discourse. I will acknowledge that the Author has a pretty
insinuating way of Writing and a good turn of Thought, but his Skill seems ill
bestowed upon so wrong a Subject, it looks like fine drawing upon a Threadbare
Coat, the Wool is worn off and the Rent will not be covered.

If the Nobility and Gentry of Ireland spend good part of their Estates in
England it is their own choice, and the Product of their Butter, Leather,
Raw-hides, Tallow, etc. which they send to the Neighboring Countries of
Europe, and of the vast Quantities of Provisions sent to the Plantations, their
Wool, Flax, Skins, etc. to England is sufficient, to bear that Expense, and
moreover to pay for all the mighty value of Commodities which he says they buy
from us; and this is largely proved by the current of Exchange between us, a
Guinea passes there for 26 s. which is near 20 per Cent. difference in the par
of the Money; but as the Proemio of the Exchange has of late been under, that
shows that the Balance of the Trade must be in their Favor. If much of their
Trade be carried on by English Stocks, yet the People are paid for their
Commodities, and the Profit they receive thereby may be Encouragement enough
for them, if they can be content when they are well.

His Computation of the great profit they are to England, is at random, do we
not deserve the utmost profit they can yield? and all too little in
consideration of the vast charge we have been at to protect them in the
possession of such mighty Landed Estates which they enjoy.

God be thanked, that the Kingdom of Ireland is ^^^petently replenisht with
English Inhabitants, and they are again in a flourishing Condition,
notwithstanding the Desolations of the late War; but to persuade us to
encourage the sending of more numbers of People thither than we can well spare,
will scarce take with us; for if their Strengthening that Country would be of
advantage to them, their remaining here is much more so to us, and it is better
for us to have People to spare to send to their Assistance upon Occasion, than
for us to need help from them. As for their leaving the Country, if we shall
lay difficulties upon them, (as he calls it) or of their joining with any other
Interest than that of England; how extravagant is it to imagine, that those
People should be so easily picqu'd into a leaving their Settlements there? when
it is certain that he that has 100 l. per Annum there, can live more
plentifully than upon 500 l. per Annum in England, and yet his 100 l. per Annum
would yield him but 1000 l. in Money, and that will buy him but 50 l. per Annum
in England, a fine Exchange: Such another 'twould be, to quit the Government of
England to put themselves under that of France, (for no Body else can protect
them). But these Thoughts are abominable, and the insinuation is a Crime
against, and a most unreasonably Reflection upon the worthy English Gentlemen
of Ireland, for whom 'twould be impossible to degenerate into so much Irish
Understanding, and so little love to their Mother Country: But it is a
sufficient indication of a hard cause when Men are put to their Shifts for
Arguments, and forced to hall them in by the Neck and Shoulders, as has been
this Gentleman's case in almost all he has used.

They are not contending for Power or great Riches, they neither trade to East
Indies, Turkey or Africa, they have neither Hamborough, Hudsons Bay, Greenland
or Russia Company; very fine, and have not the Subjects of England been
debarred from the same Trades, except they would buy Stocks in the Companies?
and might not the People of Ireland if they had Money to spare, come in upon
the same Terms? Let them say no more of this, their Merchants are no way
restrained more than the People of England, they may send Ships from thence to
all parts of the World, or concern themselves in any Adventures in Trade with
as much freedom as our selves, they cannot indeed bring some kinds of
Merchandise directly for Ireland no more can we.

They have no Fleets or Plantations: What Colonys ever had? What an Exclamation
follows next? as if they were forbid the Benefit of Earth and Air, and the
Libertys allowed by the Law of Nature, which have never been denied by the
greatest Conquerors: Do they not freely enjoy Earth and Air? have th^^ not
liberty to send abroad their Native Commodities? May they not Manufacture what
they have Occasion for of their own Product? yet because they must not bring
their Cattle or Provisions to England, (though they may send as much as they
can spare to our Plantations) and undersell the Staple Commodities of England
in Foreign Markets, they are undone. It Is evident that England has been
sufficiently put to it to support her Government, and not Withstanding all the
Advantages she can raise by her Trade and otherwise, she is involved in a very
great Debt; and for her to suffer Ireland to ruin the Trade of her
Manufactures, would indeed be the ready way to undo her.

His distinction of Colonies for Trade and Colonies for Empire, is contrived on
purpose to fit Ireland; but by his good leave, are not all Colonies upon the
same foot of keeping the Natives in Subjection, where there are any under their
Jurisdiction? to say nothing of ours on the Continent of America, where although
we treat the Indians more civilly than as a conquered People, yet there is
reason enough to say that we are obliged to keep them in Subjection; the Dutch
have many Colonies in India, where they keep the Incolae in Subjection, and yet
they don't give them Liberty to send their Spices and other natural Product to
what Markets they please, but they do restrain their whole Trade to their
Mother Country, and not only they, but all other Countries that have had
Colonies (since the Increase and Understanding of Trade) do (as far as I have
ever heard) in Fact contradict this Assertion of his, and I believe Ireland
has the greatest Liberty in that respect of any Colony in the World.

He insinuates, that if Ireland should be debarred from making Woollen
Manufactures, yet England must not expect to reap the whole Benefit, Holland,
Scotland, Venice, Germany and France, pretend also to the Woollen Manufacture
and will vye with us. I say these Countries do not interfere with us any thing
considerably in the greatest part of our sorts of Goods, and if we do but come
to so good a management of our Trade as we are capable, we shall be able to
maintain it beyond them, and none but Ireland, by her having Wools and Work
cheaper, can spoil us. But I wonder the Gentleman has never heard of any
Nations besides Spain and Portugal, with whom Ireland has dealt for
Manufactures; it seems as if neither himself, nor those that instructed him,
were acquainted with the practice of Trade; for it is certain that Ireland sends
more Woollen Goods to Holland and Flanders, than to any other Countries.

In all that he says, to cloud the Business of their Working cheaper, he is as
ill employed as if he were blowing Feathers against the Wind, his Arguments
fly back in his Face. It Is not worth my while to trace his long Insinuations,
I have said enough to that Point in the former Discourse; if he Disputes
against Principles, I have done with him: Nothing less can be offered in this
Case, than to prove, that Provisions are not cheaper in Ireland than in
England; that plenty of Work, and good Pay in one Country, will not draw
Workmen from a Neighbor Country where they are very plenty, and Work is
scarce, that those very Work men will never be persuaded to abate of the high
Wages which was at first given them, although their Numbers should increase to
ever so many, and Provissons be so cheap, that they could live very well at
Half Wages. But beyond all, to Clench it, he ought to demonstrate to us
plainly, that it is not because Ireland sells cheaper than England, that
Merchants leave us, and come to them to buy other Woollen Goods besides their
Stockings, Stuffs and Frizes, but it is for some pretty charm which they have to
attract them, though the incident Charges be a little higher there than here.
But who can forbear his pretty comparison of the Labor of the Blacks and the
Artificers in the West Indies? can the Labor of a Slave bear any proportion
but to that of another Slave, but he may be assured that the proportion between
the Labor of the common Labourer, that is a Freeman, and the Artificer, is
much the same in the West Indies as it is in other Countries.

To tell us of driving away the People from Ireland is but a Bugbear, the very
profits of the Lands in Ireland is Encouragement enough, not only to keep the
People that are there, but to draw more to them; and where is a Tradesman to be
found in Ireland, who after he has raised any Stock to spare, does not fall to
buying or renting Lands, in which they find their Improvements as easy as in
other ways?

We need not be scared from making such Laws as we think requisite for
restraining Ireland in matters of Trade, for fear of their Remissness to
execute them, or their smuggling with France and Scotland, as he suggests; but
he might have let that alone, if we cannot enforce the Execution of our own
Laws, or make what further Laws they may give us occasion, for the keeping
Ireland in a due Decorum, it is our own Faults. And for their agreeing to spend
none but their own Manufactures at home; we know they are a very Genteel
People, and perhaps cannot hold long in so moody a Temper, but if they should,
that were a Trifle in comparison, to their spoiling our whole Trade with the
rest of the World; neither could they do even that, if we should in a solemn
manner tell them and the whole World, that they shall not Manufacture any of
their own Product. ('it is his own Words) And his suggesting that we may be as
ready to dash the Linnen-Manufacture, or any other Improvements which they may
bring to perfection, is a Reflection which England does not deserve from them,
for though she must always retain her Authority, to deal with her Colonies in
all such matters as her own Prudence shall direct; yet she has always had an
easy Rein upon them, and given such Liberties which ought not to be slighted
to the degree this Gentleman does; and may be a sufficient assurance to them,
that so kind a Mother will never put any unnecessary difficulties upon them,
but will always promote them in every thing that is not unreasonably injurious
to her self; especially since it is her Interest as well as Delight, to see them
flourish under her Care and Protection. His gentle way of destroying their
Manufactures by secret Discouragements, and to let it decline by degrees, etc.
looks more like a Wheedle than a practical Project.

After all I must acknowledge, that the Author has shown abundance of
Ingenuity in the penning those Papers, and whosoever shall observe how he has
managed so bad a Subject to the highest advantage, it was capable of, will
believe that in this I don't flatter him; and if he should think fit to employ
his Ability in framing some practicable Scheme, for the incorporating, Ireland,
(and if he could take in Scotland also) with England, so as that the whole
Empire might as far as possible, be conjoined in one entire Interest, and be
steered by one United Grand-Council; I believe his performance therein would be
much more agreeable. And when he shall have considered that matter thoroughly, I
doubt not but that he may come to be of the same Opinion with me, that even
under such an Union, the well-being of the whole could not be conserved,
without the laying some necessary Restrictions upon the Parts, according to his
own Instance of Kent and Sussex, where he acknowledges that it is the Interest
of the whole Kingdom besides, to prohibit their Wool from going to France.

To Conclude, as this Gentleman has given us his Definition and Distinction of
Colonies, I Will take the Freedom to offer my Opinion, under what predicaments
all Colonies whatsoever, without any distinction, are to be considered; which
if it may be admitted, will perpetually determine this Controversy in the
Judgment of all reasonable Men.

First, That the planting of all Colonies is by permission, and in subservience
to the Conveniences of the Mother Country.

Secondly, That all the free Planters go by their own Consent, and must be
subject to the Conditions of their Settlement, as long as they remain in the
Colony, but that themselves or their Posterity may return at their pleasure,
and enjoy all the Privileges of their Native Country.

Thirdly, That for their Encogragement, Lands and Privileges are granted them
upon very easy terms, whereby they may be enabled to subsist more comfortably
than their Circumstances could admit them in their own Country.

Fourthly, That their proper Business is to cultivate the Lands, and raise the
Product which that Country will yield.

Fifthly, That no permission is granted them for Foreign Trade, but such as
their Mother Country shall from time to time see fit, because as the Care and
Charge of protecting them in the Enjoyment of their Possessions, is always
incumbent upon her, it is not reasonable that she should divest her self from
the Privilege of reaping such advantages by them therein, as their Condition
can afford.

Sixthly, That they may never look upon themselves to be out of the Power of
the Legislature of their Mother Country, but that they ought to pay an entire
Obedience to all such Laws as she shall make respecting them.

It Is for want of these Considerations, that Men take the Liberty to argue so
passionately (not to say indecently) upon the Case now depending; but if it
will not be granted, that it must always be of the Essence of a Colony, to be
under such Regulations, I see no room to distinguish between the Mother Country
and its Colony, which were absurd to think. And since I see they are so apt to
be forgetful of their Duty upon all such Occasions, I could wish our Government
would think fit, In perpetuam rei memoriam, to ordain, that an Inscription of
the purport following, should be always set up in the Parliament House in
Ireland, and in the Houses of Assembly in all our other Colonies, to be read
the first thing every Day of their Sessions:

Let us always remember, that this Island (or Province) is a Colony; that
England is our Mother Country; that we are ever to expect Protection from her
in the Possession of our Lands; which we are to cultivate and improve for our
own Subsistence and Advantage, but not to Trade to or with any other Nation
without her Permission; and that it is our incumbent Duty to pay Obedience to
all such Laws as she shall Enact concerning Us. FINIS.

