Licensed,

(...)24. (...)674. To. L'estrange.

A Treatise OF HUMANE REASON.



LONDON, Printed for Hen. Brom, at the Gun at the Westend of St. Paul's, 1674.

A TREATISE OF Humane Reason.
BEing resolved, according to the duty of every private Person, to make a
search into the nature and quality of my Religion; and according to my interest
in Humane Society, to communicate the effects of that search to others, if I
shall believe it profitable for them: I am in the first place to consider of
the choice of some Guide, for so long and so dangerous a journey, where I shall
sometimes meet with no tract or Path at all, and sometimes with so many, and
those so contrary in the appearance of their first entry, that the variety will
confound me more then the want; especially there being so many mists cast
before me by the errors and deceits of others, that one had great need of a
better Eyesight than is left us by the fall of our first Fore-father. And this
consideration after a long and Serious debate thereof, brings no other Guide to
me but my own Reason, which if it take such directions as it ought and may do,
before it sets forth, and pursue those directions with care and constancy,
though it may possibly lead me into errors, yet will bring me at last even
through them, to the proposed end of my journey, which is Happiness.

I am not ignorant of the many Enemies I must meet with in this doctrine, but
am fortified against them with the thought that they who dispute most against
the power and privileges of Humane reason, do it because their own Reason
persuades them to that belief; and so whether the Victory be o'mine, or o'their
side, are equally defeated. They seek to terrify us with the example of many
excellent Wits, who, they say, by following this Ignis fatuus (for so they call
the only North-Star which God has given us for the right Steering of our
course) have fallen into wild and ridiculous Opinions, and increased the
catalogue of Heresies to so vast a number: But truly these men either followed
not their own reason, but made it follow their will, or hudwinkt it first by
interests and prejudices, and then bad it show them the way; or were wanting in
those necessary diligences which are required for so doubtful and dangerous a
passage: Or if, without the commission of any of these faults, the weakness of
their understanding has deceived them, the error is neither hurtful to
themselves, nor would be to others, if this doctrine of governing our selves
from within, and not by example, were established. Whereas on the contrary side,
the submitting our judgments to Authority, or any thing else whatsoever, gives
universality and perpetuity to every error.

They fall naturally from hence into the large commonplace of the frailty,
uncertainty and disproportion of our understanding to divine and celestial
notions, and are eloquent herein with much of truth. For when we say that every
man's Soul has in it self as much light as is requisite for our travel toward
Heaven, we do not therefore assume, that it is as clear as those spirits which
are confessed to be all a Flame. And for the unaptness of it to receive the
impression of Spiritual truths; though the what and the How of religious
Mysteries be out of sight, yet that they are such, is sufficiently visible.
Especially if we use those helps which God has prepared for us to that purpose,
and those our Reason will dictate to her self that she is to use. The ordinary
saying of Democritus, that Truth lies in the bottom of a deep Well, is very
applicable to this matter: that is, that we must seek it in the center and
heart of our selves, and not look up into Heaven first and immediately for it;
because by this means we shall see Heaven in the bottom of the Well, though we
could not the Well in the top of Heaven.

But the chief and most Tragical argument against us is, that the allowance of
this Liberty to particular men's discourses, would beget as many religions as
there are several persons; and consequently draw after it, disorder and
confusion, as is inconsistent not only with the quiet, but the very being of
Humane Society. This is a weighty and grievous accusation, and if our Reason be
convinced of so harmful a Madness, it will be found necessary to keep it
chained and fettered, and as much in the dark as may be. But I hope it will
acquit it self. Who knows not that the Philosophy of the Ancients separated it
self into sundry parties; the Pythagorians, the Peripateticks, the Stoics, the
Scepticks, the Academicks (and these of three sorts) the Epicureans, the
Cynicks, with many others; and these differed not in slight and verbal
controversies, but in the last ends of humane actions, in the nature of good
and evil, nay of God himself; whether man worked freely or were compelled by an
inevitable necessity; whether the soul were subject to Corruption, or
immaterial and immortal? Whether the World had a beginning, or had endured from
all eternity? Whether the Gods took upon them the Government of things below,
or sat as idle themselves in Heaven as their Images were here on Earth? with
diverse other Questions of equal consequence. These opinions divided the
Philosophers, and the Philosophers the People; nor were there fewer Sects in
Athens, than are now in Amsterdam or London. And yet this variety of Opinion
neither begat any Civil War in Greece, neither did the Peripateticks (when both
by the strength of their Arguments and their Emperor, that Party was become
the greatest) set up any Inquisition, or High Commission or Committee against
the rest; but every man enjoyed his Opinion with more safety and freedom, than
either his Goods or Wife. The same likewise happened in the Religions of the
Ancients; for though several Cities professed the worship of several Deities,
yet we read not of any War which has sprung from that diversity. The Poets
have made the Gods enter into factions and quarrels for Commonwealths, but
Commonwealths never did the same for their Gods. This quiet and happiness,
which (to the shame and scandal of the Christian Name) was enjoyed four
thousand years among the Heathen, continued so long and so uninterupted,
because every Man, following the rules of his own Judgment, allowed that
Liberty to others, which he found so necessary for himself. And even the
Stoics themselves, who enslaved the Will, durst never attempt this violence to
the Understanding.

From whence then shall we say it proceeds, that since the Reformation opened a
way to this Freedom of Conscience, so much Blood and Confusion, and almost
Desolation, has followed in all those Countries which admitted it. Germany,
France, the Low Countries, and Scotland are sufficient witnesses of this; and I
could wish that miserable England had not been added to the number of these sad
Examples. But certainly, since this Liberty has been so many Ages exercised,
without drawing after it those Inconveniences which we now so justly complain
of, they must be attributed either wholly to some other cause, or to the
conjunction of some other Accidents to it, which have changed the nature and
condition thereof: And that (having examined all particulars which touch upon
this matter) I can find to be no other, than the strange and uncharitable Pride
of those men, who having with just cause vindicated their own Reason from the
tyranny of unnecessary bonds, endeavor nevertheless to lay them upon others;
so that not the use of such Liberty, but the appropriating of it to our selves
only, is the true, and, I think, the sole fountain of these Disorders: for
there cannot certainly in the World be found out, so mild and so peaceable a
Doctrine, as that which permits a difference in Beliefs; for what occasion can
any man take to begin a quarrel, when both he himself is suffered quietly to
enjoy his own Opinion, and his own opinion is this, that he ought to suffer
others to do the same. But if once men entertain an imagination, that every
thing is wicked and damnable which complies not with their own sense, and that
in this vast latitude of probabilities (which is in all kind of disquisitions,
but especially those of Religion, they being most obscure and most
indemonstrable) there is none can lead one to salvation; but the path wherein
he treads himself, we may see the evident and necessary consequence of eternal
troubles and confusions. For not only public Charity will persuade us to force
Men to that wherein consists their everlasting happiness or calamity, if by no
other means we can induce men to it (as without injury we bind the hands of a
man that would kill himself) but also our private interest, and that particular
care, which every man owes to his own Posterity, which, without suppression of
all Heresies, must run the hazard of eternal punishments, obliges us, by all
means, to endeavor the extirpation of those weeds out of the fields of our
Neighbors, which would else so quickly overgrow our own: whereas if we had
either more of Charity to others, to believe some Errors (the inseparable
Companions of Humane Nature) ought not to exclude men from the Communion of the
present Church, and the hope of the future; or less of self-flattery to think,
that all men grope in the dark that light not their Candle at ours, we could
not be so cruel in persecution of those faults, to which God himself is so
merciful, and from which we our selves are not exempt. I shall therefore
conclude this Argument with a confident assertion, That all the miseries which
have followed the variety of Opinions since the Reformation, have proceeded
entirely from these two mistakes, The tying infallibility to whatsoever we
think Truth, and damnation to whatsoever we think Error.

Another absurdity this Doctrine is accused of, that if we guide our selves
wholly by the light of Reason, we shall not only every one differ from every
body else, but every one frequently from himself, changing Religion almost as
often as our Habits, driven about perpetually by every wind, and in all
probability dashed by some one at last against a rock; now a Papist, to morrow a
Lutheran, next a Calvinist; and so like the Heathen, dedicate every day in the
week to a several Deity. I must confess, Inconstancy is one of the greatest
weaknesses of the weakest Sex, and much less to be endured in Man, especially
in that most weighty affair of his whole life, the service of God; but I cannot
conceive, that the fear of this scandal obliges us to a blind and inalterable
observance of those Laws and Opinions, which either the fate of our birth and
education, or the fortune of other accidents have engaged us in; but we ought
to make a serious and long enquiry, whether they agree most with that light of
our Understanding, which God has infused into us for that end, according to the
best extent of those means, which are allowed by him to our understandings for
this examination; and whatsoever we shall fix upon after this consideration, if
it be duly made, will be upon such grounds, as are not likely every day, and
upon every new argument to be removed from us: for if they be, it is a great,
though not an infallible sign, that the enquiry was not made at first with so
much diligence as was possible: And when we have once carefully settled our
selves in a belief, though we happen to meet afterward with some new and
unforeseen difficulties, which may seem to evince the contrary, yet Reason will
not presently advise us to a change, because it finds it self unable to unty
the knot, but suspend a while and attempt again, and try a thousand several
ways, before it despair and yield up it self to the argument; which remaining
still after all this unconquerable, it will then turn back and consider whether
if it alter now its judgment, it be able to satisfy all those defenses which
will be made for its former opinion, and if it be overmatch'd by the doubts on
both sides, rather choose to continue as before, then make an innovation without
advantage. This Rule being observed, we shall not be subject to the
inconvenience of frequent changes, and yet as true it is, that we shall not be
exempt from the possibility of changing at all, which is neither requisite nor
attainable in this life; and if in this permutation, after all our industry and
humility therein, it shall be our ill fortune to give away a truth for a
false-hood, it will be (as killing a man against our will is no murder) at the
worst but an error by chance-medley, and will both find (I had almost said
claim) mercy from God, and deserve pity from men. We know very well that every
man's body is in so perpetual a flux, that about the space of seven years,
renders him wholly and entirely another corporeal substance from what he was
before, the whole mass both of accidents and matter being thrust away by the
continual succession of new ones: and yet because the soul remains still the
same, and retains all the while the same power and uninterrupted government
over the whole succession, we justly esteem it the same person; nay every part
of him to be always so truly the same, that at any time of his life he may
say, with these Eyes I shall behold my Savior, though the accidents and very
matter of them be so often changed. Such an Identity as this is requisite to a
man's Faith: he may now be fully a Papist, and seven years hence fully a
Protestant, and yet his faith still remains the same, because it is all the
while actuated and moved by the same soul of faith, which is conscience; which
if he preserve inviolably, both when he was a Papist, and when he is a
Protestant, he may truly say, with this very faith I shall behold my Savior.

But suppose this so exalted Guide of yours, your own Conscience, should direct
you to forsake your Christian-belief? for which the Devil does not want such
pleasant colors and specious fallacies, as may possibly deceive even a good
understanding.

Before I answer this Objection, I desire to know of him that makes it, what it
is (for something it must be) which he places in the same Ecclesiastical
Superiority that I do reason? The private Spirit? what if that should persuade
him to this Apostasy? It cannot. Not indeed if it be true; but the same
condition will make Reason as infallible as that; and I may as well judge of the
truth of the one, as you of the other.

What is it then you will trust your Soul with, in this important business? Is
it the Authority of Men? These verily may lead you into error, and it is not
impossible, into the greatest and worst of all, which is the desertion of
Christ himself: not that this is likely to happen, neither more probable is it,
that our Reason should so far misguide us. But alas! in this affair of so vast
and so eternal consequence, what security can we assume, whilst there remains a
possibility of miscarriage; and this possibility is Evident* For let us
consider it in a Council; which if there be any assurance in the number of men,
is that where most probably it may be found. I will not here reckon up the many
errors which great and famous Councils have fallen into themselves, and
labored to establish in others, they are many and notorious. But certainly if
a Council could take away the satisfaction of Christ's death, and Divinity of
his person (as was done by that great one of the Arrians which condemned
Athanasius, not without the approbation of the Pope and the whole World
besides) a Council has already done that thing, which you affirm impossible for
it to do. For they who believed Christ to come into the World as an example and
pattern only of Holiness, are no more to be called Christians, than
Abrahamists or Davidists. If you will here contend, that even these men
deserted not wholly Christianity, as a man may do by the impulsion of his own
private Reason, yet certainly you will confess that they who fell so far into
error, might as well have sunk deeper, and exalted some other Prophet above
Christ, as well as made Christ to be but a Prophet: and this possibility of
Error (even in so high a degree) we shall find in the nature and very Elements
of a Council; for if any one Member of it may be a Heathen or Atheist in
Opinion (as the lives of many Popes, and the speeches of some, declare that
they themselves have been) why not two, not three, not more, not the Major
part, that is, the whole Council? From the Sanctions of the 2 / ^ Nicene
Council, which established the worship of Images, how easy a step was there
made for the next; to the introduction of a full, undisguis'd and Heathenish
Idolatry, which we must not say could not, because by the mercy of God it did
not happen. And I verily believe, if God had not stirred up some persons of
excellent Abilities and worthy Spirits (for such sure they were, though not
exempt from humane weaknesses) to examine by the Rules of their own Reasons,
those follies and dangerous Errors in Religion, which partly by the Interest,
partly by the Ignorance of Men, and insensible advances of ill Custom, were
blindly embraced by the whole World; if these Men, I say, had not discovered
the past Errors, and by that means made their Adversaries more cautious not to
fall into any new ones, the world through the Adoration of Saints and Images,
and the boundless Increase of vain and Superstitious Ceremonies, would have
past before this time, to its old and abominable worship of several Deities,
and to a Religion overwhelmed, if not with the same, yet with as many and as
vain Impieties. It remains therefore, that you put your Confidence rather in
the Traditions of the former, than the Commands of the present Church; but what
those were, you must either trust some number of Men present, which is not
without the possibility of being misguided; or your own search and diligence,
which is to fall into that Opinion which you condemn in me. And truly they who
build their Belief wholly upon the Authority of past or present Ages, if they
look upon all the Consequences of that Opinion, are in much greater danger of
being drawn from the Christian Faith, than those who remit the judgment of
these things to their own Reason: For ever since the beginning of the Christian
belief, there has been the Authority of above an hundred to one against it; and
this Authority backed and strengthened with the universal agreement of more than
three thousand years before it. But on the contrary, if we weigh impartially
the Motives and Arguments which every Religion can produce in its own defense;
Reason it self will find more and much greater for the Christian, than it can
for any other Belief whatsoever: And I am very confident, that no man ever from
a Christian, became a Turk or a Jew, because his Reason told him that was a
better Religion; but because either fear of punishment or hope of reward, or
some other sinister Cause, persuaded his Reason, that the worst Religion in it
self, would be the better to him upon those Conditions.

Now all those Arguments by which some men have labored to prove, that our
Guide in spiritual matters ought to be Infallible, will, though they be granted
for true, as I believe in some sense they are, will not at all dispossess
Reason of this Authority, which we have declared to be her due. For the
Infallibility of a Guide I conceive to be only this, That it cannot fail to
bring us to that end, for which we chose to be guided by it; and if to this end
there happen to be a thousand several ways, it is a Guide no less infallible
as to the End, if it lead us through a long, an unpleasant and obscure Tract,
than if it conducted us by a short, a delightful and an open road: for not the
goodness of the passage, but certainty of not missing the End, is that which
constitutes this kind of Infallibility. And truly every man's particular Reason,
if well followed (for whatsoever Guide you pitch upon, whether Scripture,
Spirit, Church past or present, or any thing else imaginable, must have that
condition annexed, or else it will become unprofitable) will infallibly carry
him at last, though perhaps through many tedious and troublesome wanderings, to
his eternal happiness, if it be followed (for that condition cannot be repeated
too often) with constancy, diligence and sobriety.

This Doctrine sets the great gate of Heaven so wide open, that it will
displease those men, who with an envious kind of pride think it more honor to
enter in with a few at a narrow wicket. But I truly, out of an humble
consideration of my own weakness, and the general imbecility of humane nature,
should still lament and tremble, that the entrances to Heaven are so few and so
difficult, though they were yet far more and much easier than this opinion
makes them. There are enough obstructions from the frailty of our Flesh, the
subtilty of the Devil, the tyranny of our Passions, and the perverse
crookedness of our corrupted Wil^s, without the additions of any more from the
imperfections of our intellect. Sufficient is the danger we run, in not
performing those Duties which we understand aright, without making our
mis-understandings damnable, and condemning that as a Guilt, which is to be
pitied as a misfortune. What then? shall we believe Turks, Jews, Heathens,
Atheists themselves (if there be any such) in an equal possibility of
salvation, with the unerring Christian? Shall we save all Beasts of what kind
soever, clean or unclean, in that mystical Ark the Church of God? Certainly in
the two contrary excesses of belief in this matter, that on the side of Mercy
has the appearance of greater safety; and I had rather think with Origin, That
the Devils themselves, by the excessive kindness of their Judge, shall at last
be exempted from damnation, than that he himself shall be damned for that
Opinion. But as to this their Objection; I believe first, That Reason it self
will declare to every Man in the World, that he ought to adhere to the
Christian, rather than to any other Religion whatsoever, if all things be
propounded to him in a clear and impartial manner: and this whosoever shall
deny, I dare confidently affirm, it is impossible for him to be a Christian.
But because there are thousand accidents, which hinder the greatest part of the
world from the advantages of so fair a proposal, hence it comes to pass, that
so small a part of Mankind has submitted to the Obedience of the Christian
Faith: Now to condemn all those Millions of persons (many millions for one that
is to be saved) is so wild an uncharitableness, that few have been so
barbarously severe, as to be guilty of it: and therefore those whose Ignorance
in these matters has been invincible, they left to the hands of God, without
declaring a definitive opinion either of their safety or perdition. Now if we
consider rightly, what Ignorance is to be accounted invincible, we shall by
this means restore the greatest* part of Mankind into a hopeful and comfortable
condition; and none even amongst the worst Religions, will be left to a certain
ruin, but such whose Consciences have been neglected or forced aside by those
who ought to have been guided by them; and such who can have no plea against
the rigor of their sentence, because they deserted themselves as well as God:
And the disobedience of Men to their own Conscience is not only in things of
practice, but also of belief and speculation, though not in so evident and
immediate a manner, by suffering themselves to be deceived by the insensible
operations of interest and prejudice.

Nor does it follow from hence, that Christ is not the only source and cause of
eternal felicity; for I acknowledge there is no other Name under heaven by
which men can hope for salvation. But I may very well believe withal, that
there are secret and wonderful ways, by which God may be pleased to apply his
Merits to mankind, besides those direct, open, and ordinary ones of Baptism and
Confession: which I have only advanced briefly in this place, being a matter
that will require a more ample and particular examination. Now concerning the
Salvation of all sorts of Christians, except their lives disagree from their
doctrines (which is likewise a disobedience to their Reasons) I know not why I
should be terrified out of my Charity by any Anathema whatsoever that shall
proceed from the mouth of Man. For I cannot see how any but God himself can
certainly know that any man is an Heretic, since it is only he who can discern
by what close and unlawful means he corrupts his understanding, and hardens his
own will to the obstinate belief of any Error; for without that obstinacy
there is no Heresy, and without the perfect sight of the whole contexture of a
man's Thoughts and Actions, there is no knowledge of such an obstinacy: and
therefore when the Church declares any Opinion to be Heresy, it is to be
accepted as if the Law should say, whosoever kills a man is a Murderer, which
is a sentence not absolute but to be qualified with Circumstances: even so the
Church pronounces, whosoever holds this Doctrine is an Heretic, with an
evident reservation of some Circumstances in the meaning thereof, for no man
can imagine that the sentence includes those who never shall hear of it; nor no
more, say I, those, who though they hear of it, yet cannot by any means bring
their Conscience to the assent. For to obey in matters of belief, without being
able to believe the thing commanded, is no less, and seems more a
contradiction, than simply to obey without knowledge of a Command.

Thus much briefly concerning Heresy, which indeed is a Subject worthy a
Treatise by it self. But this will not suffice, unless we can also clear our
selves from the imputation of Schism, the ordinary railing word in all
Controversies, and a slander which is often fatal in making, where it falsely
accuses a separation: of which they are truly guilty (the word it self bearing
witness against them) who break the precious unity of the Christian Church; but
that is done not so much by them who differ in Opinions, as by them who will
not allow of such a difference. Who knows, whether that God who liked best that
no men's Bodies should have the same complexion, no men's Faces the same figures,
no Hands the same lines, no Voices the same sounds, nay not so much but their
motions and gestures should be distinguishable, has not likewise best pleased
himself with no less variety in the parts of Men that are immaterial, and even
in the most immaterial Actions of those parts, which is the worship and
adoration of a Deity? Does God gain any thing by our devotions? does he receive
hurt from one kind of worship, and advantage by another? is he pleased with any
smell in the sacrifice besides that of Obedience? and can a plain uniform,
unalterable obedience be expected, without Commands of the same nature? Without
doubt, he who gave Rules which might accept of so many several interpretations,
when he might have made them as plain to all in one sense, as they seem now to
every man in his own, is likewise well contented, that they shall be
interpreted severally: and* as the Divines confess, that the same words of
Scripture admit of a Literal, Typical, Anagogical sense, and that all those
senses are both true and intended by the Holy Ghost, that Spirit of unity that
writ them; so, I say, the Commands of God concerning Religion are equally
obeyed and fulfilled by all the various kinds of Obedience, which the
Consciences of men conceive themselves bound to pay unto them: As well the Mud
by growing hard, as the Wax by melting obeys the Sun; nor is it less glorified
by one than by the other: nor are those diversities of powers in the Sun, but
of capabilities in the object that receives him: even so Faith is still
properly one, though according to the diverse receptions of it, it produce not
only diverse but contrary effects. It is not unobservable, that the Unity of
the Church of God is compared not to the unity of one Man, but of a Man and
Woman joined in Marriage; so the Church in general is one with Christ; so the
Church Militant with the Triumphant; and so every particular man with the
Church militant: Now this Unity is of one part more weak, more infirm, more
ignoble than the other; and the Female part in the similitude, is the erring
part in the Church it self; and as that by the bond of Love, so this by the
bond of Charity is to be accounted one and the same with the other. Can any
thing be more irrational, than to say that a foot when it has the Gout, or a
hand when it shakes with the Palsy, or a Head when it aches, ceases to be a
part of the body? Sound or sick, great or little, well or ill shaped, are
outward considerations to the nature of a Member; if it be informed by the same
Soul, it requires no other condition to make it such: Nor can you make this
Soul which is required of such necessity to give it life, to be a full and
entire agreement in all points of Faith, of one member with another; for then
in matters of Belief you make no distinction betwixt sickness and death, and
the least indisposition of health is a total Corruption. Men of the contrary
Opinion (I foresee) cannot choose but say here, that in dangerous and infectious
diseases cut off the affected member to save the rest; and that he who in a
Gangreen spares the Patient, is the most hard-hearted and unmerciful Physician:
and truly, if Errors in belief draw so ill a tail after them as the Devils and
Damnation; if they be to be esteemed Gangreens, as well in respect of their
mortality, as their spreading and infectious Nature; not only Prudence but
Charity it self will put a sword into our hands to cut them off. But alas!
these diseases are not so deadly, as the Physicians of the Soul would make them
for the exalting of their own reputation; and he that would presently lop off
an arm, if the Gangreen be moving in it, would not, I hope, prescribe the same
remedy, if it be but infected with an Itch: both Evils would extend themselves
over the whole body, but the one to the perpetual destruction of the being, the
other only to the temporary loss of the beauty and quiet of it: and therefore
we rather patiently endure the trouble and vexation of continual scratching
(which is the true Metaphor for the Controversies of Ecclesiastical Writers)
with the loathsomness and deformity of so many sores, than take away a Member
which may possibly hereafter recover its former health and comeliness, and is
even now without them, of great and necessary uses to the whole body.

Now as for those men, who accuse us of pride and vanity for attributing so
much to our own Reason, making presumption and self-flattery the fountain of
this Opinion; it is a scandal so false and so ridiculous, that without much
humility I should disdain to answer it. Are those to be accounted proud and
tyrannical, who being governed by their own Reason, are content that all others
should enjoy the same liberty, or those who whilst they deny that they
themselves are ruled by their own understandings, would nevertheless have all
others to submit to it? Is it the voice of Pride to acknowledge, that they who
differ from me may possibly be in the right, or if they mistake may do it
without ruin, or to say, Whosoever is not of my Opinion is in the wrong, and
whosoever is in the wrong is eternally to perish for his Error? Is it the
custom of Presumption to be ready to lay down an Opinion once entertained
(which is almost as great a Martyrdom, as laying down our lives for the Truths
sake) when cause shall appear for so doing, or by claiming to our selves the
infallibility of our Party (for he is infallible himself who agrees with them
that are so) to harden our selves into a necessary Opiniastrete.

These are the common Objections against this good-natured and gentle Doctrine:
But Mr. Hobbs, according to his extraordinary wit, has found out an odd, and
extraordinary Argument. For in his first Chapter of Religion, in the state of
Gods natural Empire, making every City the supreme Judge in matters that belong
to Gods worship, and to which we ought to render an entire obedience, says
thus: Otherwise all absurd Opinions of the Nature of God, and all ridiculous
Ceremonies which have been admitted by any Nations, would be seen at once in
the same City, by which it would happen, that every particular person would
believe all others to Contumelia afficere.
blaspheme, or irreverently to behave himself toward God; so that it could be
said of no man, that he worshipped God, because no man worships God (that is,
honors him externally) but he who does those things by which he may appear to
others to honor him.

But methinks, if this be true, the several unappealable Tribunals which are
set up by Mr. Hobbs in several Cities or Commonwealths, are as well destroyed
by it, as those which are placed by us in every Man's breast; for several Cities
appointing several kinds of worship or honor, consisting in the Opinion not of
the worshipper or honourer himself, but of the witnesses and spectators of the
worship or honor; now if he say, that when a whole Commonwealth has but one
sort of worship, none will be witnesses or spectatours of it, but those who
believe it honorable; first, as much scandal from the report, as from the
sight of it; and besides, the same I say will happen, if there were an hundred
Religions in one City; for still their Religious Congregations were to be made
up of men of the same Opinions: Again, Those who deny that a Commonwealth ought
to enforce an unity of Worship upon all its Subjects, will likewise as much
deny, that men ought to think those Worships dishonorable which are not
practiced by themselves: and if he say, there is no hindering of this latter,
he must needs pardon me if I cannot believe that impossible, which has been in
the world (even in a more ridiculous variety than is at present, at least in
our parts) for so many Ages, and which is now exercised in some places: And if
ignorant or malicious Physicians in this violent Feavour, did not apply new
heats instead of Julips, they might by Writing, Disputing, Preaching, living
Charitably (which is all the former) reduce the world in a short time to its
ancient healthful and natural temper. Lastly (to strike at the root of this
Argument) it is false, that the worship or honor of God consists in the
opinion of others; if it did, Idolatry for four thousand years, had been the
best, nay the only Religion; and if I were now in the South Continent (where I
suppose I should be the only Christian) I ought not to abstain from the
Christian worship of God (no, nor to hide or disg^^ise it) for fear least the
wonder, contempt and mockery of Infidels, should on a sudden (I know not how)
convert it into sin and blasphemy. True it is that in honor paid from Men to
Men, custom, consent, and acknowledgment, makes up the business, and an honor
contrary to the use of the place is counted an affront; as to put off the Hat
would be in the East, and in the West to keep it on before Princes. But the
reason of this is, because men who are not able to search into the hearts, must
be governed in their judgment of them by the exterior actions, and the measure
or standard of those is Custom; but with God it is quite otherwise: He beholds
and judges the very thoughts of man, which are the fountains of his actions, so
much more fully and plainly, than we do the actions themselves, that he needs
not make a second, a mediate, a syllogistical judgment of the reality of men's
worship, from the external, circumstantial, and only probable testimonies of
their outward behaviors. And truly if we put the case amongst Men, methinks a
great Roman Emperor that calls himself Master of the world, should delight to
prove himself to be so, from the variety of homages, tribute and worship, which
he receives from several Nations; and no more refuse to be honored in several
fashions, than he would to be praised in several Languages. He would be glad
perhaps to establish the Latin Tongue, and make that the Speech of all
Countries, but finding that design to be impossible, would at least pardon that
diversity which agrees and consents in his own glory. Truly if men could cast
away so much passion, as to make but true Comparisons, they would find no more
hurt from the use of different Ceremonies, then of different Tongues in the
same City; and we might be as well allowed to serve God after the English
manner, as to speak English in the Spanish Dominions. As words are the images
of our thoughts, so our thoughts are of the things themselves: and as well may
differing thoughts truly represent the worship of one God, and of his Son
Christ Jesus, as differing words can represent the same thought: And this the
Roman Church seems to acknowledge, which does not think sufficient Unity in
Gods Service to be retained, with the allowance of more than of one Language,
and for preservation of Fantastical Identity, teaches her Sons first to think,
and afterward to speak they know not what. They say first, Our error is the
same with that of the Greeks, which is taxed by Saint Paul to the Corinthians;
That they sought after wisdom, but that the world by wisdom knew not God; that
the wisdom of the wise was destroyed, and the understanding of the prudent
brought to nothing; that it was made foolishness, nay it was confounded by the
foolish things of the world. And against this wisdom, many excellent things are
spoken in the beginning of that Epistle, and it is stricken down (as Saint Paul
was himself) by a greater light of Divine truth, which came from God for that
very purpose, to amaze and confound it first, and then to convert it. But if we
mark it well, we shall observe, that under this name of Wisdom, which is
arraigned, condemned, nay and executed here (for it is brought to nothing) is
not signified Humane Reason, but that which among the Greeks at that time was
falsely and blindly esteemed to be so: As in the Laws against Magic, not that
which is truly, but that which is falsely called so, is only condemned. And
therefore Saint Paul names it the wisdom of words; the enticing words of man's
wisdom; and the wisdom after the flesh; and the wisdom of the Princes of the
world. By which three names are plainly (methinks) described, the three great
suborners and corrupters of Humane Reason (and not at all it self) the desire
of Reputation, of Pleasure, and Profit. By the first we forsake the Truth to
make demonstrations of our wit and eloquence: By the second to compass those
carnal and worldly pleasures, which our own true Reason does not allow of, and
therefore we will not allow of it: (as Henry the Eight seems to have left the
Pope, because he refused to dispense with his lusts, and to call that
Matrimony, which was indeed Adultery:) And by the third, to comply with the
interest of States and Princes, and either willingly deceiving our selves with
the errors of our Governors, or deceiving others with a desire to Govern
them. And these three (at least the two latter) causes of error in the
understanding, may be the Reason contained with truth in the parable concerning
which is strongest. That that which falsely seemed to be Humane Reason, and not
that which truly is so, is accused by Saint Paul, appears yet more plainly,
where he says, that God has chosen the things which are not, to confound the
things which are: where the things which are not can signify nothing else, but
the things which are esteemed as nothing, that is neither of value in
themselves, nor of power to produce any effects. True it is, that the best and
truest Humane Reason could not have found out of it self, that wisdom of God in
a mystery, even that hidden wisdom which God ordained before the world, which
is the mystery of Christ Jesus; but it was necessary it should first be
revealed by that Spirit, which can only search and discover the deep things of
God. But as soon as the Spirit had revealed it (which it did by Miracles, by
fulfilling of Prophecies and many other means of power and demonstration) even
Humane Reason was able to behold and to confess it; not that Grace had altered
the Eyesight of Humane Reason, but that it had drawn the object nearer to it.
And till the object was brought so nigh, the wisdom of man did as safely not
discern it, as it does not now the new state of things, which shall be revealed
at the Second coming. And whereas they oppose against this the saying of the
Apostle, that the Natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God,
for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned: The word Natural, I take to be a very ill translation,
and conceive it ought to be rendered the sensual man, for such (...) in the
Greek, and Animalis in the Latin; (...) many times signifying the lower and
sensitive part of the Soul, in distinction to (...) which is the upper or
rational, as anima is opposed to Animus, and both sometimes to Men's. So that
the meaning is, that whilst a man's Reason is seduced by his appetites and
passions, it is an unfit Judge of Spiritual matters, neither can be Umpire for
a peace, having joined it self to the Party of those things, which are in
perpetual warfare against the Spirit. But they say this authority which we
ascribe to Reason, is strangly different from that Captivity which Saint Paul
subjects it to, when he says, Casting down reasonings, and every high thing
that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into Captivity
every thought to the obedience of Christ. And what Captivity, say they, can
there be, whilst we are only guided by the motions of our own understanding?
All which signifies no more, but that St. Paul relates (in vindication of his
own just greatness against the Calumnies of some that despised his person,
especially as weak and rude of speech) how he had confuted those persons that
opposed themselves by reasonings against the Doctrine of Christ; and whereas
their understandings before were enslaved and captivated to the desires of the
sensual Soul (for which he calls them in another place beasts at Ephesus) which
hindered them from the obedience of Christ, he freed them from their cruel
bondage, by casting down all their strong holds, and breaking the chains of
their fallacious reasonings, and brought them into another captivity by right
of conquest, but such an one where the yoaks are light and the burdens easy,
that is, by true reason he overcame and captivated their false ones.

And from this Example, I desire those who would have our Understandings
captivated, to convince us first by theirs that they ought to be so, and not to
think to enslave our Reasons, till they first overcome them: which when they
have done, then they will lose what they contend for: For by our Reasons being
guided, conquered, and enslaved, theirs are become Guides, Conquerours, and
Masters. So that it will appear at last impossible for humane Reason to lose
any thing in one place, without gaining as much in some other.

They who follow the apprehension of a Vision or Revelation extrinsecally
coming into their Souls, if it happen that that extrinsecal light come from the
Father of Lights, as the pillar of Fire did which led the Israelites, they must
needs be guided rightly; but if it chance to be an Ignis fatuus (a flame driven
about, as men commonly believe, by malicious Spirits) the Errors which it
leads them into become unpardonable; for what plea can they make for mercy,
since there is no command, nor no counsel can be alleged for the trusting of
themselves to that Stranger, which they can neither know from whence he comes,
nor whither he designs to go. The like happens if we obey Authority: For if
that Authority prescribe truth, we have good fortune in our obedience, and
merely good fortune: but if it draw us into Errors, we have nothing to say for
our excuse, because we have nothing to allege for our obedience to that
Authority: So Eve pleaded the Authority of the Serpent, but both were punished:
so Adam with more appearance of innocence, the Woman that thou gave me for an
Helper bad me eat, and accordingly I did; but to him too a Curse is pronounced,
because he believed that which was figuratively one with him (as members of the
Church pretend to do the Church) rather then that which was most certainly and
singly one with him, which was his own Reason. Thus the best that can be made
of these men's Opinions is, that after they have blind-folded themselves,
amongst the many doors where they may enter, there is one which will lead them
to Heaven; which if they miss, it will be asked, not why you entered not there,
but why by blinding your own eyes did you put your self into a greater
probability of not finding, than of lighting upon the true passage. Now
contrariwise, those who commit themselves to the guidance of their own
understanding, if they do commit themselves wholly to it, are as safe on the
left hand as on the right, as secure of happiness in their Errors, as others
are, who are otherwise guided, even in the Truths which they happen to fall
into. For there is no danger of perishing but from disobedience, without which
every man may often err, the commandment of God being not to find out truth
(especially every particular one) but to endeavor the finding it: He commands
no more but to search, and ye shall find, says he, not every particular Truth,
for experience teaches us that cannot be the interpretation: but whether you
find or no the Truth which you search for, you shall find the reward of
searching, which is Happiness: Now he that bids you search, is cruel and
barbarous in his mockery, if he knows you have no power or faculty so to search
as he commands you: there is therefore in man a natural ability of searching
spiritual Truths, and that can be nothing else but his Understanding; neither
to any thing else can the command be directed, since all things else are
without us, and may serve for helps and directions in our search, but cannot be
our search it self: Secondly, because we lay the blasphemous accusation of
Injustice upon God, if he punish us for an Error which we could not avoid; and
all Errors are such which we fall into after a full and mature search for the
Truth, according to the best means represented to our understanding; so that as
the liberty of our Will, and the possibility we have of doing the contrary,
makes us suffer justly for evil Actions, so the possibility our understanding
had to have discovered and entertained the Truth, renders us liable to
Condemnation for ill beliefs. Thirdly, We ought not to believe Errors in Faith
to be damnable, because this opinion is so wildly uncharitable, that it strikes
out ten thousand Millions out of the Book of Life, for each single Name that it
leaves in it: so immeasurably vast (if we consider the whole World and all the
Ages of it) is the number of those who have lived and died in great, high, and
manifest Errors (manifest I mean to us, for they were not so to them) above
those that have been so happy as to find and to embrace the Truth. Fourthly, We
ought not to teach men, that any Errors in belief overthrow our hopes of
salvation, unless we could likewise give them a Catalogue of those Errors
which do so; it being confessed that all do not, because these must necessarily
put all considering Men into a doubt, or rather despair of their own salvation:
for what quiet or repose can our Conscience take, whilst we know our selves to
be in many Errors (the estate of a Travellour being incapable of an exemption
from them) and believe that some Errors, without knowing which or how many, do
exclude men from a possibility of entering into Heaven. Fifthly, Because in this
case we cannot know our fault, and therefore have no means of repenting of it:
Now God enjoining men Repentance and promising Pardon thereupon for all sins
whatsoever, prescribes such a Physic as is impossible to be taken; for
Repentance presupposes knowledge of the Fault, and knowledge of a fault does
not consist with an error of the understanding, for we cannot apprehend the
thing so, and yet be sorry that we are mistaken. Sixthly, The great probability
and appearance of Truth on all sides, even the erring ones, ought to make us
believe, that God will not punish those who err: if that be probable, which
all or most men, or many, or the most wise, or some wise men receive for Truth:
What Doctrine is there, which in the whole compass of Religions may not pass
for probable, and what cause have we to condemn the Understanding of any man,
in a thing which he is drawn by probabilities to assent to. I cannot possibly
conceive it agreeable to the goodness of the Divine Nature, so to have hidden
and involved, and almost disguised the Truth from us, if he had intended to
have censured the missing of it, with so heavy a sentence as that of eternal
ruin; especially seeing there is but one true Way for one hundred false ones,
and no certain Mark set upon the entry of that one, to distinguish it from the
others. And let this suffice to be said upon the first Argument, to induce us
to commit our selves wholly to our Reason in the search of Divine and Religious
Verities, which is drawn from the certainty of safety this way, and the great
hazard of it any other.

Secondly, As in visible Objects we receive confidently, and rest in the report
of the sight, because Nature has ordained and accommodated it accordingly for
that purpose, without appeal from it either to other Senses, or to Revelations,
or the Eyes of other men; and as we do the like in all other operations of the
Sense, and all other faculties of the Soul; so ought we as entirely and
absolutely to resign our Belief to the dictates of our own Understanding in
things intelligible, which are as properly and naturally the Object thereof, as
things visible are of the Eyesight; and we might as well say, we will trust
our Eyes in green, and white and black, but not in red or yellow Colors, as
affirm that our Reason must guide us in the contemplation of Nature, the search
of Arts, the Government of Public Societies, and the Regulation of men's Lives
as far as the bounds of Morality, but that it is not at all to be followed or
obeyed in matters that concern Religion; those too being intelligible Truths,
yea the chief, and therefore most to be searched, and a part of the
Understandings object as much or rather more than any other. Now as the credit
of the sight is not at all to be disparaged, because some men have the Jaundies
which paints every thing yellow, some look through Blew spectacles which
represent all things to them under the same color, and some through diverse
mediums which makes the straight Staff appear crooked, some are short-sighted
and take Men for Trees at a distance; so, I say, the mistakes which Reason by
accidental disturbances leads some men into, is not a sufficient Argument for
others to refuse to be guided by it.

If it be objected, that the Sight, though it be subject to some particular
impediments, yet is generally by its own nature much more certain and exact in
the judgment of Colors, than the understanding can ever be made (even without
accidental hindrances) in the knowledge of things Spiritual. I Answer, That if
such things be the proper object of such a faculty, we are herein to be
governed by the dictates of it, without considering whether that faculty be as
quick and perfect as God could make it in apprehension of its object: neither
ought we to give less trust to our Understanding in supernatural Truths,
because it is so much inferior to that of Angels, than we do to our Eyesight
in things visible, though it be so far short of that of Eagles. Certainly they
who remove the cognizance of Divine Truths out of the Court of Reason, take
away that which most properly and naturally falls under its determination. For
when GOD had created all things else, he thought the World imperfect as yet,
whilst there was nothing made that could contemplate, thank, and worship the
Maker of it; and therefore he created Man, and this was the chief end of the
production of a Rational Soul, that by it they might consider the things which
they saw, and discourse and collect out of them the things which they saw not,
and both praise and love the Maker for and in them both; which is the whole
substance of Religion; for the manners and kinds of doing it are accidental. So
then Religion appears to be the principal end of Man's Creation, and therefore
as if Horses be made for burden, they have a natural ability given them
wherewith to do it; if Birds to fly, they have a faculty and wings given them
for that purpose (because where an end is Natural, the means are so too) so if
Religion be the End of Man as he is partaker of a Rational Soul, that
reasonable Soul has some power naturally placed in it for the exercise,
judgment and choice of Religion, as far forth as is necessary to his own
happiness, that is, to the attaining the end for which he was Created.

In the Third place, This Opinion is not only most safe and most natural for
every Man in particular, but likewise most agreeable to the good and interest
of Humane Society: for all Wars of late Ages have been either really for
Religion, or at least that has been one of the chief pretenses; which if it
were quite taken away, it would be difficult for those men who disguise their
Ambition with it, to draw the People into the miseries and uncertainties either
of a Civil or Foreign War. Now if this Doctrine were generally planted in the
minds of Men, both the reality and pretense of fighting for Religion were
utterly cancelled; and though turbulent minds would then either find or make
some other occasion to disturb their Neighbors, yet the ill would neither be
so frequent nor so cruel as it is at present. For who would quarrel for
Religion, when this were made the main and general ground of all Religions,
That every Man ought quietly to enjoy his own. True it is, that unity in
Religion would produce the same effect; but alas! both Reason and Experience
teaches us, that the hopes of that are vain and impossible; and though a State
may sometimes force all its Subjects to submit to an outward uniformity in all
things that concern Divine worship, yet they must know, that every public
disturbance in the Commonwealth, breaks all those bonds asunder of dissembled
Obedience, and that such compulsions both beget and ripen all Disorders.

Much might be spoken in this matter, but not necessarily here, both because I
have said something of it be fore, in answering this Argument turned against
this Opinion unhappily; and because the manner of establishing this Liberty in
a Commonwealth, will require a Discourse entirely by it self.

The last defense of this Cause, and which indeed needs not the assistance of
any other, shall be, because (though men deceive themselves herein, and as it
often happens, know not their own Opinions) it is impossible that ever any man
should have been, is, or can hereafter be guided by any thing else but his own
Reason, as in other things, so also in matters of Religion; I say impossible,
for whatsoever way we take, we shall find that the last Anchor to which our
Faith holds, the last Element into which it is resolved (and therefore it is
likewise compounded of the same) is only Reason. For when I ask, why you
believe any Mystery of Faith? you will answer perhaps, Because the present
Church commands you: If I proceed and ask, Why do you believe what the present
Church commands? you will say, Because the former Church teaches the same. Why
do you believe the former Church? Because God commands you so to do. Why do you
believe that God commands it? Because you find it in the Scripture. Why do you
believe the Scriptures to be the Word of God? Because they were confirmed by
Miracles. Why do Miracles confirm that? Because they are works which can
proceed from nothing but the absolute and immediate power of the Deity. Why so?
Because nothing contrary to, or above the Course of Nature, can be done by
natural Agents; but Miracles are effects contrary to, or above the Course of
Nature; therefore they proceed from the Divine Operation. Thus you see Faith at
last resolved into a Syllogism, which is the proper work of the Understanding.
On the other hand, if I demand, Why you do believe that any Miracles were done
for the Confirmation of the Faith? Because of the great and many Testimonies of
the Truth thereof. Why do you believe those Testimonies? Because so many
Persons in so several times and places, with so several interests, could never
agree in being deceived, or to deceive. So that you rest not at all in any
Authority, but discourse first what may be said for or against the validity of
it, examine it punctually in all Circumstances, and at last submit to it upon
some Syllogism, which is the only Law that binds our Reason. Two things are
to be considered in all Authority, before we obey or believe it; first, The
condition and quality of the Persons who Command or Instruct; and secondly, The
true interpretation of their Commands or Instructions. For the first, The
Persons in Commanding must have a lawful Power derived to them, either from
God, Nature, or Custom (which latter depends upon the two former.) And in
Instructing, must have either an absolute infallibility, or else at least a
probability of not Erring. So that no Authority is obeyable or believeable in
it self without farther examination: no not that of God himself; for the
strength of Gods Authority depends upon that Syllogism, which proves that the
nature of God is such, that he can neither deceive nor be deceived. Now all
this Examination is purely and entirely the work of our Reason by measuring a
particular and an universal. Whatsoever has such Conditions is to be obeyed or
believed; but such Person or Persons has such Conditions, therefore such
Person or Persons are to be obeyed or believed: Neither does our Reason only
prescribe obedience and belief to us, but also searches and establishes the
bounds of both, setting up some solid and apparent Notions, by which we know
our Ne plus ultra. True it is, that some men Obey and some men Believe without
considering that they make this discourse; but that is only from inadvertency,
as men often move their Bodies, without any particular exerted thought of doing
so.

Thus far then Authority wholly depends upon Reason. And much more in the second
Condition, which is the interpretation of it: in which business the
interposition of Reason is so necessary, that I shall omit either to prove or
illustrate the Point.

Now as they who enslave themselves to Authority, make it the rule and guide of
Faith, because that even the belief that Scripture is the Law of God depends
upon it, as truly it does (in my Opinion) upon the tradition of Miracles; so I
say, that much rather Reason is to be accounted that Rule and that Guide we
look for, because even Authority upon which even Scripture it self depends,
depends as much upon that; neither do we more believe the Scripture for
Authority, then that very Authority for the Reason we think we have to do so.
The Samaritan says, I have an infallible Rule, which is the Books of Moses, and
only them. The Jew says, I cannot err for I follow the Old Testament, which is
infallible, and only that. The Christian assures himself of the Truth as long
as he is guided by the Evangelists and Apostles, whose Writings are the
infallible dictates of the Holy Ghost. The Turk assumes the same from the
Alcoran; and the Heathen from Oracles, Sybill's Books, and the like. What shall
I do? None of all these Books can be believed by their own Light, for there are
things equally strange in them all. Follow the Authority of the Church which
cannot misguide you? Most willingly: but again the same difficulty returns in
another habit; for as every one Cries, I follow these Books which are
infallible, so he goes on too and says, I believe these Books to be so, because
our Church and our Traditions, which are certainly the best Authority, assures
us that they were written by Divine inspiration. Let the Christian take heed of
saying here, But my Tradition is more ancient and more Universal, for in the
first the Jew will overcome him, and in both the Heathen. I must in this
diversity of ways either stand still, that is, suspend absolutely from the
belief of any Religion (which is almost impossible after the belief that there
is a GOD) or I must choose out of these. Now Election is a work so proper to
Reason, that it cannot be done by any thing else; and therefore to be brought
to a necessity of an Election, is to be necessarily brought to submit in
matters of Religion to the determination of our Understanding: So that in
matters of Religion wherein there is difference, I choose this side rather than
the other, because my Reason bids me; and where there is no difference, even
there I am wholly guided by my Reason, because the uncontradicted concurrence of
the Parties, makes up a Syllogism to persuade (I say to persuade only) my
Belief. Briefly, I cannot Believe but by an act of the Will, nor can I Will but
according to the directions of the Understanding: so that they who say they
follow Authority, or they follow Divine particular Revelation, or any thing
else imaginable, do it, because that agrees with their own Reason, and will
quit the Party as soon as it does otherwise.

The End.

