The Clothiers REASONS for Establishing the Company of Merchant Adventurers of
England.
I THE Ancient Company of Merchant Adventurers always took Care to preserve the
Credit and Esteem of our English Manufacture abroad, and had good judgment in
Cloth; and thereby kept the Trade from Foreigners, and Exported far greater
quantities of the Cloth of our Country for Hamborough, Holland and Germany than
has been Transported of late Years since we have sold to Interlopers; and the
same Cloth that was then sold current at Twelve Pound per Cloth will not now
yield above Nine; and the same Wool that was then sold at Twenty Four
Shillings per Tod will not now yield above Fifteen Shillings.

II These Merchants always paid the Clothiers ready Money for their Cloths, and
there was no Expense upon the Woollen Manufacture between the Merchant and
Clothier: This enabled the Clothier to buy his Commodity at the first hand, and
to make good Cloth, by paying his Work-people with ready Money. And in those
days Wages was continued at a certain price, and no Losses came upon the
Clothier, he then turned his Stock three times for once now; came to London and
met the Merchant at Blackwell-Hall, sold his Cloth, and was dispatched home
again in Two or Three Days, and had fair Measure for his Goods.

III That since these Interlopers have intruded into the Trade, Cloth is Sold
at Six Months and Nine Months Credit, and many times not paid in Twelve Months,
which makes many bad Debts to the Clothiers, and puts them upon straights to
pay their Work-people with Commodities: By which means such stops in Trade are
occasioned, Wages is many times beaten down from Nine Pence a Weight for
Spining, to Five Pence; which has so far impoverished m^^^ parts of the
Clothing Trade, that the same Parishes that formerly did not pay (...) the
Pound toward the Relief of their Poor, do now pay Three Shillings, a(...)
forced to Buy his W^oll of the Factor or Wooll-Broker, which carr(...) (...)
^east Eight per Cent out of the Woollen Manufactures.

(...) (...)ners commit great Abuses against the Clothiers in the M(...) (...)
Cl(...) many times get Two Yards in Thirty more than our English Merchants; and
the Clothier can be at no certainty for Payment with the Foreigner, for having
Shipped off his Cloth he can easily follow, and so no opportunity left the
Clothier to secure himself, he being One Hundred Miles in the Country.

V The English Merchant being laid aside, who stood by the true Interest of the
English Nation, our Manufacture is extremely falsified, and its esteem lost,
and thereby the Foreigners get the Trade from us. The Wool that formerly made
Eight Cloths does now make Nine, and a Tenth made out by straining; so that Ten
Cloths are carried abroad with the same Wool that formerly made but Eight,
whilst a due care to make our Woollen Manufacture true, substantial and good,
will occasion a rise upon Wool from a true ground, and preserve a Credit
abroad. The present pretense of a rise upon Wool can have no real substance in
it, the advance being only in long Wool, and not in ClothingWooll, which is
the far greater part; which if occasioned by the Exportation of the Woollen
Manufacture, what is pretended must have the same Effect upon both: Therefore
the Reason of this Rise must rather come from the great bane of Sheep that has
hapened these Two last Years, which always Effects long Wool, more than
Clothing-Wooll, that growing from low Pasture and deeper Feed, more subject to
bane; and from other Reasons.

VI Since the Trade of our Woollen Manufacture is fallen into the hands of
Foreigners, the Mysteries of our Trade are stolen away from us; these men always
searching into the Ways and Methods of making our Cloth, which we are well
assured has been of ill consequence to us; For through the want of the English
Merchants to instruct us in the humor of Markets abroad, for Colors and the
like, the Foreigners have very much prevailed upon us. And if the Merchandice
of so considerable a part of our Woollen Manufacture, as is vended in Germany,
Holland and Flanders does hereby come into the hands of Foreign Merchants,
Packers and Factors, at One or Two per Cent, What room can there be left for
the Younger Sons of the English Gentleman? who bring into this Kingdom what
they acquire and gain abroad, to the Enriching of the Nation; whereas the
Foreigner carries all he gains into his own Country, to the Impoverishing of
ours.


