ST PETER's SUPREMACY FAITHFULLY DISCUSSED, According to Holy Scripture, AND
GREEK and LATIN FATHERS. WITH A Detection and Confutation of the Errors of
Protestant Writers on this Article. Together with A Succinct Handling of
several other Considerable Points. The First Book, Divided into Three Parts.

Romae nutriri mihi contigit atque doceri,
Scilicet, ut possem Curvo dignoscere RECTVM.
(...).
Chrysostom. 67. Hom. John. Permissu Superiorum.



LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty,
for His Household and Chapel. 1686. And are to be Sold by Matthew Turner at the
Lamb in Holborn.

ALLA SERENISSIMA PRINCIPESSA Maria d'Este REINA d' INGHILTERRA, etc.
MADAMA,
ACcalorato dagli eccessi della sua paragonata benignita, e bramoso ancora
d'apportar luce alla oscurita della mia ignobil penna, non poteua raffrenarmi
di non consagrarle questo mio present Libro, il quale hora porgo a Vostra
Maesta humilissimamente genuflesso a' suoi Serenissimi piedi; accioche
altretanto venga illustrato da' scintillanti raggi dell'Augusto suo nome, che
porta in front; quanto si troua ombreggiato fra la caligine degli inchiostri
miei.

So ben, che dauanti a cosi Grand Principessa, dotata di purgatissimo giuditio,
e di lucidissimi talenti, non dourebbono a comparir se non de' piu rinomati
ingegni l'opere scielte floridamente depinte, e non i ruuidi abbozzamenti di
scrittor dozzinale; ma la Confidanza ch' io tengo nella sua degneuole bonta mi
sublima a sperar, che ella sia non solo per compatir alla rozzezza di questo
mal organizzato parto; ma che sia anco per accettarlo, come ossequioso homaggio
della mia veneratione; con quella placidezza del uolto ch' e sua propria:
Riguardando non alla pouerta della uittima, ma alla Deuotione del cuor, che mi
ha mosso a farle questa offerta, inchineuolmente portandola all'Ara del vostro
Nume.

Gli e vero, che pecco in temerita; e grandemente m' arrossisco della
picciolezza dell'oblatione; ma qual essa sia si ella si compiacera di prenderla
ingrado, co'l solo suo compiacersene, le dara quel merito e lustro, del quale
essa si troua bisogneuole; adoperando a guisa del Re de' Pianeti, che non solo
indora le cime di monti, e le summita di torreggianti palaggi aspergendole
della luce: ma illustra ancor con li suoi raggi solari le cose piu basse e vili.

Francamente confesso, che a farle questa dedicatione, da niun' altra ragione
sono stato indotto, che dal solo merito del soggetto, che in realta e vaga, e
curiosa; ed oltre di cio di tanta altezza, che m' e paruto non pur degno della
sua pardonanza; ma etiandio in qualche part proportionata alla di lei
grandezza: Onde mi seruirebbe d'apologia, per adombrar la colpa del souerchio
ardir, e per rendermi l'assonto perdonabile.

Ecco Signora Sourana, il Beato Pietro diuien l'Argomento de' miei
ragionamenti; e non poteua meglio seruir alla di lui splendidezza, che con
procurargli per Tutrice una Principessa; nella chiarezza della nascita, nella
sublimita della sort, e nella singolarita della virtu parimente Eccelsa.
Sarebbe indecente all'honor di colui, chi s' addimanda il Prencipe degli
Apostoli, ad altri esser raccomandato, che alla piu eminente Principessa. Ecco
a qual segno sono guinte le sue glory! il San Pietro, la Pietra Fundamentale
della CHIESA: L'USCIER CELESTE, chi tien le chiaue del Regno stellato: L'
Uniuersale Pastore della greggia di Christo: Il Maggiordomo, il Luogotenente
del N. S. Saluator, l'Augustezza del vostro soglio riverisce, ed al vostro
Altiero Fato s' inchina rallegrandosi con essa lei in veder la cosi felicemente
ascesa a tanta sublimita: gli anco implora il suo ambito favor, alla sua
protettione, quasi a sicura franchigia recorrendo. Nel suo Real Palaggio chiede
un cantoncino, da involarsi a' colpi de' nemichi, dalli quali vien bersagliato.
Ella si degni di gratiosamente raccoglierlo con raggio di luce benigna. Chi sa
forse vien apportator, o almeno precursor, di qualche segnalata benedittione,
questo Grand Apostolo.

E ben vero che e stato la sua disauventura, che li convien rappresentar sele
dauanti, sotto habito vile and abjetto; il che lo confesso e stato cagionato
dalla mendicita del mio pouero style soprofatto dalla ricchezza della materia.
E forse a vestir suggetto si sublime con abbigliamenti confacevoli, le
dovitiose guardarobbe delle prime pen del secolo, diverrebbono esauste e
mancanti, non che la mia. Pero la supplico a coprirlo col manto della sua
gratia, accio che senza rossore e senza tema si lasci veder publicamente nella
luce del mondo.

In quanto al contenuto del Libro, ho trattato di vary cose, ma piu
diffusamente, e con piu essatto squittinio del Primato di S. Pietro: Materia
d'importantissimo rilievo, concio sia cosa da questo articolo mal capito, come
da feconda Madre, nasce una numerosa figlivolanza d'errori: Et a grand ragion
gli si puo dir la radice, e l'originario font dello scisma Aquilonare: E pero
e stato il mio principale intendimento, con ogni dilucidita rischiarar questa
verita Fundamentale: Impresa ardua e faticosa, oue si trovano molti groppi da
scioglier, che a prima uista paiono indissolubili. Ho etiandio attentato di
purgar molti altri dogmi Catolici delle macchie, apposteli da' nemichi della
verita; disuelando di quegli astuti truffatori l'arte prestigiosa. Smascherando
le loro fallaci sofismi, inorpellate menzogne, e colorite ragioni. Mi sono anco
affaticato in rintuzzar loro l'orgoglio, and in otturar la loro lingua
defamatoria, con la quale ad ogni potere s' adoprano d'annerar ci la
riputatione, calunniandoci con imputationi malign and con accuse intessute di
falsita, per renderci odiati al popolazzo. Ma quello che piu importa, questi
Maestri d'errori imbrogliando il senso Germano alla S. Scrittura annebbiano la
luce alla verita: bugiardi predicatori con oratorii incantessimi
s'impossessando degli affetti, tradiscono l'intelletto: Con si fat frodi
uccellando la plebe illeterata instillano massime nociue, a tutto ingegno
attendendo alla dannosa agricoltura di seminar zizzanie. Quinci nasce, che
questa fiorita Isola, un tempo beata e gradita al cielo, vien diluviata dall'
inondatione spauenteuole di set; and insaluatichita da folte boscaglie di
Heresy, ortiche, lappole, e tutte le sorti d'herbaccie, con profonde radici
abbarbicate: Mentre il buon grano de' Catolici dogmi vien suffocato da'
sopraseminati loglii delle Dottrine male sane. La gente semplice, cosa
ueramente lagrimeuole soddotta dall'ingannevoli imposture delle loro guide
infide, smarrito lo sentiero dritto, vanno errando fru ciechi rauuolgimenti
d'un laberinto inestricabil, testardi, orgogliosi, cervicosi, and inuaghiti
delle loro opinioni erronee; senza speranza di trouar da' quei giri intricati,
l'uscita: Mentre malamente ammaestrati sparlano, e con stomacheuol maledicenza
lacerano la fama della S. Chiesa Catolica, che sola, a Sembianza di Faro, nel
buio del present secolo con fido lume puo insegnarli, come hanno da indrizzar
la nauigatione senza naufragar'. Ma sopra questa materia per hora non
aggiongero piu parole.

So been, che dourei, come e lo style di chi dedica, decantar di U. Maesta i
pregi, e tesserle encomii; ma io non ardisco usurpar la fontione di Panegirici;
essendo li suoi vanti maggiori della mia lode, and ella maggior di loro. Io per
verita non tengo vocaboli espressiui, ne parole adeguate all'eminenza delle sue
prerogative; onde mi sembra piu meglio con facondo silentio ammirar le, che con
imperfetto ragguaglio minorarle. Ma volendo-le celebrar, non saprei donde
essordir dourei: La sua Patria, la sua Famiglia, il suo Maritaggio, la sua
Leggiadria, le sue Virtu essendo ugualmente sublimi.

Italia, la sua Culla, and alma Nudrice, e debitrice a lei dell'accrescimento
della sua gloria. La bella Italia, Primo freggio della natura, Piazza del
mondo, e simolacro del Cielo: Eletta dal nume degli Dei per far piu chiaro il
cielo, e noue stelle aggiongere al Fermamento, riusce piu luminosa, illustrata
dagli aurei raggi della U. Maesta.

Ella uscita dalla chiarissima, and antichissima casa, non solo da lei riceue,
ma etiandio accommunica splendour, auantaggiando la chiarezza de' Natali, con
l'ingrandimento della Fortuna, e con le marauiglie delle sue virtu. O luce,
gemma, fior della celeste sterpe.

-- O Del Ceppo Estense
Propagine maggior, Germe di Regi.
Nell'Erario della cui Real Persona, ha riposta la Natura i suoi piu ricci
monili: Nel cui sagro petto si ritrouano, recapitulate, tutte le diverse
perfettioni, sparse in altre: Strana union di virtu congiurata per inalzarla a
questa degnita: Ma ella precorrendo le dignita, con meriti, in vece di riceuer,
par che aggiunga honori; esaltante il soglio, non meno, che dal soglio vien
esaltata; e ueramente di tanti pregi adorna, che la minor part, che la fa
risplendere e, la Maggioranza del grado. O Donna Diuina fuste prima Reina di
valor, che di nome; ne vi mancaua altro, ch'l titolo: Voi foste produtta
grande, e la vostra front dalla natura fu creata maestosa, ma al nostro Grand
Re fu riserbato l'honor a cingerla d'Aurea Corona, il maggior dono de' Dei, ma
scarsa mercede de' vostri meriti.

O Fida Segretaria! O Individua Compagna dell'Inclito Consorte! all'alta bonta
di summo Dio e piaciuto, che homai d'ogni passata noia, d'ogni amara doglia, di
ogni patimento sofferto, raccogliate il frutto: Siate hora alzata a tal segno,
che di maggior auuanzamento e incapace, collocata nel meriggio dell'humana
felicita.

O del Sagro Marito Fortunata Consorte! O Dolce Alleuiamento d'affari alti! O
Grato Ristoro di pensieri noiosi! nel cui petto latteo, lucente specchio
d'illibata Matronal pudicizia, nel cui seno odorato, come in porto d'Amor, si
ritira il Giacomo, stanco nel sostener lo scettro, and aggravato dalla soma
pesante della sua vasta Monarchia.

O Beata Reggia Coppia! O Felice Inserto, tra l'Inuincibil Leoni, e le Candide
Aquile! O Alma con Alma unita, Amante Amata! nissun sinistro auuenimenro ui
molesti l'almo riposo, od interrompa il godimento all vostre compiacenze. S.
D. M. ui conceda inalterabil quietezza; giorni sereni, come la faccia
d'Angiolo; e tranquilli, a guisa del seno del mar addormentato nella calma.
Nelle vostre Person pioui il cielo diluuii di benedittioni; e dopo lunga serie
d'anni felicissimi, ui trasferisca N. S. nell'alberghi riposati dell'Eternita,
per interminabilmente goder le delitie della Beatitudine; cangiando le vostre
ombratili, e Caduche Corone ne' Massiccii Trionfali Diademi, imperlati
d'immarcessibili gioie, in tessuti di viuaci Margarite.

Ma hora, condonate mi l'assonto, a voi, O Sire, dirizzo le sequenti righe: non
sdegniate l'humil osservanza d'un vostro Lealissimo suddito, mentre con piegate
ginocchia riuerisce la vostra sagra Maesta, accostando sele, non per ritardar
le il progresso, per lo sentiero della fama incaminando all'immortalita: Ma per
accompagnarla con lieto applauso, mentre cinta la vittoriosa chioma di
trionfanti allori, poggiate la cima alla gloria. Auuanzate pur auuanzate; e con
gesti egregii stancate il volo al Grido, Impareggiabil Giacomo, di nome
SECONDO, di senno e di valor PRIMO. Principe veramente degno di tutta la voce
della fama, e di tutti gli attributi della lode: O saggio, O forte, O
magnanimo, O mansueto, O Giusto, O Pio. O Occhiuto Guardator, O Zelante Custode
della riputatione del Regno, al cui alto senno, alla cui inuitta destra commise
Iddio la cura delle Britanniche Mura. In cui mani la felicita de' nostri giorni
sta riposta. O Novello Alcide domator de' mostri; debellator d'Hidri fecondi di
rinascenti e rediuiue test. O del conquassato Nauilio Timoniere vigilante, il
quale fra le minaccie del mare burascoso ha fat illustri prove della sua
prudenza. O Dono delle stelle cortesi. O REX OPTIME REGUM. O Nume Tutelar,
disceso dal cielo. O instancabil Campion della causa di Dio. O Propugnacolo de'
Fedeli. O Defensitor della Feed. Questa in realta fra tutte le gioie, della
vostra Imperial Corona e la Gemma piu splendida: Concio-siacosa che non
habbiamo quagiu cosa, ne piu veneranda, ne piu Augusta della Religione. Deh
Poderoso Signor, habbiate pieta della lacera afflitta chiesa, non vi spauenti
la malagevolezza dell'impresa; non ui sbigottisca ne la moltitudine, ne la
malignita degli auuersarii, siate custodito sotto l'impenetrabil scudo della
divina protettione, pero con ogni in trepidezza proteggete le ragioni della
veritiera Religione; a Gloria di Dio, la cui persona sostenete, and a benefizio
della sua chiesa che la vostra autoreuol difesa supplichevolmente implora: Ben
sapendo che in rimuneratione de' vostri gloriosi sudori riceverete nel secolo
venturo mess granita. O che applausi canori u' assordaranno! che Trionfi
festosi ui esaltaranno! che diademi ingioellati ui coronaranno! che splendori
abbaglianti vi glorificaranno! ma io mi reprimo perch, so ch'l vostro ardente
zelo non e bisognoso di stimoli, pero non aggiongero d'auuantagio: e la vostra
opera natia il proteggere le cose divine. O Prencipe Santo come valor con
Religiosita accoppiate! come brauura con pieta temprate! Quinci nasce the S. D.
M. ha voluto ampliar i confini della vostra grandezza. Quinci e che a dispetto
di tutti gli sforzi degli huomini tristi: Ad onta dell'Inferno scatenato, siate
asceso al Trono de' vostri Illustri Antenati; fermata immobilmente la corona su
la vostra testa Reale: e tutta la malignita de' nemichi vostri, non ad altro ha
servito, che ad augumentar la chiarezza della vostra sorgente gloria. Indarno
ordiscona trame, e fanno empie congiure per distornar gli irretrattabili
consigli dell'alta Providenza: Cosi sta scritto nel infallibil libro, nel fatal
volume del Destino: In vano folle humana forza, per impedir l'esecutione degli
eterni decreti, giostra con incontrastabil braccio di Dio: Gli solo tien in sua
balia le sorti, e le dispensa, come gli aggrada: Corrono dove gli le inuia, le
Corone, gli scettri ed gli ostri.

Iddio Arbitro della fortuna, e Regnator de' Regi conceda a V. Maesta in tutte
le sue grandi imprese felice riuscita: E Voglia che ella impadronita degli
animi de' sudditi, Monarcheggi molti anni in disarmata pace, con imperio
assoluto sopra i cuori; portando fra noi ll secolo d'oro.

Scusate, Bella Reina, l'ardir della mia penna, e gradite questa picciola
dichiaratione de' miei ossequii, e permettete, che con questo mezzo, mi s' apra
l'adito a vostra gratia feconda di ventura: Mentre io, pregandole il colmo di
quei maggiori contenti che sono da lei piu ardentemente desiderati, con
profondissima somessione abbassandomi mele inchino,

Di Vostra Sacra Maesta Humilissimo and Divotissimo Suddito and Vassallo,
Guglielmo Clenche.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Am to acquaint you, by way of a short Preface, that the Foundation of this
Book was laid some Years elapsed, occasioned originally by an Intercourse of
some Papers, which passed betwixt a Protestant Divine and my self; which
thinking, that he would not so soon have interrupted (having promised me a
satisfactory Answer) I continued my Indagation, not only for my better
Information, but likewise to qualify my self for to mould a Reply, in case he
had complied with his Promise. But hearing no more from him, and finding in me
a particular curiosity to penetrate deeper into the knowledge of this important
Point, I found it absolutely necessary to consult with the Fathers (whom my
Opponent had in his Papers to me plentifully cited) to avoid the frequent
imposture of false imperfect Quotations, and to acquire their true German
Sense; concluding, that those great Luminaries of the Church, could not write,
both for, and against the same thing, but that this their imaginary
contradiction was engendered, either by the Interest, or Weakness, or depravity
of their Readers picking out here and there some words, which might seem to
countenance their Opinion without weighing the scope of the Author, or
examining the precedaneous and succeeding lines. Having given the Fathers a due
Discussion, I applied my self to the Modern Authors of both sides, and finding
them very warm; the one in maintaining, the other in impugning this Article,
and perceiving their Books larded with Citations out of the same Authors, I
assumed a Resolution to find out on which side the Cheat lay, and so to detect
it, well knowing the great importance of this Point, clearly containing the
irreversible Monarchic Government which Christ himself instituted, investing
St. Peter with it, as a platform of Polity, for the succeeding Ages of the
Church to imitate. From this Model Protestants have not only revolted; but with
opprobrious and reviling Infamations asperse and blacken it, not only to make
it, and those who submit to it odious to the Populace, but likewise, to
justify their Schismatical Defection from St. Peter's See.

Having perused the chiefest Propugnators of the Protestant Party, I found my
Opponent had very plentifully gleaned from them, presenting me as it were with
a Synopsis of them, which he judging Irrefragrable, made me more desirous to
Probe it: For indeed I had never imbarqu'd my self in so inconsiderable an
Employ, as to trouble my self about subverting any particular Error he might
solitarily be found guilty of; but the reason that induced me to confute him,
was to involve those Authors of whom he had borrowed the substance of his
Writings, in his Confutation. So I would not have any one fancy, as if I
(guided thereto by some Pique,) had whet my Pen against one particular Person,
for I am in perfect Charity with him, and heartily wish he may live to see his
mistakes in Religion; one may detest the Heresy, and yet at the same time
affect the Person infected with it; according to what St. Chrysostom. affirms, De
Phoca, (...).

Now as to my writing this Book, I was in a manner enforced to Compose it; for
having formerly made some imperfect Essays on this Subject, which were
communicated to others, I found my self now obliged to write more completely,
to prevent that injury to my Name, which possibly might have been offered after
my Death, by their being made public. What I have here offered you, is as well
performed as my Abilities would permit; so I am not ashamed to own it; and what
is here wanting shall be supplied in my Second Book. In the interim, I am to
beg your candid Censure, and Pardon for the imperfections of a Work which was
begun solely for my private satisfaction; but having how finished it, relying
on your Benignity, I divulge it for your benefit: And I shall be heartily glad,
and think my self sufficiently rewarded, if it becomes serviceable to you, by
confirming you, if a Catholic, or by convincing you, if a Protestant: And so
Farewell.

THE CONTENTS.
PART. I.
CHAP. I. COntaining the Introduction, and concerning St. Peter's True
Successor. Page 1 CHAP. II. Concerning Schism; and whether the Roman or English
Church be guilty of it. p. 8 CHAP. III. Concerning the Respect which Catholics
pay to Images. p. 27 CHAP. IV. Of Transubstantiation. p. 34 CHAP. V. Of
Communion in one kind. p. 43 CHAP. VI. Concerning Public Prayers in Latin, and
of several other Points. p. 50 CHAP. VII. Concerning Protestants objecting
Errors to the Church of Rome. The Authors Apology for himself. His Advice to
the Protestant Divine with some other Particulars. p 56
PART II.
CHAP. I. The Preface to St. Peter's Supremacy, and whether St. Andrew knew
Christ's Divinity before St. Peter. p. 67 CHAP. II. The difference betwixt
Nathaniel's and St. Peter's Confession of Christ: and in what Sense St. Peter
is said to be Os Apostolorum. p. 74 CHAP. III. Whether the other Apostles knew
Christ's Divinity as soon as St. Peter? Concerning the Blessed Virgin Mary, and
St. John, etc. And concerning the Devils knowledge of Christ. p. 86 CHAP. IV.
Concerning Christ's Reply to St. Peter's Answer. Whether the Bishop of Rome's
Supremacy be grounded on Scripture? Of Christ's being the Rock; and St. Peter's
being the Rock. Of St. Austin's Interpretation of Super hanc Petram. p. 95
CHAP. V. Concerning St. Peter's Faith or Confession being the Rock. And how
those Fathers, who Interpret that to be the Rock, Exclude not his Person. p.
109 CHAP. VI. Concerning the other Apostles being Foundations. Of Peter's new
Name given him by Christ. Peter the Rock of the Church. Of Origens
Interpretation. (...) and (...) all one. The Inconvenience of Expounding Christ
to be the Rock in this place. p. 117
PART III.
CHAP. I. Of the Keys. That they denote Supreme Power. Whether Sobna were
High Priest? Of the Highpriests and Kings of the Jews. Whether the Jewish
Kings were Supreme in Church Affairs? The differenoe betwixt the Jewish and
Christian Priesthood. p. 133 CHAP. II. Concerning the Sacerdotal and Regal
Head. Of Christian Emperors intermedling with Church Matters. The Fathers
Opinion of it. Particular Emperors, who are falsely affirmed by Protestants to
Act as Heads of the Church. Of our English Kings. Of Henry VIII. Of this our
present King James II. p. 144 CHAP. III. Of the Keys. In what Sense St. Peter
may be said to answer for the Rest. That what Christ replied, was directed
immediately to Peter only. In what Sense 'twas extendible to the Rest. How the
other Apostles may be said to share in the Keys. An Account of the Fathers who
acknowledge St. Peter Paramount in the Keys. The Exposition of St. Matt. 18. v.
18. and of St. John 20. v. 21. How the Church received the Keys in St. Austin's
Sense. Whether a Minister of the Protestant Church has the Power of the Keys?
With Advice to him. p. 156 CHAP. IV. Of St. Peter's being called Satan: And of
his Denial. p. 171 CHAP. V. The Introduction to Pasce Oves meas. Of the word
(...). Wherein St. Peter exceeded the Rest as Pastor. Whether Pasce Oves meas
were an Exhortation or a Commission? Why St. Peter was sorry for Christ's thrice
asking him. The Reason of the trine Interrogation. That the foregoing words
were spoken immediately to St. Peter only. p. 176 CHAP. VI. That St. Peter's
surpassing love to Christ was the Foundation of his Prelation. That Peter by
virtue of Pasce Oves meas had Universal Jurisdiction. Several nice Distinctions
answered, That the words Oves meas included the other Apostles. That St. Peter
was the only Supreme Pastor: With an Apostrophe to him. p. 190

CHAP. I. Containing the Introduction, and concerning St. Peter's True
Successor.
SIR,
I Had no sooner perused the Papers you sent me, but by way of a Letter, I
imparted unto you my Sense of 'em, and withal, acquainted you, that I would
answer 'em. But having at that time Imbarqu'd my self in a particular Study,
which my Genius warps to with a stronger propension than to Controversal Points
in Divinity; I could not prevail with my relucting Fancy to relinquish it, and
reassume Polemics, till I had conducted it to a Completion. But I need not make
use of any excusive words for this my long silence; matters of so high
importance as I am now about to handle, ought to be maturely perpended, and not
spurred on with a hurrying precipitancy. However, if the adjournment of this my
rejoinder has seemed to you too long protracted, I am content to afford you a
proportioned consideration for your forbearance, which you shall find lapp'd up
in these Papers.

As for Disputation, I am not so much a forreigner to my self as to be ignorant
of its being an employment, not only discordant to my Temper, but surmounting
my Abilities; requiring a richer Exchequer of Learning than I can pretend to:
So I would not have you figure to your self, that I catch at the name of a
Disputant; I yield that Dignity to those whose politer Temper, and more
embellished Parts entitle 'em to that Honor. But if my Talent did excel this
way, I should very unwillingly grapple with so topping an Antagonist as you
are: It might seem presumption in me, who am but a Laic, to enter the List, and
take up the Gantlet against so eminent a Controvertist. But that which makes me
more backward herein, is my fear (you being (...)) of incurring the displeasure
of the rest of your Coat, who like the Bells in Joves Dodonean-Grove, hang so
close together, that if one be touched, all of 'em sound; this inconvenience I
have fully surrounded; so I shall not here so much pretend to oppose you, as to
defend my self, which in Honor I am obliged to do. And I hope hereby I shall
not disgust any Ingenuous Person; for you having answered me so briskly, and so
convincingly, as you fancied, I could do no less than try whether your, or my
Opinion were erroneous, and so expiscate the Truth, which I find not to float
on the Surface of the Well, but to dive very deep, according to the saying of
Pyrrhon, (...), Truth lies at the bottom.

It will then be my present employ to examine those Papers which I composed,
both for the Satisfaction and Defense of my Brother, and withal, to bring your
Answer to a strict Disquisition; this is my whole proponiment, my pretensions
aspiring to no more than what every Christian ought to have, a short Scheme and
Diagram of his Religion, which is what St. Paul calls, (...). Such a Platform
of Sound Doctrine is attainable by one of the Laity, if he will bend his Mind
to the Acquisition of it, and not indulge himself in a lazy, desidious
acquiescency: For as St. Chrysostom. affirms, Sermon. de Sigillis, (...), every
Soul has in it self the Seed of Divinity. Now if it ever were necessary to
possess such an abridgment of wholesome Principles, it is much more so in this
humorous, inquisitive Age, which presents us with so many varieties of false
Opinions, dressed up in the semblance of Truth, that if a discerning
Circumspection be not made use of, the fallacy may pass undiscovered; and
whoever considers the vast differences amongst those who are in the attire of
Christians, their various and discrepant Judgments in Doctrinal Points, and
ritual Ceremonies, and with what ardour every Sect endeavors to defend its
Opinion, and with what acrimony it opposes that of another, must needs judge
it absolutely necessary to purchase so much knowledge, as to be able to shield
himself from those many impostures which Prestigiators in Religion obtrude on
credulous Persons, under the livery of saving sound Doctrines. This made
Theoph. call false Teachers, (...), Dicers or Coggers of Dice, alluding to St.
Paul's Phrase, (...). This setting, topping the Die, even in Temporals, is
pernicious enough, being able to decoct and ruin the most flourishing Estate;
but in Eternals, it is far more exitial and destructive, as much as Spirituals
transcend Temporals. It will therefore highly concern every one to guard
himself from the grand cheat of being imposed on in matters of Religion, and
considering there is so much cozenage in the World, to be cautious what
Articles he admits as Sterling, measuring his Faith by a sure Standard; which
is the Method I design to take in my ensuing Discourse, not devoting my self to
any Private Persons Opinion or Dictates, but steering my course by the unerring
Pharos of Antiquity.

The first Objection you make against my Treatise of St. Peter's Supremacy, is,
That if his Monarchic Power were supposed, the Bishop of Rome 's Succession in
that Dignity could not be inferred any more than the Primates of Antioch, etc.
This Opinion of yours I look on as erroneous; for those Primates succeeded him
not in the full ampltitude of his Power, but in that particular Diocese,
Succession to any in his whole right being only to him who leaves his place,
either by voluntary Resignation, Deposition, or natural Death; whereas St.
Peter, tho he was at Antioch for some time, yet he invested in the High
Priesthood, quitted that place, Vivus valensque, and with his Person
transplanted all the Pontificial Dignities from thence to Rome, having upon his
departure from Antioch subrogated in his place, either Evodius or Ignatius:
This his removal from thence to Rome, is asserted by St. Chrysostom. in Inscript.
Act. Apostol. (...). This is one of the Prerogatives of our City of Antioch, to
have had first the Prince of the Apostles for its Teacher; for it was no more
than fit, that that City in which the name of Christians was first heard,
should receive the first Shepherd of the Apostles; but when we had him for our
Teacher, we did not keep him all his lifetime, but we delivered him over to
the Royal City of Rome.

This clearly manifests his relinquishing Antioch, and his Transmigration to
Rome, where he settled and fixed his Cathedra, and concluded his Life by a most
glorious Martyrdom; so that the Bishop of Rome, who succeeded St. Peter, dying
there, and not the Bishop of Antioch (which place he had abandoned) inherits
the Pontificate and Prefecture of the Universal Church, as being his apparent
Heir. Hence St. Hierom in his 58th Epistle ad Damasum, calls him, Successor
Piscatoris, and in the Council of Ephesus, Part Secunda, Pope Coelestine is
called, (...), The Successor and Vicar of St. Peter; and accordingly, Rome, by
the Fathers is called, St. Peter 's See, as in St. Augustine, cont. literas
Petil. Cathedra quid tibi fecit mali in qua Petrus sedit and in qua hodie
Anastasius sedet. And likewise St. Hierom in his 57th. Epistle ad Damasum, Ego
Beatitudini tuae, id est, Cathedrae Petri communione consocior: Suitable to
which, is that of St. Cyprian, Navigare audent ad Petri Cathedram ad Ecclesiam
Principalem. But that which gives me full satisfaction in this point is, the
Custom of the Fathers, who in their enumeration of the Bishops of Rome place
St. Peter first, as the Author of that Succession; some of them join St. Paul
with him, Irenaeus reckons the Catalogue from St. Peter and Paul to Pope
Eleutherius; Eusebius likewise to Sylvester; Optatus, from St. Peter to
Siricius; St. Austin, from St. Peter to Anastasius; Tertullian, from the same
to Anicetus, and demands of the Heretics of his time, a List of their Bishops:
Irenaeus having begun a Roll of Popes succeeding one the other, adds, Per hanc
Successionem confundi omnes Haereticos; and St. Austin, contra Epistolam
Manichei, confesses, that this Succession of Bishops from St. Peter, was one of
the Reasons which kept him in the Catholic Church.

It Is observeable, That when the Fathers design to give the true Succession and
descendency from St. Peter, as he was the Christian High Priest, they do not
enumerate the Antiochian, but the Roman Succession. Not placing St. Peter
first, then Evodius or Ignatius, Bishops of Antioch; but first St. Peter, then
Linus, etc. Bishops of Rome: These things duly perpended, I could not but
wonder how B. Bramhal should question how the Bishop of Rome came to be St.
Peter's Heir, ex ass, to the Exclusion of his Elder Brother, the Bishop of
Antioch. I never read, says he, that the Church was governed by the Law of
Gavelkind, that the youngest must inherit. Here he affecting to show some
sportive Wit, seemed to me to talk more like a Lawyer than like a Divine.

But now you pretend to give a Reason why the Bishop of Rome could not succeed
St. Peter in his Dignity, affirming, That singular and personal Privileges are
not derivable to Successors; herein you are certainly right, for Privilegium
personale cum persona moritur; but then, on the other side, you are as much in
an Error in fancying what was spoken by our Savior to him, was delivered as to
a Private Person, and to terminate with him: You had pleased me very well had
you mentioned what those singular Privileges were, that were so solely affixed
to St. Peter's Person, as not to be inherited by his Successors, Tu es Petrus,
and super hanc Petram, etc. was none of them, nor Confirma Fratres, nor Pasce
oves meas. Cardinal Bellarmine gives this account of them, Quaedam dicuntur
Petro pro se tantum, ut vade post me Satana, Ter me negabis; quaedam ut uni ex
fidelibus, ut si peccaverit in te frater; and quaedam pro se and Successoribus
ratione officii Pastoralis, ut Pasce oves meas, etc.

This Pastoral Privilege conferred on him, was not Personal, but transient to
his Successors, being granted him as a Public Person, so not to expire with
him, but to survive in his descendents. For the Office of a Pastor being
ordinary, ought to be continued as long as there be Sheep, Quamdiu permanet
ratio institutionis Christi, tamdiu etiam res instituta necessario permanere
debet; the Pastorship which was instituted for the good of the Flock, ought to
have an equal duration with it, which is to the consummation of the World. The
Bishops of Rome then lineally descending from St. Peter, have the same Pastoral
Authority devolved on them by Divine Sanction which St. Peter had over the
Church, they succeeding him in all those prerogatives which are ordinary and
belonging to him (as Supreme Bishop) for the Government of the Church; for
eadem Antecessoris and Successoris ratio in alicujus maneris obeundi ratione;
so that Pastoral Praefecture which St. Peter was invested in, after his Death
passed to his Successor, by him handed to the next, from him transmitted to the
following, etc. and so by a perpetual descendency, embalmed and conveyed to
this present Bishop, as being Ordinary, successive and indefectible; and
correspondently I find Eusebius in his Catalogue of Roman Bishops having ranked
St. Peter in the Van, under the Title of Christianorum Pontifex Primus, to
reckon Linus for the Second, and the rest in their order, to Sylvester his
Synchronist the one and thirtieth Pope from St. Peter; this Catalogue was
continued by St. Hierom to Damasus the thirty fifth from St. Peter. The Popes
of Rome then succeeding St. Peter in the Pontificate, are Jure Successionis,
Heirs to the Sacerdotal Power and Dignities which belonged to St. Peter's
Sacred Function, as he was Pontifex Christianorum, it being but rational, that
those Supreme, Pontificial Royalties which St. Peter (for the good of the
Universal Church) was inrob'd in, should still reside in his Successors for the
keeping all subordinate Pastors in their duty, and for the prevention of
Schism, which will of necessity arise where there is no Coercive, Compulsory
Power to quash it. Thus in the Old Law, there was a Sacerdotal Succession of
Highpriests, and Aaron (who was the Head of the Levitical, as St. Peter was
the Head of the Christian Hierarchy) was succeeded by Eleazer, and he by
Phineas, etc. and the Authority which Aaron and his Children was invested with,
died not with 'em, but was propagated to the succeding Highpriests.

CHAP. II. Concerning Schism; and whether the Roman or English Church be guilty
of it.
THE next thing you observe, and seem to mislike, is my skipping over that part
of your Papers which treated of Schism. I must confess, I did decline handling
it, being unwilling to enter into so large a Field of Matter, and so I am
still; but because you urge, and remind me, and seem so fond of what you wrote
on that Point, as to take it ill that I made a Preterition of it, I shall now
supply what I omitted then, for I perceive it is your temper to imagine what I
did not answer, to be unanswerable. It cannot but be as pleasant to hear you
declaim against Schism, as to have heard Verres inveighing against Theft, or
the Gracchi against Sedition. You are pleased to call it Damnable Schism, the
Epithet was very proper, and now look about you, and strictly examine, whether
like David in his Parley with Nathan, you have not through another side
imprudently transfixed your self, by being found guilty of that Crime you have
so severely condemned in another. I perceive you make use of all your Artifice
for your compurgation, but all is but fucous and elusive, your actual
Separation having too much evidence to be denied, and too much atrocity to be
defended.

I shall now, as summarily as I can, contract what you write on this Subject,
and then shape my Reply to it. Having defined Schism to be a voluntary
departure from the Catholic Church, you divide it into Paternal and Fraternal;
the former you say is a renuntiation of Obedience and Communion to, and with
our Ecclesiastic Governors; the latter you term to be a Causless Division, of
one particular true Church from another; then you say your Church is not guilty
of Paternal Schism, because you perform Obedience to Christ and his Apostles,
observing all their Rules and Ordinances left in the Scripture; then you pay
Reverence to the Fathers of the Church, and own the Four first General
Councils, and are willing the differences 'twixt your and other Churches should
be decided by their Umperage. This you judge sufficient to clear you from
Paternal Schism. As for Fraternal, you very fairly clear your Church of that,
because you give the Right Hand of Fellowship to so many Churches and
Christians in the World.

Having, as you fancy, acquitted your Church, you bring in your Indictment
against the Church of Rome, accusing her as notoriously guilty of Schism in
both respects. First, of Paternal by many Doctrines and Practices contrary to
the commands of Christ and his Apostles; and of the Ancient Church, such as are
Image Worship, Transubstantiation, etc. Then you say, she is guilty of
Fraternal Schism by her renouncing Communion with all Churches not in subjecton
to her; denouncing all damned, who submit not to her by sending Emissaries into
all the World, laboring to make a Spiritual Conquest of all other Churches,
etc. These things prove the Church of Rome, you say, guilty of Schism in both
acceptations. This is a short abridgment of what you write about Schism, which
I design to answer, as soon as I shall have premised something concerning the
Nature and Danger of that Sin: Schism does essentially consist in deserting the
External Communion of Christ's Visible Church; it is a most heinous sin, as
tending to the destruction of Christ's Mystical Body, whose Essence consists in
the Union of all its substantial parts, its ruin in their Division; it is a
cutting Christ's Seamless Garment into Shreds, as St. Chrysostom. affirms. (...).

What the bold Soldiers dared not to do, the Audacious Schismatic performs:
This sin is of that Malignancy, that neither rectitude of Faith, nor a Virtuous
Life, nor Good Works can atone; nay, Martyrdom it self, according to St.
Cyprian, cannot expiate it: Macula ista nec Sanguine abluitur inexpiabilis and
gravis culpa discordiae, nec passione purgatur. St. Chrysostom. says of it,
(...), nothing is worse. August. cont. Parmen. Lib. 2. says, Non esse quicquam
gravius Sacrilegio Schismatis. The Devil seeing his Idols demolished, and his
Temples deserted by the planting of Christianity, found out this Sin out of
black Revenge. Excogitavit novam fraudem ut sub ipso nominis Christiani titulo
fallat incautos haereses invenit and Schismata quibus fidem subverteret,
veritatem corrumperet, scinderet, unitatem rapit de ecclesia homines, says
Cyprian in his Book De Unit. Eccles. How lucky this Stratagem has been to him,
the many Rents and Fractions amongst Christians can attest. I shall now
examine, whether the Roman or the Protestant Church be guilty of this damnable
Crime; and herein I shall regulate my Discourse according to the Definition you
have made of it; namely, That it is a voluntary departure from the Catholic
Church, and this being an evident Matter of Fact, it will be easy, to
determine, which forsook the External Commuion of the Visible Church. That the
Church of England, in the beginning of the Reign of Henry the Eighth, agreed
with the Church of Rome, and all other Churches in her Communion concerning
Faith and Doctrine, is undeniable; That at his coming to the Crown, there was
an Actual Church Government settled by a long continuance in Ancient
Possession, is undebatable; That Protestants altered the then owned Faith, and
brake the Bands of that Government, is manifest to the World. Both the Time
when, and Occasion why, can be assigned. Moreover, That the first Protestants
were born of Catholic Parents, and Originally in the Communion of the
Catholic Church, is unquestionable, and that they, as desirous of Innovation
voluntarily departing from that Church, renouncing those points which were
Principles of Unity both in Faith and Government, ipso facto became
Schismatics, is easily proved; for Schismaticos non fides diversa facit, sed
communionis disrupta societas, says St. Hierom on Matt. 11.

Now, how Rome should be guilty of Schism, which did never withdraw from any
known Christian Society, or depart from the Communion of any former Church,
with which before she held Communion, I cannot possibly apprehend; she
continued fixed where she was, as the Pillar and Firmament of Truth. All
Heretics, and Schismatics go out of her; this going out, is an ancient note
of Falsehood, Truth being elder than Error; They went forth from us, 1 John 2.
19. And certain that went from us, Acts 15. 14. and accordingly St. Austin. 3.
tract. Epist. Johan. says, Omnes Haeretici, omnes Schismatici ex nobis
exierunt, i. e. ex Ecclesia exeunt. And de Symb. Lib. 1. Haereses omnes de
Ecclesia exierunt tanquam sarmenta inutilia de vite praecisa; ipsa autem manet
in sua radice. And in this Case the Rule of Optatus is very observable,
Videndum est quis in radice cum toto Orb manserit, quis for is exierit, Lib.
primo. Now as for Luther and Calvin, when they had voluntarily departed from
the Roman Church, they separated from all the Christian-Churches in the World,
and consequently, from the Catholic Church; for they did not adjoyn themselves
in Communion of Sacraments to any Christian Church which was existent before
their revolt from the Roman, there being not one Church to be found upon Earth
antecedent to their Apostasy, to which they did apply themselves after their
defection, but they stood alone till they had acquired more Revolters out of
the Roman Communion; this is most clear, and confessed by themselves. Luther in
his Preface to King Henry, says of himself, Solus primo eram; and Calvin to the
same effect in his Epistle to Melancthon, Absurdum est postquam discessionem a
toto orb facere coacti sumus inter ipsa principia alios ab aliis dissilire; So
this New Church at the first, was but one Person, which by the accession of
more Schismatics grew numerous, being protected by the Secular against the
Spiritual Power.

But to prove your departure from the Roman Communion to be unvoluntary, and
consequently not Schismatical, according to your definition of Schism, you cite
a saying which you say was King James's, Non fugimus sed fugamur; I must
confess, I never could be informed how the truth of these Words could be made
out; for Protestants before their Excommunication having made a wilful breach,
may be said to be Fugitivi rather than Fugati: and accordingly, their Expulsion
may not so properly be termed, a driving them out of the Church, as their
Punishment for going out, they having before deserted the Church of their own
accord. So she had too much reason to make use of her Spiritual Weapons; for
they, by their Novel Doctrine, and Schismatical Separation, having first
receded from her, and by way of Anti-communion, raised a new party of Pretended
Reformed Christians distinct from the general Body of the Catholic Church,
having instituted new Rites, and molded new Articles of Faith, contrary not
only to the Roman, but to the Faith of all particular Churches then known,
immediately before they began their Separation, and refusing to Communicate and
join with her in Public Liturgy, and Participation of Sacraments, disowning
her Faith and Power, to which they had submitted for above 900 Years, and
persisting obstinate in their Opinions and Separation, the Church having with
much patience attended their return, and having tried all Methods that might
seem conducive to their amendment, was enforced at last to proceed against
them, according to her Canons by a just Excommunication, eliminating them from
her Bosom for their Schism, as St. Paul did the Infamous Corinthian for his
Incest, who by the heinous offense gave the first cause of his Excision: So
it is manifest, that the orignal departure was theirs, and accordingly St.
Hierom in his Comments, Epistle to Titus avers, Haeretici in semetipsos
sententiam dicunt suo arbitrio ab Ecclesia recedendo. And Cyprian in his
Fortieth Epistle, Paenas quas meruerunt pependerent, ut a nobis non ejecti
ultro se ejicerent and de Ecclesia se expellerent: For the Church forsakes no
Person, neither does she eject any, but like a tender Mother, cherishes her
Children in her Vital and Fotive Breast, unless such as wilfully separate
themselves by their obstinate adhesion to Heretical Doctrines, or by
persevering in a Flagitious course of Life; so as she is not now the hindrance
of their Reunion, so neither was she at first the occasion of their Separtion.

Protestants well knowing, that their formal Schism can neither be denied, nor
maintained; find themselves obliged to acknowledge the Matter of Fact, but to
blanch and candy their Crime, pretend to have had a just Cause given them for
their Separation; and upon this supposition accuse the Church of Rome of causal
Schism. This is what I conceive Dr. Stillingfleet to mean, when he says, The
Church of Rome, imposing unlawful Conditions of Communion, it was necessary not
to Communicate with her. Bishop Lawd is very clear herein, The cause of Schism
is yours, says he, for you thrust us from you, because we called for Truth and
Redress of Abuses. As for Abuses, if any were crept in, they ought to have been
redressed; and this is properly Reformation; but to alter received Articles of
Faith established by Councils, that is Heresy. But I could not be satisfied
what truth it was, that the Bishop says, they called for: I am fully convinced,
that in the beginning of Henry the Eighth's Reign, our English Church did
retain as a faithful depositary, all those Sacred Truths which Gregory the
Great conveyed unto us by St. Austin, who I do fully believe did convert this
Nation to the true Faith, establishing his Doctrine with Miracles, which
Doctrine is still preserved unstained by the Catholics of this Kingdom. So I
could not understand what the Bishop meant by calling for Truth, neither could
I tell when, or by whom it was called; for I must confess, Henry the Eighth,
who opened the Sluices to let in all the ensuing Mischief, did call, and that
Vocally, but not for Truth: His first call was for a fresh Bedfellow, that was
Carnal; then he called for innocent Blood, that was Tyrannical; his other call
was for Church-Goods and Lands, that was a Sacrilegious call; he had no
scruples concerning the truth of his Religion, neither altered he any thing of
it, but to gratify his Lust and Covetousness, Nulla fere in re a fide
Catholica discessit, praeterquam libidinis and luxuriae causa, as Sanders
affirms of him: And accordingly he ordered his Son to be brought up in the
Catholic Religion, excepting the Title of Head of the Church. Edward the Sixth
was too young to call for Truth; he had most reason to call for it, being early
infected with the Zuinglian Heresy, contrary to his Fathers Will, by the
Sacrilegious Protector, who did call indeed, but it was for the remains of the
Goods of the Impoverished Church; he likewise called for false Teachers to
dilate the Gangren: Martin Bucer a Dominican, Peter Martyr a Canon-Regular,
Ochinus a Capuchin, Apostate Monks and Sacerdotes Vxorati, from such we were
not like to have Truth, who, not only fell from the Catholic Church, but
flagitiously violated their Oath of Continency, for which, by the then
established Law, they lay obnoxious to an infamous Death. I shall say nothing
of Queen Elizabeth, she being a Woman, and wholly unqualified to meddle with
Church Affairs, and to tamper in Articles of Faith; neither shall I say any
thing of the succeeding Princes, who found the Schism begun, and Religion
altered to their Hands. I know very well, that in this case Truth is the
Pretext, but that is no more than what is in the Mouth of every Sectary: This
is the usual Mask to hide the ugly Face of a foul Action, which without so fine
a cover would affright those deluded Souls that are cheated with its beatiful
Paint, (...), there must be a plausible glittering Title, a winning
Frontispiece to a bad Enterprise; but if the Origin of this unhappy Schism be
examined, we shall find that Revenge, Haughtiness, impure Flames, and desire of
Plunder were the Springs that moved the first Machin, and nothing at all of
Truth. I do not find, that Henry the Eighth did ever recant the Book, he writ
in defense of the Roman Church; he hated both Lutheranism and Zuinglianism, and
fell out with the Church, rather for its Booty and Prey, than for its Doctrine;
and this was Tyndals Sense of it in his Letter to Frith, where writing of King
Henry the Eighth's intention against the Pope and Clergy, says thus, Fox page
987. I smell a Council to be taken, little for the Clergies profit in time to
come, but you must understand, that it is not out of pure Heart, and for love
of Truth, but to avenge himself, and to eat the Whores Flesh, and drink the
Marrow of her Bones, which because it is somewhat enigmatically expressed, Fox
is pleased in the Margent thus to expound; eating the Whores Flesh, is to spoil
the Popes Church only for the Prey and Spoil thereof, not Religion. Bishop
Bramhall is very honest herein, As for the suppression of Monasteries (says he)
we fear that covetousness had a great Oar in the Boat; and that sundry of the
Principal Actors had a greater aim at the Goods of the Church than at the good
of it.

Having premised thus much, I shall now take notice how you acquit your Church
of Schism, even according to your own Distinction and Division of it: You say
she is not guilty of that Crime, because she owns and performs Obedience to
Christ and his Apostles; Then, because she pays Reverence to the Ancient
Fathers of the Church: Thirdly, Because she owns the first four General
Councils, etc. This you think enough to clear her of Schism, whereas it is
nothing at all to the purpose, being a mere (...), and besides the Cushion; you
define Paternal Schism to be a renuntiation of Obedience and Communion to and
with our Ecclesiastic Governors, so how do any of these Reasons clear you of
it? You are accused by Catholics, of a voluntary departure out of the
Catholic Church, of a defection from the Government of your Occidental
Patriarch, under whose Spiritual Prefecture this Nation was for several hundred
Years. From this your Spiritual Governor you have revolted, renouncing his
Authority, looked on as of Divine Institution; this being your Accusation, the
Reasons alleged for your acquittance are too weak and dilute for such a
purpose. Now, though you come off with a scratched Face concerning your Paternal,
I must needs say, you come off very fairly with your Fraternal Schism, because
you so courteously give the Right Hand of Fellowship to so many Churches; and
herein your obliging carriage is highly to be commended, you extending your
kindness to Lutheran, Calvenist or Hugonot; and indeed, to any Church that will
but join with you in separating from, and defaming the Catholic.

The next thing I have to do, is to see how you prove Rome guilty of Schism;
and the Method you take herein, I found to be as improper as that by which you
would clear your own Church of it. For instead of proving Rome separating it
self from any visible Society of Christians with whom she formerly held
Communion, which is properly Schism, you accuse her of false Doctrine; which
Accusation, could you be able to make good, it would prove her to be rather
Erroneous than Schismatical.

But I shall now descend to the Examination of those three Particulars, by
which you would prove your self not guilty of Schism. The first is because you
own, and perform Obedience unto Christ and his Apostles, and observe all the
Rules and Ordinances they have left you in the Scriptures. But how you can
pretend to pay full Obedience to Christ, and disobey his Spouse whom he enjoins
you to hear under penalty of being reputed an Ethnic; or how you can fancy to
be united to him, when you fall off from his Mystical Body, the Church, of
which he is the Head, I know not; or how you can be said to follow all the
Rules of the Apostles, when they recommend Tradition, and you reject it; when
they tell you, that the Church is the Pillar and Firmament of Truth, and you
make her Apostatical. I could instance in many particulars, how counter you run
to the Scripture you so much pretend to, but I shall wave them, and only tell
you, that it is an unwarrantable way to fall off from the Church, and then
appeal to that Scripture which commands you to obey the Church; yet this is
your practice, when you dispute with Catholics; but when you have to do with
Sectaries, who plead Scripture against you, then you have recourse to Fathers,
and Tradition, using the same Arguments against them as we do against you.

It was long ago observed by the Fathers, That Heretics were great pretenders
to the Scriptures, backing their false Opinions with it. Omnes Haeretici ex
sacris Scripturis falsas atque fallaces Opiniones suas conantur defendere, as
Hilarious attests Lib. prim. de Trint. and Vincent. Lyrinensis, to the same
effect, Nihil de suo proferunt quod non Scripturarum verbis adumbrare conentur.
This they formerly did, and still do, to reject the Authority of the Church,
and to avoid a living Judge they appeal to the Scripture; then they assume to
themselves what they deny the Church, it is Exposition, perverting it is true
Sense according to their wild Fancies, and so crooken the Rule to their own
Bent: This was observed by St. Basil Hexam. Hom. 2. (...); These falsifiers of
Truth which do not teach their mind to follow the Scripture, but contort the
meaning of Divine Writ to their own Wills. Now though the Scripture, as being the
Word of God, is infallibly true, yet it does witness of it self, that it is not
of private Interpretation, and those that dare Expound it that way, may instead
of sound Truths, extract damnable Doctrines. St. Austin avouches, That all
Heresies take their Birth from its wrong Interpretation, in his 222 Epistle to
Consentius, Neque enim natae sunt Haereses nisi dum Scripturae bonae
intelliguntur non been: To avoid this, we must not Interpret them according to
our Fancies, but adhere to the Interpretations of the Church, not at all
questioning, but that that Spirit of Truth which did direct it, to distinguish
Canonical from Adulterine Writ, will likewise instruct it in the right
Interpretation: And herein consists the difference betwixt Catholics and
Heretics, as St. Austin observes, Libro de Gratia. Haeretici secundum suum
sensum Sacras Scripturas legunt; but we according to Antiquity and constant
Tradition, receiving both the Scripture, and its Sense from the Church; and her
Authority is so considerable herein, that St. Austin. Epist. Manich. says, Ego
Evangelio non crederem, nisi me Catholicae Ecclesiae commoveret authoritas.

The Second Reason, is because you pay Reverence to the Ancient Fathers of the
Church. Of this I shall hereafter have occasion to take notice, and likewise of
your Honesty and Integrity in quoting them.

The Third Reason to acquit your self of Schism, is, because you own the first
four General Councils, and are willing that the difference betwixt you and
other Churches should be decided by their Vmpirage; but I must tell you, That
if you owned Forty Councils instead of Four, and revolted from the Church, that
would not discharge you of the Crime of Schism: As for your pretended
willingness to admit them as Judges in differences betwixt you and other
Churches, this will appear to be a very empty Compliment, unless you can prove,
that they made Definitions concerning our Modern Controversies; they convened
to define about the Heresies rise in those days of the Arrians, Nestorians,
Eutychians, Macedonians, not concerning those of Protestants, a word not then
known, and had their Doctrines been then extant, they would as certainly have
been condemned as the foregoing: I shall only instance in one point, in one
Council, that of Chalcedon; I am fully convinced, that that Council which paid
so much respect to Pope Leo, acknowledging him to have received the custody of
the Vineyard from Christ, granting him, when they sent their Relation to him to
preside over them, by virtue of his Legate, as the Head does over the Members,
would have severely sentenced your revolt from that See. That Council (which
deposed Dioscurus the Patriarch of Alexandria, and consequently no Subject of
Leo's, as he was Patriarch of the West; not for any Erroneous Doctrine, but for
his Sawciness against him, whom they call his (...), Lord; and because he dared
to convene a Synod without leave from the Apostolic See) would most certainly
have condemned your defection ftom the Authority of your Occidental Patriarch,
and more, your Opprobrious Revilings of him. But why the first four General
Councils? why not a Stage farther? why Hic Terminus haeret? Can you prove that
all Contests in Matters of Faith, arising in future Ages, and in much different
Centuries could possibly be determined in those Councils? Would you have an
Heresy be condemned before it be broached? your referring all our Controversal
Differences to their Decision, is as irrational as if Macedonius, who was
condemned concerning his Heresy about the Holy Ghost in the Second General
Council, had appealed to the Nicene, which assembled chiefly to confute the
Heresy of Arrius concerning God the Son, and determined nothing about the
Third Person of the Trinity: Besides, I know no reason why the Church should be
credited in the first four General Councils, and slighted and disbeliev'd in
the following; Christ promised he would be with them to the consummation of the
World; I do not in the least question, but that the same Spirit of Truth which
guided and directed the Church in its first Synods, did accompany it in all its
succeeding Conventions, rendering it inerrable in its Definitions of Faith. I
can find no place where Christ promised to be with them for a limited time, so
as to direct them in their first four Assemblies, and to leave them for the
future to themselves: It would have been a great encouragement to all new
Heresies, if no Decision in Gods Church should have been after the first four
General Councils. The truth of it is this, It Is usual with Heretics to be
Enemies to those Councils, and to reject them that have condemned their
Opinions, charging them with Error as the Arrians did that of Nicene; the
Nestorians that of Ephesus; the Eutichians that of Chalcedon, and accordingly
the Emperor Zeno being an Eutychian, having put out a Profession of Faith,
which he called Henoticon; he left out the Council of Chalcedon, which had
condemned that Error, embracing only the Faith of the three first Councils.

The next thing I shall Discourse of, will be concerning your Church which you
assert to have all the Essentials of a true Church, and to be a sound part of
the Catholic; This I wish you had proved as manifestly as you confidently
affirm it: Had you done this, I would never have forsaken its Communion. You
cannot but imagine it to be a very hard task for any to forsake his Relations,
his Friends, his Contrymen in Matters of Religion, and thereby to expose
himself to their Odium, the severity of rigid Laws, and his Temporal Concerns
to ruin; nothing but the saving of ones Soul can be preponderant to all these
Mischiefs. So you may conceive, that had I imagined my self as safe, in
reference to my Salvation in your Church, as where I now am, I had most
certainly fixed my self there, Clavo Trabali.

As to your asserting your Church to have all the Essentials of a true one, I
must tell you plainly this, That I find in the Fathers, many to be condemned
for Heretics, for denying but one of those many Articles which you disown: But
as for Essentials, and Fundamentals, I know you pretend to them, but I cannot
see where your Authors define how many they be, but leave them uncertain for
their own advantage. As to the other branch of the Assertion, That your Church
is a sound part of the Catholic Church; I must beg your Assistance herein, to
inform me how a particular Church, that did voluntarily fall off from the
Catholic, as yours did, and afterward was cut off by Excommunication from it,
can yet continue to be a sound Member of it; this I desire you to clear up to
me. You must not shuffle with me herein, and tell me ye did not fall off from
it, but from its Errors; that is ridiculous: Neither that ye did not fall off
from the Catholic, but only from the Roman Church; that is false; for ye then
broke Communion from all Visible, Orthodox Churches, both in the West and East:
According to my Authors, such Churches as yours can be no more Members of the
Catholic Church, than a dead Bough may be termed part of that Tree from which
it is separated by Excision. The Church is but one, and cannot be divided,
Scindi unitas non potest, nec corpus unum discidio compaginis separari divulsis
laceratione visceribus in frusta discerpi, quicquid a matrice discescerit
seorsim vivere and spirare non potest, substantiam salutis amittit; Cyp. de
Unit. And accordingly St. Austin, Epist. 48. ad Madurenses. Videtis multos
praecisos a rudice Christianae societatis, etc. de sola figura originis sub
Christiano nomine quasi arescentia sarmenta gloriari quas Haereses and
schismata nominamus. But I find when your Party lay claim to be the Catholic
Church, and would vie for extent and number with the Romanist's, then they make
their false Musters, and spread their wide Lap to several Sects, only to
acquire a more considerable multitude, which when compared with one another,
are indeed found to be so many several Churches, distinguished not only by
Nation and Climate, but by Doctrine and Points of Faith. Now though these be
opposite Parties, of different Principles, yet to enlarge their bounds, and to
boast of their greatness; they rake all those together, under the Title of
Protestants, who have revolted from Rome, counting them on their side, as if
the definition of a Protestant were, One that had apostatis'd from the Roman
Church and that stands in opposition to it: And I find some Protestants to
specify as much, as Dr. Willet in his Preface to his Synopsis, a Protestant is
he, who professes the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and has renounced the
Jurisdiction of the Sea of Rome: And Musculus in locis tit. de coena, I embrace
all for. Brethren in the Lord, however they disagree from or amongst
themselves, as long as they maintain not the Popish impieties: By this Method
they patch up an Heterogenial Church, consisting of all condemned Sects,
jarring with one another, as Eutychians, Nestorians, Monothelits,
Sacramentarians, Lutherans, Calvenists, Hugonots, Anabaptists, with all the
numerous Spawn and Increment of fruitful Error; this made Dr. Vane very
ingenuously to say, That the Church has the property of Heat, Congregare
Homogenea, things of the same kind, Disgregare Heterogenea, separate things of
a different nature, casting out of her Communion, all sorts of Heretics; but
your Church, he says, has the property of cold, Congregare Heterogenea,
enfolding under her Name a Miscellany of different Religions, rather freezing
than uniting them together; and accordingly I find Bishop Usher in a Sermon of
his preached at Wansted before King James, to adopt and matriculate into his
Church, Greeks, Abyssines, Egyptians, Jacobites, though at variance with one
another, and more at odds with him, and tainted with Heresies, expressly
condemned by General Councils. For the Egyptians, Aethiopians, and Abyssines,
were cast out of the Church by the Council of Chalcedon, as infected with
Eutychianism, holding but one Will, Nature, and Operation in Christ; much of
the same Kidney, are the Armenians, Jacobites, Georgians and Copthites. The
Christians under the Turk and Persian are tainted with Nestorianism, and
ejected out of the Church for asserting two Persons in Christ.

The Grecians, Muscovites, and Russians, according to Athanasius's Creed, are
excluded from Salvation, for denying the Procession of the Holy Ghost from
Father and Son, on whom Mr. Rogers in his Thirty nine Articles is very
Decretory, This, says he, discovers all of them to be Impious, Erroneous from
the way of Truth, which hold and affirm, that the Holy Ghost proceeds from
the Father, but not from the Son, as this day the Grecians, Russians, and
Muscovites maintain. It was a saying of King James, the First, That they erring
about the Holy Ghost, had lost it. As for the Doctrines of Lutherans and
Calvenists, I find them formerly condemned in Donatus, Aerius, Vigilantius,
Xenias, Nevatus, etc.

But now, after all this, I find, that neither Schism nor Heresy, according to
the Sense of your Party, hinders one from being a Member of the Church. Thus
Dr. Field in his first Book of the Church, thinks when he says, That the
departure of Schismatics is not such, but that notwithstanding their Schism,
they are, and remain parts of the Church of God; and Luther Sermon. de Dominic
says, That they are frantic, who go about to separate the Church from
Heretics. This their favorable Opinion of Heretics and Schismatics made me
imagine, they themselves were guilty of both, and that they did not exclude
them from being Members of the Church, lest by that Action they should bar out
themselves; but how a Schismatic, who go's out of the Church, or how a
Heretic, who depraves its Doctrine, who has made shipwreck of his Faith, and
whom we are ordered to shun and avoid, can be a Member of the Church, I cannot
conjecture; so I shall keep steady to St. Hieroms saying, contra Lucif. Nulla
Haeretica Congregatio potest dici Ecclesia Christi. Neither can I imagine, how
Churches opposite one to another, disagreeing in weighty points, so as not to
join in Communion, can be said to be Members of the same Catholic Church,
which is but one Body, and has but one Faith, (...); The Name Church is no Name
of Separation, but of Union and Symphony, says Chrysostom. 1 Homil. Corinth. And
accordingly St. Austin told the Donatists, who came much nearer to Catholics
than you do, If our Communion be the Church of Christ, yours is not Christ's
Church, for that is but one, whichsoever it be: In his first Book against them.
And St. Cyprian in his Seventy sixth Epistle, If the Church were on Novatus his
side, it was not with Cornelius: So careful were they to preserve the Unity of
the Church. This makes them restrain the Church to a Company of Christians
united together, obeying their Supreme Pastor, outwardly professing the same
Faith, Communicating with the rest of the Members in Public Worship, and
Participation of the Blessed Sacrament: Hence Austin in his Forty eighth
Epistle to the Donatists, tells them, Nobiscum estis, you are with us in
Baptism, and the Creed, etc. In ipsa Ecclesia Catholica non estis; They
believed more than what you esteem as Fundamental, yet were out of the Pale of
the Catholic Church. In this Church is Unity of Faith, Harmony in Doctrine,
Conformity in Administration of the Sacraments, Uniformity in her Liturgy and
Ceremonies all the World over. To distinguish this Church from all Heretical
Sects, the Apostles in their Creed, the Ancient Fathers in their Writings gave
her the Surname of Catholic: This very name seemed so emphatical to St.
Austin, that he reckons it as a principal reason, next to the Succession of
Popes from St. Peter, that kept him in the true Church, Cont. Epist. Manichaei,
Tenet ipsum Catholicae nomen quod non sine causa inter tam multas Haereses, sic
ipsa Ecclesia sola obtinuit, ut cum omnes Haeretici se Catholicos dici velint,
Quaerenti tamen peregrino alicui ubi ad Catholicam conveniatur nullus
Haereticorum, vel Basilicam suam, vel domum audeat ostendere: From this place
you may evidently see, That it was the humor of the Heretics of those Days, as
well as it is now, to affect the Title of Catholic, but this was but an
usurpation in them, and so it is with you: He, says the Greeks, called this
Church (...), quod per torum orbem terrarum diffunditur: And according to this
sense it is true, Heretics may be called Catholics, for they are disseminated
all over the World: But in his Fourth Book against Cresconius he makes this
distinction betwixt a Real Catholic, and an Heretical one. Catholics, says
he, are the same every where, and Heretics are different. Hence it is that a
Lutheran will not Communicate with a Greek, nor a Greek with a Lutheran, nor a
Calvinist with a Muscovite, nor an Anabaptist with an Armenian, or an Hugonot
with a Georgian, and vice versa; whereas a Catholic Communicates with a
Catholic in any part of the World, as Members of the same Body, and as having
the same Unity of Faith, as Irenaeus affirms in his first Book C. 3. The Church
spread over the whole World, having received the true belief, keeps it, and
practices it, as if it dwelt but in one House, and had but one Soul and Heart;
Neque hae quae in Germania sunt fundatae Ecclesiae, aliter credunt; neque hae
quae in Iberis sunt, neque hae quae in Celtis, neque hae quae in Orient
Aegypto and Lybia: Thus it was at first, when Christian Churches were united
and untainted with Heresy; for the Apostles taught the self same Doctrine
wherever they went; and all those various Churches seated in diverse Kingdoms
and Regions differed only in Situation, not in Doctrine: Hence from their Unity
of Faith, they may be called One Church, as St. Chrysostom. in his Comments on
first Corinth. affirms, (...); There ought to be but one Church in the World,
although it be divided into many places. Now it is evident, that of all Orthodox
Churches, an Union of which constitutes the Catholic, Rome as being the Sea of
St. Peter, the Prince of the Apostles, was the chief; and upon that account
though Jerusalem and Antioch were somewhat before her in time, she was before
them in Dignity: Hence by Irenaeus she is called the Greatest and most
Glorious; by St. Cyprian, the Principle Church; and St. Austin says, it is
Arrogance to deny her the Primacy; and that she had obtained the Primacy,
frustra Haereticis latrantibus. Hence it is that by way of Eminency, she is
called the Catholic Church, including all the latitude of her Communion, of
which she is the Center, the Mother, the Mistress, the Radix and Matrix: Hence
it is that the Fathers promiscuously use Catholic and Roman, as Synonima's, as
I shall hereafter demonstrate out of them.

CHAP. III. Concerning the Respect which Catholics pay to Images.
I Shall next employ my self in taking a Prospect of those Points, for
maintaining which, you would prove Rome notoriously guilty of Paternal Schism;
and this I do the more willingly, because you stand highly guilty of a false
Representing them. The First is Image Worship (as you phrase it) which you have
improved, and sublimated to that height as to make it pass for Idolatry: This
is done to render your selves acceptable, and us odious to the Populace, as
Violators of the first Commandment. It Is but rendering Pesel (which properly
signifies Sculptile) to be an Image, and then boldly affirming us Idolators; to
bring all the places in Scripture and Fathers against the Idolatry of the
Gentiles, and the business is done: But those places are indeed nothing to your
purpose, they only importing a Prohibition of giving Sovereign Honor due to
God, to an Idol; whereas you are to prove out of Scripture, That it is unlawful
to give a Relative Honor to the Picture of Christ for his sake: But by this
Action, you do not only show your self defamatory, but ungrateful to the Roman
Church, which, when this Nation lay really in the Pollutions of Idolatry, took
compassion of us, and by planting the Gospel here, rescued us from that
Calamitous Condition. This confounding Image Worship with Idolatry, is
certainly, a most fraudulent and malicious Method, they being quite different
things; the one is an Honorary, Relative Respect to the thing represented,
which is Sacred: But the other is a Worshipping a Creature, an Idol, a Devil,
or false God, in some dark Representation, giving it Divine, Incommunicable
Attributes, and in the Imagination exercising supreme Devotion to it; for to
those Idols, by Magical Conjuration they annexed an Evil Spirit to do Wonders,
and thereby to extort Divine Worship from the cheated People; hence they are
often called Gods; as in the Fifth of Daniel they prayed their Gods of Silver,
Brass, Iron, Wood, Stone. Now to ascribe this heinous Sin to the Catholic
Church is highly injurious, Idolatry being the blackest Sin a Church can be
spotted with; for it does not only thereby cease to be a true Christian Church,
but it becomes worse than a Jewish Synagogue; and I had rather turn Jew or Turk
than Idolater. There is no Question, but that Idolatry is a sufficient excuse
for any one to fall off from a Church that is tainted with it: But if this were
the reason of your falling off from Rome, the pretense was malicious and
forged; and Mr. Thorndike, who well knew what Idolatry was, will tell you in
his Just weight, Cap. primo, his Opinion herein, whose words are these, Should
the Church of England declare that the change, which we call Reformation, is
grounded upon this supposition, I must then acknowledge that we are
Schismatics.

But I shall now make a short Discussion of this Point, according to the
Definition of the Council of Trent, which I find to take all care imaginable to
obviate any accusation herein; the Words being as so many Characters, to
distinguish the respect paid to an Image, from Idolatry. First, the Council
thinks fit, Imagines Christi Deiparae Virginis and aliorum Sanctorum in Templis
praesertim habendas and retinendas eisque debitum honorem and venerationem
impertiendam; but then by disclaiming any Divinity to be in them, the Council
acquits us of Idolatry in the following words, Non quod credatur inesse aliqua
in iis divinitas vel virtus propter quam sint colendae, vel quod ab eis sit
aliquid petendum, vel quod fiducia in imaginibus sit habenda veluti olim fiebat
a gentibus quae in idolis spem suam collocabant; sed quoniam honos qui eis
exhibetur refertur ad prototypa quae illa repraesentant, etc. Now as to the
first part of the Council concerning retaining Images in Churches, this was
anciently practiced long before that Council. Gregory Nazianzen in his Forty
ninth Epistle to Olymp. makes mention of Images in the Church of Diocesarea.
Basil in his Oration of Barlaam points to his Image which stood in the
Church. Greg. Nyssen in his Oration of Theod. speaks of a Church so beatified
with Images, that it showed (...), some pleasant and flowery Meadows. Nicephorus
affirms, that Pulcheria the Empress built a Church at Constant. and placed
therein a Picture of our Blessed Lady, which Eudocia sent her from Jerusalem.
Tertull. in his Second Book de Pudicitia, witnesses, that the Image of Christ
in form of a Shepherd, carrying a Sheep on his Shoulders, was engraven on the
Chalices used in the Church. August. de consens. Evang. witnesses, that in his
time Christ was to be seen in many places painted between St. Peter and Paul.
Eusebius in his Seventh Book of his Ecclesias. History, makes mention of a
Brazen Statue of Christ at Caesarea Philippi, thought to be erected by the
Haemaroissa, cured by him; this Statue he declares to have continued to his
days, and that he had seen it. Sozomen adds, That when Julian the Apostate out
of spite against our Savior, caused it to be cast down, and his own set up in
the place, that there came miraculously Fire from Heaven which consumed
Julians; Christ by this avenging the affront offered his Statue by that
Insolent Apostate, as much as if it had been done to his Person: And the same
Author tells us, That when Christ's Image was thrown down, and broken in pieces,
the Christians gathered up its fragments, and laid them up in the Church, which
certainly was in Honor to the Prototype.

The other part of the words of the Council is, That those Images should have
their due Honor and Veneration. It cannot be denied but that an Image is
capable of Honor, and of Contempt; and it naturally flows, that those that hate
the Party represented by the Picture, will hate the Picture; and those that
love the Party, will respect the Picture. Now this respect which Catholics out
of love to the Persons represented by them, have for Pictures, is very
slanderously called by you Idolatry; whereas that consists in forsaking the
true God, and Worshipping either real Devils, or false Gods; so those Idols
stood in opposition to the true God, as it is. 1 Kings 18. 21. If the Lord be
God, follow him; but if Baal be God, follow him. And it is well known, that the
Jews, as often as they fell to Idolatry, always forsook the God of Israel. Then
the Council gives the Reason why they should be Honored. Quoniam honos qui eis
exhibetur, refertur ad Prototypum. This is exactly what St. Basil affirms, de
Spiritu Sancto, (...); The Honor done to the Image redounds to the Prototype.
And accordingly Athanasius 4 Sermon. con. Arrianos, says, (...); He that worships
the Kings Image, in that worshippeth the King. For Images by imagination, stand
for the Prototype; and what is done by way of Honor to the Image, is mentally
done to the Person: So the Honor addressed them is Relative, for they be not
honored because they be Pictures, but because they represent such persons, so
the respect is determined to the Party represented: Abstracted from the
Prototype they are not capable of Honor. A Civil Honor is due to the Picture of
a King of our Ancestors, and nigh Relations, and to those we love. We resent
any ignominy offered them, and naturally conceive indignation thereat. A
Religious Honor is due to the Pictures of Christ, his Holy Apostles and Saints;
the Respect shown them redounding to the Original, and ultimately terminating
on it, as it is in the Second Nicene Council, Act 7. Vt per hanc Imaginum
pictarum inspectionem, omnes qui contemplantur ad Prototypi memoriam
recordationem desideriumque veniant, illisque salutationem, and honorariam
adorationem exhibeant. According to Niceph. Xenaias, a Persian by Birth, a
Slave by Fortune; one of an Avdacious Spirit, and Impudent Mouth, was the first
that dared to affirm, That the Image of Christ and of the Saints were not to be
reverenced. Now when the word Worship or Adoration is applied, it does really
amount to no more than an honorary Respect and Reverence, a Relative, Inferior
Honor: We do not take those words in that Sense, as the Tribute of Honor due to
God, as you injuriously asperse us with, this we abhor; for in that Sense we
Adore and Worship only the incomprehensible Deity, that Supreme Monarch who has
Sovereign Dominion over all, renouncing all other Divine Adoration.

Now, as to the word Adoration (of which you make great advantage against us
with the Communalty) you must understand, that it does not always signify
Divine or Religious Worship, but it has likewise an inferior Sense, importing
Reverence, Respect either of Body or Mind, communicable to Creatures according
to their Dignities; sometimes any bowing the Body in sign of Reverence, as may
be proved by many places in Scripture, where Creatures are said to be adored;
and so to Deserving, Eminent, Worshipful Men, we may be said to give Worship,
when we Honor and Respect them by bowing, or by any other outward gesture,
according to the custom of the Country.

Now, as to the Act of worship, that consists of two Parts; the Exterior sign
is Kneeling, the Interior is the Affection directed to what we Worship; and
indeed, that is the main thing; for as to the Exterior, that we grant to
Persons of several qualities (as well as to God) as to our King, our Bishop,
and Parents; but this is done with different Apprehensions and Affections; we
worship God as our Creator in a more sublime and eminent manner; others in a
lower degree. This may be gathered out of the Fathers, who take the word in
different acceptations, sometimes in the more principal and losty Sense (...),
for Divine Worship, Supreme Honor due to God only, as in Epiphanius, Heresy
79. Sit in honor Maria, Deus adoretur: And Hierom in his 53 Epist. Non Angelos
vel aliquam creaturam adoremus; yet sometimes they take it in an inferior
Sense, and say other things besides God are to be Adored, as in August. de
Civit. Dei, Lib. 10. c. 4. Homines, si multum eis addatur, etiam adorandi: and
Cyr. Alexand. Hom. de Deipara, Crux adoratur toto orb torrarum. Accordingly
Lactantius, Flecte genu, Lignumque Crucis venerabile adora. And St. Hierom,
Epist. 17. says, Baptistae cineres adorate. St. Ambrose in his Funeral Oration
on Theodosius praises the Empress Helena for setting the Cross upon the Crown
of Kings, that it might be adored in them; Sapienter Helena egit quae crucem in
capite Regum levavit, locavit, ut Crux Christi in Regibus adoretur: And St.
Hierom in Epitaph. Paulae, reports of her, that having at Jerusalem found out
the Cross upon which Christ suffered, she adored it, as if she even had seen
our Savior hanging on it. St. Chrysostom. is very clear herein, in several
places, but more especially in his Hom. de Adorat. Crucis. That the Primitive
Christians had a great veneration for the Cross, may be proved out of
Tertullian, in his Apology, where he acknowledges, that the Heathens took
notice of it, and accused them as Crucis Religiosos. This double acceptance of
the word Adoration, was well known to Mr. Thorndike, who affirms the words
Adoration, Worship, Respect and Reverence to be equivocal, and the cause of
this Equivocation to be for want of words to signify those conceptions which
flow not from Common Sense; and from this Equivocation in those words the
greatest part of the difficulties which occur, take their rise; So you may see
how deceitfully you deal by us herein, always taking the words Adore, Worship,
as importing Supreme Honor to God, and then falsely, accusing us of giving Gods
Honor to a Creature or Image, which we detest with a greater abhorrency than
your self.

The other thing the Council took care in, not to leave the least umbrage of
suspicion of Idolatry to any Rational Man, is, that they did disown any Virtue
or Divinity to be in them; that upon that account they should be respected, or
that they should be requested any thing, or any trust reposed in them, as the
Gentiles did, etc. and this puts me in mind of what Gregory, several hundred
Years before the Council wrote, in his Seventh Book of his Epistles to
Secundinus, who it seems had desired Gregory to send him some Pictures, which
he did, and likewise instructs him in the right use of them, agreeable to the
Council, Scio quidem quod Imaginem Salvatoris nostri, non ideo petis, ut quasi
Deum colas, sed ut ad recordationem filii Dei in ejus amore recalescas cujus te
imaginem videre desideras; and nos quidem non quasi ante divinitatem, ante
illam prosternimur, sed illum adoremus quem per imaginem, aut natum aut passum,
sed in Throno sedentem recordamur.

CHAP. IV. Of Transubstantiation.
THe next Point by which you would prove Rome guilty of Schism, is
Transubstantiation, which you have lewdly abused, and injuriously represented;
but I am afraid you are not so much offended at the word as at the meaning of
it: As to the word, the Church was pleased to make use of it, as fit and proper
to declare the change of the Bread and Wine after the words of Consecration
into the Body and Blood of Christ. Quam quidem conversionem Catholica Ecclesia
aptissime Transubstantiationem appellat, As the Lateran Council says Canone
Secundo: And accordingly the Council of Trent, Quae conversio convenienter and
proprie a S. Catholica Ecclesia Transubstantiatio appellatur. The Council
defines not the word to be of Faith, but makes use of it as a fit word,
expressive of their Sense; so that if you can tell me a more proper one than
this, I shall not quarrel with you about it. For names of words speaking in
their rigor, are not Objects of Faith; as Athanasius shows in his
Reconciliation of the Verbal Controversy of Person and Hypostasis, but the
Matter and Sense therein couched. As to the newness of the word, which is often
objected, though it was never in Latin publicly authorized before the Council of
Lateran; yet the Greek word (...), may be proved to be very ancient, and the
thing thereby signified, seems as old as Christ's celebration of his Supper: For
a Point of Faith may be elder in it self than the Council that defines it. The
Consubstantiality of the Son and the Divinity of the Holy Ghost must be
admitted to be elder than the Council of Nice and Constantinople that defined
them. The Conciliary Definition being generally occasioned by the emergency of
Heretical Opinions, contrary to the Sense of the Church, which had they not
arose, the Church had never been necessitated to a more Explicit Declaration:
Thus it happened here. Sundry monstrous Opinions being broached about the
Blessed Sacrament, the Church was obliged to intervene with her unerring
determinations, establishing the Truth, and dispelling Error. Now though this
Article was always in it self of the substance of Faith; and though the thing
signified by the new term was always held as a Divine Truth, yet it was not
obliging under that notion till the Solemn Declaration of the Church, Quae
veritas etsi prius erat de fide, non tamen erat prius tantum declarata, as
Scotus says. Now that the Church has power to coin a new word for the
Elucidating Truth, and that she has made use of this Power, is clear by the
Council of Nice, which to declare Christ's Consubstantiality with the Father,
found out the word (...): and by the Council of Ephesus, which to express the
Mystery of Christ's Divine Incarnation made use of the word (...), Deipara. That
the Fathers long before the Council of Lateran and Trent did believe a Real
change after the consecratory words, is most evident, and accordingly to
express their belief of a Real Conversion, they make use of Real Changes
mentioned in Scripture; as of Aarons Rod into a Serpent, Water into Wine. Hence
the Greek Fathers call this mutation (...), affirming after the Consecration
the Symbols to be changed, (...), the Greek words importing Transelementation,
Transfaction, Transmutation, Transfiguration. Thus St. Ambrose, Lib. 4. de
fide, Per Sacrae Orationis mysterium in carnem transfigurantur and sanguinem;
and Lib. 4. de Sacramento, Vbi accesserit consecratio de pane, fit caro
Christi; non erat corpus Christi ante consecrationem, sed post consecrationem
dico tibi quod jam corpus est Christi; ipse dixit and factum est. And again,
Sermo Christi qui poterit ex nihilo facere quod non erat, non potest ea quae
sunt in id mutare quod non erant?

And accordingly George Nyssen in orat. catechet. Recte Dei verbo sanctificatum
panem in Dei verbi corpus credo transmutari. And Cyril Hieros. in his Catech.
Mist. says, Panis and Vinum Eucharistiae ante sacram invocationem adorandae
Trinitatis Panis erat and Vinum merum, peracta invocatione Panis fit corpus
Christi, Vinum Sanguis Christi. And in like manner Theoph. (...), The Bread is
changed into the very Body of Christ.

Now that we might not disbelieve this stupendous change, because it is
supernatural, he tells us how it is effected, (...); This Bread is changed into
the Flesh of our Lord by arcane words, by the Mystical Bendiction, by the
accession of the Holy Ghost, on John 6. St. Chrysostom. in his 83 Hom. on Matt.
says, That this change is not a work of Human Power, but Christ himself
performs it: He Sanctifies and Transmutes it: That Christ, who as soon as he
willed or spoke a thing, by his Omnipotency effected it; as soon as he said
(...), I will, the Leaper was cleans'd; as soon as he said Lazare exi foris, he
caused and enabled him to come forth; as soon as he Commanded the Devils to
dislodge out of the Demoniacks, he drove them out; as soon as he ordered the
Winds to hold their Breath, he caused a Calm; as soon as he said (...), he
raised the Virgin to Life. The same Almighty Jesus, at his last Supper having
taken Bread into his Hands, and having said, Hoc est Corpus meum, did by virtue
and energy of those Operative, Divine Words, incomprehensively, ineffably
change and transelement it into his Body, and the like concerning the Wine.
This adorable Mystery I shall not in the least question, because I cannot
comprehend it, that is, to incur Nicodemus his Error, neither will I disbelieve
it, because it is above the strength of Nature, that was the weakness of
Zaoharias, but with the Blessed Virgin, I will rely on the word of God, who
neither can deceive, nor be deceived. Fiat secundum verbum tuum, firmly without
any diffidence by a generous and vivid Faith, acquiescing in the veracity of
Christ his words. Cum Christus ipse affirmet ac dicat, hoc est corpus meum,
quis deinceps audeat dubitare? ac eodem dicente, hic est Sanguis meus, quis
dubitet ac dicat non esse Sanguinem? Aquam aliquando mutavit in Vinum, quod est
Sanguini propinquum; and non erit dignus cui credamus quod Vinum in Sanguinem
transmutasset? Quare cum omni certitudine Corpus and Sangninem sumamus; nam sub
specie Panis datur tibi Corpus; sub specie Vini, Sanguis, says St. Cyril in his
Mystag. Catechism: Which words are as clear for Transubstantiation as any thing
in the Council of Lateran or Trent.

Now, as I do undoubtedly believe, that (when Christ spoke these words) they
had their effect as soon as they were uttered, and for this I have St.
Chrysostom. Authority, who affirms, That Christ, when he said this is my Body,
made it his Body: So with the same Father, I do believe, when a lawful Priest
of the Catholic Church pronounces the same Consecratory words, that they have
the same effect. Sacra ipsa oblatio, sive illum Petrus sive Paulus, sive
cujusvis meriti sacerdos offerat, eadem est quam dedit Christus Discipulis;
quamque sacerdotes modo conficiunt nihil habet ista quam illa minus: cur id?
quia non sanctificant homines, sed Christus qui illam antea sacraverat, in his
2. Hom. on 2 Epist. Timothy.

I know this Doctrine is much opposed by our Adversaries, and they fancy that
we are sufficiently confuted by having it tried at the Tribunal of our Senses;
but this is not at all prevalent with me; for Christ never intended, that this
supernatural change should be subjected to our External Senses; for had it been
visible to them, it could not have been matter of Faith, which is properly
argumentum rerum non apparentium.

It is observable, that Christ, before he wrought this invisible Miracle, had
done many visible ones, to convince his Disciples of his Divine Power; they
having imbibed that belief, could never rationally doubt of his Veracity, or
Ability in performance of what he had said, knowing him to be Omnipotent: Ipse
Dominus testificatur nobis quod Corpus suum accipiamus and sanguinem, quid
debemus de ejus fide and testificatione dubitare? says St. Ambrose. Christ then
willing to exercise their and our Faith in this Mystery, and at the same time
to free us from eating Flesh and drinking Blood in their proper Species, which
we naturally abhor, was pleased to give us them Clothed, Apparelled under
another Species of Bread and Wine. Quod occulis apparet species sunt visibles
panis and vini, quod sub speciebus iisdem fides nostra non sensus aut ratio
comprehendit, id verum Christi corpus. And accordingly Theoph. (...). Therefore
God indulgently condescends to us, and preserves the Species of Bread and Wine,
but transelements them into the strength of his Flesh and Blood.

There is no question but that the Fathers were Men of Sense, and as acute and
subtle Persons as any of our Adversaries; yet in judging of this Mystery, they
admitted not their Senses as Umpires, Credamus ubique Deo, nec repugnemus ei
etiamsi sensui and cogitationi absurdum esse videtur quod dicit; superat and
sensum and rationem nostram sermo ipsius; verba Domini falsa esse nequeunt;
sensus noster saepe fallitur; quoniam ergo ille dixit hoc est Corpus meum,
nulla teneamur ambiguitate, sed credamus, says St. Chrysostom in his 60 Orat.
ad Pop. Antioch; and some of them advise us not to judge of this great Mystery,
either by our taste, or by our sight, being of an higher nature than to have
such an inquest to sit on it. Non est panis etiamsi gustus panem esse sentiat,
sed esse corpus Christi and vinum quod a nobis conspicitur, tametsi sensui
gustus vinum esse videatur, non tamen vinum sed sanguinem esse, says St. Cyril
in his Catech. St. Ambrose raises a Question for you, but then he solves it,
Sed forte dicis speciem sanguinis non video, sed habet similitudinem, ut nullus
horror sit cruoris, Lib. 4. Sacrament. And in like manner Theoph. (...). But
why does it seem to us not to be Flesh, but Bread, that we should not loath the
eating of it: And again, (...). It seems unto us to be Bread, but it is Flesh
indeed. And again, (...), it is changed by an ineffable energy, though it seems to
us to be Bread.

Now the high abuse you offer Catholics in this Point, is by representing our
belief herein after a Gross, Carnal, Capharnaical meaning, impressing those of
your Party with the same false Ideas concerning us, as the Heathens conceived
against the Primitive Christians, as if we were a Barbarous Inhumane sort of
Cannibals, (...), Carnivorous and Blood drinkers, whereas our Apprehensions of
Christ's Body in the Blessed Eucharist are of a quite different nature from the
gross conceptions of those People; they, as St. Austin affirms in his 27.
Tract. on St. John understood such Flesh, Quo modo in cadavere dilaniatur in
macello venditur, non quo modo spiritu vegetatur, non sicut illi intellexerunt
carnem, Christus dat suam manducandam carnem. So you are to understand, that
though we do believe a real change, as looking on the words uttered by Christ to
be absolutely true, yet withal we believe no gross change in a Natural way, but
confess it to be invisible, Inexplicable, Mystical and Sacramental. The words
seem very plain, and easily enough performed, if considered as the words of an
Omnipotent God; the only obstacle lies in our incredulity and high conceit of
our Natural Parts, and our foolish fondness of reasoning about matters above
Reason: For to this incomprehensible Mystery, sola fide metiendum, adorandum
magis quam investigandum, we must surrender the Forts of our frail
Apprehensions, to this we must veil the Fasces of our Judgments, and dethroning
our usurping Understanding, subjugate it to the Obedience of Faith, knowing it
to be too sublime for flagging Reason to soar to, though its Wings were imp'd
with Angelical Plumes: Here we must in a more especial manner beware of
Philosophy receiving this Blessed Mystery (...) as believing Fishermen, not
(...), as Critical Disputants, not fighting against it with silly Arguments
drawn from the quiver of Impotent Nature, or from our weak Imaginations, like
those foolish Persons, who fancied the Bodies of Men in Heaven were like those
on Earth; whereas our Savior informed them better, and told them, they were
(...), like the Angels, declaring the original of their Error to be because
they neither knew the Scripture, nor the Power of God. That Omnipotent Power
which could substract Weight from heavy things, enabling St. Peter to walk on
the moist back of the Sea; that could make its own Body invisible to the Jews;
that could make bright and radient things not to shine, as his own Body after
the Resurrection; which though it were then more Fulgid than the Sun, yet darted
no Rays. That Power, which as it made Nature, presides over it, divesting
Vipers of their Poison, to preserve St. Paul; and Water of it is fluidness, as
those of Jordan, and rapid flames of their scorching, as those of the
Babilonish Furnace, to question and disbelieve the Operations of this Power,
because our Reason cannot comprehend them, is not only prodigious Pride in us,
but it is the highest indignity that can be offered our Savior. But what shall
we think of those who call in their External Senses as Judges herein, and in a
matter of Faith appeal to their Eyes, as if those Organs, which cannot see the
Wind which is a Natural Substance, should be able to discern an invisible
Mystery of Faith, a Supernatural, Glorified, Spiritual Body. It Is impossible
the Senses should perceive any thing here, this Mystery is too fine and rare
for Mortal Eyes; nothing to them can seem changed, the Symbols appearing the
same. Faith only with the piercing Rays of her more than Aquiline Eyes,
assisted by the interposition of a Divine Authority, penetrating the Veil of
the Elements, discovers Christ really present there.

This stupendous and adorable presence of our Savior, I find Catholic Authors
to describe, not to be according to his natural way of Corporeal Existence;
that is, with Extension of Parts in order to place, as if one part were here
and another part there; but to be after a supernatural way, without locality,
being one and the same in many places, and whole in every part and portion of
the Symbols, without the Accidents of the Body, as Quantity or Figure; being
neither thick nor big as to Occupation of place, not as exposed to the External
Senses, or obnoxious to Corporeal Contingencies, but as invisible,
imperceptible, impassible: After this manner, Spirits in their substances are
said to be. The Body of Christ here is Spiritual not Sensual, as St. Paul avers
of our Bodies after the Resurrection; it is sown a Sensual Body, but risen a
Spiritual Body: The Quality of these Bodies are different in reference to
Clarity, Agility, and Impassibility, but the Substance perishes not (which
made Job say, he should see God with these Eyes:) Thus the latter Adam is
called A quickening Spirit, and as such, he is really in the Sacrament: So that,
in fine, this (...), this Flesh that is to be eaten, is (...), Spiritual Food,
and (...), a Mystical Banquet.

CHAP. V. Of Communion in one kind.
THe third Point by which you would prove the Roman Church guilty of Schism, is
Communion in one kind. This is generally termed by you and yours, but an half
Communion, and a Violation of Christ's Institution; and we are herein accused by
you, as Sacrilegious against God, Injurious to Men, Robbing the Church of
Christ's precious Blood, by giving the People a lame imperfect Sacrament,
instead of an entire, whole one: This Accusation runs very high, but I will see
how just it is.

That Christ did institute the Blessed Sacrament in both kinds, is readily
granted; but that he commanded it should be always taken in both kinds, as
necessary to the complement of it, is no where to be found; and accordingly, in
this case, we have the example of Christ himself, who is a sufficient warrant,
for he having in his last Supper instituted it under both kinds, gave it to his
Disciples at Emaus, Luke 24. but under one, where the Text says, That they knew
Jesus in breaking of Bread: Here is no mention of Wine at all, but of Bread
only; and this place is Interpreted by the Fathers, of the Administration of
the Blessed Eucharist. August. Lib. 3. de consensu Evang. says, Christ did
permit they should not know him, Vsque ad Sacramentum Panis. And Theoph. on
that place says, (...): The Eyes of those that did partake of Consecrated Bread
were opened so as to know him; for the Flesh of our Lord has great and
unspeakable Power. This was likewise originally practiced by the Apostles. In
the Second of the Acts we find, that the 3000 Baptized were persevering in the
Doctrine of the Apostles, and in the Communication of breaking Bread: Here
likewise is no mention of Wine. And in the Twentieth of the Acts, we find, at
Troas, when St. Paul made his long Harangue, that the Apostles were gathered
together on the first day of the Week to break Bread: Here is likewise a deep
silence of the Cup. This breaking of the Bread is likewise Interpreted by St.
Austin of the Sacrament, in his Epist. 86. ad Casulanum, where speaking of St.
Paul, he says, Eadem Nocte fracturus Panem sicut frangitur in Sacramento
Corporis Christi, produxit sermonem ad medium Noctis, ut post Sacramenta
celebrata, etc. Thus it is apparent, that though Christ did Institute it in both
kinds, it was no violation of this his Constitution to Minister it in one; for
this there be Presidents in the same Scripture which mentions both Species.

The next thing to be considered, is, whether Communication under one kind be
an Imperfect, Lame Communion? Herein, upon consulting the Holy Writ, I find as
much ascribed to one kind as to both; sometimes it attributing Salvation to the
Bread and Wine, sometimes to the Bread only: Thus in the Sixth of John, the
same Christ, who says, Nisi manducaveritis Carnem filii hominis, and biberitis
ejus Sanguinem, non habebitis vitam in vobis, says likewise in the same Chapter
as much of the Bread alone. Si quis manducaverit ex hoc Pane, vivet in
aeternum. He that says, Qui manducat meam Carnem, and bibit meum Sanguinem,
habet vitam aeternam, says of the Bread only, Panis quem ego dabo, Caro mea est
pro mundi salute. He that says, Qui manducat meam Carnem, and bibit meum
Sanguinem, in me manet, and ego in illo, says likewise, Qui manducat hunc
Panem, vivet in aeternum: By these places it is evident, that Christ ascribes
to the Bread alone everlasting Life and Salvation of the World, which is a
sufficient proof, that it is no imperfect Communion, no Soul desiring more than
that: It remains then, that it appears not by the Scripture, that the reception
of Christ under the Species of Bread only, is a Defective, Incomplete
Communion, it being visible from thence, that Christ, who gave the Sacrament
but twice, gave it in one of those two times in Bread only; and the Apostles
after him are found to Communicate without any mention of Wine.

From the Scripture I shall have recourse to Councils for my fuller
satisfaction (they being the most fit Interpreters of it.)

Totus Christus continetur sub specie Panis, and totus sub specie Vini, sub
qualibet quoque part consecratae hostiae, and Vini consecrati separatione
facta totus est Christus; says the great Council of Florence, consisting of
Greeks and Armenians, as well as of those Bishops of the West.

Firmissime credendum sit, and nullatenus dubitandum, integrum Christi Corpus
and Sanguinem, tam sub specie Panis, quam sub specie Vini veraciter contineri.
Consilium Constans. Sess. 13.

Nec ullatenus ambigendum est, quod non sub specie Panis Caro tantum, nec sub
specie Vini Sanguis tantum, sed sub qualibet specie est integre totus Christus.
Concilium Basil. Sess. 30.

And accordingly the Council of Trent, Sess. 21. says: Sub altera tantum specie
totum atque integrum Christum verumque Sacramentum sumi verissimum est tantum
sub alterutra specie atque sub utraque contineri; and in Sess. 13. Totus enim,
and integer Christus sub specie Panis, and sub quavis speciei part, totus item
sub Vini specie, and sub ejus partibus existit.

The Church is very clear in expressing her Sense herein, by the Mouth of these
unanimous Councils; declaring, that in one kind is contained the whole
Substance, Essence, and Parts of the Sacrament, either part having Christum
totum and integrum, secundum Divinam humanamque naturam; for Bread and Wine are
not the two integral parts of the Sacrament, our Savior instituting the whole
Sacrament both in Bread and Wine, as two distinct, entire matters, not as
integral parts thereof; so the Flesh cannot be participated without the
concomitance of the Blood, that being not disjoined from it; neither can the
Blood be taken apart without the Body, that being contained in it; neither can
there be a participation of either without the Soul and Divinity, by reason of
the inseparable Hypostatick Union.

The next thing I shall consider, is, whether the Laity be by any Divine
Precept, Commanded to participate of the Cup. The Council of Trent determinates
it in the Negative, Sess. 21. Nullo Divino Praecepto Laicos and Clericos non
conficientes obligari ad Eucharistiae Sacramentum sub utraque specie sumendum:
Here they likewise exempt Clericos non conficientes, from that obligation which
I find to be according to the Council of Basil. Sess. 30. Post diligentem
perscrutationem Divinarum Scripturarum Sacrorum Canonum, etc. they thus affirm,
Clerici communicantes and non conficientes, non adstringuntur ex Divino
Praecepto ad suscipiendum sub utraque specie Sacrum Eucharistiae Sacramentum.
The Priest Conficient is obliged to the participation of both Species; for as
the Bloody Sacrifice of the Cross was performed by a distinct effusion of
Blood; so the (...), the Incruentum Sacrificium upon the Altar, which is a
Commemoration and Representation of that ought to be performed by a distinction
of Symbols, this being not only a Sacrament, but a Commemorative Sacrifice
representative of the Bloody Passion.

The following matter to be weighed, is whether the Laity be injured or robbed
of any thing hereby: The Council of Trent says no. Nulla gratia necessaria ad
salutem eos defraudari qui unam speciem solum accipiunt: This follows upon
Christ's being entire, and whole in each Species, as Canisius affirms, Vbi
Christus totus, and integer sumitur illic deesse non potest integer fructus and
efficax gratia Sacramenti tanti. Laici nulla utilitate fraudantur, sive rem in
Sacramento contentam, Christum scilicet Deum, and Hominem spectas; sive fructum
and gratiam quae Eucharistiam sumentibus ad animarum salutem donatur, quaeras;
sed tantum hi sub altera accipiunt, quantum sub utraque, si liceret, essent
specie percepturi: So herein they cannot be injured unless you can prove the
Body and Blood of Christ to be separated; and that he that receives him under
the form of Bread, receives his Body only, and of Wine, his Blood only.

As for those of the Ancient Church, had they believed that Christ so
instituted the Blessed Sacrament, as that he would not have one part taken
without the other, and looked on the usage of the Cup as of the Essence of the
Sacrament, necessary to Salvation, they would not have Communicated under one
Species only, as it is apparent they did; and the custom hereof is so ancient,
that its Cradle and beginning cannot be defined. It was practiced in the time
of Persecution in Domestic Communions, in which the Eucharist was delivered to
the Faithful under one Form, to be carried home; as may be proved out of
Tertull. Lib. 2. ad Vxorem. Cyprian Lib. 1. de Lapsis. Ambros. Orat in the
Death of his Brother Satyrus. It was given to Children, Sick People, and
Travelers in one kind. And that they did so in their Churches, is highly
probable by the Manicheans, hiding and lurking amongst them, who could never
have found shelter and opportunity of Communicating with Catholics had the use
of the Cup been frequent, they being a sort of Heretics, who by the Principles
of their Religion would not drink Wine, abhorring it as a thing unlawful to be
drunk, as a Creature of the Devil, as Fell Draconis; and so superstitiously
abstaining from the Chalice; in detestation of which Heresy, the Church
Commanded Communion in both kinds, not as if the other were either unlawful or
imperfect, but for the detection of those Heretics, pursuant to their
Exclusion from Catholic Societies: At that time the Bishops, to crush and
extirpate that Heresy, highly extolled and commended the use of the Chalice;
but that Error being extinct, and in process of time, another Heresy arising
against the Essential Integrity of Christ's Body under either kind; as also,
avouching the absolute indispensable necessity of both, the Church began
universally to practice Communion under one kind; and to confute this Error,
did not only declare, and publish the Truth by her Decrees and Definitions, but
likewise by her Practice; well knowing, that as it was not unlawful in its self
to Communicate under both sorts; so it was likewise not necessary, but in its
own nature indifferent, and so consequently determinable to one or both kinds,
according to the Discretion of the Church, the Precinct and Line of whose Power
extends it self to things Adiaphorous; for things absolutely Commanded Man
cannot forbid, nor Command things absolutely forbidden. This thing being thus
of a middle nature, was as such within the territory of the Churches
Legislative Power, which according to the differences of Place, Time, and
Persons, has power to enjoin both, or command but one, as the juncture of
Affairs may be, and the benefit of the Church may require; and upon these
accounts the Church may restore the Cup again, having Power to dispense in this
Point of Discipline, according as may be most advantageous to its Peace and
Unity; and accordingly as a tender Mother for quietness sake, she restored the
Cup to the Bohemians, and there is no question but that she would have granted
it you upon that account, had it been requested before your Revolt, rather than
see you perishing in Damnable Schism. Now that the Church has this Power is
acknowledged by the Council of Basil Sess. 30. Ecclesia quae regitur Spiritu
veritatis, etc. ordinare habet quomodo ipsis non conficientibus ministretur,
prout pro reverentia ipsius Sacramenti and salute fidelium viderit expedire;
and accordingly the Council of Trent, Sess. 21. Declarat Synodus hanc
potestatem perpetuo in Ecclesia fuisse, ut in Sacramentorum dispensatione salva
illorum substantia ea statueret, vel mutaret, quae suscipientium utilitati, seu
ipsorum Sacramentorum venerationi pro rerum, temporum, locorum varietate magis
expedire judicaret: Hence it is that the Church varied from the first
institution in reference to time, which was then after Supper, whereas it is now
taken fasting, and before Dinner; so I believe, that Christ did not strictly
tie us up to the first institution, but left it to the discretion of the
Apostles (who afterward referred it to the Judgment of the Succeeding Church;)
this seems to be St. Austins Sense of it, Non praecepit quo deinceps ordine
sumeretur, ut Apostolis per quos Ecclesias dispositurus erat servaret hunc
locum, 118 Epist. ad Januarium; and certainly it is more fit that this Power
should be lodged in the Hands of the Church, than committed to the Arbitrament
of Private Persons; and you had better, herein have acquiesced in her
Determinations than in your own Elections; for what have you gained by
extorting this Cup, but instead of a Cup of Salvation, a baneful Potion, your
departure and Schism from the Church, tainting your very Sacraments, and
poisoning the very Springs of your Holy Actions, Omnia Sacramenta Christi non
ad salutem, sed ad judicium habentur sine charitate unitatis, August. Lib. 3.
Con. Literas Petil. Neque sides, neque Sacramenta ullis nisi persistentibus in
Ecclesiae unitate sunt salutaria. De Unit. Eccles. Quid prodest homini, vel
sana fides, vel sanum fortasse fidei Sacramentum, ubi lethali vulnere
Schismatis perempta est sanitas Charitatis? De Baptismo con. Donat. Lib. primo.

CHAP. VI. Concerning Public Prayers in Latin, and of several other Points.
THe Fourth Point by which you would prove the Roman Church guilty of Paternal
Schism, is, her Public Prayers in Latin. This Point is highly opposed, and
fancied to be against the Word of God, as contrary to the Sense of the 1 Corinthians. 14. which is generally brought against it, and fully believed by your
Flock; though if rightly understood, nothing to the purpose; for this place does
not reprove the Practice of the Roman Church in having her Liturgy in Latin,
but prohibits Extemporary Prayers in Public Meetings in an unknown Tongue,
according to the Inspired infused Devotion of the Speaker: Here is not a Word
concerning (...), Common Liturgy (which has set known Offices for every Day);
If there were, it would be an admirable place for you to confute Fanatics, and
to establish your Common Prayer against Sectaries. I know no reason why the
Western Church should not have the liberty to make use of the Latin in her
Religious Worship, (which is her Sacred and Learned Language, and in her extent
the most generally known) as well as the Jews use the Hebrew, or the Eastern
Churches the Greek, which, although consisting of several Nations that speak
Languages as much different from Greek as ours is from Latin: Nay, although the
Grecians have lost their own Language, which is now no more resemblant to the
Learned Greek, than French is to Latin; yet they retain their Liturgy unaltered
in the pure Language of Chrysostom, not understood but by the Learned. St.
Hierom in his Preface in Paralip. says, That in those Days all those Churches
were served in Greek, using Basil's Liturgy. And Alexander Ross will tell you
in his Review of Religion, That the Copthies, Jacobites, Georgians,
Circassians, and others, to whom you will give the Right Hand of fellowship,
use not their vulgar Language, but an unknown Tongue to the Vulgar in their
Divine Service. Now you must understand, that it is no Position of the
Catholic Church, that the Public Service should be in an unknown Tongue; but
it being Composed at first, ever since the Apostles days in Latin in the
Western Church, the Church did not think it expedient, that it should be turned
into the Vulgar Barbarous Language of every Nation. This was not Englands case
alone, but France, Spain, Germany, Poland, etc. fared no otherwise; nay most,
part of the World, according to St. August. in his Book de vera Religione.
Quotidie per orbem universum humanum genus una pene voce respondet sursum corda
se habere ad Deum. And that the Divine Service was in Africa performed in the
Latin, and not in the Punic Language, is evidently to be proved out of the same
Father in his Second Book de Doctrina Christ. and in his Exposition on Psalm.
123. But if you had a mind to quarrel with the Church for this, it might have
been begun several hundred Years past; for it can be proved, that this Nation
used Latin in her Public Service above Nine hundred Years ago, as is evident
out of the Council of Cloves Hoviae, under Archibishop Cuthbert. But that which
gives me full satisfaction herein, is, that our Apostle St. Austin, who made us
Christians, taught us to serve God in that Language; and this seems not to be
only out of high respect to God Almighty, to serve him in Public Liturgies,
not in the Common, Profane, Vulgar Tongue, but in the most Pure, Sacred
Language; but it seems likewise to denote Unity, that the Church which is
united in the same Faith should join as much as possible in the same Language;
by this means any one of her Communion may join in her Liturgy in any part of
the Jurisdiction of the Western Church, a German if in Italy, a Frenchman if in
Poland, an Englishman if in Spain, etc. Neither are the People so ignorant of
these Prayers as you would persuade your Party; for the Liturgy having set
Offices for every day, and being in one set Language; they by virtue of their
Catechisms, Manuals, Prayers and Psalters in the Vulgar Tongue, (where the
Prayers used by the Church, are found, and likewise Psalms and Hymns proper to
every day) have several other Books Expounding the Churches Service to the
meanest capacity: Besides the Priests are very solicitous herein, assisting
them by their private Instructions, so that the Sense of the Churches Liturgy
is well understood, even by Women and Persons of ordinary Capacity. But this
Practice of the Church, in having her Liturgy in Latin, being no Article of
Belief, but rather a Point of Church Discipline, and as such, not
indispensable, but changable (whereas Articles of Faith are unalterable) you,
who knew 'twas in the Power of the Church to gratify you herein, should have
fairly requested it before you made the breach, and took upon you to tamper
with Articles of Faith before your expelling and deposing your Spiritual Guids.
It may be, the Church, to prevent a greater inconvenience might have humored
you, condescending to what might have seemed most expedient; for long ago it
was permitted to other Nations in her Communion, as to the Sclavonians by Pope
John the Eighth, and to the Chinese by Paul the Fifth, to make use of their
own Languages in their Divine Worship; the Church does not hold it as unlawful,
but as not expedient every where to celebrate in the Vulgar Tongue, as she
declares in the Council of Trent.

The Fifth Point is St. Peter's Supremacy. This is, I must confess, an Article
which all Catholics are obliged to believe; and because it is of high import,
being the Basis of Papacy, I intend to Discouse of it at large, and to
establish it.

The Sixth Point, etc. Is the Bishop of Rome his Supremacy: This flows
naturally from the Fifth, Jure successionis, St. Peter being the First Bishop
of Rome invested with Universal Jurisdiction.

The Seventh, is the Popes Infallibility; to which I shall say nothing till you
can prove it to be an Article of Faith to believe the Pope Infallible,
separated from a General Council. As for his granting Indulgences to break Gods
Law (as you accuse him of) that is a false Crime of your own hatching; for we
deny any thing of that Nature, knowing his Power to be conversant in things
indifferent. As for his absolving Subjects of their Allegiance to their
Princes; when it is acknowledged as an Article of Catholic Faith, I shall
Discourse of it; in the interim I will only hope that no Person will absolve
you, or that you will absolve your self of your Allegiance; and herein we shall
desire no more of you, than that you be as good Subjects to this present
Prince, and stand by him with your Lives and Fortunes, as we did by his Royal
Brother and Father.

Your ensuing Discourse is to prove the Roman Church guilty of Fraternal
Schism; for this you have Three strong Reasons.

The First is, because she renounces Communion with other Churches, etc. As to
this I must needs tell you, that it is an high piece of injustice in you
wilfully to revolt from her, and then falsely to accuse her of renouncing
Communion with you. It Is clear enough, that she rejects no Church that has not
Schismatically fallen off from her; and so found guilty of Schism and Heresy.

The Second is, Because she denounces all damned, who submit not to her. This
you look on as very hard and uncharitable, though the Church herein is not
blamable; but those who dis-join themselves from her, and stand in opposition
to her; she can do no less than acquaint them of their unhappy Estate; this she
does out of kindness rathan severity, that they being thereby made sensible of
their desperate condition, may return to her Bosom, and so avoid that
Condemnation which attends those who depart this life unreconcil'd to her. Her
plain dealing in this case has much more of tenderness than your Latitudinarian
Indulgence, which flatters poor Souls with false hopes of Salvation; and then
consigns them into the Hands of Perdition, cheating their baffled expectancy of
their imaginary Paradise.

If you accuse the Roman Church of rigidness herein, you may bring the same
Indictment against all the Fathers, there being not one Point in which they are
more positive than concerning the Unity of the Church, and that out of its Pale
Eternal Life is unattainable, Nemini salus nisi in Ecclesia, Cyprian 62 Epist.
ad Pomp. and St. August. in his 204 Epist. to Donatus says, Foris ab Ecclesia
constitutus aeterno supplicio punieris, etiamsi pro Christi nomine Vivus
incendereris. The Fathers are so strict herein, that they look on that Person,
who separates from the Catholic Church, to be in a damnable state, though he
leads a Religious, Devout and Virtuous Life; Quisquis ab hac Catholica Ecclesia
fuerit separatus, quantumlibet laudabiliter vivere se existimet, hoc solo
scelere quod a Christi unitate fuerit sejunctus, non habet vitam, sed ira Dei
manet super ipsum, says St. Austin to Donatus; the Reason is, because being
separated from the Catholic Church, he is consequently separated from Christ,
who is the Head to that Mystical Body: Another Reason is, Quia in una Catholica
Ecclesia vera hostia redemptionis immolatur. The Third Reason may be, Quia sola
est per quam Sacrificium Dominus libenter accipiat, as I find it, St. Aust.
Sermon. 181. de temp. He has one Reason more in his 50 Epist. Quia extra hoc
Corpus neminem vivificat Spiritus Sanctus.

Your Third Reason to prove Rome guilty of Fraternal Schism, is, Because she
sends her Emissaries into the known World, etc. But instead of accusing her for
this, had you not been of an ungrateful temper, you might have taken a fair
opportunity of thanking her for sending her Apostles to convert this Nation to
Christianity, when we lay in the impure Arms of Heathenism. But why should you
take offense at her sending persons to propagate the Gospel, even to the
Remotest, and most Barbarous Countries, as long as you (whilst they are in the
midst of Persecutions and Martyrdoms) enjoy the soft Embraces of a Wife, and
the affluence of United Livings?

CHAP. VII. Concerning Protestants objecting Errors to the Church of Rome. The
Authors Apology for himself. His Advice to the Protestant Parson; with some
other Particulars.
HAving hitherto followed you (...), tracing the print of your Footsteps, and
in as succinct a manner as I could examined your Reasons to clear your Church
of Schism, and to derive that crime on Rome, they have appeared to me too
infirm, either to justify the one, or to cast the other. As for your accusing
her of Errors, that being but supposed, and not proved, it imports nothing.
Your Proofs to evince her Doctrines erroneous, must be as manifest as your
Actual Schism; and your Arguments to justify your Schism must not be
conjectural or Probable, but they must be as Ostensive and as Irresistible as
that you made it. Nay, you must prove her guilty of Damnable Doctrines, and
that Salvation was not attainable in her Communion; or else you can expect none
out of it. For to accuse the Church of Error, and upon that account to depart
from her, is Inevitable Perdition without a return. I know it was always
customary with her Enemies to object unto her the want of Truth; but this was
done by Schismatics, as St. Austin well observed, Hoc dicunt qui in Ecclesia
non sunt: Upon this false surmise they audaciously attempt the reforming of her
Doctrines, broaching new ones in opposition to them, which is done to
authenticate and justify their Secession. This was anciently observed by St.
Hierom. Nullum Schisma non sibi aliquam fingit Haeresim, ut recte ab Ecclesia
recessisse videatur. First they separate, and so become Schismatics; then they
mint new Articles of Belief, and so turn Heretics; one follows upon the Neck
of the other, for they never continue long disjoined: Schism being a very fair
step to Heresy, and Generally a Harbinger to it. Quis unquam Haereses
instituit nisi qui se prius ab Ecclesiae Catholicae universitate and
antiquitatis consensione discreverit, says Vinc. Lyrinensis. I know that in
this case, Truth is the pretense, though indeed it is Pride and Arrogance which
makes Men give the preference to their own Private Opinions, and which keeps
them from submitting to the Decisions of the Church; for had they really with a
pure ardour affected Truth, they had never gone out of her, who is the Pillar
of Truth; out of which, when once departed, they must not expect a Pillar of
Fire to Pilote them, but foolish Fires and Spirits of Delusion to misguide them
through all the Serpentine windings and Mazes of falsehood. In ventre Ecclesiae
veritas manet, quisquis ab hoc ventre Ecclesiae fuerit separatus, necesse est
ut falso loquatur, says St. August. on Psalm 57.

I am apt to believe, that if you would but once disenchant your self from the
Spells of your unhappy Education, and with an Impartial Judgment take a serious
view of the Doctrines of the Church, as proposed and explicated by her (not as
wrongfully represented by her Adversaries) that all those little Mormo's and
Specter raised by an injurious description of her Articles (which have
hitherto frighted you) would disappear, and that you then would be so
captivated as not to be able to resist the charms of her naked Truths. The
force of Education is certainly great, and lays violent anticipations on the
Judgment which misleads us in our Elections, disposing us to reject or embrace
things, rather as they suit or jar with our first receptions and
prepossessions, than by their conformity to Truth: Till these false Ideas be
dislodged, Truth can expect no Introduction, but must stand excluded by
Preconceptions. When this difficulty is conquered, you would do well to
question the Integrity of those Authors who have wrote in defense of your New
Religion, who first imbued your undiscerning Minority, with adulterate
Tinctures, and then you are to apply your self with an unprejudicate Mind to
those Authors, who have opposed them. After this you must lay aside all
thoughts of Secular Advantage. No Sophister can be more fallacious than
Interest: This imposes on our yielding Temper, bribes our Judgments, and by
secret Attractions, draws us to the wrong. This made Alexander so violently
stand up for his Ephesian Goddess, though a false Deity; and accordingly the
Pythonissa was a long time maintained, though possessed with an impure Spirit,
for the lucre that she acquired for her owners. In the last place, you are to
divest your self of your Conceitedness, and high Opinion of your self, assuming
Humble Thoughts: Fancy not your self unfallible in your Explications of
Scripture, look on it as unbecoming and arrogant in you, to censure the
Doctrines of the Church, and to oppose the Definitions of General Councils.
When you shall have conquered all these Impedimental Obstacles, you will soon
descry those Mists which have hitherto benighted your Understanding to retire;
then through a serene and disclouded Medium you will clearly see the verity of
Catholic Doctrines, and by Gods assistance implored, embrace them. Nullus
pudor ad meliora transire. Amb. Epist. 31.

But now finding you to plant your Artillery to play on me, I must take some
care to defend my self, which I do not at all despond of.

(...). Both Shields and Spears are in my Armory,
To guard my self, and gall my Enemy.
First, You profess your self heartily sorry that I own my self revolted from
my Mother Church: But your sorrow being grounded upon a mistake, I beg of you
to supersede it, Quam pro me curam geris, hanc precor optime pro me deponas,
for I have not forsaken the Mother Church, but the Schismatical Daughter. But
pray how can your Church be the Mother Church, which began but in Luthers days;
and consequently, so young, that she resembles an Infant, rather than a grave
Matron? I must confess, I cannot see her reckoned either by Irenaeus amongst
those Churches which he calls Maximae and Antiquissimae, or by Tertullian
amongst those which he terms Matrices and Originales; whereas the Roman Church
is of that Antiquity and Renown, that the very Holy Ghost by the Pen of St.
Paul celebrates her Faith and Fame. Henry the Eighth, before he had violated
the pure Faith he first imbibed, in his Book against Luther, will tell you,
which the World acknowledged for the Mother Church. Negare non potest Lutherus,
quin omnis Ecclesia fidelium sacrosanctam sedem Romanam velut Matrem
Primatemque recognoscat and veneretur. King James the First was not ignorant of
this Truth, when in his Speech to the Parliament, he acknowledged the Church of
Rome to be our Mother: And well she may be called our Mother, not only in point
of Dignity, but Kindness, having twice planted the Gospel in this ungrateful
Nation.

Next, you seem dissatisfied that I should take so much pains to answer those
Papers you sent my Brother, hazarding the Shipwreck of his Faith in my
Paper-boat, under the notion of St. Peter's Bark. As to the first part you could
not possibly imagine, that a Person of his green and verdant Years should be
qualified to answer your Composures. But this I must needs say of him, That
having perused them, he did much question their Truth and your Honesty in
framing them, looking on them as beset with Adulterous Gems: The truth on it is,
you had made them very plausible and winning, their Superficies being sprinkled
with Scripture and Fathers, but Deceit and Cosenage lay at the bottom; and they
may well be compared to those Vessels with which Hannibal cheated the
Gortynians. Amphoras complures complet plumbo, Summas operit auro argentoque;
this made me endeavor to rescue my Brother from being a Prey to these Nets you
had spread for him, and to answer your Papers, as Nodus vindice dignus, not
intending hastily to cut it, as Alexander did the Gordian knot, but leisurably
to unty it.

As for my being accused by you, for hazarding the Shipwreck of his Faith in my
Paper-boat, under the notion of St. Peter's Bark; I must tell you, that by my
keeping him in St. Peter's Ship, I preserved him unspotted of two dangerous
Sins, Heresy and Schism; and I question not but (whatever your Opinion be)
through the Infinite Mercies of his Redeemer, he is safely arrived at the Haven
of Eternal Bliss; for as St. Ambrose Sermon. 11. affirms, Hanc solam Ecclesiae
Navim adscendit Dominus in qua Petrus Magister est constitutus, dicente Domino,
super hanc Petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam. Sicut enim Arca Noe mundo
naufragante cunctos quos susceperat illaesos reservavit, ita and Petri Ecclesia
conflagrante saeculo omnes quos amplectitur repraesentabit illaesos. It Is usual
with the Fathers to assimulate the true Church to a Ship: Epiphanius in his
Second Heresy says, (...), The Church of God is like to a Ship: And St.
Ambrose Lib. 3. de Virg. Navis Ecclesia est quae pleno Dominicae crucis velo
Spiritus Sancti flatu in hoc been navigat Mundo. And again, Hi igitur de
Synagoga ad Navim Petri, hoc est, ad Ecclesiam convenerunt: But in Sermon. 15. he
may be said to come nigh your Fancy, styling it a Bark: Nautellam istam fratres
cogitate Ecclesiam, turbulentum mare hoc saeculum. This Bark, I question not,
will ride Admiral in spite of any Fleet you shall be able to set out against
her; and if you dare to embarque your self in such an Enterprise as to board
her, I question not but that she is strongly enough Manned to defend her self.

Your following Accusation reared against me, is of rashness, and you tell me,
That a Matter of this Nature ought to have been deliberately managed. But how
you should know what Authors I have perused, or what time I have impended in
Matters of Religion, I cannot conjecture. This I am sure of, that I have not
credulously surrendered my self into the Hands of any Opinion, neither have I
omitted a competent ventilation of my Religion (otherwise I had never been able
to throw off the prejudice I once had against it by a contrary Education) but
have fully satisfied my Curiosity, Judgment, and Conscience, and do no more
foster any doubts concerning the truth of Catholic Doctrines, than I question
the certitude of Christianity.

After all this, you seem to take it amiss, that I did not consult with your
Oracular Tripus. But if you will promise me not to be offended at my open and
free discovery, I will acquaint you, why I looked on you as an unfit Person to
advise with in this case. It Is too evident to all that know you, that you have
all along been appassion'd, prejudiced, and scurrilous against Catholics,
endeavoring to blast their Repute by defamatory Aspersions and slanderous
Obloquy, taking all occasions to injure them in the Pulpit and out of it, both
in their Morals and Religion, both in reference to their God and King,
continually reviling and barking at them, as if you had been related to those
sorts of Indians, which Pliny mentions in his Seventh Book to be Genus hominum
capitibus caninis, and pro voce latratum edere. And how peccant you have been
in your perverse disfiguring of Catholic Doctrine, and what purulent stuff you
have raised from your exulcerated Lungs against the Bishop and See of Rome can
be attested by multitudes. So I could not but look on you as an unfit Oracle to
give Responsals herein. Had you not been so much tinctured with prejudice, and
so strongly overbiass'd, it is likely I might have resorted to your Infallible
Cortina. You may be so good an Oculist as to know that the Christalline Humor,
wherein the visive Power sways, is not colored; I leave the Application to
you, whose Function renders you most qualified for it. I would not have you
fancy, that I rip up these past things with a design to accuse you, my only
intent herein is, (if possible) to stir you up to consult with your Second
Thoughts, and to make Sedate and Calm Reflections on what you have
passionately, and unadvisedly committed. By this Method you may be induced to
repent of them, and for the future to suppress such Ebullitions of Gall, and
Rancorous Defluxions, which though like a pleasant Potion may be imbibed by the
uninquisitive and profane Herd, Densum humeris bibit aure vulgus; yet to the
Politer sort they must needs be nauseous, and like the drops that fall nigh the
Line, leave a putrid and corrupt steam behind them. I am the more free and
affectionate to you herein, because you were so kind as to afford me your
wholesome Advice; I fancied I could not better correspond with your favors,
than to prompt your Memory to ruminate on your past transactions; and to show
you how grateful I am for your good Counsel, I return you mine in its lieu;
that (if ever you hope to obtain pardon for your miscarriages against the
Catholic Church) you would endeavor Ad Ecclesiae Catholicae unitatem scissi
Corporis membra componere, and Christianae Charitatis vinculo copulare, and
effect as much as in you lies a Redintegration of the Primary Union, a
Re-piecing the unwoven Garment of Christ miserably torn asunder by your Schism.
Consider what a generous Action it would be to leap into this Gulf, and
thereby close the unhappy Clefts and Breaches of Separation: Perpend how much
more Christian-like it would be to moderate and reconcile Differences, rather
than by abusive Expressions, and false Representations to exasperate and widen
them: Think how ingenuous it would be in you (who are so influential and
leading to the rest of your Flock) heartily to acknowledge your Errors, having
been convinced of them; disabuse them of their false pre-occupations, rescue
them from the Chains of their Erroneous Education; dispose them to a right
conception of Catholic Doctrine: Shed no more Cockle amongst 'em, as knowing
your self responsible for the pernicious Principles you infuse into them: Teach
them sound Catholic Verities, gratify their distempered Stomachs with no more
unwholesome viands, humor their prurient itching Ears with no more empty
gingling, (...), Deluding their dainty Ears with the Magic of the Tongue: When
you have exerted your best endeavors herein, you may with some ground hope for
Remission from Propitious Heaven; otherwise you may justly fear, that those
Darts which you have thrown against the Catholic Church should beat back and
reverberate upon your self; for as St. Basil observes in his Hom. of Envy,
(...): Those Darts which are flung with violence if they light on any firm and
obdurate Matter, recoil upon him that threw them.

But I shall now decline things of this nature, and return you my Thanks for
the long Bedroll of Authors which you have recommended to me; Jewel is the
First, and indeed, you did well to place him in the Front, as being most bold
and frontless; after him comes Whitaker, Abbot, Hall, White, Laud, Hammond,
etc. these you desire me to peruse, not questioning but by an impartial reading
of them I may be reduced from the strangers Lap into the Bosom of my True,
Chaste Mother. I shall not go about to extenuate the Credit of these Men but
shall pay a just Deference and Respect both to their Quality and Parts. But I
shall not so overvalue them, as to grant them the Prelation to the Catholic
Church, Councils and Fathers; nay, I shall not equalize them with Cardinal
Bellarmine, Perron, Baronius, or multitudes of others in the Roman Communion: I
will grant you, that they have wrote as well as possibly could be in your
behalf; and had your Case been desensible, they had maintained it; but it was
their misfortune to be engaged in a wrong Quarrel, which they presuming to be
true, have bent all their endeavors, and distended every Nerve to support
Error, and obscure Truth. It Is pleasant to observe, how these cunning
Fencing-Masters shift their Weapons; when they fight against Sectaries in
defense of Episcopacy, one would swear they were perfect Catholics,
Brandishing Glittering Weapons, drawn from the Armory of Antiquity, Tradition,
Practice of the Church, Councils and Fathers; but when they grapple with
Catholics, the Case is altered, Then Scripture is the only Rule, Councils may
err, and the Church Apostatize, and the Fathers guilty of mistakes, making use
of all the shifting, evading ways imaginable to avoid the dint of the Argument:
But as soon as I came to understand the vast difference amongst them in their
Disputings with Catholics, I did conclude their Case very bad. Whitaker in his
Answer to Campians Reasons appeals to the first Six hundred Years after Christ,
which Jewel likewise did in his Ostentatious crack at St. Paul's Cross; but Dr.
Humphrey in the Life of him does much reprehend him for his bold appealing to
the Fathers, as if he had thereby spoiled himself and his Church in giving the
Catholics too large scope. Bishop Laud being sensible of Jewels rashness, lops
off, very fairly, Two hundred Years, contracting the time to a narrower
compass, to the Fathers of the first Four hundred Years, as appears in his
Forty eighth Sect. The Protestants offer (says he) to be tried by all the
Ancient Councils and Fathers of the Church within the first Four hundred years,
and somewhat further. Dr. Hammond, who I conceive to be much more Learned than
the two foregoing, finding Bishop Laud's Four hundred Years not to hold Water,
abates One hundred of them in his Eighth Chapter of Schism. For the particular
Doctrins (says he) wherein we are affirmed by the Romanists to depart from the
Unity of the Faith, we make no doubt to approve our selves to any that will
judge of the Apostolical Doctrins and Traditions by the Scriptures, and consent
of the first Three hundred Years, or the Four General Councils: This pruning of
Antiquity, and shrinking it from the Sixth to the Fourth, and so to the Third
Century, seemed to me the most foul and unreasonable thing imaginable; for by
this means most of the chief Fathers, whose Works are most Copious, were
excluded from attesting the truth of the Churches Doctrine, and very few
admitted, only those who had wrote little or nothing of our differences, but
some small Treatises, Epistles, and Apologies against Heathens, and
Exhortations to Martyrdom, the Church being then under perpetual Persecutions.
But to answer you concerning your Catalogue of Authors, I have perused those
parts of their Works which relate to the Catholics; but they are so far from
removing me out of the Strangers Lap, that they have much contributed to my
fixing my self there. But pray what makes you call the Roman Church a Stranger;
don't you know that she is the Origin and Center of Unity, and that all true
Christians are obliged to Communicate with her? Don't Irenaeus (to whom I shall
give more credit than to all your List of Authors) affirm, That all the
Faithful are obliged to have recourse to this Church for its more powerful
Principality? Does not St. Hierom say, That he is profane who Eats the Lamb out
of this House? This is the place where God planted his only Altar; and here is
fixed that Cathedra, against which, whoever erects another, is, as Optatus
affirms, Schismaticus and peccator: It Is clear, that St. Hierom, though in
reference to local distance, he was much remote from Rome, as he acknowledges
in his Fifty seventh Epistle to Damasus, Neque vero tanta vastitas elementi
liquentis and interjacens longitudo terrarum me a pretiosae margaritae potuit
inquisitione prohibere; yet notwithstanding this, in the same Epistle, he says,
Cathedrae Petri Communione consocior; The same happy state I heartily wish you
and all other Schismatics, well knowing how deplorable a thing it is to die
out of that Communion. I shall therefore conclude this Point with St Cyprian's
Advice, Ad Matrem revertimini unde prodistis.

The End of the First Part.
THE SECOND PART.
CHAP. I. The Preface to St. Peter 's Supremacy, and whether St. Andrew knew
Christ's Divinity before St. Peter.
WHAT I have hitherto wrote, may resemble a (...), a light Skirmish, it being
but Prefatory and Introductive to that main design I am at, which is the
Vindication of St. Peter's Supremacy; a Point of so high Import (being the
Common Center and Origin both of Catholic Unity, of Sacerdotal Dignity, and
Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction) but withal, so strangely snarl'd and perplexed,
that I think no Point stands more in need of an Assistant Hand to unclue its
Intricacies, and to restore it to its native undisguis'd Visage, than this. And
if (as Greg. Nazianzen affirms) (...), Every Truth is with difficulty
demonstrated and made visible. This may seem to require more pains than most
others to represent it clear and manifest; it containing so many difficulties
seemingly insuperable, and so many Knots inextricable, that to solve all the
Doubts and Objections about it, would be a very fit Task for an Elias to
undertake. For though this Point has had very Eminent Champions, who with the
richest Bullion of their Learning and Florid Eloquence have maintained it, yet
has it had no want of considerable Opposers to impugn it, who guided either by
their Judgment or Interest have not failed to make a fair Scene and Pomp both
of their Reading and Talents to undermine it. I who incidentally fell upon this
Subject, am not insensible of its being too Sublime for me to handle, nor
ignorant of its being too momentous and weighty for me to sustain its Pondure;
but finding my self engaged therein, and discovering in my self a particular
curiosity in penetrating deeper into it; I shall not now stop my pursuit and
indagation after it, but continue the quest till I have given my self full
satisfaction, and rescued this Captive Truth from those Fetters you have
enchained it with, in your obscure Durance. And as you have united all the
Forces of your Wit to the numerous Auxiliaries of Quotations, and Spoils of
plundered Authors, pressing even the unwilling Fathers to fight for you in
defense of your Opinion; so I question not but to meet you with as great a
strength, and to vie, and drop Citations with you, attended with larger Shoals
and Clouds of Testimonies. Now though this is likely to prove a toilsome and
operose Province, yet I am resolved to undergo it, hoping to meet with some
alleviation of my Fatigue in the detection of your Errors, which cannot be but
delectable and satisfactory; for as we have in us a Principle of Abhorrency
from being imposed on, so we are naturally endowed with a strong Appetite, and
bent to the investigation of Truth; and as Cicero observes, Veritatis luce
menti hominis nihil dulcius, nothing is more luscious and pleasing to our
Natures than Truth. This is that fine Mistress which Men of all persuasions
pretend to Court, but is enjoyed by few, most being cheated by the Counterfeits
and Impostures of Error dressed up in her semblance; for Error, Fallacy and
Deception arise from the appearance of some similitude, as Aristotle observes,
(...); as when one takes a Parhelion for the Sun, or embraces a gaudy painted
Vapor for Juno. This is the Method which St. Chrysostom says, the Devil takes
in deceiving Mankind; he introduces Error into the company of Truth; then he
paints it with his deceitful Colors, adding some false Strokes and lineaments
whereby it may somewhat resemble Truth, and thereby cozen the seducible: His
words are these, (...)

I shall now gird my self to the performance of what I have undertaken,
detecting those many false semblances you have made use of to countenance your
Opinion; and laying bare all those Deceits you have covered with the specious
Mask of the Authority of the Fathers; refining the Truth from those Adulterate
Mixtures you have endeavored to debase it with, by rendering it pure and
unalloy'd.

The first thing that encounters my view, is your accusing me of laying a false
Hypothesis at the Foundation of St. Peter's Supremacy, by my asserting, that he
first knew Christ's Divinity: This you deny, affirming St. Andrew and Nathaniel
to have got the start of him in the knowledge of that Mystery. Now because the
Foundation of every Fabric ought to be firm and strong to support the
Superstructure, I shall thoroughly dissect those Reasons you have made use of
(as so many Machins) to evert and undermine my Hypothesis; and manifest unto
you how unsufficient and unable they be for such a Design, and withal discover
with what false Topics you have deluded your self. The Argument you use to
evince St. Andrew elder in the knowledge of Christ's Divinity than St. Peter,
is derived from the first Chapter of St. John, where it appears, that St.
Andrew was the first of the Apostles, who acknowledged our Savior for the
Messiah. Now (say you) he first knowing him to be the Messiah, consequently
knew his Divinity, because in the 9th. of Isaias v. 5. the Emanuel is styled
God. This your Argument does not seem forcible to me: For though I grant that the
Messiah is called so by the Prophet; yet it does not follow that St. Andrew, by
the Hebrew word El, or Deus (which was not Gods Incommunicable Name, but
Jehovah) should know the Messiah to be the natural Son of God, of the same
essence and substance with the Deity; but rather that he apprehended him as
some eminent Person, extraordinarily endowed by God, sent to free the Jewish
Nation from the Bondage of the Romans, to whom they were subjugated: This is
Theophyl. his Opinion, they did expect that their Messiah should be (...); A
Savior and Redeemer from those afflictions which lay upon them, and from the
yoke of Bondage which the Romans had imposed on them, and to Reign in a
Terrestrial Kingdom: This seems to be their plain Sense of the Messiah, and
accordingly in the following Verse of Isaias, it is said of him, Super solium
David, and super regnum ejus sedebit. This made Nathaniel, after he had
confessed Christ to be the Son of God, to add, Tu es Rex Israel. This made the
Apostles before our Savior's Resurrection ambitiously to court the highest
Preferment and Dignity in his Kingdom, looking on it as Terrene, Aspectable and
Pompatick. And we find Cleophas (no meaner a Person than the Brother of St.
Joseph, the Father of the two Apostles St. James and St. Jude, very intimate
with the whole Apostolic Quire) in the Twenty fourth of St. Luke, to describe
our Savior (in the Character he gives of him) not as the Consubstantial Son of
God, but as an Eminent Man, an Illustrious Prophet, Jesus Nazarenus qui fuit
vir Propheta potens in opere and Sermon, etc. Hence Theophyl. takes notice of
his diminutive thoughts of Christ, (...); See what a low and slender Opinion
they had of our Lord, they call him a Man, a Prophet, such an one as Elias or
Moses. Then he freely discovers what great expectations they had fomented of
his glorious Achievements, Nos sperabamus quod ipse redempturus sit Israel;
upon which St. Ambrose in his Ninety sixth Psalm Enarrat. glosses thus, Jam
spem perdiderant, non enim dixerunt speramus eum redempturum, sed sperabamus
quod esset redempturus Israel: And accordingly Theophyl. observes, that they
spoke this, (...), as defeated of their Hopes and Expectancy. Thus it seems
apparent, that they looked on their Messiah, as one that should be Isreal's
Restaurator, Redemptor, Liberator, as one sent to raise up the fallen Kingdom
of Judea, and to restore it to its Pristine Glory, and to file its Luster as
Radiant as it was in the Golden Days of King David and Solomon.

But to come to the Hebrew word El or Deus, which is, the very Lock in which
the strength and nerve of your Argument lodges, none can by that word prove
the Hypostatick Union in the Messiah, that he should be very God of very God:
God by Essence and Nature, because he is called El; for in the Old Testament I
find, not only Angels, but eminently Potent, and Godly Men are called Elohim.
Thus in Psalm 138. In conspectu Angelorum psallam tibi; in the Hebrew it is
Elohim, and in Psalm 8. Minuisti eum paulo minus ab Angelis: It Is likewise
Elohim in the Hebrew: And in Psalm 82. Deus stetit in Synagoga Deorum, in medio
autem Deos dijudicat: Here the Eminent Judges are called Elohim, or Gods; and
in the same Psalm likewise, Ego dixi Dii estis. Moses is also called God, and
that by God himself, Exodus 5. Dixit Dominus ad Moysen, ecce constitui te Deum
Pharonis, which Hilarious in enarrat. Psalm 136. took notice of, Invenio and
Mosen Deum nuncupari, cum ei dicitur, Deum te posui Pharaoni. Hence Philo Lib.
primo de Mose, says, Cum amicorum omnia sunt communia, Deus potestatem and opes
suas cum Sanctis communicate; and St. Basil, Hom. de Spiritu Sancto says, That
Holy Men are called Gods, for having the Holy Ghost dwelling in them. St.
Cyril. l. 7. c. 12. John observes, that the word Deus in Holy Writ is taken in
a triple Sense: First, by Nature, as Audi Israel, Dominus Deus tuus, Deus unus.
Secondly, By Adoption or Participation, by which, they who are Adopted to be
Sons of God, become partakers of the Divinity, and are called Gods. Thirdly,
Falsely so called, and only nominally, as the Devils and Idols, as it is in Psalm
49. Omnes Dii Gentium Daemonia. Now that which I deduce from hence is this,
That notwithstanding St. Andrew had known that the Messiah was called by Isaias
El or Deus, it does not at all follow, that by that Description he should
conceive him to be the Son of God by Eternal Generation, that being a Mystery
which was inaccessible to Humanity, without a Revelation, and not knowing him
to be such a Son of God, he was ignorant of his real Divinity. This Recondit
and Sublime Mystery did transcend all the Natural Wit and Subtilty both of Men
and Angels, and was unattainable without a Celestial Illustration; therefore
Christ calls the manifestation of it a Revelation, as of a thing hidden, and
abstruse, as Theophyl. observes, (...); He calls the Knowledge of this Mystery
a Revelation, as a discovery of Occult and unknown things made manifest by the
Father: And accordingly Origin acknowledges, that St. Peter arrived to this
Knowledge, not by Humane Skill or penetrancy of Wit; but by illumination from
the Heavenly Father: (...); Peter as a Disciple, not of Flesh and Blood, but of
the Father in Heaven, comprehending the Revelation, confessed him to be THE
CHRIST. But wholly to elucidate the inconcludency of your Argument, that St.
Andrew must necessarily know the Divinity of the Messiah, because Isaias calls
him Deus; to this I answer, That it is apparent by the 24th. of St. Luke, that
the Apostles did not understand the Prophets till our Saviors Resurrection; for
in the 45th Verse, he then opened their Understanding to apprehend the
Scriptures; and in the 27th Verse, he beginning from Moses and all the
Prophets, interpreted them to his Disciples.

CHAP. II. The differenc betwixt Nathaniel 's and St. Peter 's Confession of
Christ: and in what Sense St. Peter is said to be Os Apostolorum.
MY next employ shall be to ventilate the Confession which Nathaniel made of
Christ, and try whether it be of the same stamp and import with St. Peter's:
The first I shall consult with herein, shall be Theophyl. who in his Notes on
the Frst Chapter of St. John gives this account of it, (...). Notwithstanding
that Nathaniel does confess Christ to be the Son of God, yet he does not
confess him as Peter did: He confessed him the Son of God, as true God;
therefore he received the Beatification, and was entrusted with the Church; but
Nathaniel confessed him as a mere Man, graciously adopted by God for his
Virtue; for he was not as yet arrived to the perfect knowledge of the real
Deity of the only begotten Son. St. Chrysostom. likewise in his 55th Hom. on St.
Matt. makes Nathaniels Confession, and that of others, to be quite of a
different nature, and of no Cognation with Peter's, (...), They did not consess
such a Filiation as Peter did, but looked on him as one of those many Sons
which God had, but as the most eminent and choice of them all, but not as of
the same Substance with God. And in the same Homily he declares, that St. Peter
knew him as his (...), as his Proper, Natural Son, and therefore rewarded,
(...); Why was St. Peter pronounced Blessed? because he confessed Christ to be
the Natural Son of God, upon that score he pronounced none of those who
confessed him before Blessed. This is likewise the Opinion of Epiphanius adver.
Cath. (...); because he clearly confessed him the true Son of God: for in
saying he was the Son of the Living God, he demonstrated him to be his Natural
Son. Now if Nathaniel, as you affirm, made a true Confession of Christ before
Peter, what Reason can be given, that Christ, who is (...), no respecter of
Persons, should give that reward of Beatus es, etc. to Peter, which Nathaniel
did more deserve, if (as you say) he first made true Confession of him? Now, as
for Nathaniels Confession, it was so far from deserving a Reward, that coming
short of the Truth (as Chrysostom. affirms in his 55 Hom. Matt.) it was
derogatory to Christ; for what could seem more lessening and eclipsive of his
Luster and Excellency, who both in Essence and Glory was equal to God the
Father, than to be looked on as an Eminent Man, as a Petty King, Rex Israel? He
that holds the whole Fabric of the World in the hollow of his Hand, King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, is by guileless Nathaniel entitled but as King of
Judea; whereas Peter looked on him as the Monarch of the unbounded Universe.
This Flaw was observed in Nathaniels Confession by Theophyl. (...): If he had
confessed him God indeed, he would not have called him King of Israel, but King
of the Universe, therefore he was not pronounced Blessed: And likewise by St.
Chrysostom. in his 17th. Hom. on St. John, (...); The Son of God is not King of
Israel, but of all the World. Now though the words that Nathaniel spoke do
resemble Peter's, as St Austin in his 6th Tract of St. John, observes, Talem
vocem protulit Nathaniel qualem Petrus; yet Chrysostom. conceives the Sense of
them to be very foreign and remote from St. Peter's, (...). Peter and Nathaniel
spoke the same words, but not with the same meaning, for Peter confessed him
the Son of God, as truly God, but Nathaniel, as a mere naked Man. These things
being duly weighed in just Scales, your Argument that Nathaniel knew our
Saviors Divinity, because he called him Filius Dei, seems to me very feeble
and invalid; that Title being given usually to Persons eminent for Sanctity,
who are no Natural, but Adopted Sons of God; Sons by Election, not Generation,
as Romans 8. Quicunque Spiritu Dei aguntur, ii sunt filii Dei: And John 1. Dedit
eis potestatem Filios Dei fieri: And in Genesis 6. Seths Sons are called, Filii
Dei, not by Nature, but for their Temeperance, Justice and Sanctity, by which
Divine Imbellishments, Humanity approximates to Divinity, and may be said to be
allied to it.

It remains then to assert, that St. Peter was the first of the Apostles that
knew the Divinity of our Blessed Savior; he attaining to the knowledge of this
most lofty Truth, not by the dusky twilight of the shady Prophets, (...), Not
making use of penetrating subtilty, or persuaded thereto by Humane Reasonings,
but having his Understanding enlightened by God the Father: Or as Origin has it,
(...), by a light beaming from the Father: (...), from God himself, says
Athanasius in his 4th. Orat. cont. Arrianos. Patris ipsius enuntiatione filium
Dei Christum ipsum esse agnovit, as Just in affirms in Tryph. Haec fides
paternae revelationis est munus, says, Hill. 6. Trinit. (...); Chrysostom. in
Petrum and Eliam. Peter, who confessed the Truth by a Divine Revelation. (...),
Dion. Eccles. hier. Illuminated by the Divine Revelation of the most
Sacro-sanct Father. (...); Epiph. Ancor. Peter was assisted by God in laying a
sure Foundation of Faith. (...), Cyr. Dial. 4. de Trinit. God the Father from
above, manifestly discovering his proper Son.

Thus having so glorious and able a Tutor, who, together with his Divine
Doctrine could bequeath a Capacious, Suscipient Apprehension, he first knew that
the Word was made Flesh, the Mystery of the Trinity, and the Distinction of the
Persons.

He then knew him as the splendour of Gods Glory, and Figure of his Substance,
Heb. 10. He knew him as one in whom the plenitude of the Deity inhabited
Corporally, Col. 2.

He knew him as (...), as one sitting on the same Throne with God, as of the
same Glory, Nature, and Substance, as of the same Power, Glory; and
Sovereignty. He knew him as (...), as the proper Son of God, the only Son,
having no other Brother. He knew him, as Origin has it, (...), As that select
Son, he by way of emimence, THE SON. He knew him to be the Son of God, (...),
Properly not Catachrestically, Naturally, not by Adoption. He knew him, not as
one advanced, (...), from a Servant to an Adopted Son, but as a Son begot from
Eternity by an inscrutable, incomprehensible Generation, as may be gathered out
of the Greek Fathers, to whom I shall adjoin some of the Latins, that you may
see how accordantly they conspire in this Point. St. Ambrose Lib. 3. de Spiritu
Sancto, accosts our Savior in this manner, Vnum te esse cum Patre dixisti, quia
hoc credidit Petrus, Claves regni Coelorum accepit. And again, speaking of
Peter's Confession, he acknowledges it to include, Non adoptionis nomen, sed
naturae proprietatem; non creationis in eo ignobilitatem, sed nativitatis
gloriam. And St. Austin in his Sermon. 144. de Temp. says, That Peter did not
look on Christ as unus ex Prophetis, sed ut filius adimpletor Prophetarum,
Creator Angelorum. And in his 26. Tract. on John, Tu es Christus filius Dei
vivi, non sicut aliquis magnus justus, sed sicut unicus, sicut aequalis. He
then knew him as Filius Altissimi, Luke 1. as Filius unigenitus, John 3. as
Filius proprius, Romans 8. as Filius verus, John 1. 5. This his Confession St.
Austin calls Vera and plena Confessio. Chrysostom. calls it, (...), A complete
Confession; and it could not but be so, since it was not Peter's conjectural
Apprehension, but the Fathers Doctrine, and Suggestion: This Confession Christ
commends, partly from its Effect, Being, Beatitude; partly, A causa procreante,
which was the Father; this he amplifies, Antithesi causae disparatae judicii,
vel virium naturalium, to show that all the Forces of Man's Wit, all Human
Wisdom, Industry, and Sagacity could never have arrived to it without a
Revelation. This Christ approves of, not as (...), as a Human Opinion, but as
(...), a Divine Decree; this according to Chrysostom. he illustrates and explains
(...), As you are are the Son of Jonas, of the same substance, so am I
consubstantial with my Father. This Confession he strictly charges them to
conceal, as being too sublime to be divulged, whereas Nathaniel had liberty to
publish his. This Confession our Savior not only owned, but accepted of Peter's
person, which Theophyl. says, Was a sign that all other Men's Opinions of him
were false; (...). Lastly our Savior was pleased highly to reward Peter for
the Merits of this Confession; and this is the concurrent suffrage of all the
Fathers; I shall here insert the Sayings of some of them.

(...); Basil advers. Eunomium Lib 2. Peter, who for the acknowledging the
Truth was honored with the Beatitude.

(...); Epiph. Ancorate. Peter says thou art the Son of the Living God, and
Christ presently declares him Blessed.

(...), Theoph. Therefore he is pronounced blessed and entrusted with the
Church.

St. Hierom says on Matt. 16. Testimonio de se Apostoli reddit vicem, dixerat
Petrus, tu es Christus filius Dei vivi, mercedem recepit vera confessio, Beatus
es Simon Barjona, etc. St Austin. Sermon. 13. in Matt. Deinde addidit and ego
dico tibi, etc. Tanquam diceret, quia tu dixisti mihi, Tu es Christus filius
Dei vivi, and ego dico tibi, quod, etc. Hilarious on Matt. 16. Dignum plane
confessio Petri praemium consecuta est.

I shall add no more Testimonies to strengthen this Point, but advance it to
its deserved height; for you are to understand, that though Peter's Confession
did exceed that of others, by declaring Christ to be Gods Natural Son; yet this
was not the sole reason of his Preferment and Honor; but because the Father
singled him out of the Apostolic Society, illuminating him with a particular
Revelation, and inspiring him what he should return in answer to Christ his
Question; or if you please, God himself spoke by him, making use of his Organs:
You will find by the following Quotations that the Fathers assert both.

(...). And again, (...), -- He was declared Blessed, because he spoke the
Sense of God, because he received what he spoke from the Divine Grace.

(...), Epiph. Ancor. As the Prince of the Apostles witnesses, who by our Lord
was vouchsafed to be proclaimed Blessed, because the Father discovered the
Revelation to him.

Origin affirms in his Notes on St. Matthew, that St. Peter knowing the Son
(...), by the Revelation of the Father; had (...), The highest Blessing: And
accordingly St. Austin, Psalm 138. Jamdudum quia dixerat, tu es Christus filius
Dei vivi, auvit, non tibi revelavit Caro and Sanguis, sed Pater meus qui est in
Caelis, ideo Petra, ideo Beatus.

Thus you may easily perceive, that the sourse of Peter's Glory was originated
from God, who became his Tutor, and taught him this Divine and Mystical
Theology, (...), as Damascene calls it: And accordingly St. Ambrose, Incar.
Dom. Sacram. says, Qui veram generationem loquitur Patris a Patre assumpsit,
Peter spoke it, but God suggested it, as Damascen affirms, (...); This Doctrine
God declared to him and he taught it the Church, (...), Epiph. Ancor. For
Christ did not ask the Question as if he were ignorant, but as willing to
manifest, that this was the Doctrine of the Father, which did proclaim his true
Son to the Church. That Peter should be enforced to speak and declare what he
was taught by the Father. He being thus endoctrinated from Heaven, promulges
this Article of belief, and imparts it faithfully to the rest, as Epiph. in
Ancor. observes, (...), he makes a true discovery of Christ, who had shaded
himself, and was pleased to pass Incognito, under the Title of Son of Man; but
Peter by a luminous illapse and ray from above, finds him out, and Proclaims
him the Son of God. St. Hierom affirms, That he had this Revelation from the
Holy Ghost, but this his Opinion can raise no difference, for Opera
Sanctissimae Trinitatis ad extra sunt indivisa; his words are these, Quod Caro
and Sanguis revelare non potuit Spiritus Sancti gratia revelatum est: And again
in another place, Ex confessione Petrus sortitur vocabulum quod Revelationem ex
Spiritu Sancto habeat, cujus and filius appellandus, alluding to Barjona, for
in the Hebrew Language Jona signifies Columba, the Symbol of the Holy Spirit
descending in that shape. Hence we may see what a high Favorite this grand
Apostle was of every Person of the Blessed Trinity. The Father, and the Holy
Ghost cull him out of the whole Body of the Apostles, and honor him
particularly with a Revelation. Christ superadds to this Dignity, making him a
promise of building his Church on him; and of the Donation of the Keys, and
after this, constituting him his Supreme Vicar, Pastor and Head of his
Universal Church, as shall hereafter be manifested.

Now after all this you are pleased to pass a slight Complement on St. Peter,
allowing him to be a forward speaker, and therefore styled by the Fathers, Os
Apostolorum, and if he were their Mouth, you say, he surely spoke their Mind.
To return a fit answer to this, I shall first examine in what Sense he may be
termed the Mouth of the Apostles: And then I shall enquire whether or no the
other Apostles had the same Sense of Christ's Divinity, as he had when he
offered to solve the proposed Question. First, I must acknowledge, that I
cannot find in any place of the Scripture, that the Apostles ever chose or
pitched upon Peter for their Speaker, but spoke themselves to Christ when they
had a mind to it, or saw occasion; this I shall prove by several Instances, as
Matt. 13. Accesserunt ad eum Discipuli, dicentes, edissere nobis hanc
parabolam. Matt. 14. Accesserunt ad eum Discipuli ejus, dicentes, desertus est
locus. Matt. 15. Dicunt ei Discipuli ejus, unde ergo nobis in deserto panes?
Matt. 17. Tunc accesserunt Discipuli ad Jesum, secreto dicentes, etc. And John
14. dicit, ei Thomas; and in the same Chapter, Dicit ei Philippus; and John 12.
Dixit ei Judas Iscariotes; and as Nazianzen observes in his 26th Oration,
(...): Peter asks Christ one Question, Philip another, Judas this, Thomas
something else; and indeed any other of them did the same. By this it clearly
appears, that they all spoke to our Savior as well as Peter. Nay in St. John
13. Peter gets John to speak for him, beckoning on him to ask Christ a
Question: Besides, they did not only in their Addresses to Christ speak for
themselves, but likewise answered for themselves, when Christ proposed any
Question which they could solve. Thus in Matt. 13. 51. Christ asked them, if
they understood all these things? they said to him, Yes Lord. Christ asked
them, How many Loaves they had? they answered, Seven. He asked them, Matt. 21.
31. Which of the two Brothers did his Fathers Will? they said, The first. He
asked them, Whether they wanted any thing, when he sent them without Purse,
Scrip, or Shoes? they said, Nothing. And in John 21. he asked them, Whether
they had any thing to eat? they answered him, No. These easy Questions, you
see they all answered as well as Peter; but when Christ proposed this difficult
Question which we now treat of; all the rest were silent, and Peter only
answered it. It Is very observable, that though it was proposed to them all in the
Plural Number, Peter only replied to it, and in this, all the Evangelists, as
many as mention it, agree exactly, as you may see in Matt. 16. Mark 8. and Luke
9. whereas in their raccounting other Passages they seem to vary.

Now it is easily discernible when Peter speaks for the Rest, uttering their
common Sentiment, by his speaking in the Plural Number, as in St. John 6. upon
our Saviors asking them, Nunquid and vos vultis abire? Peter answers in the
Plural Number in the name of all of them, Domine ad quem ibimus? Here Theophyl.
observes, that he spoke for all of them; his Reason was (...); For he did not
say, to whom shall I go, but to whem shall we go? And accordingly St. Austin in
his 28th Tract. Johan. Respondit Petrus pro omnibus, unus pro multis, unitas
pro universis, Domine ad quem ibimus? Repellis nos a te, da nobis alterum te.
Peter likewise spoke for them all when he said, Ecce nos reliquimus omnia and
secuti sumus te. Hence Christ answers to them all in the Plural Number, Dico
vobis quod vos qui secuti estis me, etc. And likewise when in John 6. 69, he
says, We belive and know that thou art Christ, the Son of the Living God: Here
he undertook by answering for the Rest, to give an account of their Faith; but
he committed a great mistake therein, for Christ told him, that that was not
the belief of all of them, one of them being a Devil. When they were all
accused, as warmed with new Wine, Peter makes an Apologetical Harangue in the
defense and name of them all. By these Passages it is obvious and transparent,
that Peter herein was the Representative of the Apostolic Society, venting in
these his Responsals their joint and united Opinions; so I shall supersede a
further pursuit herein, and make it my present business to inform my self in
what Sense some of the Fathers entitle him Os Apostolorum, whereas indeed they
had as much liberty and freedom of speaking to our Savior as he had. The most
Radiant and Plausible Opinion amongst them, for their dubbing him their
Speaker, was, because they looked on him as their Prince; and thus it may not
improperly be said in a subordinate Sense, that what was spoken by the chief of
the Society, was said by the whole Company, he representing them all as their
Head and Prince; and in this Sense it is that Cyril acknowledges Peter to have
answered for the Rest, as is apparent in several places of his Comments on St.
John, Princeps Caputque caeterorum primus exclamat, Tu es Christus, etc. Per
unum qui praeerat omnes respondent. Per Principem consortii haud dubitant
exclamare, Tu es Christus, etc.

And accordingly it is very familiar with Chrysostom. after he has styled him, The
Mouth of the Apostles, to join another word with it, which denotes him to be
chief; as in his 55th Hom. Matt. (...): And again on the 87th Hom. on St. John,
(...); He was the Prince of the Apostles, and Mouth of the Disciples, the
Supreme top of the Society. (...); Peter the Prince of the Apostolic Quire,
the Mouth of the Disciples, De occursu Domini. Thus St. Hierom, who
acknowledges that Peter did profess this Truth, ex persona omnium, acknowledges
him to be their Head. St. Cyprian in his 55th Epistle declares, that Peter
answered for all of them, but confesses he did this as the Representative of
the Church, Vnus pro omnibus loquens, Ecclesiae voce Respondens. St. Austin
fancies he only answered to preserve Unity, Vnus pro multis dedit responsum,
unitas in multis: And in his 118 Tract. de Temp. Ideo unus pro omnibus, quia
unitas in omnibus: But in Sermon. 13. Evang. Matt. He gives Three chief Reasons
why Peter is said to be their Speaker. First, Because he is the Type of the
only Church. Then because he was the Prince or Chief of the Apostles. Lastly,
Because he was most ardent in his Affection toward Christ, Petrus unicae
Ecclesiae Typus ipse in ordine Apostolorum primus, in Christi amore
promtissimus, saepe unus respondit pro multis. It Is customary with St. Austin
to affirm, that Peter represents sometimes, the Church, sometimes the Apostles;
the Church he represents as its Head and Rector, the Apostles as their Primate,
as will hereafter be made out; and in this Sense he is called their Speaker,
not as if he were their Attorney or Praeco, but their Princeps.

CHAP. III. Whether the other Apostles knew Christ's Divinity as soon as St.
Peter? Concerning the Blessed Virgin Mary, and St. John, etc. And concerning
the Devils knowledge of Christ.
THe next thing I am obliged to Discuss, is, Whether or no the other Apostles
had the same Sense of Christ's Divinity as St. Peter had, when Christ proposed
this Question to them, Vos autem quem me dicitis esse? So that Peter herein may
be said to have spoke but their Sense, and that they knew, and could have
answered the Question as well as he. This is in short, what you affirm, and
what is attested by Modern Protestant Writers. Dr. Cave in the Life of St.
Peter says thus of him, Does he confess Christ the Son of God? Besides, that
herein he speaks but the Sense of all the Rest; this was no more than what
others said as well as he. Nathaniel expressly told him, Thou art the Son of
God. This is likewise Dr. Barrow's Sense of it, only he delivers it more
Sportively and Comically in his Treatise of the Supremacy, p. 43. But who say
ye that I am? up starteth Peter, he skippeth forth and preventeth the other
Apostles, not ignorant of the Point, they took Jesus for the Messiah, which
according to the common notion of the Jews, did imply his being the Son of God;
they had the same Faith, he from a special alacrity of Spirit, and expedition
in utterance, more forward in declaring it. This Opinion seemed to me very thin
and silly, That Christ should propound a Question to a Dozen Persons, which he
knew any of them could solve, and make honorable Promises only to him that
should speak first, seemed to me a childish fancy, and beneath the Conceptions
of a Doctor, this being not to reward an Excellency of Faith, but the
promptitude of a nimble Tongue, which has nothing of Merit in it. Having now
mentioned the two above cited Doctors, I shall add something more to their
Quotations. Peter is said to answer for the Rest, not as if he spoke or knew
their Opinion on this Point; for the Question was asked by our Savior on a
sudden; and it does no where appear, that the Apostles had any Praecedaneous
Conference or Consultation about it; but because his Answer thereto was
Orthodox, they were obliged to own and embrace it as the Common Belief of the
Church. And I conceive, that upon our Saviors asking the Question, the rest
being silent, and suspending their Answer, Peter first spoke not their Common,
but his Particular Sentiment; Suam fidem pro se professus est, says Jansenius;
Pro se solo respondit, says Abulensis; and this he did as one made more knowing
than the Rest, being instructed in this Mystery by a particular Revelation from
the Father. He then being more fervid than the Rest, inflamed by this
illumination from God, and instigated thereto by a Divine impulse, hastened with
all speed to describe the Son as the Father had instructed him, lest any of the
Twelve should speak any thing beneath, and unworthy of Christ, and so be
rebuked by him as they often were. This is what St. Chrysostom means, when he
says, Peter (...), not a first starting or hopping, or skipping, as the Doctor
paints to himself in his deluded fancy; for St. Peter did not merit any thing
by speaking first, and so preventing them by the glibness of a voluble Tongue,
but by the eminency of his Faith, by his anticipating the rest in the knowledge
of that Mystery: Hence it is as Jansenius observes, Cum Chrysostomus and alii
eum vocant Os, and nomine omnium respondisse, non sic accipiendum quasi
responderit id quod omnes sentirent, sed quia solus responderit quod omnibus
respondendum fuisset. Now if the other Apostles did equally know it with Peter,
and he only spoke their Sense for them, I shall with Maldonat ask this
Question, Si pro omnibus Petrus loquebatur, cur non omnibus dictum beati estis?
Cur non omnibus mutata nomina? Cur non omnibus dictum vobis dabo, etc. Besides
it seems strange to me that the rest should be able to understand this Mystery
without a Revelation; and that Peter, who in other things was more forward and
penetrant, should here be so dull and unapprehensive as not to discover this
without a particular Beam from the Father of Light; for had he understood it
before, the Revelation had been superfluous: But herein Dr. Hammond was pleased
to lend me his charitable Hand, by clearing up this doubt to me in these words,
I must in Charity (says he) believe, that some other of the Twelve acknowledged
the Divinity of Christ, and had it revealed to them by the Father. This seemed
at first very apposite; but when I considered that the Doctor could not
possibly prove any Revelation either at or before that time, concerning the
Divinity of our Savior, to any of the Twelve, but to Peter; I concluded, that
what the Doctor was pleased to call Charity, was really Policy: So I left him,
and applied my self to St. Hilary, as being the abler Man, and he acquainted
me, that the other Apostles were ignorant of it, on Matt. 13. Ignorantibus
caeteris primus, Respondit, Tu es, etc. And Cyril in his 11th Catech. informed
me, That the other Apostles were silent at our Saviors Question, because it
was above Humane reach. (...), etc. All the Apostles being silent, for this
Doctrine was above the power of Humane Apprehension, Peter the Prince of the
Apostles, etc. And accordingly Hilarious Lib. 6. de Trin. acknowledged it to be
Vltra humanae infirmitatis modum. This Doctrine (as St. Ambrose affirms Lib. 4.
Lucae.) a Human Mind could never comprehend, Plena rationis investigatione:
This made the other Apostles to hesitate, and fluctuate, not knowing what
Answer to shape to this sublime Question, as Basilius Seleucius observed,
(...). But whom say ye I am? He suspended them all in silence, and seeing their
ignorance, he suggested to Peter an Answer from God.

Now what concerns the other Apostles, although I grant, that they took Christ to
be the Shiloh or Messiah, yet that did not imply to them his being Gods Natural
Son, Per identitatem substantiae, but rather an Imputative, or Assumptive Son:
And this their belief did amount to no more than this, Credimus te esse
Messiam, quem scimus vocari Filium Dei. Now although they called him Filius Dei,
and thereby seemed to know his Name, they were ignorant of his Nature, whereas
Peter, by virtue of his Revelation knew both. Complexus est omnia, qui nomen
and naturam complexus est, as Ambrosius says: And herein lies the difference
'twixt Peter's knowledge and theirs. For the true knowledge of the Messiah
consisted in knowing his Nature, as Hilarious observes, Gloria Revelationis
Naturae scilicet non nominis, cum frequentata nominis professio jam fuisset.
'Twas ordinary and common with them to call an egregious Person Filius Dei.
Hence the Seamen upon his appeasing the tumultuous Sea, called him so. It Is not
at all probable, that such rude illiterate People should know the Mystery of
the Trinity, his Consubstantiality with God. The Centurian likewise in St. Mark
says of him, Vere hic homo filius erat Dei, which saying is very well explained
by St. Luke, Vere hic homo justus erat; this word Filius, is ascribed to Men as
well as Christ, as Chrysostom. affirms in his 4th Hom. de incompreh. Dei. (...);
It Is properly attributed to him, improperly to Men; and accordingly St. Amb.
Lib. 1. de fide Filius aut per adoptionem, aut per naturam est; per adoptionem
nos filii dicimur, ille per veritatem naturae est.

Having plainly evidenced the difference 'twixt Peter's Sentiments of Christ,
and that of the other Apostles: I shall add this, That the Fathers, when they
incidently say, That the other Apostles knew Christ to be the Son of God,
before Peter's promulging him so, do mean thereby his Nominal, and not his
Natural Filiation: If they do not mean so, they must prove, that the others had
Revelations of that kind; for I will never be induced to believe otherwise than
that St. Peter's Revelation did discover to him more than either what he or they
knew before, otherwise it had been of no import. That which confirms me in this
my Opinion concerning the Fathers, is, because I find St. Ambrose in one place
to affirm, that the other Apostles knew Christ to be the Son of God as well as
Peter; and in another place, to seem to appropriate it wholly to him, Lib. 4.
Lucae. Et si aliis imperatur ut laxent retia sua, soli tamen Petro dicitur, duc
in altum, hoc est, in profundum disputationum, quid enim tam altum quam
altitudinem divitiarum videre, scire Dei filium and professionem divinae
generationis assumere; and accordingly he explains, duc in altum, in his 3d.
Book de Virg. duc in altum ad filium altissimi, non ducebat in altum quando in
stagno piscabatur. By these Quotations he plainly ascribes to Peter only the
knowledge of the Divine Generation. And in his 84th Sermon. he makes him to excel
in Faith, and consequently in his Confession, Petrus solus Christum Dei filium
confitetur; gradus quidem sunt fidei, and qui devotius credit religiosius
confitetur. Besides this, I find, several of the Fathers acknowledging Peter
first to know, and first to confess Christ his Divinity. Hilarious on Matt. 16.
Dignus judicatus est, qui quod in Christo Dei esset primus, cognosceret. Et in
enarrat. Psalm. 131. he calls him Primum filii Dei confessorem: And accordingly
St. Cyrill. (...), Peter first confessed the Faith. St. August. Sermon. 124. de
Temp. Hic est Petrus, qui Revelatione Divina primus omnium veritatem meruit
confiteri dicens, Tu es Christus filius Dei vivi. And Origin in his Comments on
St. Matt. (...); The reading of the Scripture makes it evident every where,
that Peter now first of all confesses Christ to be the Son of the Living God.
St. Chrysostom. de negatione Petri, introduces him, expostulating with our Savior
thus, (...); Did not I discover you before all others, and cried out, you are
Christ the Son of the Living God? And Athanasius in his 4th Orat. contra
Arrianos, speaking of Christ, (...). At length Christ is confessed, first by
Peter. then by all of them, that he is truly the Son of God. From this his
first confession of Christ he is called by St. Chrysostom. (...), and (...), the
foundation and beginning of Orthodoxy; and (...), The great Mystagogus of the
Church. St. Cyril in his 11th Catech. calls him (...), The Churches supreme
Promulger. And St. Austin calls him, Apostolicus Confessor.

After all this you are to take notice, that although I have said Peter was the
first that knew Christ's Divinity, I have hitherto made a Comparison of him,
only with the other Apostles; with Nathaniel, the Centurion, and the ordinary
Persons Aboard-ship; not with the Blessed Virgin Mary, whom I dare not affirm,
or think to be ignorant of that Mystery after she was informed by the Embassy
of the Archangel Gabriel, that she should Conceive, and bring forth the
Blessed Jesus, who should be called The Son of God; the Son of the Most High.
She, who was so highly honored by every Person of the Holy Triad, could not but
know the Mystery of the Trinity: She, whom the Holy Ghost by supervening did
ingravidate: She, whom the Power of the Highest (God the Father) did Obumbrate:
She, whose Virginal Womb was the Mansion and Mother-Pearl to God the Son,
cannot rationally be supposed to be nescient of his Natural Filiation: Yet
after all this, it seems as if all were not then revealed unto her, for she is
said to wonder at what Old Simeon told her, which is a sign it was new unto her.

Neither dare I exclude St. John the Baptist from the knowledge of this
Mystery, he who was filled with the Holy Ghost from his Mothers Womb; even when
he was in that Confinement, by his supernatural skipping and exulting may be
said to have known him, to have saluted him, and to have paid him Tributary
Homage: He, who heard a None from Heaven by a Celestial Herald, promulging him
to be the Son of God: He, who saw the Holy Ghost effigiated in the form of a
Dove, descending from above, and lighting upon him, may very well be imagined
to have been instructed who he was.

As for Joseph, Zachary and Elizabeth, Simeon and Ann the Prophetess, who were
honored with Revelations and Visions, filled with the Holy Ghost, and had the
gift of Prophecy; if they did not fully know his Consubstantiality, they had at
least some (...), some obscure Rays of it; and if they knew this imperfectly,
they clearly knew he was the Savior, the Shiloh, the Messiah.

I shall add but one thing more on this Subject, and that is concerning the
Devils knowing of Christ; and herein St. Austin is very positive, acknowledging
but little difference 'twixt their Confession of Christ, and that of Peter's,
as will appear by several passages in his Writings; Petrus dixit, Tu es
Christus filius Dei vivi: and Dominus, Beatus es Simon Barjona, etc. O Domine,
hoc tibi dixerunt Daemones, quare ipsi non sunt beati; quia Daemones hoc
dixerunt timore, Petrus amore, Hom. 6. And in his 10th Tract. in Epist. Johan.
Hoc Petrus, hoc and Daemones, Tu es filius Dei vivi Sanctus Dei, eadem verba
non idem animus; hoc Petrus cum dilectione dicebat, Daemones sine dilectione.
In his 16th Sermon. de verbis Apost. Hoc dixit Petrus, and audivit, Beatus est,
hoc dixerunt Daemones and audierunt obmutescite una vox est, sed Dominus
radicem interrogat non florem. Daemones dixerunt timendo, Petrus amando.

Now, how the Devil did arrive to this Knowledge, Opinions are various; some
Divines hold, that when he was a glorious Angel in Heaven, God revealed unto
him, that his Son should assume Humane Nature, and that Man should be exalted
to the Hypostatick Union with the WORD. Theophyl. says ((...)) The Thief stole
this Knowledge from the Voice from Heaven. Augustine, Lib. 9. de Civit. Dei,
says, Innotuit eis per quaedam suae virtutis effecta, by the operation of so
many Miracles wrought by the Finger of God, which the Devil knew did transcend
his and all Angelical Power. Others think he did not certainly know the
Incarnation of the Son of God, but only suspected it. This is the Opinion of
St. Chrysostom's Scholiast, who upon the Devils pretending to know Christ in
St. Mark, by his saying, Scio qui scis, says, he meant by Scio, suspicor,
conjector, opinor: And indeed, it is much to be questioned, whether he had
firmam and certam notitiam adventus filii Dei; for though it were granted, that
he did hear the Oracle of God from Heaven; yet, on the other side, seeing
Christ in the form and appearance of an ordinary Plebeian Person Poor, Low and
Humble, and seeming to be in want of Bread; he in his Haughty, Proud Thoughts,
pondering the Poverty and Humility of Christ Incarnate, did look on this his
Lowliness and Condescension incompatible with his Majestic Divinity: This made
him accost our Savior to satisfy this his Doubt and Scruple, which did so much
excruciate him, but he addresses himself as one doubting, Si filius es Dei?
This is agreeable to the Sense of Theophyl. on Matt. 4. (...): On the other
side, seeing him hungry, he began to doubt how the Son of God should be hungry,
therefore he tempts him, that he might be certainly informed who he was.

CHAP. IV. Concerning Christ's Reply to St. Peter 's Answer, Whether the Bishop
of Rome 's Supremacy be grounded on Scripture? Of Christ's being the Rock; and
of St. Peter 's being the Rock. Of St. Austin 's Interpretation of Super hanc
Petram.
HAving dispatched St. Peter's Solution to our Saviors Question, I shall next
take Christ's Reply unto him in to Examination: And this, though it seems in it
self to be the plainest and most intelligible thing imaginable, as not
containing one difficult word in it; yet if taken with the Glosses which the
Opposers of Peter's Supremacy have affixed to it, it may appear to be as knotty
a place as any; as if the intent of Commentators were not to illustrate dark
Texts, but to raise Dust and obscure Serene Passages; not to dilucidate what
may seem dubious, and so expose the unquestioned Truth, but to make Scripture
serviceable to that Interest and Design they are a moulding; of which
unwarrantable dealing, this place is a most Pregnant Example, being by the
various Interpretations of Men of different Persuasions rendered, perplexed,
and impregnated with varieties of Queries. As whether, what Christ promised
here, were promised to Peter, or to himself? If to Peter, whether to his
Person, or to his Faith and Confession? Or if to his Person, whether to that
alone, or equally to his fellow Apostles? Or if to all the Apostles, whether
not to every Scholar and Disciple of Christ? Or again, whether to Peter
personally only, or extendible to his Successors? These, in short, are the
numerous offspring of Questions, which are raised out of the Fruitful Womb of
this Text. As to the last of these Queries, whether what was said to Peter be
extendible to his Roman Successors? I find Catholic Writers to hold the
Affirmative, asserting thereby Papacy to be grounded on Holy Writ, and
instituted by a Divine Irreversible Sanction of Christ in Peter. The Enemies to
the Apostolic See, eagerly deny and oppose this Opinion. Calvin is herein very
bold, his words are these, Quicquid accepit Petrus nihilo magis ad Papam
pertinet quam ad Mahometam. Nihil Petro datum est his verbis quod non omnibus
Evangelii Ministris perinde sit commune. Beza is very taunting, who though he
denies the Pope to succeed him as he was called Peter, yet he frankly grants
his Succession to him as he was called Satan. In hoc quidem cognomine
successisse Antichristum libens concessero. Dr. Stillingfleet is very facetious
in his Sermon preached on 5. November. So dark and obscure (says he) so
impertinent are the Proofs brought from Scripture of the Popes Supremacy, that
I may say, that Aristotle 's Politick's do prove it much more better than any
Text in the Bible. Erasmus seems very ambiguous in his Comments on St. Matt.
where he plays fast and loose, dictum indictum, says and unsays. First, he
wonders any should apply those words to the Pope; then he says they do
undoubtedly belong to him as Prince of Christians; his words are these, Miror
esse qui hunc locum detorqueant ad Romanum Pontificem in quem haud dubie
competunt in primis velut in Christianae fidei Principem, etc. Now that which
induces me to believe, that if the Church were built on Peter, it was likewise
built on his Successors, is, because Christ's main design of coming into the
World being to purchase to himself a Church which was to continue to the
consummation of the World; it is absurd to imagine this Church should have a
visible Foundation and Head, for Peter's lifetime, and to have none after him.
This Power then and Office of his, was not conferred on his individual Person,
so as to cease at his expiration, but was granted him as the Mystical Head of
the whole; but so as to be transient, and survive in his Successors. And indeed
this is the chief reason, why those that oppose the Power of Peter's Successor,
strike first at his Supremacy, knowing that as the Admission of the one, infers
the other, so the supplanting of the one undermines the other. Bishop Bramhal
in his Schism Guarded, having affirmed, That all that Peter had, was a
beginning of Unity, adds this, What Peter had the Pope may pretend a right to:
That Christ did institute in the Peter the Origin of Unity is acknowledged by
the Fathers, but that this Unity can be preserved without a Paramount
Authority, will never be made out: And if Christ made the best provision
imaginable for the preservation of Unity, Protestants have done all that is
possible for its Violation.

Dr. Whitaker says, he would not much value the granting Peter's being the
Foundation, if the Catholics would not extend it to the Roman Bishops, Vt
socios collegasque hujus dignitatis. Si Petrum (says he) creatum esse summum
Pastorem Ecclesiae concedimus, id ipsum mox inferunt similiter ad omnes Petri
Successores pertinere. This is the sole reason why his Supremacy is so warmly
opposed; for its Enemies know very well, if that be granted, the Bishops of
Rome, as his Heirs have a fair Title to it: This makes them exert all their
cunning endeavors to defraud Peter of it; and then deluding themselves with an
imaginary Conquest, as if they had subverted that Article, to infer, That if
the Original had it not, the Derivative could not have it. With this false
supposition Dr. Hammond imposes on himself, and on such as adhere to him, What
Peter had not himself (says he) he could not devolve to any of his Successors,
the Derivative Power in his Successors being like Water that flows from a
Spring, apt to ascend no higher than the Fountain stood. But now if it be made
appear, that Peter was by Christ invested with the Supremacy, it will be
evident, that the Doctor built a ruinous Fabric upon a false Foundation. But
to return to the Point, Whether the Bishops of Rome were concerned in what was
said to St. Peter? To this I reply, That I find several of the Ancient Popes,
to make use of these words, as if by virtue of them -- the Roman See had its
Primacy. Anaclet says, Sacrosancta Romana Apostolica Ecclesia non ab Apostolis,
sed ab ipso Domino Salvatore nostro Primatum obtinuit, dicente, Tu es Petrus,
etc. And Gelasius likewise in his Epistle to all Orthodox Bishops, Evangelica
voce Domini, and Salvatoris nostri Primatum obtinuit, dicente, Tu es Petrus,
etc. Alexander, Calixtus, and others, have Sayings to the same effect. These
Men, I know, are rejected by Protestant Authors as Men partial in their own
case; as you may see by Dr. Whitaker, who delivers his mind very plainly, Quid
illi dicunt de sua sede nos non moramur; erant hi Pontifices Romani quibus
insitum est, suam sedem, quantum possunt, ornare, and extollere ementitis
privilegiis. This his Sense of their Actions I could by no means embrace, for
it seemed to me very uncharitable to imagine, that those Religious Bishops, so
nigh to the Apostolic Age, Persons of so strict Piety, and unspotted
Conversation, living under horrid Persecutions, should conspire to advance
their Sees by false Maxims and forged Privileges: But I am more inclinable to
believe, that those great Priests, who were both Bishops and Martyrs, sealing
their Religion with their Blood, were not only extraordinarily illuminated in
the knowledge of the Gospel, but sincere in their Expositions and Applications
of it. But besides the Testimonies of these Great Men, I find that Athanasius,
together with the Bishops of Egypt, Thebais and Lybia, convened in the
Alexandrine Council in their Epist. to Faelix to speak much to the same effect,
Romana seeds, cui ab ipso Domino potestas ligandi and solvendi speciali est
privilegio super alios concessa.

I shall add but one thing more on this matter, and that is concerning the
Opinion of St. Austin, and the Milevitan Council about the Popes Power, from
whence 'twas derived? They in a Letter to Innocentius, beg of him, that he
would exert his Pastoral Power, in magnis membrorum Christi periculis, by
repressing the Heretics, Caelestius and Pelagius infecting Africa and
Palestine with their false Doctrine, in this case, why did they not write to the
Patriarch of Jerusalem, or to the Primate of Africa? The Reason given, is,
because they concluded those Heretics would with more ease yield to
Innocentius, as to one whose Authority was drawn from the Scripture. Now this
Power which they did desire him to show, was neither his Diocesan nor
Patriarchal, but his Papal Power, for Palestine was no Limb of the Western, but
Eastern Patriarchate, and consequently out of his Jurisdiction, as he was the
Occidental Patriarch. This Power of his, which they desire him to make use of,
they acknowledged to be drawn out of the Scripture, which cannot be made out,
but by what was spoken by Christ to Peter: And this is the Method St. Bernard
uses in his Book of Considerations to Eugenius, who having attributed high
things to him, proves what he says, ex dictis Domini: I shall now come to take
a view of the words, which the Fathers, in the Milevitan Council, (of which
Austin was one) used to Innocentius, which in Epist. 92. of St. Austin I find
were these, Arbitramur adjuvante misericordia D. N. J. Christi Authoritati
sanctitatis tuae, de sacrarum literarum authoritate depromptae facilius eos qui
tam perversa and perniciosa sentiunt cessuros; The words are very plain, and
clearly discovering their Opinion, that his Authority was from Scripture; but
because this is a truth that must be suppressed, It Is very pleasant to see how
it is depraved by Expositors, Cedent authoritati tuoe de scripturarum
authoritate depromptae, that is, says Chamier, Tibi veram doctrinam a
Scripturis expromenti. But the intent of these words is not that Innocentius
should make them yield, by quoting of places out of the Scripture, and so
confute their Heresies (that the African Bishops themselves, or any other might
have done if they had pleased) but by virtue of his Supreme, Ecclesiastic
Authority, to which the Fathers imagined these Heretic would more readily
submit as grounded on Scripture: This is the genuin Sense of those words, but I
shall add no more on this Matter, but confine my following Discourse chiefly to
St. Peter's Supremacy.

First, You must understand, that I do believe, as firmly as you do, that
Christ is the Primary and Principal Foundation of the Church; the Lapis summus
and angularis, a nullo alio dependens, the Lapis fundamentalis, cui totum
innititur aedificium, on whom, not only every true Christian, but the Apostles,
and Peter himself is Mystically superedified, as St. Austin affirms, Petra erit
Christus super quod fundamentum etiam aedificatus Petrus: And accordingly St.
Cyril in his Notes on Isaias, Lib. 4. (...); For Christ is the Foundation, and
unmovable Basis of all, containing and strengthening all, to the end they be
well supported, for we are all of us built on him. Thus you may perceive, that
we do not go about to despoil our Savior of his due Honor, and invest Peter
with it (as you traduce us with) for if he be the Rock of Church, much more
Christ is; to deny which would be Antichristian. But Peter is not hereby
excluded, notwithstanding this, but is likewise the Rock, but in Subordination
and Inferiority to Christ. And thus St. Basil, Hom. 28. de Paen. makes this
distinction, (...); For if Peter be a Rock, he is not such a Rock as Christ,
sed sicut Petrus Petra est, whereas Christ is really, and of himself a Rock
unmovable, Petrus autem propter Petram. Thus I conceive Christ to be the
Primordial, Absolute, and Independent Rock; the Petra (...), by virtue of his
own Strength Authority and Divinity, whereas Peter is a Rock, (...),
Subordinate, Vicarious, Ministerial, by Commission and Derivation from him,
laid by Christ's own Hands the glorious Architect of his Spiritual Fabric next
to himself, as Theophyl. observes on Luke 22. (...); introducing Christ
speaking to St. Peter, This thing belongs to you, (says he) as one who after me
are the Rock and Strength of the Church. Hence you may easily perceive, that
things Subordinate combat not one with another, but suppose one another;
therefore to say Christ is the Foundation of the Church, and Peter is the
Foundation, are no repugnant duelling Propositions, but friendly and
compatible: And thus (as it was observed by Cardinal Perron) Moses saying, That
God guided the Israelites in their Travels from Egypt to the Promised Land;
and Stephen affirming Moses to have conducted them in the Wilderness, are not
Contrariant or Antistoichal one to the other, God doing it by the strength of
his Omnipotent Arm, and Moses by Order and Authority from him as his
Lieutenant: With the same facility this our Discrepancy may be sodered: for I
affirm not Peter to be Fundamentum (...), vel aliud, from Christ, but
Fundamentum (...), vel alterum, not alterius generis, as in opposition to
Christ but Christo subalternum; for as Salmeron well observed, Respectu Christi
non est fundamentum, sed aedificatio, nec caput, sed membrum; praecipuum,
tamen: respectu nostri, and caput, and fundamentum: This distinction of a
Principal and Inferior Foundation, you must allow to be deducible from St.
Paul, or else you must grant a Contradiction: For as in one place, he affirms
that Christ is the only Foundation, and that no other can be laid: He in
another place calls the Prophets and Apostles Foundations: Now this difference
cannot be reconciled, but by admitting a Primary and Secondary Foundation.
Hence it is that Austin in Psalm 86. entitles Christ the Foundation of
Foundations. Fandamentum Christus primum and maximum, etc. Si Sacramenta
cogites, Christus sanctus sanctorum; si gregem subditum cogites, Christus
pastor pastorum; si fabricam cogites, Christus fundamentum fundamentorum. Thus
it seems to be in the Church, as in the State: For as in the State,
notwithstanding God by his Omnipotency and Wisdom, tempers and disposes all
things as King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: Yet has he established here on
Earth Principacies, into whose Hands he has committed the Sword, whom we are in
duty obliged to obey; so though Christ be the Moderator and Foundation of the
Church, and does rule and direct it by his Internal Influxes, yet has he
established a Visible Monarchick Government in it, with which he invested St.
Peter, propagating it to his Successors. Now though Christ did build his Church
on Peter, he himself is the main Basis of the Structure; and as Christ is the
Head of the Church, God is the Head of Christ, who by his Omnipotent Power
supports and sustains the vast pile of the Catholic Church.

I shall next give you some Testimonies of the Fathers, who notwithstanding
their affirming Christ to be the Rock, disrobe not St. Peter of that
Illustrious Title, but ascribe it to him Participatively, Tertul. Lib. Contra
Marc. Christus Petrum ita vocat, quia lapis, and Petra ipse est, itaque
affectavit charissimo discipulorum de figuris suis peculiariter nomen
communicare.

St. Hierom on 16 Hier. Non solum Christus Petra est, sed and Apostolo Petro
donavit, ut vocaretur Petra: And in his Comments Abdiae, Ipsa Petra Petro
donavit ut Petra sit.

August. de Cath. Petri: Consortium meretur nominis qui consertium meretur and
operis.

St. Ambrose, Recte quia Petra Christus, Simon nuncupatus est Petrus, ut qui
cum Domino fidei societatem habeat cum Domino habeat nominis Dominici
societatem.

Thus you may discern, that our Saviors being the Rock, hinders not Peter from
being so; neither does Peter's being the Rock exclude Christ from being so: This
may be manifested out of St. Basil 28th Hom. de Poenit. (...): For Christ gives
away his Dignities, not as if he were deprived of them, but as retaining what
he bestows. Thus he is Light, yet he says to the Disciples, ye are the light of
the World, he is a Priest, and he makes Priests. He is a Sheep, yet he says to
his Disciples, Behold I send you as Sheep amidst Wolves: He is a Rock, and he
makes a Rock. It Is very observable here, that this Father acknowledges Christ
to have made the other Apostles, Lights, Sheep and Priests, but he mentions but
one Rock, which is Peter. This Criticism may be observed in St. Ambrose, Lib.
6. Lucae. Ego sum inquit lux mundi, and id tamen quo ipse gloriatur Discipulis
suis nomen indulsit, vos est is lux mundi. Ego sum panis vivus: Et nos omnes
sumus unus panis. Petra erat Christus, etiam Discipulo suo hujus vocabuli
gratiam non negavit. Here Christ is said to make many Lights and Loaves, but no
more than one Rock. St. Hierom likewise accords herein in his Comments on
Abdias, Ipsa Petra Petro donavit, ut sit Petra. Pastor quoque bonus Apostolis
Pastorum largitus est nomen, ipse Salvator Apostolos suos mundi esse voluit
Salvatores. The rest of the Apostles are here called Pastores and Salvatores,
but not Petrae.

My next Remark shall be, That whereas St. Basil says, that Christ bestows his
Dignities on his Disciples. St. Hierom says, Quodcunque dicitur de eo, servis
tribuit, ut dicatur. St. Amb. Lib. 6. Lucae. restrains this, Magna Christi
gratia, qui omnia prope vocabula sua Discipulis suis donavit. St. Austin
expresses the Title which Christ reserved to himself, which is OSTIVM, as
appears in his 47th Tract. on John, Petrus Pastor, Paulus Pastor, caeteri
Apostoli Pastores, and boni Episcopi Pastores, OSTIVM vero nemo nostrum se
dicit, hoc sibi ipse proprium tenuit qua intrant oves. Now the Reason you
allege to cut off Peter from being the Rock, because Christ is called so, is
so languid, that should it be admitted as forcible, by the same Rule, none
should be called Light, because Christ is called Light; none Magister, because
Christ is called so; none Pastor, because he is called Pastor bonus; none
Bishop, because Christ is called Episcopus animarum; and thus you may discover
with what facility you might be stranded on your own shallows.

But before I bid adieu to this Point, I shall bring St. Austins Exposition on
this place to a scrutiny; for I perceive you court him Cap in Hand, and gripe
his Gloss as fast as the Tallons of a dying Man: And herein you conspire with
Calvin, and such as are of his Kidney, who by their choicest Chemistry
endeavor to extract some false Deductions injurious to Peter's Primacy.

I shall take the words altogether as I find them in his Lib. 1. Cap. 2.
Retract. Dixi in quodam loco de Apostolo Petro, quod in eo tanquam in Petra
fundata est Ecclesia, qui sensus etiam cantatur ore multorum in versibus
Beatissimi Ambrosii de Gallo-gallinaceo, etc. Sed scio me postea Saepissime sic
exposuisse, ut super hanc Petram, intelligeretur quam confessus est Petrus, non
enim dictum est illi, tu es Petra, sed tu es Petrus, Petra autem erat Christus
harum duarum sententiarum quae sit probabilior eligat lector. These are the
celebrated words which you hug so closely, though I must confess, I have not
penetrancy enough to discover wherein they can be serviceable to you, for upon
a just scanning them, they appear to be a neutral and Equilibrious Testimony
swaying to neither side: For after St. Austin had acknowledged he had formerly
very often interpreted, Hanc Petram on Peter, he here seems to Interpret it on
Christ, but does not determine which of these two Interpretations is the true
one; but in the conclusion refers it to the arbitriment and option of the
Reader, to choose which he pleases; so with the same License of St. Austin, I
may Interpret the words on Peter, as well as you do on Christ: Then you are to
take notice, that by this varying from his former, frequent Explication, he
deviated from St. Ambrose, who Baptized him, and was his Tutor: But this is not
all, for it is apparent, he changed his former Exposition upon a mistake
occasioned through his Ignorance of the Hebrew and Syriack Tongue, as is
concluded by Learned Men; the reason of this his alteration, he makes to be,
because Christ did not say to Peter, Tu es Petra, but tu es Petrus, as he
confesses himself, he thereby imagining Petra to be the Primitive word, Rock,
and Petrus the Derivative Rocky; whereas in the Syriack which our Savior spoke,
and in the Hebrew which St. Matt. wrote, there is no difference in the
Termination, but it is, thou art Cepha, and on this Cepha, etc. and thou art
Kipha, and on this Kipha: Now that I have not injured St. Austin in affirming
him to be no good Hebrecian, you may hear what he says himself in his 131
Epist. Neque enim ex hebraea lingua quam ignoro, potuit etiam numeros interpres
exprimere, etc. That this mistake of St. Austin was originated from this
Spring, will appear more evident by what he writes, Sermon. 13. in Evang. Matt.
Petra erat nomen principale, ideo Petrus a Petra non Petra a Petro, quomodo non
e Christiano Christus, sed Christianus a Christo: Here he most clearly makes
Petrus a Derivative of the word Petra, which is a manifest error in him, as I
shall hereafter evince: Now that both Peter's Name and Authority was derived
from Christ the Principal Petra is granted: But I deny it to be a Derivative of
the word Petra; for as Jansenius observes, Atticis Petrus and Petra idem sunt,
Petrus non sonat idem quod saxeus, then it should have been Petreius, sed idem
quod saxum: And accordingly, Baronius, Hac ratione dici potest nomen Petri, ut
Petra, derivatum a Christo, non tamen derivatum nominis Christi.

The next thing I shall say concerning St. Austin's Exposition, is, That as in
his Retract. he does not condemn the Opinion of the Churches being built on
Peter, so in other places he asserts it, as in festo Cathedrae Sancti Petri,
Petrum fundamentum Ecclesiae Dominus nominavit, and ideo digne fundamentum hoc,
Ecclesia colit, supra quod Ecclesiastici aedificii altitudo consurgit. Et de
Jejuniis Priscorum, Petrus Apostolorum caput, Caeli Janitor, Ecclesiae
fundamentum: And Sermon. 124. de Temp. Totius corporis morbum in ipso capite
curat Ecclesiae, in ipso vertice componit membrorum omnium sanitatem, in ipsa
confessionis Christi crepidine, in ipso immobilis fidei fundamento, in Petro
scilicet. I shall add no more of this import, for I hasten to conclude this
Point, and shall only inform you, That St. Austin did not refer it to the
election of the Reader, to believe or disbelieve Peter and his Successors to be
Heads of the Church, but whether or no their Power was signified by these
words, Super hanc Petram, etc. For in most perspicuous terms he acknowledges in
several places of his Writings Peter's Supremacy, and declares them wretched and
Heretics that disown him to be the Rock: Thus Agon. Christ. he calls them
Miseri dum in Petro Petram non intelligunt. Et contra 5 Haeres. he says, Neque
Haeretici intelligunt in Petro Petram, and datas illi claves: Here in plain
terms he calls you, and such as you are Heretics: But that which must gag you,
and make you as silenced a Minister as if the Wolves had first seen you, is,
That he makes the Succession of the Bishops of Rome to be the Rock, Contra
partem Donati. Numerate Episcopus ab ipsa sede Beati Petri, ipsa est Petra,
quam non vincunt superbae inferorum portae. Having thus fully satiated my
curiosity concerning St. Austin's Opinion on this point, I shall now advance to
encounter your following Arguments.

CHAP. V. Concerning St. Peter's Faith or Confession being the Rock. And how
those Fathers, who Interpret that to be the Rock, exclude not his Person.
THe next stratagem to thrust out St. Peter's Person, is your making his Faith
or Confession to be the Rock, and not his Person; and now I am to enter into a
large Field of Matter, where I may justly expect to meet with varieties of
Intricacies which will appear insuperable; and I am sensible, that I shall find
it a very difficult task to evolve my self out of them; but having embarked in
this troubleosme Matter, I shall not now dastardly recede, but the more
vigorous opposition I meet with, contra audentior ibo.

Those Fathers that assert Faith to be the Rock, take it not a part from Peter's
Person, but as inherent in him, they take his Faith as conjoined with his
Person, or else his Person confessing the Faith; so when they call Faith the
Rock, they take not these words simply and absolutely, secundum se, but
respectively with a personal relation to Peter, they either take Faith cum
aggregato Petri, or else they take Peter, cum adjuncto fidei; so their Sense of
the thing is plainly this, upon thee, confessing me, will I build my Church: So
neither his Person alone, nor his Faith alone, but both conjoined make up this
Rock. Peter without Faith, had been unqualified for such an Office, and Faith
taken separate, had been incongruous: For the Foundation, and the rest of the
Building ought to be Congenial. The Church is a Congregation of Men, as of
Living Stones; so the Rock, which is the Foundation of the Church ought to be a
Man strengthened and supported by Divine Assistance. Fundamentum debet
cohaerere cum aedificio, sicut caput cum membris; si fundamentum est ipsa
fides, cum sit res mere spiritualis, non conveniret cum Ecclesia, quae ex
hominibus corpore sensa and ratione constantibus conflatur. So I conclude, that
as Peter is not the Foundation without Faith; so neither Faith taken
solitarily, or residing in any other Subject than in him; but his Faith in and
with his Person, as St. Chrysostom. elegantly phrases it on Peter, (...), firm as
a Rock in Faith, or, Immobili inconcussa firmitate solidato in fide. It was
observed by Cardinal Perron, that the Ancient Fathers upon the Arians oppugning
the Divinity of our Savior, finding no place in the Scripture more fit to
manifest Christ to be the connatural Son of God, than this most noble
Confession of Peter, did much exalt its Dignity, but with no intention in the
least of denying the Church to be built on his Person, but looked on this his
Confession to be the causal, and his Person to be the formal Foundation of the
Church. Thus the Fathers sometimes affirming Peter's Faith to be the Rock, and
sometimes himself, are not contrary Expositions excluding or extinguishing, but
including one the other, they meaning hereby, the Church to be built causally
on Peter's Confession, and formally on his Person, his Confession being the
Motive which induced our Savior to build his Church on his Person: This does
approximate very nigh to Maldonat's Sense, Commodissima interpretatio mihi
videtur, si dicamus eos dicere voluisse super fidem and confessionem Petri
Ecclesiam aedificatam, id est, super Petrum propter fidem and confessionem:
hujusmodi phrasibus vulgo utimur, ut dicamus in unius hominis fide fundatam
esse rempublicam, i. e. in uno homine propter ipsius fidem: So that to affirm
the Church to be built on Peter's Faith, is not to bar and disclude his Person,
(no more than it was St. Hieroms meaning to deny Peter's walking on the Sea,
when he said in his 61 Epist. ad Pammach. Super aquas non ambulasse corpus, sed
fidem:) But to signify the cause why it was super-edified on him, there being
no discordancy 'twixt affirming the Church built upon Peter's Faith, and on
Peter confirmed in Faith. Hence Cyril Lib. 4. de Trinit. calls this Rock, The
most unshaken and firm Faith of Peter, combining both the causal and formal
Foundation together in a friendly League, (...).

I shall now, pursuant to what I have already laid down, take a full survey of
those Fathers who affirm Peter's Faith to be the Rock, and see whether they
thereby design to exclude his Person. The first you quote is Hilarious, Super
hanc confessionis Petram Ecclesiae aedificatio est: But that he did not by
saying so, lock out his Person, is evident by his Writings; as on Psalm 131.
enarrat. Petrum, cui superius Claves Regni Caelorum dederat, super quem
aedificaturus erat Ecclesiam, etc. And Lib. 6. de Trinit. B. Petrus
aedificationi Ecclesiae subjacet. And again, O in nuncupatione novi nominis
felix Ecclesiae fundamentum. And on Psalm 131. Petrum primum Dei confessorem
Ecclesiae fundamentum. The next you cite is Theophyl. Haec confessio, quam
confessus es, fundamentum erit credentium; but that he did not except Peter's
Person is manifest; for speaking of Christ rewarding his Confession, he says,
(...); Our Lord recompenseth Peter, giving him a great reward, promising him,
the Church should be built on him. And on Luke 22. he introduces our Savior,
calling him, The next Rock of the Church after himself, (...). I find you to
cite no more Authors on this Subject, so I shall take my leave of your Papers
for some short time, and make an Excursion to other Writers, who quote more of
the Fathers on this Point. This Digression I hope will be pardonable in me,
whose design in writing, is not only for your confutation, but for the
investigation of Truth and my own satisfaction.

I find St. Chrysostom to be much contended for, and insisted on by your
chiefest Champions, as a great Assertor that the Church was built on Peter's
Faith, and not on his Person, insomuch that Dr. Whitaker having cited a Saying
out of him, countenancing this Opinion, drolls upon Card. Bellarmine, saying,
Ecquid tibi Jesuita Chrysostomus arrisit? But it is withal to be observed, that
although in his 55th Hom. on St. Matthew. he makes Confession or Faith to be the
Rock, yet he does not seclude Peter's Person, but attributes as great things to
it as to his Faith; (...): Christ raises Peter's thoughts higher, making him a
Shepherd. Here he acknowledges his Pastoral Power; then he says, (...); He
committed into the Hands of a mortal Man the Power of all things in Heaven.
After this he adds, (...); God set Jeremy over one Nation, but Peter over all
the World. Here he confesses his universal Jurisdiction. As for his saying in
his Sermon. de Rentecost, That Christ did not build his Church upon a Man, but
upon Faith. I conceive he means there, upon (...), a bare naked Man; for we
grant, that Christ did not build his Church, simpliciter super personam Petri,
ut Hominis nudi, sed fide solida Christum confitentis; as on one irradiated by
the illapse of a Celestial Beam darted from God the Father; as on one
strengthened by the Mission and Power of the Holy Ghost; as on one for the
Indeficiency of whose Faith Christ composed a particular Prayer, or to use St.
Chrysostom's own words, to explain his meaning, as on one who was rendered
(...); Immovable, unshaken, invariable, fixed, firm, rooted in Faith,
hardened, and stronger than a Rock in Faith. This Explication must be admitted,
or else you must accuse him of the greatest incogitancies, and contradictions
imaginable, opposing Chrysostom to Chrysostom. I shall now insert as many
Sayings of his, to Broadseal, and Authenticate what I have here asserted, as I
have observed in perusing his Works, manifestly to evince, that though he
interpreted Faith to be the Rock, yet he did thereby not intend any injury to
Peter's Person.

In his Hom. ad eos qui scandalizati sunt: He calls, him (...); The Prince of
the Apostles, the Foundation of the Church, the chief of the Society of the
Disciples. On the 50th. Psalm, (...); Peter the Pillar of the Church, the
Foundation of Faith, the Head of the Apostolic Quire.

Hom. 4 de verbis Isaiae, (...); Peter the Foundation of the Church, the
desperate lover of Christ.

(...); Peter the chief of the Apostles, the Mouth of the Disciples, the Pillar
of the Church, the Firmitude of Faith, the Foundation of Confession, the
Oecomenical Fisherman.

In his 9th Hom. de Paenit. (...); When I say Petrus, I mean a solid Petra, an
unmovable Foundation, the Great Apostle, the chief of the Disciples.

Hom. Petri and Eliae. (...); That Peter, the top of the Apostles, that
immovable Foundation, that solid Rock, that Prince of the Church.

In Psalm 50. (...); Hear what he says to Peter, the Pillar, the Foundation,
who therefore was called Peter, because he was petrified in Faith.

Hom. in Petrum and Paulum, (...); Hail Peter, the Rock of the Faith, the
Foundation of Orthodoxy.

De abnegat. Petri. he introduces St. Peter apologizing for himself to Christ;
Did not I first promulge you, crying out, Thou art Christ the Son of the Living
God, wherefore you accepting of my Testimony, did declare me Blessed, ((...),
etc.) and did entitle me the Rock of the Church, saying unto me, Thou are
Peter, etc.

Hom. 28. de Paenit. (...); Peter having said, Thou art the Son of the Highest
God, had this Answer, Thou art Peter, etc. Thus Peter said, therefore he was
made the Foundation of the Church.

By these Testimonies it evidently appears, what great respect, and what signal
Honor he ascribed to Peter's Person, calling him, not only the Pillar and
Foundation of the Church, but the Prince of the Apostles. And if in some part
of his Works out of reverence to his noble Confession, he affirms the Church to
be built on it (and in one Sense it may be said so) yet he robs not his Person
of this Honor, but attributes as much to that as to his Confession: I may add
more, for if he affirms his Confession, or Faith to be this Foundation,
advancing that to so high an eminence, he exalts his Person to an higher
Battlement and Altitude, in making him the Foundation of this Faith, by his
calling him, (...), the Foundation and Firmitude of Faith. (...), the
Foundation of Confession; (...); the Foundation and Basis of Orthodoxy. I have
expatiated my self at large upon this Great Father, not only to inform my self
of his true and genuine Sense in this Point, but also to unveil those
Imposturous Gulleries which several misguiding Writers obtrude on their easy
Readers under the Umbrage of this eminent Author, by depraving his Sense, and
contorting his meaning, which my self have been too sensible of, being before I
had read him, often imposed on by their plausible Quotations out of him.

The next Author I shall discuss, will be Epiphanius, who in his 39th Haeres.
says thus, (...); Upon this Rock of firm Faith I will build my Church. Now that
he by this Saying does not exclude Peter's Person, is evident by his other
Sayings; as first in his Ancorat. (...), etc. For it did become the Prince of
the Apostles, that Solid Rock on which the Church of God was built, etc. And
Adversus Catharos, (...), etc. The holy Peter, the highest top of the Apostles,
who became to us indeed a firm Rock, founding the Faith of our Lord. And in the
same place he calls him, (...); The firm Rock of the building, the Foundation
of the House of God. In his Ancorat. he says thus of him, (...); who was
assisted by the Father, in laying a firm Foundation of Faith. And in the same
place, (...); In all respects Faith was established and confirmed in him.

St. Cyril, who in his 4th Book de Trinit. says, Petra opinor per
agnominationem aliud nihil quam inconcussa and firma Discipuli fides, etc. Does
not take his Faith apart from his Person, but confesses the Church to be built
on him as well as on his Faith, Lib. 2. Cap. 3. in Johan. In Petro tanquam in
Petra and Lapide firmissimo Ecclesia aedificata est: And in Lib. 2. Cap. 12. in
Johan. Nec Simon fore nomen, sed Petrum dixit, vocabulo ipso commode
significans quod in eo tanquam in lapide firmissimo suam esset aedificaturus
Ecclesiam. And on the First of St. Johan. (...); Upon him he destined to build
his Church.

My next employ shall be to consult with St. Ambrose concerning this Point,
whom I find Lib. de Incarnat. Dom. Sacram. Cap. 5. to make Faith the Foundation
of the Church; his words are these, Fides est Ecclesiae fundamentum; non enim
de carne Petri, sed de fide dictum est, quia portae mortis ei non praevalebunt,
sed confessio vincit Infernum. These words were so pleasing to Dr. Whitaker,
that having cited them to Cardinal Bellarmine, he triumphantly cries out,
Audin' Jesuita? Yet notwithstanding this imaginary ovation, the words of St.
Ambrose are easily answered: For first, no Catholic does affirm the Church to
be built on Peter's Flesh, so that he should support it as Caelifer Atlas does
the Heavens, by virtue of a strong robust Back, and a pair of broad Shoulders;
neither do we affirm it to be built on his Soul, but on his Person, consisting
of Body and Soul. Next I shall prove out of Ambrose, that although he calls Faith
the Foundation, he does not deny Peter's Person to be so likewise, as is well
known by those celebrated Verses of his which St. Austin quotes, wherein he
acknowledges Peter to be Petra Ecclesiae: And in Lib 4. Lucae. Non turbatur
ista navis quae Petrum habet, turbatur illa quae Judam habet, quemadmodum
turbari poterat cui praeerat is in quo Ecclesiae firmamentum est. Et de Incarn.
Lib. 4. Hic est Petrus qui respondit pro caeteris, imo prae caeteris, and ideo
fundamentum dicitur. And Lib. 4. De fide. Quem cum Petrum dicit firmamentum
Ecclesiae indicavit.

St. Basil, though he is pleased to say, (...); on 2d. Isaiae, The sublime Soul
of blessed Peter is called the Rock, because it is firmly rooted in Faith; Yet
does he not offer to depose his Person, as appears in his 6th Book against
Eunomius, (...); Peter for the excellency of his Faith was entrusted with the
Church which was built on him.

The rest of the Fathers do perspicuously acknowledge the Church to be built on
Peter's Person.

St. Hierom. in Cap. 14. Ezechiel, Apostolus Petrus, super quem Dominus
Ecclesiae fundamentum solidavit. And on Matt. 16. aedificabo Ecclesiam meam
super te: And in the same place, Petro illam beatitudinem, and potestatem and
aedificationem super eum Ecclesiae in futuro promissam.

St. Cyprian is very positive in affirming the Church to be built on his
Person, Petrus super quem Ecclesia Domini dignatione fundata. De bono
patientiae. Petrus super quem aedificata a Domino fuerat Ecclesia. 52. Epist.
Petrus cui oves suas Dominus pascendas tuendasque commendat, super quem posuit
and fundavit Ecclesiam. De Disciplina Virg. Petro primum Dominus, super quem
aedificavit Ecclesiam, and unde unitatis originem instituit, etc. Epist. 70.
Baptisma unum, Spiritus Sanctus unus, and una Ecclesia a Christo Domino super
Petrum origin unitatis and ratione fundata, in the same Epistle.

Tertullian, who in his Book de Pudicitia, says concerning Peter, In ipso
Ecclesia extructa, is pleased to explain himself thus, id est, per ipsum. In
the same Book affirms the Church to be built not on Peter's Faith, but on his
Person, Manifesta Domini intentio personaliter, hoc Petro confer, super te,
inquit, edificabo Ecclesiam meam, though he denies it to belong to his
Successors, being when he wrote that Book infected with the Heresy of
Montanus. And in his Prescriptions, Petrus aedificandae Ecclesiae, Petra
dicitur: And again, in Monog. Petrum solum invenio maritum per socrum:
Monogamum praesumo, per Ecclesiam quae super illum aedificata est.

CHAP. VI. Concerning the other Apostles being Foundations. Of Peter's new Name
given him by Christ. Peter the Rock of the Church. Of Origens Interpretation:
(...) and (...) all one. The Inconvenience of Expounding Christ to be the Rock
in this place.
MY following Province will be to treat of the rest of the Apostles, whom (to
lessen and extenuate St. Peter's Glory) you would equalize with him; that they
were (...), Foundations: I concede to you, Oecomenius on the Apocalypse, gives
the reason of it; (...); Because they laid the first groundwork of Faith in
Christ: And accordingly St. Hierom in Psalm 86. In illis erant fundamenta, ibi
primum posita est fides Ecclesiae; They in reference to their Apostolic Power
had equal Authority of founding Churches in any part of the World: In relation
to their Doctrine, they were equally Orthodox and Infallible: And what concerned
their Writings (they being directed and influenced by the same Spirit) they
were alike Canonical; and what appertained to the Government of all other
Christians, they were equally Pastors, Heads, and Rectors: And in these
Considerations the Church may be said to be built ex aequo (as St. Hierom says)
on all of them. Now notwithstanding, they were all equal Foundations in these
Aspects, St. Peter was here the only sole Rock on whom Christ promised to build
his Church, which did consist not only of all Christians whatsoever, but even
of the Apostles themselves: If they were Foundations, so was St. Peter and the
Prophets; if they were Foundations, they were Sub Petro and post Petrum; whom
our Savior to preserve Unity, chose out of the Apostolic College, and with
his own Hands laid next to himself, as Theophyl. affirms (...). Now that Peter
was the only Rock of the Universal Church, will appear evident, if we consider
that Christ did here engage himself by promise solely to him, to build his
Church on him, upon his peculiar Confession of his Divinity, which the other
Apostles, till they had learned it of him, were ignorant of: this I have
already proved: Now what our Savior replied to this his Confession, was
vicissim, (...), reciprocally directed to him only (the Pronouns tu and tibi
excluding plurality and partnership) not only as an Approbation, but as a
reward, which I have already evidenced, and shall here add a further
confirmation, Chrysostom. Hom. 28. de Paenit. (...), etc. Peter having said, thou
art the Son of the highest God, had this in answer, Thou art a Rock: And again,
(...), etc. (...); Thus Peter said, etc. therefore he was made the Foundation
of the Church. Cyril. Dial. 4th. de Trin. (...); For if B. Peter was thought
worthy of such eminent rewards for his confessing Christ to be the Son of the
Living God, etc. And in the same Dialogue he calls our Saviors Reply and
Promise to him, (...), A requital of his true Explication of him. Now if Peter
were not this peculiar Rock, on whom Christ in a more signal and remarkable
manner promised to build his Church; and if he were not the Person to whom our
Savior in a more transcendent Sense promised the donation of the Keys, I cannot
see where the reward of his true Confession lies, or wherein the Prerogative of
his Revelation consists; or indeed, to what purport his name was changed. So
the Argument of my next Discourse shall be upon what account he had a new Name
given him, which I judge not unworthy to be discussed and penetrated: For as
St. Chrysostom. says, (...): De nominum mutatione.

When God gives any one a Name, we ought to use all diligence to find out the
reason of it; for God does nothing in vain, but every thing with that Wisdom
that is becoming him.

Thus we see it was not unusual with God in the Old Testament, to impose new
Names on Persons; as is visible in Abraham, Jacob, and Sarah; and that new Name
was always apposite, correspondent, and adequate to some egregious design or
employment, which God did thereby indigitate. Thus it was with Peter, who had a
new Name given him proper and suitable to that high Design our Savior had
destined him to. Hence St. August. 7. Tract. Johan. Evang. says, Magnum, quia
mutavit ei nomen, and fecit de Simone Petrum: And again in the same place, Si
hoc ante Petrus vocaretur, non ita videres mysterium Petrae, and putares casu
eum sic vocari, non providentia Dei, ideo voluit eum aliud prius vocari, ut ex
ipsa commutatione nominis Sacramenti vivacitas commendaretur: Here St. Austin
acknowledges an occult Mystery latent in this word, which our Savior in Matt.
16. is pleased to unriddle; for in the first of St. John he gives him a
Prediction of a new Name, Tu vocaberis Cephas, which is all one with Petrus: In
Mark 3. he has the imposition of his new Name, Imposuit Simoni nomen Petri: And
in Matt. 16. he has the meaning and Explication of it, Thou art Peter, and on
this Peter; or, Thou art a Rock, and on this Rock will I build my Church: Here
by an ingenious allusion to the Name he uncurtain'd the abstruse Sense of it.
This pleasant alluding to words, I find practiced by several good Authors. Thus
Athanasius calls Hosius, (...); and Chrysostom. alludes to Euodius, calling him,
(...). to Dorcas, (...); to Manes, (...); Nazianz. accordingly on Eusebius,
(...). Thus St. Cyprian alludes to Novatus, Novarum rerum Cupidus. Irenaeus
nominis sui correspondens etymo, id est, pacis studiosus; And Valentinus, as
Vopiscus relates, was wont to say of Probus that he was Vir sui nominis; the
same may be said of Peter, who, as his Name did signify a Rock, so he was
really an egregious surpassing one. For Christ changing his Name, and making
this common Appellative of Rock to become his proper Name, is an evident sign,
that to him, by way of eminency above the rest appertained the thing, whereof
he alone bore the Name and Title. Now there can be no reason assigned, why
Christ of all his Disciples, changed only Peter's Name for a Name that did
denote a Rock, but that by this Antonomastical Appropriation of that word to
him, he did destine him to be in a more peculiar excelling manner THE ROCK, on
whom he would build his Church. Hence St. Basil adversus Eunomium says, (...);
Appellations are indications of properties, which decypher and charactarize
every one. Now I find that there be two especial Reasons why Peter had this new
Name, One is for his firm Faith; this is acknowledged by Chrysostom. in Paralypt.
demissum per Tecta. (...); He was called Peter, because he had an unshaken and
steady Faith.

In Inscriptionem Act. Apost. he gives this reason, (...), etc. He was not
called Peter, because he raised the Dead, nor because he cured the lame Man,
but he inherited this Name, because by his Confession he revealed his true and
genuine Faith, Christ saying unto him, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will
I build my Church, etc.

(...); In illud Paulus vocatur, Peter had that Name given him for his Virtues
sake, Christ placing in his very Name a demonstration of the firmitude of his
Faith, that his very Name might be to him as a perpetual monitor, putting him
in mind of his Solidity.

But the chiefest reason why he was called so, was, because by that Name Christ
discovered his Intentions of building his Church on him.

This is St. Cyrils Sense, (...); He was by an adapt and congruous word called
Peter, by Christ the Rock, because he did intend to found his Church on him.

And accordingly Origin in his Comments on St. John, (...); He was denominated
and called Peter from his Stability and Solidity which was fit for the Office
designed him.

Thus St. Hierom on Matt. 16. says, Simoni, Petri largitus est nomen, ac
secundum metaphoram Petrae, recte ei dicitur aedificabo Ecclesiam meam super
te. And accordingly Hilarious, O in nuncupatione novi nominis felix Ecclesiae
fundamentum: And Tertull. de praescript. Latuit aliquid Petrum, aedificandae
Ecclesia Petram dictum.

It will not now be unseasonable to observe, that not one of the Apostles in
Divine Writ are called Petrus or Petra, but Peter, that name being by our
Savior attributed to him solely, and so ascribed to him, as to become his
proper name; this is not undeserving of an Asterisk; the other Apostles are
called (...), which word is communicable as well to Peter as to any of the
rest; but he besides that name common to him with the other, had his new name
Petrus appropriate to himself. Now (...) signifies a Foundation in general, it
may of Wood, Wooll-sacks, Straw, Hay, or any such evanid Matter, and
accordingly the Sees of the other Apostles have been detriumph'd, stooping to
the Insulting Conqueror, and yielding to the pollutions of undermining Heresy;
but Peter signifies such a Foundation as is fixed on an inexpugnable Rock: So
our Savior may here be said to imitate that wise Architect (he himself speaks
of) in building his Spiritual edifice on a Rock, and on such an one as is not
only able to repel the foaming Surges of the aspiring Sea, but can walk on the
back of its towering Waves, Solidam carnem super liquentis elementi terga
suspendens. A Rock immovable, planted with an eternal Root. A Rock able to
evacuate all the Plots of Hells Divan, and naufragate all the lurid designs of
empoisoned Heretics.

I shall next produce the Sayings of some Fathers, to prove the Church more
eminently built on Peter, than on any of the other Apostles. The first shall be
St. Hierom, who on Isaias 2. having compared them to Mountains, says, Super
unum montium Christus fundat Ecclesiam and loquitur ad eum, dicens, Tu es
Petrus, and super hanc Petram, etc. But that which must needs confound all the
Enemies to St. Peter and his Successors, but such as have their Face cased in
Tripple Brass, is, that besides his owning him to be the Rock, he calls his
Cathedra at Rome likewise so; in his Epistle to Damasus, Ego beatitudini tuae,
id est, (says he) Cathedrae Petri Communione consocior super illam Petram
aedificatam esse Ecclesiam scio: This Saying of this great Father left a deep
incision in my Mind, and being willing to find out a (...). to heal it, I
repaired to Dr. Whitaker, who thus informed me, Cathedra Petri non successionem
Pontificum, sed Petri fidem significat. This appeared to me to be a mere
shuffle, for I knew that that Father did in his 57th Epist. to Damasus
acknowledge him to possess both fidem and sedem Petri: From this Doctor I went
to Dr. Stillingfleet, expecting in his Rational Account to find something that
might be proportionate to that Title, but I found my self likewise there
defeated of my desired satisfaction: His words were these, This Testimony seems
big and high at first, and I shall not impute these expressions, either to St.
Hierom 's heat, or flattery, although it looks the more suspicious, because at
that time he had so great a pique against the Eastern Bishops; and that those
words are contained in a complemental address to Damasus, because looked on as
a Roman Christened in that Church, he addresses himself to Damasus.

Here the Doctor pretending not to ascribe these words either to St. Hierom's
heat or flattery, does obliquely perstringe him as guilty of both. As for the
pique which he says Hierom had with the Eastern Bishops; I question whether the
Doctor can prove he had any more disgust against them than what might arise
from their Errors and Schism; so he seeing their Contentions and Divisions
thought it the safest way to break off Communion with them, and apply himself
to St. Peter's See. Their Schism he declares in these words in the
abovementioned Epistle, Quoniam vetusto Oriens inter se populorum furore
collisus indiscissam Domini Tunicam and desuper textam minutatim per frusta
discerpit. After this he discovers the true Doctrine of the Western, and the
Errors of the Oriental Church; the former he affirms to have preserved
incorruptam Patrum haereditatem; and that they did return Dominici seminis
puritatem centeno fructu; but that in the latter, the good Seed did degenerate
in Lolium avenasque: Then he says, In occidente Sol Justitiae; in orient
Lucifer: vos aurea vasa; hic lignea, testacea: These are high Encomiums of the
Roman Church; but now after all this, the main reason that obliged him to
associate himself in Communion with Damasus was, because he as Heir to St.
Peter, sat in his Cathedra, on which he acknowledged the Church to be built as
St. Austin did confess the Succession of Bishops from Peter to be the
invincible Rock) so here is neither flattery nor complement as the Doctor would
fain shift it off with, it being very irrational to imagine, that that Great
Father would make use of either in matters of Faith which concerned his Souls
Salvation. And if the Doctor has a faculty to deprave such a plain place as
this is, no passage in the Fathers will be able to resist the cunning of such
contortions.

My next proof is out of St. Cyprian, Ecclesia quae una est, super unum qui
claves ejus accepit voce Domini fundata; and accordingly, speaking of Peter's
See, he says, Navigare audent ad Petri Cathedram ad Ecclesiam principalem, unde
unitas sacerdotalis exorta ost.

My Third Proof is out of Gregory Nazianzen, Orat. 26. (...). You see that
amongst all the Disciples of Christ, who were sublime, and worthy to be
elected, this Man Peter is called the Rock, and is entrusted with the
Foundations of the Church.

St. Basil in his 6th Book against Eunomius gives the reason why the Church was
superstructed on him, (...); Peter for the excellency of his Faith was
entrusted with the Church which was built upon him.

I might in reason imagine, that what I have already wrote, should be a
sufficient Collyrium to open your ciel'd Eyes, and fetch off those Scales which
have obstructed your visive faculty, that you might now discernibly see the
inanity of your effoete, and barren endeavors in assaying to purloin from St.
Peter that inherent and inseparable Honor of being the Rock of the Church. I do
not see any thing to the contrary, but that your Objections are solved, and
that in no evasive manner: Having performed thus much, I was preparing to
advance forward, when I found my self on a sudden obliged to make a short halt
upon my discovering a small Quotation of yours out of Origin, Petra est
quisquis Christi Discipulus. But pray do you not think that you have
sufficiently sullied your self with guilt, by endeavoring to disrobe St. Peter
of his Illustrious Dignities, without committing Sacrilege on the whole
Apostolic College, by robbing them likewise of the Title of Foundations of
the Church, and by cantonizing it out to every Christian? Must Peter be
dismounted, and the rest of the Twelve by a levelling principle have equal
shares, and after all this must every Christian Scholar come in for a joint
Dividend? Had I not a Clue more unerring than that of Ariadne, I could not
possibly disinlabyrinth my self from these sinuous windings. First, Christ is
the Rock; then Faith and Confession; then all the Apostles: but now every
Christian, and who not? so Peter the right Heir be by a Bill of Exclusion shut
out. Amongst your choice of Interpretations on this Text summoned on purpose to
stave off Truth, I was very well pleased to see the generality of Catholics to
keep themselves to one Interpretation, which is, of Peter's Person and his
Successors; and indeed, Truth is but one, (...), Truth is single, and not split
into many pieces, Chrysostom. 48. Hom Matt. whereas Error is multiform, more
fruitful than Circles in the Water, or than Virgils white Sow. But to answer
your Quotation, (...), upon perusing the place where this was taken out, I
found Origin to speak not Dogmatically but Allegorically, as the sequel of his
Discourse evidences, he calling Haereses Daemones, and regna Caelorum virtutes:
And again, Enitere ut tu sis Petra non extra te, sed intra te Petram require:
Petra tua men's super hanc Petram aedificatur domus tua: These are Mystical
Glosses, and fanciful Allegories, Which whosoever indulges, may make quidlibet
ex quolibet. As for your Quotation out of him, it would certainly be the most
absurd thing imaginable to take it in a literal Sense; for if every Christian
were a Foundation, where would be the Superstructure, how could this Spiritual
Building ever be completed? this therefore could not be Origens genuine
meaning to equalize every Disciple of Christ to Peter, whom by way of
transcendency he calls, The great Foundation of the Church, Exodus 5. And on
Romans 6. Cum super Petrum velut super terram fundaretur Ecclesia: And again,
Petrus, super quem Christus fundavit Ecclesia, duas tantummodo Epistolas
scripsit, In Matt. de Can. Novi. Testam. And his Comments on St. John, (...);
Peter on whom the Church of Christ is built, against whom the Gates of Hell
shall not prevail, etc.

I shall now with as much brevity as may be, dispatch the rest of your
Objections on this Text to my affirming that Christ spoke Syriack, and used no
other word but Kipha both for Person and thing. You reply, that it is an
uncertain conjecture, and that he might use different words, for all we know,
without bringing any Authority for what you say, but your own fancy, which I am
so far from giving credit to, that now I mistrust your Jugdment: Pray hear what
Beza says on this place, Dominus Syriace loquens nulla usus est agnominatione,
sed utrobique dixit, Cepha, quemadmodum and vernaculum nomen Pierre, tam de
proprio quam de appellativo dicitur. And herein the Original and Oriental
Languages agree, as I find it in Cornelius a Lapide on this place. Thou art
Alsachra, and on this Alsachra says the Arabian. Thou art Bim, and on this Bim
says the Armenian. Thou art Kepha, and on this Kepha says the Hebrew. Thou art
Kipha, and on this Kipha says the Syriack.

In the next place you would fain make some distinction betwixt (...), but
herein you run counter to the Sentiments of your own Writers. Dr. Hammond in
his Notes on this place says, The word (...) in the Masculin is exactly all one
with (...) in the Feminine, it being in the Syriack, thou art Kipha, and on
this Kipha, etc. Likewise Beza in his Notes on St Matthew, In Graeco Sermon
(...) and (...) non re sed terminatione tantum differunt. Now that Cephas and
Petrus signify Petra take St. Hierom's Authority for it in his Notes on the
Epistle to the Galatians, In Evangelio, and in aliis Pauli Epistolis, and in
hac quoque ipsa, modo Cephas, modo Petrus scribitur, non quod aliud significat
Petrus aliud Cephas, sed quam nos Latin and Graece Petram vocamus, hanc
Hebraei and Syri propter linguae inter se viciniam Cephan nuncupant. Now as to
the word (...), it does not at all differ from (...), but being applied to a
Man, it had a Masculin termination, that it might gratify the Ear with a more
pleasing Euphony. Hence by the Fathers (...) and (...) are promiscuously
applied to Peter. Chrysostom. in his 9th. Hom. de Paenit. (...): And again,
(...), etc. (...); Nazianz. Orat. 26. speaking of Peter, (...). Epiphanius in
Ancorate, (...). Thus St. Ambrose in his Hymn speaking of him, Hoc ipsa Petra
Ecclesiae canente, etc. And Tertullian, Latuit aliquid Petrum Ecclesiae
aedificandae Petram dictam.

As for the demonstrative Pronoun hanc, I affirmed, that it must be referred to
the next Antecedent, which was Peter; this will appear undeniably true, if you
consult the Original, either as our Savior spoke those words in the Syriack, or
as St. Matthew wrote them in the Hebrew, in both which Languages the same word
serves for Person and Thing: So the word hanc cannot with any color of reason
be referred either to Christ, or to Peter's Confession, because Christ had not
spoke of either of them before, but only of him as he was the Son of Jona.

Next you desire to know, what inconvenience would arise from expounding this
Rock to be Christ. To this I answer, that though I grant Christ to be called a
Rock, yet it is very irrational to Interpret the word Rock of Christ,
wheresoever you find it expressed in Scripture, our Savior being not really a
Rock, but only called so by a Metaphorical Locution. This is observed by St.
Austin, Per similitudines Christus multa est, quae per proprietatem non est:
per similitudinem and Petra est Christus, and Ostium, and Lapis Angularis, and
Pastor, and Agnus, and Leo. And in the same place, Non est Petra, quia durus
and sine sensu non est: Nec Ostium quia faber eum non fecit; nec Lapis
Angularis, quia non est a structore compositus; Nec Pastor, quia custos non est
ovium quadrupedum; nec Leo est, quia fera non est; nec Agnus, quia pecus non
est, etc. 47th. Tract. Johan. Here you see that Christ has many other Names
besides Petra, but I shall here apply my self only to that, Bibebant de
spirituali Petra, Petra autem erat Christus; that is, as Hugo Grotius observes,
Christum praefigurabat, as in Genes. 41. Septem boves, septem spicae, sunt
septem anni. Here Christ is called a Rock, not as if the word Rock were in all
Respects and Considerations applicable to him, for then he would be barren,
unfruitful, deaf, cruel, without bowels of compassion, etc. but in
consideration of those Crystal Pellucid Streams of Water that issued out of
the Womb of the Rock, that being a Typical Adumbration of him. Hence he invites
those that thirst to come to him and drink, in John 7. And in Apocal. 22. He
that thirsts, let him come and take of the Waters of Life freely: In this
Sense our Savior is here by the Apostle styled a Rock. Now in Isaias 51. I find
Abraham likewise to be called a Rock, but in a different acceptance, for as
Hugo Grotius observes, Voces per translationem usurpatae, aliis aliter
aptantur. The Jews being there said to be hewn out of his Entrails, as Stones
are cut out of a Lapidicina, or Quarry: But in this place Peter is called a
Rock, in reflection on the Relation which a Rock has with the Foundation of a
Building: So he here is the only Rock our Savior speaks of, on whom he designed
to rear his Church, Christ being in this place not so properly called its Rock
as its Architect, not its Foundation as Founder; as the word Aedificabo
intimates. This was excellently well observed by Hugo Grotius, Paulus se
Architectum vocat, quod officium Christus hic sibi vendicat. Besides, it is most
apparent by the foregoing and following words, which are directed only to him,
that Christ is he, who here promises to build; and Peter is the Person on whom
he engaged himself by Promise to build on; and this you must assent to, unless
you will assign the words such an understanding as contradict the words
immediately precedent, and subsequent, from which only the true genuine Sense
is to be extracted. The precedent words are, Tu es Petrus, and the subsequent
are, tibi dabo, etc. both which imply Peter's Person, as the Pronouns tu and
tibi evidently evince the intermedial words; super hanc Petram must likewise
relate to Peter. And you may observe, that Christ did not say, that he would
build his Church on a Rock, but determinately, on this Rock, deictically
designing Peter, vel digito, vel nota; thus hanc cannot be referred to Christum
Petram, but to Petrum Petram there being no other Rock mentioned here, but he;
Christ being described here, not by the name of Petra, but as Filius Dei vivi;
he then in relation to the Rock, is the Builder; in reference to the Keys, is
the Donor: This appears more evident by the Conjunction Copulative (et) Et ego
dico tibi, etc. which connects and knits together the foregoing Speech of our
Savior to him, otherwise it should have been (sed) not et. Besides, pray tell
me, how were these words (Et ego dico tibi) spoken to him, but by way of
explaining the meaning of his new Name; for he had a promise of this Name
before, as appears by the First of St. John, Tu vocaberis Cephas; and to what
purpose was the exact description of his Person (which Salmeron says, was so
precise, Vt nec pluribus, nec evidentioribus circumstantiis haeredes a
Tabellionibus publicis denominantur, describuntur quam Petrus hic) whose Son he
was, and what his Name was, if nothing designed his Person? And where is the
reward of his Confession, which the Fathers unanimously acknowledge he
deserved, and obtained, if the Church were not built on him? Having thus at
large discoursed about this Text, I shall here subjoin the true Native meaning
of our Savior, which in short, is this, Tu es Petrus, and super te quasi rupem
firmam me confitentem aedificabo Ecclesiam meam: The words are really plain,
the Sense of them seems obvious, but to see how by Interessed, and Heretical
Pens they be contorted, is portentuous.

Your last Argument is, That if the Church were built on Peter 's Person, it
must have expired when he gave up the Ghost. To this I answer, That by my
saying the Church is built on him, and on his Successors, I mean, him and them
to be Supreme Heads of the Church. So I shall answer this Objection by way of
Question. Pray did the Jewish Church expire upon the Death of Aron? Did not he
survive in the succeeding Highpriests? even just thus Peter dies not: But
lives in his Successors; as you may find it in Epist. Praeamb. Conc. Calch.
(...); Considering the B. Peter who lives and presides in his own See. And
accordingly Conc. Ephesians. (...); Peter, who lives, judges and defines in his
Succescessors: Thus it is likewise good in Law, Rex non moritur.

The End of the Second Part.
THE THIRD PART.
CHAP. I. Of the Keys. That they denote Supreme Power. Whether Sobna were
High Priest? Of the Highpriests and Kings of the Jews. Whether the Jewish
Kings were Supreme in Church Affairs? The difference betwixt the Jewish and
Christian Priesthood.
MY ensuing Task will be to treat of the Keys, which I design here to do with
as much brevity as the avoidance of obscurity will permit. I proved in my
Papers to you, that they, by a general acceptance, were Symbols and Ensigns of
Dominion: And moreover, that by a Scriptural Metaphor in Isaias 22. they
denoted Supreme, Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction. To my first Proof you are as
silent as a Turkish Mute: My second you oppugn. But before I write any thing in
its defense, I must tell you, That whether or no our Savior did allude to those
words in Isaias, it is easy enough to make out, that he, by promising them to
Peter did destine him to the Supreme Spiritual Power without the assistance of
an allusion to this Passage: Yet it is highly probable, Christ did allude to
them, and whosoever does sedately poise these words Dabo Clavem domus David,
and dabo tibi Claves; will find such a strict adjacency and alliance betwixt
them, as with good reason he may imagine our Savior did allude to them. But to
choke up the very Springs of this Cavil, I shall now prove the Keys even in the
Sense of the New Testament to decypher absolute Dominion: and accordingly you
will find St. Chrysostom in his 55th Homil. on St. Matthew, to affirm, that our
Savior, by virtue of his Promise of the donation of the Keys, did not only give
St. Peter Power over the whole World, but to rise a Key higher, even over
things in Heaven. The Keys likewise in Apocalips 1. verse. 10. signify Supreme
Power, where our Savior says of himself, Habeo Claves mortis and inferni; By
which Phrase absolute dominion over Death and Hell is indigitated; and St.
Chrysostom. affirms as much, (...); by the Key of Hell is signified, that Christ
has power over Life and Death: In his Comments on Apoc. Cap. 8. and in the same
place he says, (...), The Keys are ensigns of Power: And thus Oecomenius in his
Comment on these words, Qui habet Clavem David, says, (...); He calls Power by
the name of a Key, for he that has Power of shutting and opening, is entrusted
with the House; and this you may more clearly learn in the Gospel, by those
words which Christ spoke to Peter, Et dabo tibi Claves, etc. And a little after
he says, (...), The Keys import Power; and in this Sense it is twice more used
in that Book, as in Cap. 9. v. 1. Data est ei Clavis Putei and Abyssi; and Cap.
20. v. 1. Videt Johannes Angelum habentem Clavem Abyssi: And accordingly it was
anciently used in Orphicis, (...).

Thus you may see I need not be beholden to that Passage in Isaias to prove
Peter's Power granted him by the gift of the Keys; but because I mentioned it as
an Argument, I shall say a little in its defense, and make some Reply to your
Objections. First, you say, That it cannot be proved, that Sobna or Eliakim
were of the Priests Order: To this I answer, that you cannot disprove but that
they were. This I am sure of, that I have better Authority which avouches they
were, than you have, that they were not. As for your Pretensions to the Hebrew
Tongue, should I grant them just, and permit you to pass Muster for a Rabbi;
yet it does not at all follow, that I should be so conceited of you as to
equalize you to St. Hierom, whose knowledge in that Language was so great, as
all ought to veil to him. So I judge it my safest way not to exorbitate from
his Translation impressed by the stamp of the Catholic Church. But to keep to
the Point, the Hebrew word Sochen (which is no novelty in that Language) is
liable to different meanings. But I find St. Hierom to translate Ingredere ad
Sochen thus, Ingredere ad eum, qui habitat in Tabernaculo ad Sobnam Praepositum
Templi, The Septuag. says thus, (...); which was a place in which the Priests
did abide whilst they served in the Temple: thence they were called Pastophori.
Pastus signifying either the Sacerdotal Pall or Lodging. And thus St. Cyril. on
Book 2. Comments on Isaias, upon the word (...), says, (...), This place is in
the Temple. Hence this Sobna is called Praepositus Templi,; and the Prophet
deters him from the excision of his Sepulcher, because God would transplant the
Priesthood. Thus v. 18. it is said, Coronans te coronabit, etc. which Corn. a
Lapide observes, is rendered in the Chaldee, Auferet a te Tiaram. The Septuag.
says, Auferet stolam and coronam tuam gloriosam, by which is meant, Corona and
Tiara Pontificalis: And accordingly I find St. Cyril. to call the Stola (...),
Holy, Sacred: And in his Second Book of his Comments on Isaias, speaking of
Eliakim, (...). That the Sacerdotal Honor was conferred on him, is manifest, by
his promising to Crown him, and saying, I will give you the Stola, Economy,
and Power, to be able to rule the People subject to you. Now, as for Sobna, his
being called (...), I find St. Cyril to solve that Objection in his Second Book
of Comments on Isaias, (...); He inveights against Sobna the (...), who had got
the High Priesthood, but abused it. Your other Argument to cut him off from
being High Priest, is, because he is called Praefectus Domus, scilicet Regiae,
as you add, by which you would have him to be only (...), or Steward of the
Kings House; but you must understand, that the Temple was called Antonomastice
Domus; and accordingly, our Savior, when he drove the Buyers and Sellers our of
the Temple, told them, that his House was called Domus precationis, etc. Now if
Josephus makes no mention of them, as you affirm, that at best is but a
Negative, and so inconcludent: I find he is silent of several things which the
Scripture makes mention of; he takes no notice of Gods punishing the Israelites
for their murmuring whilst the Flesh of the Quails stuck betwixt their Teeth. I
hope I may have the liberty to believe it, though he be found mute herein; but if
his Authority be so swaying with you, I shall hope you will not disbelieve
Absoloms Hair to have weighed two hundred Sicles, and that it could scarcely be
powl'd in Eight days time. Then you say, that the Highpriests of the Jews were
Types of Christ, not of Peter. That they were Types of Christ in some Sense
cannot be denied; so was Solomon for his peaceable Reign, Christ being styled
Princeps pacis; so was Isaac, carrying the Wood to burn the Sacrifice, as
Christ did the Wood of the Cross; and Jonas for abiding Three Days and Nights
in the Whales Belly, as Christ was in the Sepulcher; and Joseph sold by his
Brothers, as he was by Judas. And many more Types might be mentioned, but this
is not worth the insisting on, and it may easily be proved, that the Jewish
Highpriests were Typical of the Christian, if the Point were material; I am
sure St. Cyprian in his Epistles Expounds those things which are said
concerning the one, of the other.

The next thing you affirm is, That by the Keys in that place, is not meant any
Supreme Authority, either in Church or State, such as the Romanist's claim for
Peter and his Successors, for Sobna and Eliakim, if Priests were subject to
King Hezechias, and the Kings in those Days, and many Ages after, were Supreme
in all Causes, both Ecclesiastical and Civil.

To this I answer, that it is not necessary to my purpose, to go about to prove
what is meant by the Keys mentioned by Isaias, St. Peter's Authority being not
grounded upon that, but on the words in St. Matthew, Et dabo tibi Claves.

As for the other part of your Assertion, That the Jewish Highpriests were
subject to the Jewish Kings, (whom you affirm to be Supreme in all Causes, both
Ecclesiastical and Civil, and to have governed Church Affairs, both de facto
and de jure) I find my self obliged to make some Reply to it, as likewise, of
Christian Princes (to whom from the Jewish you descend): But I would more
willingly have declined treating of this Point, knowing how nice and dangerous
it is to handle it; and that now I walk per ignes suppositos cineri doloso: But
because you have so fairly thrown it in my way, and being treating of the Keys,
it will seem fit to clear their Authority, I cannot well avoid taking some
notice of it, which I shall here do, making a short halt in taking up this
Atalanta's Apple, which you seem to have dropped to impede my course. It may
appear strange that I, who am of the Laity, should write in favor of the
Clergy; and that you, who are a Divine should endeavor to establish
Laicocephalism, and depress the Clergy, robbing it of its just Rights, and
thereby becoming false to your own Coat: But if this be well inspected, there
is much to be said in your Vindication; for you (knowing that your New Religion
was begun, and hitherto maintained by the Secular Power) cannot but in
gratitude and policy give it the preference; however, you may perhaps in this
present conjuncture, be willing to recall part of what you have so prodigally
granted.

The first you mention to have governed Church Affairs, both de facto and de
jure, is Moses; and it is granted you, that he did so; but then you are to look
on him as a mixed Person, in whom both the Sacerdotal and Regal Power were
combined: So what he did herein, was not purely by virtue of his Kingly, but
Priestly Power. This is clear out of St. Austin's Testimony, in his Questions
on Leviticus, Lib. 3. Quest. 23. Si Moises Sacerdos non fuit, quomodo per illum
omnia gerebantur? si fuit, quomodo summum Sacerdotium ab ejus fratre incipit?
which he thus solves. Ambo erant summi Sacerdotes, Aaron propter vestem
Pontificalem, Moses propter excellentius ministerium. Thus likewise Philo in
his Life of Moses gives this account of him in his Third Book, (...); Such was
the Life and Death of Moses, who was both King, Legislator, High Priest, and
Prophet. And accordingly Greg. Nazianzen in his Sixth Oration calls him, (...),
and (...), Prince of Princes, and Priest of Priests. Now the Secular and
Ecclesiastic Power which was united in the Person of Moses, was afterward
parted betwixt Eleazer and Joshua, the one succeeding him in the Priestly, and
the other in the Princely Power; as you may see in the 27th of Numbers, where
God commands Moses to give Joshua part of his Glory; but in the same Chapt. you
may see that he subjected Joshua to Eleazer, at whose word, both he and all the
Children of Israel were to go in and out.

Your next Example is of Solomon, whom I grant to have removed Abiathar from
the Pontificate, and to have subrogated Sadock in his place. But first you are
to understand, that he was not deposed for any matter of Faith, or concerning
Religion; but for Treason and Rebellion: For conspiring with Adonia (whom he
had Anointed King) against Solomon. Next you are to observe, that Solomon
exauctorated him not as King, but as Prophet, to whom God had committed some
things after an extraordinary manner. So what he acted herein, was not by his
own Royal Power, but by Authority and Commission from God, by Divine
Inspiration, as the Text evidences, Vt impleretur Sermo Dei quem locutus est
super domo Eli in Silo. This Action therefore of his, does not at all prove him
to be superior to the High Priest: But only that God was pleased to make use of
him as an Executer for the performance of a Sentence which he had formerly
denounced: And this will be easily understood if recourse be made to History.
Aaron had two Sons, Eleazar and Ithamar: Eleazar as eldest succeeded him in the
Priesthood, his Son Phinees succeeded him, and his Posterity down to Heli
continued in that Holy Function. At which time the Posterity of Phinees
incuriously administering the Priesthood, God was pleased to punish their
neglect, by translating it from the Family of Eleazar to that of Ithamar, to
wit, to Heli; in which Family it continued about 120 Years, to Salomons days,
who deposed Abiathar the -- Abnepos of Heli, for conspiring with his Corrival
Adonias, substituting Sadock in his place. Now as the Pontificate was removed
by God's order from the Family of the eldest Brother to that of the younger
House, so was it likewise transplanted from thence into the right Line, by the
Authority of the same God, who was pleased in several things to order and
direct those Kings of Israel, governing as it were by them. This made Josephus
to affirm in his Second Book against Appio, That God did not so much institute
in Israel a Monarchy as a Theocracy or Deiarchy: But now if this Action of
Salomon's deposing Adonias, be construed in favor of the Prince, as if he
thereby were Superior to the High Priest, The Clergy has as strong an Argument
for their Superiority, in Samuel's declaring King Saul dethroned; but I look on
both these Examples as extraordinary, and consequently not Presidential.

The next Example is David, but he being likewise King and Prophet, what can be
alleged concerning him, is answered in what is said of Solomon; it is moreover
mentioned of him, that what he did in Church Matters was, Juxta omnia quae
scripta sunt in Lege Domini.

As for the Example of Ezechias, though it be granted he constituted Levites in
the House of God; yet in the Second Book Paralip. Cap. 29. you may perceive,
that what he did herein was, Secundum dispositionem David and Gad videntis, and
Nathan Prophetae. Siquidem Domini praeceptum fuit per manum Prophetarum ejus.
And herein you will likewise find, that he was much ruled by Isaias, as in
Eccles. 48. 25. Fecit Ezechias quod placuit Deo, and fortiter ivit in via David
Patris sui, quam mandavit illi Isaias. Thus you may perceive, that the Examples
of these Kings are not at all apposit to your Point, they not proving, that
Princes by their sole Royal Power may intermeddle in Church Affairs, or reform
Religion in its Substance; enacting things by their own Authority, contrary to
the Assent of Gods High Priest and Prophets. Some Kings by extraordinary
Command, as Kings and Prophets did concern themselves in Church Affairs; Others
not without consent and assistance of the Priests, did very laudably use their
utmost power to destroy Idolatry, and restore Discipline; but which of them
disowned the Authority of the High Priest? abrogated his-Power, and invested
himself with it? Now that the Kings of Israel were not Supreme in Church
Matters, seems evident by the word of God spoken to the High Priest Eliakim in
Isaias 22. where after he had promised to give him the Key of David, he
explains to him the Power of it; Et aperiet and non erit qui claudat, and
claudet, and non erit qui aperiat; by which he plainly makes him Supreme in
Church Affairs, no Person whatsoever being able to exclude whom he opened to;
Or to introduce whom he shut out. And to Sinew this Argument with a stronger
Nerve, you will find that Jehosophat, who was a Religious Prince, would not
handle Church Affairs, knowing that they belonged to the High Priest, as in
Paralip. 2. 19. Ananias autem Sacerdos and Pontifex vester in his quae ad Deum
pertinent praesidebit. And on the contrary, Osias, who presumed to usurp the
Sacerdotal Function, and offer Incense to God, was by the incensed Deity struck
with Leprosy. By what I have mentioned it will clearly appear, how irrational
it is for you to produce the Jewish Kings as Examples to justify your former
Kings exorbitant tampering in Church Affairs, there being no Parallel at all
betwixt them; They acting therein as Kings and Prophets Authorized by Gods
extraordinary Commission, and in their Reformations joining with the
High Priest; whereas yours was in opposition to him, and warranted by nothing
but Secular Might. But now after all this, if you could clearly prove, that the
Jewish Kings were superior to the High Priest, and Supreme (Quatenus Kings) in
Church Affairs; it would not follow, that that similitude should hold good
amongst Christians; The Priesthood in the Old Testament being Imperfect,
Carnal, Umbratick, and Prefigurative, of one that was Complete, Sublime and
Spiritual. Hence St. Chrysostom. Lib. de Sacerd. comparing the Priests of the Old
Testament with those of the New, ascribes to them the cure of the Leprosy of
the Body; but to these, the Power to cleanse the filth and impurity of the
Soul, they bring Fire; but these the Holy Ghost. And in his Orat. 5. adver.
Judaeos, speaking of the Pontificate of Melchisedeck, he says, (...); For if
such a Type were more splendid than the Jewish, how much more glorious is the
true one?

Your last Reason for the Jewish Kings Supremacy in Church Affairs, is, Because
by Divine appointment they were, Custodes utriusque Tabulae. This Argument
seems to me very insufficient for such a Proof: For though the Book of the Law
was by Gods Command given to the King, it was not that he should expound the
Sense of it upon any emergent Controversy; but it was given him to govern
himself and his Subjects by it: That by the frequent reading of it, he might
learn to fear God, and keep his Statutes; and that by his Laws and Temporal
Sword, he should defend the true Religion therein concontain'd: As for the
Interpretation of the Law that belonged to the High Priest, according to the
inviolable Decree in Malachy 2. Labia Sacerdotis custodient scientiam, and
Legem requirent ex ore ejus: They were as Josephus affirms in his Second Book
against Appio. (...), Judges of Controversies: And in Deuteronomy. 17. Princes were by
Gods institution to take the Copy of it from the High Priest: And in the same
Chapter, in doubtful Cases the Jews were obliged to recurr to him with severe
injunctions to acquiesce in his determinations. Now whether the Jewish
High Priest were liable to Error as you assert, is not worth my present
Discussion (no Catholic being bound to believe the Popes Infallibility, but in
Conjunction with a Council;) But this is clear, the Jews were absolutely
obliged to submit to his determinations under penalty of Death, he having
written on his Rationali DOCTRINA ET VERITAS. By this you may imagine how
dangerous it would have been for any one in those days to have affirmed him
Fallible, and upon that pretense to have opposed his Definitions. You see our
Savior put no such fancies into their Heads, but paid much respect to Moses's
Chair; and though he knew that those who sat in it, were bad Men, yet he says,
Quaecunque vobis dixerint, facite: And St. Paul styles the High Priest (though a
Persecutor of the Christians) Princeps Populi.

CHAP. II. Concerning the Sacerdotal and Regal Head. Of Christian Emperors
intermedling with Church Matters. The Fathers Opinion of it. Particular
Emperors, who are falsely affirmed by Protestants to Act as Heads of the Church.
Of our English Kings. Of Henry VIII. Of this our present King James II.
YOur next Discourse is about Christian Princes, these you assert to be Heads
of the Church; and your Reason for this Assertion is this, That if a King be
Head of his Kingdom, he is Head of the Church, because that is in his Kingdom.
This I must acknowledge to be a very strong Argument, to prove a Nero Head of
the Church, because in its Infancy it was in his Dominions. But Card. Bellarmin
will give you good information herein, and acquaint you how Christian Kings are
Heads of the Kingdom, and how they may be Supreme, Praesunt Reges Christiani
hominibus, non ut Christiani, sed ut homines sunt: Reges non ut Christiani
praesunt, sed ut homines politici, etc. And again, Reges habent primum locum
inter Christianos, ut Christiani sunt homines; id est, Cives terrenae
Civitatis: Non ut sunt Cives Sanctorum, Domestici Dei, Ecclesiae membra. Hence
you may see, that a King may be absolute in his Kingdom, and yet not be Head of
the Church; those two Estates residing in two several Persons, as being of
distinct and different Natures. The ones Dominion extending to Mundan,
Temporal, Corruptible things; the Body and Goods of Fortune; the other reaching
to things Spiritual, Eternal, Celestial, to things appertaining to another
World, and Salvation of the Soul. And it is necessary to have two such distinct
Governors: The Civil Power to maintain Peace, to protect and secure us in our
Temporals: The Ecclesiastic to teach us the true Worship of God, to feed us
with Food that perishes not, to direct us in Spirituals, to the attainment of
Eternal Bliss. These two Kingdoms consisting of things so widely distant one
from the other, cannot be injurious or prejudicial to one another (or any way
interfere but by way of abuse) but rather assistant to one another, being in
themselves Friendly and Amicable. Hence Samuel having anointed David King,
kissed him, the Kiss being a Symbol of Peace and Amity: This was a Signature of
the mutual Agreement, and Accord betwixt these two Governments; they are both
Independent, so as one might not usurp on the other, or hinder the other in the
due Execution of their Charge. The Prince is absolute in Administration of all
Civil Matters, in which all Persons in his Dominions are subject; and herein
the King may be called Homo a Deo secundus, and solo Deo minor, as Tertull. has
it, ad Scapul; or as Chrysostom. says in Hom. 2. Antioch. (...): the King is
Chief and Head of all Men upon Earth.

The Priest on the other side presides in Church Government, in Spiritual
Affairs, in Resolutions of Controversies in Faith, in Explications of Articles
of Belief, in Interpretation of Scripture, etc. Thus the Prince is Caput
Regale, and the Priest is Caput Sacerdotale. They are both of Divine
Institution: The Kingly Power communicated to Princes from Heaven, their
Charter being derived from God, by whom Kings Reign. The Priestly Jurisdiction
originated from Christ, subsisting in its own Nature without Subordination or
dependency on the Temporal Power. Now to admit and submit to the Sacerdotal
Power, as Supreme in things merely and purely Spiritual, does not at all
dislustre the Regal Sway, nor defringe the least Particle from his Sovereign
Jurisdiction, the former properly insinuating it self to the secret Closets of
Spiritual Recesses, where the Scepter of the Temporal Prince has no Dominion.

Having premised thus much concerning the Kingly and Priestly Power, I shall
make a short Reply unto you about Christian Princes, whom you affirm to have
governed Church Affairs, both de facto and de jure. Now that some of them did
intermeddle with Church Affairs, is not denied, several of them being Arians;
but that they did it de jure, will not be yielded you, neither could I ever
learn how they should come by this Right; for it is evident, that Christ
committed the Care and Government of the Church and Church Affairs to his
Apostles. Now if you can produce his Commission for the transferring this Power
from their Successors into the Hands of Secular Princes, I shall herein be
satisfied. This I am sure of, that it continued in their Hands above 300 Years,
Constantine being the first Christian King; and it is evident enough, that he
never attempted to rob them of it, and assume it to himself; and the other good
Emperors would not intermeddle with Church Affairs, but by assent of the
Church, and to assist it: Some other Emperors that were busy herein, ruined
themselves thereby, and some repented of it, as Constantius by name, who upon
his Deathbed declared this to be one of the three things that most disquieted
him, which Nazianz. mentions to be these, (...); The murder of his Relations;
his proclaiming the Apostate Julian Emperor, his Innovation in matters of
Faith. But that which gives me greatest satisfaction herein, is, because I find
the Fathers to check the Emperors when they put their Fingers into Church
Matters, which had been very unproper, had they looked on them as Heads of the
Church. Thus Athanasius, Ad solit. vit. agentes, speaking of Constantius the
Emperor's usurping Power in the Church, says, (...); For who is he that seeing
him ruling over the lawful Bishops, and presiding in Ecclesiastic Judgments
will not consequently say, this is the abomination of desolation spoken of by
the Prophet Daniel. And in the same Epistle he tells the Emperor wherein his
Power properly consists, (...); God has committed the Kingdom to you; but he
has entrusted the Affairs of the Church with us. And accordingly St. Ambrose
tells the Emperor upon the like occasion, Publicorum tibi moenium jus
commissum, non sacrorum; ad Imperatorem Palatia pertinent, ad Sacerdotem
Ecclesia: In his Epist. 33. ad Imperat. and in his Epist. 32. he tells him, In
causa fidei Episcopos solere de Imperatoribus, non Imperatores de Episcopis
judicare. This Power of the Clergy in Ecclesiastics is acknowledged by
Ignatius ad Smyrn. where he expressly says, (...), which Bishop Usher thus
translates, Nemo praeter Episcopum aliquid agat eorum, quae ad Ecclesiam
pertinent; the words may be translated either praeter Episcopum, or sine
Episcopo. This Priestly Power is acknowledged by the Fathers: Hence it is that
Nazianz. in his Orat. 17. ascribes to them (...), A Dominion, Tribunal and
Principacy: And in the same Orat. he affirms their Power nobler than the
Secular, where speaking of the Governor, he says, (...); For we our selves
rule, I will add, that our Principacy is greater and more perfect: And
accordingly he tells the Governor, (...); That the Law of Christ had subjected
him to his Dominion and Tribunal. St. Chrysoft. seems to be of the same
Opinion, Hom. 5. de verbis Isaiae, Vidi Dominum: (...), The Priesthood is a
more venerable and greater Principacy than a Temporal Kingdom; affirming, that
God subjected the Kings Head to the Highpriests Hands, instructing us, (...),
That he was the greatest Prince of the two. And accordingly Cyril in his 17th
Catech. says, (...); To this very day we see Earthly Princes governed by
Ecclesiastics. I have not quoted any of these Authorities with an intent to
decide which of these two Powers be the greatest, but to prove, that the
Fathers did acknowledge them both as distinct, and as I have declared both of
them Absolute and Independent in their kind; so I shall conclude this Point
with the saying of Ignatius to that purpose, (...). You are now pleased to
descend to particulars, mentioning the Christian Emperors by name, who de facto
and jure governed the Church. The first you pick out is Constantine, whom you
have most falsely traduced, by making him a Head or Governor of the Church, as
assuming to himself Ecclesiastic Supremacy: A Crime he both abhorred, and was
wholly untainted with. It Is well known, he was a great Honourer of Sylvester
Pope in his days, looking on him as Peter's Successor, Supreme Head of the
Church, and he was besides a great enricher, no Sacrilegious Robber of it. He
attempted not to alter any of its Articles, but embraced its Doctrine, and
ratified its Conciliary Definitions, as Athanasius affirms, (...),
strengthening them by his Imperial Law. And he was so far from acting as Head
of the Church, as he dared not to judge a Bishop, as Augustine affirms in his
166 Epist. Sed quia Constantinus non est ausus de causa Episcopi judicare, eam
discutiendam atque finiendam Episcopis delegavit: And Ruffin. likewise, Lib.
10. Hist. Cap. 2. mentions this Answer of his to the Bishops, Deus vos
constituit Sacerdotes, and potestatem vobis dedit de nobis quoque judicandi,
and ideo nos a vobis recte judicamus. As for the Objection of Caecilianus, I
find it fully solved by Card. Perron in his Third Book to King James Cap. 4.
Besides, whoever considers his behavior in the Council will not think he acted
as Head of the Church. For, first, he would not sit down till he had desired
permission of the Bishops, which Theodoret expresses thus, (...), having asked
leave of the Bishops to grant it: Eusebius thus, (...), which Valesius thus
translates, Nec prius sedere sustinuit quam Episcopi id nutu significassent.
Theodoret after he had mentioned the Speech he made, adds this, Haec and
similia tanquam filius, and amator pacis Sacerdotibus veluti Patribus
offerebat. Here he acted as a Son of the Church, not as a Head, neither did he
any thing in the Council by way of defining, but by assenting to its Dicisions,
being present there, rather (...), for Decency and Order than for any thing
else.

As for the Emperors Justinian, Theodosius and Charlemain, whom you likewise
particularize upon the same account as you did Constantine, I must acknowledge,
that they did make Laws concerning the Affairs of the Church, but none of them
made any in opposition to it, or the Definitions thereof, but rather agreeable
to them, reducing the Churches Faith and Canons for Discipline into Imperial
Laws, to the intent they might be more obeyed by their Subjects. This is no
more than what was practiced by Jovinian, who in those great differences of
Opinions which were in his days, desired of the Orthodox Bishops a Platform of
the True Faith, which Athanasius gave him, (...), as Nazianz. calls it, A Royal
Gift indeed, which he confirmed by his Imperial Power. But to return to the
above mentioned Emperors, and to see how their Examples will jump with your
Case. First, They made Laws, that the Catholic Religion should be observed in
all their Dominions: You make Laws for its subversion, altering its Articles,
and foisting in their room new Negatives in opposition to them. They made Laws
in defense of the Pope, acknowledging him the Prince and Head of Gods Holy
Priests: You make Laws in defiance of him, pulling of him down as a Spiritual
Usurper. They made Laws which were according to his Approbation, the Rules and
Definitions of the Church, backing the Spiritual with the Temporal Sword: You
make Laws in affront to him, and against the Decrees of the Church. Thus you
see their proceedings herein have no affinity with Henry the Eighth's Headship,
nor with Edward the Sixth's Reformation of the Ecclesiastic Laws, nor with
Queen Eliz. New Articles and Canons. But that you may more be convinced herein,
I shall give you a few Patterns of these Emperors Decrees, which at your
leisure you may confront with those of your party, and see how they quadrate;
(...). Justinian, Novel. 131. We enact, that according to their own Sanctions,
the most Holy Pope of Old Rome, be the Prince of Highpriests: And in his
Decrees about Justiniana, he acknowledges therein to have followed the
Definitions of Pope Vigilius, (...); and in Justin. eod. Lib. 7. he says thus,
(...); Neither will we suffer any thing which belongs to to the State of the
Church, not to be referred to your Holiness, as being the Head of all the Holy
Priests of God.

As for Theodosius, I find in Sozom. L. 7. C. 4. that he put out an Edict,
Commanding that Religion which Pope Damasus had preserved, as delivered to him
by St. Peter, should be observed, enjoining all his Subjects to embrace it. I
can find no Edict of his for reforming and altering it: This he enjoined those
under him to be of, under penalty of being reputed Heretics, and Infamous, and
deservers of Punishment. Thus much Power in Church Affairs is still granted
every King; and to speak the Truth, it is their Duty to defend the Church by
their Temporal Power against Heresy and Schism: By such Actions as these they
purchase to themselves the glorious Title of Nursing Fathers and Propugnators,
not by usurping Authority over the Church, depluming its Head of that Power
which Christ invested him with, and appropriating it to themselves, changing
Articles of Belief established by General Councils, and Ancient Traditionary
Truths, handed down from Father to Son; these are Actions unpresidented by any
well instructed Christian Emperor, who I find to be very cautious touching
Church Affairs, as you may perceive by the Answer of the Emperor Valentinian to
the Bishop of Heraclea, Sozom. Lib. 6. C. 7. (...); It is not lawful for me,
who am one of the Laity to concern my self about such things.

After this vagrancy of your Roving Fancy you begin to think of home, and being
returned into your own Country, you affirm of our English Kings, that
Church Affairs were both de facto and jure, governed by them. This if you shall
ever be able to prove out of good Authors, you will certainly deserve the Palm
for an admirable Historian.

I have already proved, that Church Matters do belong to the Spiritual not to
the Temporal Power; and that these two Governments are distinct; and for this I
have the Authority of St. Chrysostom. who in his Hom. 4. de verbis Isaiae in Vidi
Dominum, says, (...); There be other limits of a Kingdom, and other limits of
the Priesthood, but this is greater than that. As for Matter of Fact, I will
not deny but that some Princes before Henry the Eighth irritated, either by
their Passion, or allured by a curiosity of intermedling with what did not
appertain to them, have entrenched upon the Immunities of the Church, and
asserting a pretended Right, have clashed with the Roman Bishop, and meddled de
facto with Church Matters, but quo jure is the Question. You cannot prove a
right of Power by proving an exercise of Power, unless it be allowed of for
granted, That whatever a King does is lawful. Their Quarrels with the Pope were
chiefly about Investitures, and disposal of Bishoprics: They did not deny his
Supremacy in Spirituals; or if they quarrelled with any particular Pope, they
did not attempt the abolishing of Papacy. A Pope may be to blame, and so may a
King; but neither of these Institutions (as Sacred) ought to be abrogated for
the faults of Men. But to bring the parrallel home to your Case: Did our Kings
before Henry the Eighth make themselves absolute Heads of the Church
immediately under Christ? Did they challenge as innate to their Crowns, Supreme
Power in all Cases both Spiritual and Civil? Did they rob the Pope of his
Power, and assume Papal Jurisdiction? Did they vendicate to themselves
Authority in Church Affairs, ordering Laymen, Vicar Generals in Spiritualities,
as Cromwell was, who sat in the Convocation-House amongst the Bishops, as Head
over them? This would to them have appeared as new and monstrous a sight as
ever was brought out of Africa. Suppose they clash'd with the Church of Rome,
did they ever part from her, and all other Christian Churches besides, as you
did in your Reformation? making Laws to reverse Decrees of General Councils,
changing Religion, and altering Articles of Belief? Did they pick Quarrels with
the Church, and then Sacrilegiously seize on her Lands and Goods, Sacrificing
to their fury as many Churchmen as would not comply with their Nefarious Oaths;
Demolishing Religious Houses, violating Sacred Orders? Was any thing of this
nature acted in the days of Henry the Seventh, or of those brave Princes before
him? But I shall not proceed further on this Point, we having at present a King
granted us by the indulgent benignity of Heaven, who well knows, how to
distinguish betwixt the Rights of the Church, and his own Royal Right; betwixt
what belongs to, God and what to Caesar; what to the Miter and what to the
Crown. A most Religious Prince tracing the sure Footsteps of his Great
Ancestors; owning the Religion which his vast Kingdoms received at their
forsaking Heathenism, and Conversion to Christianity. In a Right and proper
Sense Defender of the true Catholic Apostolic Faith, for defending whereof,
this Crown obtained that illustrious Title. For this Prince, Pietate insignis
and Armis, no less Pious than Valiant, no less Just than Good; endued with all
those Adorable Qualities, which render him amongst Kings, the most Conspicuous,
amongst Monarchs the most Renowned; we ought to be highly grateful to the
Supreme God, whose Lieutenant he is; hoping that under so Gracious and Merciful
a Prince we may be protected from our cruel inveterate Enemies, and that now at
length our Innocence may be a sufficient Shield to defend us from the false
Oaths of Profligate, Perjured Villains, who have so long triumphed over us,
bathing their wicked Hands in guiltless Blood. And now having made mention of
our Natural Liege Sovereign, I shall conclude this Point with a Prayer for him,
according to the Platform of Tertullian, wishing his Majesty Vitam prolixam:
Imperium securum: Domum tutam: Exercitus fortes: Senatum fidelem: Populum
probum: Orbem quietum: And I hope you will join with me herein, not formally,
as when you pray for him in your Church, marring your Prayer with some oblique
Reflection; but ex Pectore, Heartily wishing him all those Benedictions which
he may desire as Homo, and as Caesar; Which God grant him. Morever, I would
desire you to leave off injuring your Prince, in railing against his Religion
in your Sermons, falsely representing it to your cheated Auditory, impressing
them with wrong Ideas of it, and thereby alienating the Affections of his
Majesty's Liege Subjects, which is a Crime of the greatest magnitude, and of
most dangerous Consequences; yet this freedom is taken by several, who fancy
they may wreak and evaporate that Passion (which they dare not on his Sacred
Person) safely against his Religion; thus slily discharging their rancour
against a most incomparable Prince, to whom they can ascribe no other fault,
but what really in it self is Glorious and deserving Acclamations, namely, His
returning to the bosom of the Catholic Church; which Action of his being
rendered more noble by the violent Oppositions and Contrasts of his Enemies
(will maugre their spite) purchase to him surpassing Glory in this World, and
Immortal Beatitude in that to come. He, who (like a Generous Eagle, slighting
the Artillery of the Sky, darting through the midst of the storm, where the
flashes are most astonishing, and the claps most loud) with an undaunted
Spirit, triumphantly resisted and brake through the tumultuous Rage of popular
fury, and stemmed the torrent of its impetuous stream, contemning those many
Crowns that did attend him, for his Conscience sake. He has not only now his
Victorious Temples adorned by the Justice of Heaven with a Diadem more bright
than that of his Predecessors (being thereby made CONTEMPTAE DOMINVS
SPLENDIDIOR REI:) But has an innumerable quantity of Celestial Crowns, beset
with Stars reserved for him in the rich Treasury of Heaven, as a suitable
reward for his hazarding his Temporal ones for the sake of his GOD AND
RELIGION. For Thee, GREAT PRINCE, Praise has no proper Encomium, nor
COMMENDATION a fit Panegyric, nor this World an adequate Recompense, nor thy
Kingdoms a suitable Sacrifice; but that of the Hearts of thy Subjects. Too
happy would this Nation be, had it understanding enough to apprehend its own
Good, having a Prince, who would not only protect them here on Earth, but serve
as a Pilot to conduct them to Heaven.

CHAP. III. Of the Keys. In what Sense St. Peter may be said to answer for the
Rest. That what Christ replied, was directed immediately to Peter only. In what
Sense 'twas extendible to the Rest. How the other Apostles may be said to share
in the Keys. An Account of the Fathers who acknowledge St. Peter Paramount in
the Keys. The Exposition of St. Matt. 18. v. 18. and of St. John 20. v. 21. How
the Church received the Keys in St. Austin 's Sense. Whether a Minister of the
Protestant Church has the Power of the Keys? With Advice to him.
IT may now seem high time to finish my intermitted Discourse concerning the
Keys, answering you likewise in that Point: But upon perusing your Papers, I
find you write but little on this Subject, but only offer me a rude indigested
Lump of Quotations, without any Method, which in lieu of becoming a Clue to
conduct me, were a Skain of snarled Thread to perplex and involve me; which made
me more curious in prying into the intricacies of this matter and of acquiring
satisfaction herein, which I thought could not be obtained without reducing
your Quotations into some form, and then by solving them. Your chief drift in
them was, I perceive, First to prove that Peter answered for the rest of the
Apostles; and thence to infer, that what was said by our Savior to him, was
spoken to the Rest: By this Method you would evince the Rest to be equally
concerned with him in the donation of the Keys: This, in short, is the Web of
your Design, which I shall here endeavor to unravel. This kind of Argumenting
I find Dr. Whitaker to make use of long before you, Petrus Discipulorum omnium
nomine respondit, Tu es Christus, etc. Ergo omnium nomine audivit, Tibi dabo
Claves; but the cunning of this reasoning will be easily detected, when it is
examined upon what account he may be said to answer for the Rest. Dr. Whitaker
says, it was because they had the same Faith, and he only spoke for them; his
words are these, Non in sua tantum persona illam confessionem edidit Petrus;
fuit enim communis illa fides atque confessio, Petri unius ore edita: But this
his Opinion can never be proved, the Revelation of the true Faith being made to
him only, as I have already manifested. As for the Fathers who affirm, that
Peter answered for the Rest, Salmeron says of them thus, Recte intelligendi,
Orthodoxe interpretandi: And this is good Advice; for they in saying so, take
the Twelve as a Society, and Peter as their chief; and in this Sense he may be
said to speak for them: But then he did not speak as their Praeco, but as their
Princeps, he spoke not their Sense, but what God the Father had revealed and
suggested to him; he answered what they could not answer; but they, by their
silence approving his Confession upon his first promulging it, are said to
answer by his Mouth; though properly speaking Petrus solus respondit, caeteri
assentiuntur: Now they being Members of that Community of which he was Supreme,
the words may be said in an inferior Sense, to be spoken to the Rest, which
were originally spoken to him. But now if they had the same Faith as he had,
our Saviors rejoinder had seemed more proper, thus, Beati estis, quia Pater
meus revelavit vobis: vos estis Petrae, etc. But you see Christ addresses his
Reply to Peter only, the words Tu and Tibi shutting out all partnership. And
this is St. Austin's Opinion of it, Sermon. 5. In Festo Petri and Pauli, where
speaking of Peter, he says thus, Solus inter Apostolos meruit audire; Amen dico
tibi, quia tu es Petrus, etc. And herein Spalato is very honest, Certe verba
Christi adeo sunt arctata and voculis individuantibus ad unum Petrum directa,
ut nefas sit ea a Petri persona divellere and direct ad alios dirigere;
certissimum est Christum cum Petro direct and proxime loqui. Now if Persons
would be ingenuous, it is easily discerned when Christ grants a thing peculiar
to Peter, and when he grants a thing in common to them all; what he designs the
other Apostles should equally share in with him, he evidently expresses in the
Plural Number. Hoc facite in mei commemorationem, this related to the
Sacrifice, and concerned them all jointly as Priests: What appertained to
Preaching and Baptizing was delivered in common to them all, Euntes docete
omnes Gentes, Baptizantes, etc. And likewise what belongs to Remission of Sins,
Accipite Spiritum, Sanctum quorum peccata rimiseritis, remittuntur. What he
gives Peter apart and peculiar, is in like manner evidently manifested by
Christ's speaking to him in the Singular Number, Tu es Petrus: Dabo tibi Claves:
Confirma Fratres: Pasce Oves meas. As for your Quotation out of St. Ambrose,
Quod Petro dicitur, caeteris dicitur, It Is granted to be true in one Sense, and
I acknowledge, that the Fathers have Sayings to this effect; as Origin, Dabo
tibi Claves, caeteris quoque commune, and others might be mentioned, which
Catholic Writers do not deny, as you may see by Salmeron, Vere dicunt Patres,
verba illa dicta etiam aliis; non quod ad alios immediate dicta sint, sed quod
ita Petro dicta sunt, ut non sibi soli dicta: They grant the other Apostles to
partake herein, but not eodum gradu: Your Authors affirm, that they did equally
share with Peter, and that he had nothing egregious and singular, as Dr.
Whitaker affirms; Nos non aliter quam caeteri, nullo modo concredimus
accepisse, nihil proprium aut singular tributum: But I shall return to your
Quotation out of St. Ambrose, granting it true derivatively, or in a
subordinate inferior acceptance; this hinders not but that these words were
primordially delivered to Peter alone, though in a proportionate Sense, they be
extendible to the Rest, as Members of the Apostolic College, and comprised in
him their Head. Now if ((...)) Purple must be judged of by Purple; I shall by
confronting St. Austin with St. Ambrose authenticate this my Explication: St.
Austin Quaest. 75. Vet. and Novi Testam. on Ego rogavi pro te, says thus, Pro
Petro rogabat, and pro Jacobo, and pro Johanne non rogabat; Vt caeteros taceam,
manifestum est in Petro omnes contineri; rogans enim pro Petro, pro omnibus
rogasse dignoscitur: Semper enim in Praeposito populus aut corripitur, aut
laudatur. Here they be said to be included in Peter as their Governor. And in
the same Book, Salvator cum pro se and Petro dare jubet, pro omnibus exolvisse
videtur; quia sicut in Salvatore erant omnes causae magisterii, ita and post
Salvatorem, in Petro omnes continentur, ipsum enim constituit caput eorum. Here
they are said to be contained in him, as in their Head. But if any one should
have as nice and sagacious a Nose as Erasmus, and fancy that by the style he
can smell out this Book not to be St. Augustin's, I shall give you another
Saying out of him to the same effect out of his 124th. Tract in Johan. Cum enim
Petro dicitur, sequere me, nec dicitur caeteris, qui simul aderant; profecto
eum sicut Magistrum Discipuli sequebantur. Here they are included in him as
their Master: In this Sense it is not improper to say, that what Christ said to
Peter was spoken to the Rest; not but that the words were primarily and
immediately directed to him, but because in an inferior Sense they are
communicable to them all, as summed up in him. Now that the promise of the
donation of the Keys was originally made to Peter solely, is clearly attested
by the Authority of Eulogius Alexandrinus, (...); Our Savior said neither to
John, nor to any other of his Disciples, I will give unto thee the Keys of
Heaven, but to Peter only; and upon what account they were given him, St.
Chrysostom. in Hom. 8. Fest. Pascal. declares, (...); He received the Keys as a
recompense of his Orthodox Faith. And Photius much to the same Sense, in his
35th Epist. (...); He delivered into the Hands of Peter the Keys of the Kingdom
of Heaven, as a reward of his true Confession. Now as to the other Apostles
having the Keys, I shall premise this in Honor to St. Peter; First, That it
cannot be proved out of the Scripture, that the Keys in express words, were
given to any but to him; and unless you can show me some place in the New
Testament where our Savior says to his Disciples, Conjunctim, vobis dabo
Claves; or to any of them Particulatim, tibi dabo Claves, he has the best Plea
and Title to them. Now as for your Quotation out of St. Matt. 18. v. 18. and
out of St. John. 20. 21. to prove that the other Apostles had them; I answer,
That it cannot clearly be inferred from either of those places, that they had
them, the word Keys being not so much as mentioned there; or if it should be
granted that they had them by virtue of those places of Scripture, it does not
follow they had them in the same Sense and Amplitude that Peter had: And herein
I submit to Jansenius, whose words are these, Quamvis dici potest sicut Patres
frequenter dicunt, etiam omnibus Apostolis traditas Claves, loquendo de
Clavibus; ut per eas communiter significatur potestas remittendi retinendique
peccata; sicut, ibi nulla Clavium mentio, ita non est necesse dicere Claves
Petro promissas, omnibus traditas secundum eum sensum, quo Petro hic promissae;
non Apostolis ibi, aut alibi Claves ita traditae. Now if either, or both of
these places you cite, were equivalent to Dabo tibi Claves, what Reason will
you give why Peter should have both a particular, and general promise of them;
and why he should have two Promises of the same thing, whereas one had
sufficed. But, Secondly, I add, That whatsoever was meant by either of those
Texts, they being spoken conjointly to the Twelve, Peter had certainly as large
a share in them as any; but having (over and above his portion in this joint
promise) a particular one apart to himself, in which the Rest were immediately
no sharers; it cannot be disproved, but (by virtue of this singular, separate
Promise made to him personally, in the presence of the Rest) that he had the
Keys either alone; or if the Power of the Keys were afterward given to the
Rest, that he was Supreme in it; he having besides the Power of Binding and
Loosing, which is an effect of the Keys: The Keys themselves, which are a Badge
and Symbol of that Power.

He then Originally received them as they are Ensigns of Supreme Ecclesiastic
Power, Economy and Stewardship in Christ's House, which is the Church; and was
thereby constituted his Steward, and set over all his Family. But
notwithstanding all this, I shall not here go about to appropriate the Power
and Use of the Keys only to him; limiting them to his sole peculiar enclosure,
but shall grant you that they had the use of them; for Peter did not receive
them so as to retain them solely to himself, but to communicate them to the
other Apostles, and following Pastors, as Thomas contra Gentes affirms, Non sic
intelligitur, Petro Claves Regni commississe, ut ipse solus haberet, sed per
eum derivarentur ad alios. And accordingly St. Leo, Transivit quidem in alios
Apostolos vis potestatis hujus, and ad omnes Ecclesiae Principes, decreti hujus
constitutio commeavit. Having yielded you thus much, I shall here only maintain
the Inequality, Inferiority, and subordination of this Power in the other
Apostles, to an higher, sublimer and compleater degree of it in Peter: They
then may be said to have received the Keys Secondarily, Derivatively,
Participatively, by their Associating, Adhering, and Communicating with him
their Head and Prince, to whom after a particularizing manner, they were
originally given to indigitate his Plenitude and Sovereignty in them.

Origin who asks the Question, An soli Petro dantur a Christo Claves,
acknowledges Peter more excelling in the Power of the Keys than the other
Apostles: And in his 6th Tract. on St. Matt. he says, That there was a great
difference betwixt that which was said to Peter, and what spoken to the Rest:
Frst, He confesses him to have received the Keys, not as the other Apostles
did, but (...) only of one Heaven, (...), but of many: Then he says, That that
which Peter bound and loosed was ratified not in one Heaven only, but in all
the Heavens. But says he, What the other Apostles did bind and loose is
confirmed, (...); Not in the Heavens, as what Peter did, but in Heaven, their
Power not extending so far as Peter's did, so as to bind and loose in all the
Heavens, concluding him to be (...), Melior ligator; and he most happy who is
loosed by him. It is most evident from hence, that Origin did believe Peter to
be more eminent, and to surmount the rest in the Power of the Keys, though
Maldonate thinks he did injure this his true and solid Opinion by a too subtle
way of proving it, by making use of Heaven and Heaven's.

Hilarious, who calls the other Apostles Janitores Caeli, acknowledging them to
have the Keys, calls Peter by way of transcendency, O Beatus Caeli Janitor: He
likewise affirms him advanced above the Rest, Quia solus respondet caeteris
Apostolis silentibus supereminentem fidei suae confessione locum promeruit. And
it is observable out of him, that whereas he affirms the other Apostles to have
received the Keys ob fidei suae meritum, he asserts in his Comments on Matt.
13. Petrum fide caeteros anteisse: Thus he having a greater portion of Faith,
consequently had a larger Power in the Keys, that being the reason why he
recev'd them.

As for St. Ambrose, I find him to attribue the Keys to Peter as a Character to
distinguish him from the Rest, confessing him to excel them therein in his
Sermon. 66. Cum omnes Apostoli parem gratiam apud Dominum sanctitatis obtineant,
nescio quo facto Petrus and Paulus videntur prae caeteris peculiari quadam in
Salvatore fidei virtute praecellere, quod quidem ex ipsius Domini judicio
possumus approbare nam; Petro sicut bono dispensatori Clavem Regni Caelestis
dedit. Here he confesses them to be all equal in Sanctity, but differenced in
the Keys.

In his Lib. 10. Cap. 22. Lucae, he says, Tollit ergo Petrus aurem, quare
Petrus? quia ipse est qui accepit Claves Regni Caelorum. Here he asks a
Question, why Peter of all the Twelve cut off Malchas's Ear, because, says he,
it was he, who received the Keys; now had he thought the other equal in the
Keys with him, this had been no Reason. In the 24th Chap. of the same Book, he
says much to the same effect, where speaking of Peter, Constanter qui posterior
venerat primus ingreditur, quasi, qui Claves. Regni Coelorum, ut aliis
aperiret, acceperat: In his Lib. 8. Cap. 9. Lucae, he mentions the Keys as his
peculiar Characteristical Note and Badge, Petrus ascendit qui Claves Regni
Caelorum accepit, Johannes cui committitur Matter Domini, Jacobus qui primus
Sacerdotale solium ascendit.

Cyril Catech. 6. makes it Peter's Glory to have the Keys, as it was St. Paul's
to be snatched up to the Third Heaven, (...).

St. Chrysostom. in his 21 Hom. Corinth. acknowledge him principally entrusted
with them, (...): For it was not such a wonderful thing to show the other
Apostles doing this, as to demonstrate their Prince who was entrusted with the
Keys doing it.

St. Basil acknowledges him Supereminent hererein, De Judicio Dei; where
speaking of him, he says, (...); He that was preferred before all the rest of
the Disciples, who only obtained a more noble Testimony, and proclaimed
Blessed, who was entrusted with the Keys of the Kingdom.

St. Cyprian in his Epist. to Jubain. does either acknowledge him to have
received them solely, or eminently, above the Rest; Ecclesia quae una est super
unum qui Claves ejus accepit voce Domini fundata.

Bid Hom. in Matt. 16. confesses he exceeded them in the Keys as he did in
love, Qui Regnum Caelorum majori dilectione prae caeteris confessus est,
merito, prae caeteris collatis Regni Caelestis Clavibus donatus est.

As for St. Austin, I do acknowledge, that he affirms the Keys to be given to
the Church, when they were given to St. Peter; and this is by Protestant
Writers alleged as highly injurious to his Supremacy, though I cannot see
wherein it is prejudicial to him, or defringes the least Ray of Claritude from
his Glory, but rather guilds it with more radiant luster, if rightly
understood: For if you consult his Writings, you will find that the reason
which moved him to affirm this, was, because Peter represented the Church; now
in what quality he represented it, he discovers himself in his Tract ult. in
Johan. Cujus Ecclesiae Petrus Apostlus propter Apostolatus sui primatum gerebat
figurata generalitate personam: And in Psalm. 108. Cujus Ecclesiae ille
agnoscitur gessisse personam propter primatum quem in Discipulis habuit: And in
Sermon. 23. de verbis Domini, B. Petrus figuram Ecclesiae portans Apostolatus
Principatum tenens. Here he declares his Representation of the Church to be by
virtue of his Principacy and Principacy: So he may be said to represent it, not
in a Parabolical Sense as its Substitute or Vicar, but Historically and Really,
as its Governor and Primate, and consequently he received the Keys as one that
had right and relation a part rei, not as an Attorney who takes possession for
another, but as a Prince receives the Keys of a City for himself, though for the
benefit of his Nation. He received them immediately: The Church by him, as
Tertul. affirms in Scorp. Memento Claves Coeli hic Dominum Petro and per eum
Ecclesiae reliquisse. Dr. Stapleton says, That Peter received them formaliter
for himself, but finaliter for the benefit of the Church, for the Power of the
Keys was not limited to his Person, but derivable to the Governors of the
Church, even to the consummation of the World.

One thing I shall add more, which tends much to Peter's Glory, which is, that
in St. Austin's Judgment, none of the Apostles represented the Church but he.
De Agon. Christi: Non sine causa inter omnes Apostolos hujus Ecclesiae
Catholicae personam sustinet Petrus, etc. And in Sermon. 49. in Evang. Johan.
Dicit Petro in quo uno format Ecclesiam, etc. And in Sermon. 13. Evang. Matt. In
illo ergo uno Apostolo, id est, Petro in ordine Apostolorum primo and precipuo
in quo figurabatur Eccclesia. He then only of all the Apostles representing the
Church, was entrusted not only with the Keys of Heaven, but with the Keys of
the Church, as St. Austin affirms Sermon. 124. de temp. Credendae erant Petro
Claves Ecclesiae, imo creditae sunt ei Claves Regni Coelorum. He then may be
said to have received them in their largest latitude and extent, and in their
Independent Jurisdiction, as Head of the Church, and of the Apostolic Quire:
the Rest received them in a lower, narrower acceptance as Members of that
Society. He received them immediately, (...); From our Lord himself, from our
Lords own Mouth, as Chrysostom affirms. They received them by a Proxy or
participatively; either by him, or as Photius thinks, (...), In the Person of
their Prince. It Is most certain, he first received them, and as Tertull. de
pudic. affirms, he first made use of them, Primus in Christi baptismo reseravit
aditum Coelestis Regni. Optatus con. Parm. says, The Keys were given to him
only, to preserve Unity, Stant tot innocents and, peccator accipit Claves ut
unitatis negotium formaretur; but then he acknowledges they were to be
communicated to the Rest; but withal grants Peter the preference herein: De
Schism. Lib. 7. Praeferri Apostolis omnibus meruit, and Claves Regni Coelorum
communicandas coeteris solus accepit. If you do believe thus much, I shall hold
no further Dispute with you about the Keys. Now though I have already said
something to your Quotation in St. Matt. 18. 18. I shall here make some
addition. That the Fathers did not attribute an equality of Power in the Keys
to the rest of the Apostles with Peter, by virtue of that place, is evident by
their Expounding it of Fraternal Correption, giving by these words to the
injured party Power of binding and loosing the Offender: This is St. Chrysostom.
Sense of this place. And St. Hierom likewise, In qualibet causa nos frater
loeserit, demittendi habemus potestatem. And St. Ambrose says, Cum
concordaveris cum fratre solvisti eum. Peter also seems to take it in this
meaning; for presently upon Christ's saying, Whatsoever ye bind on Earth shall
be bound in Heaven: He asks him, Domine, quoties peccabit in me frater and
dimittam ei? Origin comes nearest the point of any, and does clearly decide it
in his Notes on St. Matt. where he says, that those words, Whatsoever ye bind
on Earth shall be bound on Heaven, were common both to Peter and those that did
admonish their Brothers: But as for the words Dabo tibi Claves, he says, they
were delivered separate apart to him, that he might have something peculiar and
egregious above the Rest; his words are these, (...): And in the same place he
does acknowledge, that what was spoken apart to him, did far exceed what was
spoken in common to the Rest; those words do really appear more Authoritative
and Extensive than the Power of binding and loosing granted the Rest, which
contains not the total, but partial Acts of the Keys; for they, besides their
including Power of Solution and Alligation are Badges of Dominion: This made
our Savior, when he gave his Apostles the Power of binding and loosing to make
no mention of the Keys, reserving that Honor for St. Peter. As for your
Citation out of St. John. 20. v. 5. here is likewise no mention of the Keys.
Christ did by virtue of these words give them all full Jurisdiction and
Authority over the Universe. In this their Apostolic Commission, they were all
equal; but this was granted them not in reference to one another, but in
relation to the whole World, of which they were all Princes and Heads, whereas
Dabo tibi Claves was spoken to Peter, apart, after a particular manner, not
competent to the other, with a particular Blessing, sprung from a particular
Act of his confessing Christ his Divinity, Christ alluding to his Name, and
declaring to him his Fathers Name, and this was done in the presence of the
Rest, to show them he designed him their Head and Prince.

The next thing I am to remark, is your Quotation out of St. Ambrose, Claves
illas Regni Coelorum in Beato Petro cuncti suscipimus. Then you give me a check
for saying they received them, a Petro, whereas you say it was in Petro. I
shall not concern my self in the defense of this Criticism, I know there is
much to be said for either of the Opinions; as you may see in Salmeron, some
say a, some in, and some per Petrum, as you may see in Tertull. Scorp. Nam si
adhuc clausum putas esse Coelum, memento Claves ejus hic Dominum Petro, and per
eum Ecclesiae reliquisse. And accordingly, Greg. Nyss. de Cast. (...); He gave
to the Bishops the Key of Caelestial Honors, per Petrum. St. Ambrose Lib.
Sacerd. dign. says, Cum Petro, cum illo suscipimus omnes; but I shall wave
these niceties, and come to your Quotation, Claves illas Regni Coelorum in B.
Petro cuncti suscipimus: And here you left out a very material word,
Sacerdotes. The Fathers did not mean by this saying a Minister of a Separate,
Reformed Church, but a Priest of the Catholic Church, and the word Priest does
imply both Altar and Sacrifice. Having thus gloss'd upon the words, I grant
them to be true. The Master of the Sentences acknowledges every Priest to
receive the Keys with his Sacerdotal Order, Lib. 4. Distinct. 19. Cum enim
recipit ordinem Sacerdotalem simul and has Claves recipit. Now though every
Parish Priest has the Keys as really and as truly as a Bishop or Primate, yet
he has them not in so ample and full a manner as they have, but in a
Circumscribed, limited Sense, he having no power to use them but on such as are
in subjection to him, which are fewer in number than they who are under a
Bishop: But upon examining this Author, out of whom you have quoted so much, I
find him to ascribe the Power of the Keys only to the true Church, Jus ligandi
atque solvendi solis permissum est Sacerdotibus: recte ergo Ecclesia hoc sibi
vindicat; quae veros habet Sacerdotes Haeresis vindicare non potest quae veros
non habet Sacerdotes, Lib. 4. Did. 18. And now it will seem a very fit time
for you to look about you, for your Case is very dubious, and I must confess, I
cannot see what Title you have to the Keys. You, who who are no Priest of the
Catholic Church, but only a Minister of a Particular one, fallen off from her.
You, who Write and Preach against Catholic Doctrine and Unity in Justification
of your Schismatical Defection. You, who have so much distended your Nerves, in
injuring not only Peter, whom our Savior entrusted with the Keys, but likewise
in abusing his Successors who possess them after him. You, who by
Excommunication are severed from the Body of the Catholic Church, as Sarmentum
and Ramale emortuum, how you should have them, I cannot imagine: And I may ask
you, as Optatus did the Donatists, Lib. 2. Cont. Parm. Vnde est quod Claves
Regni vobis usurpare contenditis, qui contra Cathedram Petri vestris
praesumptionibus and audaciis militatis. St. Cyprian will tell you in his
Epist. 73. Foris nec ligari aliquid posse, nec solvi: And in his 6th. Epistle,
Dicimus omnes omnino. Haereticos atque Schismaticos, nihil habere potestatis ac
juris: But on the other side Theophyl. says, (...); They have power to loose
and bind who are honored with Episcopal Grace according to Peter. But before I
quit this Point I shall very seriously recommend to you the Saying of St.
Hierom in his Comments on Matt. 16. where speaking of the Power of the Keys, he
acknowledges Peter to have received it, Speciatim, especially, particularly,
Quod quicunque ab unitate fidei and Societate Ecclesiae se separaverit, nec a
peccatis solvi, nec Caelum possit ingredi. By this you may apprehend your
deplorable condition, being separated from the Unity of the Catholic Faith,
and from the Society of the Catholic Church. Be so indulgent to your self, as
not to use any Sophistry in gulling your self. Permit this Saying of St. Hierom
not to float like a Buoy on the Surface of your Brain, but to subside to your
interior and deepest consideration. Be so kind likewise to your Flock, whose
Opinion of your Learning and Orthodoxy has made them ductile to your Guidance,
and recipient of your Impresses, as to impose no more false Tenets on their
obvious credulity. It Is your Duty to instill into them saving Truths, and not
to infect them with pernicious Doctrine. Pliny makes mention of a Poisonous
Fountain in Arabia, where the Shepherds pay the price of the Sheep that drink
thereof and perish; what punishment would that Shepherd deserve, that should
poison his Flock himself? and how far more he, who having, the care of Rational
Sheep committed to him, should in lieu of feeding them with the sincere Milk,
taint them with destructive Principles? You know very well how often you have
preached over those Papers you sent me, and how, unsuspectedly they were
imbibed by your greedy Auditory. Having now laid open those many Errors
contained in them, you would show your self an ingenuous Person if you would
uncurtain to them those many falsehoods you have vented under the fallacious
Mantle of sound Truths; By such candid an Action, as by a piacular Victim, you
might efface that guilt you have contracted by your slanderous reviling the
Catholic Church, and injurious Representations of her Doctrins; I cannot
imagine, but that you must needs be conscious to your self of your great
miscarriages herein, and that a Person of your Reading must know better things,
and can teach too, if you please; but whether a long Habit or Interest retards
you herein, i will not pretend to define. I shall only tell you what the
Shepherds in Hesiods Theogonia say of themselves, and so conclude this Point,
leaving it to you to make Application;

(...)
(...).
Lies that resemble Truth we know to teach,
And if we please, the ancient Faith can preach.
CHAP. IV. Of St. Peter 's being called Satan: And of his Denial.
IT will not now seem incongruous to say something of Christ's calling St. Peter
Satan, not long after he had told him that he would build his Church on him,
and had promised him the Keys: For this I find objected by several, as if by
calling him so, Christ had evacuated what he promised him before. But it is to
be considered, that this happened betwixt the time of the Promise and
Performance which was not exhibited till after Christ's Resurrection. St. Hierom
on his Comments on Matt. 16. seems with this solution to satisfy the
Objection, Prudens lector inquirat quomodo post tantam beatitudinem, etc. nunc
audiat. Vade retro me Satana; aut quae sit tam repentina conversio, ut post
tanta praemia Satanas appelletur. Sed si consideret qui hoc quaerit, Petro
illam beatitudinem, potestatem, and aedificationem super eum Ecclesiae in
futuro promissam, non in praesenti datam intelliget, Aedificabo, inquit, super
te Ecclesiam meam, and Portae Inferi non praevalebunt adversus eam, and dabo
tibi Claves Regni Coelorum, omnia de futuro, quae si statim dedisset ei,
nunquam in eo pravae confessionis error invenisset locum. And accordingly
Theophyl. (...); The word Dabo signifies the time to come, to wit, after his
Resurrection. But if that for which he is checked be well inspected, you will
find two things which much extenuate his fault; the one is his great Love and
Tenderness to Christ, declared in these words, Propitius esto tibi Domine; the
other is his ignorance of Christ's design in coming into the World. Now he is
called Satan, not as if he willingly or maliciously did go about to hinder the
Salvation of Mankind, but because he out of ignorance of Gods Eternal Decree,
gave Christ that Advice of favoring himself, which had it been followed, would
have obstructed our Redemption which was designed us by the Bloody Sacrifice of
the Cross. St. Austin on his 49th Tract. Johan. does acquit him of any Crime
herein, Nec Petro tamen humana ignorantia proficit ad crimen, non enim ei Pater
adhuc omne passionis Mysterium revelaverat, voluerunt consilium dare Domino, ne
moriretur qui venerat mori, ne ipsi morerentur.

The next thing of this nature which I shall insist on, is, his Denial, which
by several is highly exaggerated, as if all his Dignities had thereby been
forfeited and lost; but in this his fault, it is likewise to be considered,
that it was committed before his installment in his Supreme Power, which was
not solemnized till Christ returned Victorious from the Grave. It was before he
was virtute indutus ex alto; it was before he had received the Holy Ghost by
Christ's Insufflation, Timore Petrus ter negavit, nondum enim acceperat Spiritum
Sanctum; accepto postea Spiritu Sancto cum fiducia caepit praedicare; qui ad
vocem ancillae ter negaverat, accepto Spiritu Sancto inter flagella Principum
confessus est quem negaverat, says St. Ambrose, Psalm. 90.

The Fathers allege several Reasons why God permitted this Great Apostle to
commit this Offense. The first is, that he might be proposed to us as a pattern
not to despair when we fall into any Sin; this is Theophyl. Sense of it on Luke
22. The Second is, That he might be a happy Example unto us of not persevering
in our Sins, but by a speedy Repentance to lament, detest and forsake them. The
Third is mentioned by St. Austin, Ideo B. Petrum paululum subdeseruit, ut in
illo totum humanum genus posset agnoscere nihil se sine gratia Dei praevalere.
But the proper and adequate Reason is, because Christ designing him to be the
Supreme Ruler of the Church, whom he did purpose to entrust with the Keys (by
which he gave him full Power to absolve or retain Sins) that he might be
compassionate and favorable to poor Penitent Sinners in absolving them, as
Christ had mercifully forgiven him. And this is clearly St. Austin's Sense of
it in Sermon. 124. de Temp. Vt Ecclesiae Rectori futuro ignoscendi peccatoribus
quaedam regula poneretur: And in the same place, Divinae Providentiae secretum
ita temperavit atque permisit, ut primus ipse laberetur ac rueret in peccatum,
quo ergo peccantes duriorem sententiam proprii casus intuitu temperaret. For
Peter was thought to be by nature very severe and rigid; and lest he should be
too strict a Censor of Human Frailties, God suffered him to fall into this Sin,
that by reflecting on his own Offense he might be more gentle and indulgent to
other Transgressors, Vt in Clavibus esset fidelis Janitor, in sententiis
clementissimus Dispensator; erat enim revera Petrus paulo durior and severus,
says the same Author. This is likewise St. Chrysostom's Opinion of it, in
Petrum and Eliam, (...); He was permitted to Sin, that he, as being without Sin
might not be rigid and averse to pardon: He who was entrusted with the Church,
the Pillar of the Churches, the Haven of Faith, even Peter the Master of the
World, was suffered to trespass, that this Man's being permitted to Sin, might
become an Argument of favor to others.

St. Austin in his Sermon. 124. de Temp. is pleased to call this a small fault in
him, Exiguae culpae permittitur subjacere tantus Apostolus, etc. Not but that
the Offense was foul enough, but because it was of so short a continuance, he
immediately recovering himself by a sincere Repentance. It was a short Eclipse,
a Trip, rather than a Fall; a Verbal, rather than a Real; a Labial, rather than
a Mental Abnegation, In Domini passione titubat Petrus Sermon non Mente. His
Tongue had no sooner disowned him, but his Heart protesting against it,
proclaimed him with penitential Tears, Voce visus est denegare, lachrymis
fatebatur, says St. Ambrose. And if the Devil, as Theophyl. affirms, did in
this storm blow off some of his Leafs, the Root was sound and vivid. Now if the
Carriage of the other Disciples be well inspected, I much question whether they
will be found in this juncture truer to our Savior than he: For if he did deny
him, and Judas did betray him, how honorably the rest did behave themselves,
Theophyl. will tell you, (...), The rest fled for it: And this Action of theirs
was not only a disowning of him, but a sign of a fearful, distrustful temper.
Peter only of the Disciples had the Heart to follow him, and expose himself to
danger. St. John did indeed accompany him, but this was not out of pure Valor
and Gallantry as Peter did, for St. John run no Rischie herein, he relying on
the High Priests acquaintance for his safeguard and protection: And this was
well observed by Theophyl. who says, he did not follow Christ as ((...)) a
Disciple, but as an Acquaintance of the High Priest. But if we consider the
dirity of that dreadful time, when he denied his Master, it will much lessen
his fault; it was when the Power of Darkness ruled with its Black Scepter; It
was when the Sun was Obtenebrated, the World shak'd with unusual Tremours, and
obdurate Rocks cleft asunder; then it was when the destined Rock of the Church
was moved. So I shall not (as some Petulant and Saucy Pens have done)
exprobrate this Offense to him, but endeavor to imitate him as an incomparable
pattern of a speedy Penitent, (...); For he even in his failures is profitable
to us, by his hasty Tears, abolishing his Offense, and being shaken for a
little time, he became the Foundation of the Faithful for ever. Now that after
his fall, he was not only restored to his former Dignities, but advanced to a
higher Degree, I shall prove when I come to treat of his Commission.

CHAP. V. The Introduction to Pasce Oves meas. Of the word (...). Wherein St.
Peter exceeded the Rest as Pastor. Whether Pasce Oves meas were an Exhortation
or a Commission? Why St. Peter was sorry for Christ's thrice asking him. The
Reason of the trine Interrogation. That the foregoing words were spoken
immediately to St. Peter only.
HAving thus traveled through all these several Stages, I am at length arrived
to Pasce Oves meas; which words I find to be strongly urged by Catholic
Writers, in defense of Peter's Supreme Pastoral Jurisdiction; and impugn'd by
Protestant Authors with all their Force and Armory, as being most Emphatical
for the establishment of his Ecclesiastic Praefecture, Nullo in loco adeo
aperte vidtur soli Petro totius Ecclesiae cura committi atque ubi ei dicitur,
Pasce Oves meas, says the Archbishop Spalato. Hic est ille unicus locus quo
Petri Papatus nititur. Aut hic Petro Papatus, aut nusquam datur, was Dr.
Whitakers Sense of this place. These words being confessedly thus momentous, I
shall expend some Oil and Pains in giving them a due discussion; for this must
be done examinately not cursorily, according to what Maldonate affirms, Locus
est gravis, and in quo paulo altius figere pedem oportet. It shall therefore
now be my province to make a strict revision of what I wrote on this place, and
maturely to poize what you returned me in opposition thereto; this I shall
perform, not only for your Answer, but for my own satisfaction: For I can with
a Serene and Unclouded Conscience affirm, that I embraced the Catholic Faith,
not by the persuasion of any Temporal or Mundan Interest, nor by the insidious
enticements of any Persons whatsoever, as you have figured to your self; but as
attracted thereto purely by the Alliciency and Magnetism of Truth; and you
shall find me correspondently to maintain none of my Tenets, either with
Obstinacy or with Unclassical Authors, but by approved uncontested Authority:
You have not now to do with a Pertinacious, Undisciplined Fanatic, but with a
Candidate of Literature, a Votary of Antiquity; if you can prove, that I go
contrariant to her, stemming her Sacred Current, I shall acknowledge my Error,
and sing my Palinode upon your convincing me: But notwithstanding this my
pliant and yielding inclination, you shall find me severe enough to such as
endeavor by delusory Impostures to obtrude their Smoke on me, offering
Fallacies washed with Chemical Tinctures, such Persons I have just reason to
shun and abhor, (...). Now how sincere you have dealt by me in Matters of
Religion will be obvious to the dimmest Eye, when I shall have ungilt your
Varnish, unmasked your specious Artifices, detected your Wiles and Doubles,
then it will be discernible whether you have endeavored to reduce me to the
right Opinion, or seduce me into Erroneous Principles.

The first thing you attack is the word (...), which I affirmed to signify
Regere and gubernare, as well as Pascere: To this you make no other Reply than
this; but aliter pascit Rex, aliter Episcopus. This seemed to me a mere evasive
slight, and I must acknowledge my want of Augury to Divine what you mean by
the word Rex, for I never ascribed any Royalty or Monarchy to Peter, but what
was merely Spiritual: If this then be all you have to say against (...), it
amounts to no more than a Greek Expletive Particle which signifies nothing; it
remains then that it denotes to Rule as well as to Feed; and if you think I did
not sufficiently prove it in my first Papers, I shall here give you full
satisfaction. St. Austin. Tract. 123. in Johan. gives a clear Gloss on Oves
pascendas, id est, says he, docendas regendasque. St. Ambrose Lib. 10. Cap. 24.
on St. Luke, speaking of Peter, Oves pascere jubetur perfectiores ut perfectior
gubernaret: And Theophylact, John 21. says, (...). Now besides these
Testimonies, Reason will carry it on my side, for to this very Intention our
Savior changed the word (...), which implies not all the Functions of Pastoral
Authority, but only what appertain to feed, for the word (...), which signifies
both to Feed and to Rule; this was observed by Erasmus in his Notes on this
place. Bis dixit (...), i. e. Pasce sive ale, semel (...) i. e. rege: Thus the
word is commonly used, and it being applied to Reasonable Creatures, it imports
Rule and Government: For this cause Kings are called Pastores, as in Isaia 44.
Qui dico Cyro pastor meus es: And accordingly the Five Tribes spoke to David,
Dixit Dominus ad te, tu pasces populum meum Israel, and tu eris Dux super
Israel. Thus the Emperor Tiberius in Suetonius compares himself to a Shepherd,
and his Subjects to Sheep, Praesidibus onerandas tributo provincias suadentibus
rescripsit, Boni Pastoris esse tondere pecus non deglubere, which Dion renders
thus, (...). Plato in his 4th Book de Repub. calls the Magistrates (...): Homer
calls Agamemnon (...); and Hesiod likewise in his Theog. calls Jason so, (...).
Hence Cyril Glaphyr, Lib. 1. says, (...); It Is usual with the Divine Writ, and
with the Wise Men of Greece to call the Governors of Nations, Cities or People,
Shepherds of the People. Xenophon says, (...): The Actions of a good Shepherd
and a good King are nigh related. And St. Basil. Homil. de Mar. Mam. says,
(...); The Pastoral and Regal Art are Sisters, differing only in this, the one
is entrusted with the Government of Irrational, the other of Rational
Creatures. These Authorities I look on to be a sufficient Guard to secure what
I wrote on the word (...).

Next you affirm, That the other Apostles had Commission to Feed and Rule the
whole Flock as much as Peter. This your Assertion I cannot assent to; yet I
will grant, that the other Apostles were Capita and Pastores totius Mundi.
Having most full and ample Power to found Churches every where, to Convert,
Baptize and Preach to every Creature; and that they were (...), All in Common
entrusted with the world; the whole Universe being their Diocese. Yet
notwithstanding all this, they did not equalize Peter: for he besides his equal
share with the rest in that General Commission to teach all Nations, given to
him jointly with them, had a particular Commission apart solely to himself, in
which the rest were no immediate sharers, not only to strengthen and confirm,
but also to feed and govern the rest, they being included in the words Oves
meas, and consequently recommended to his Pastoral Care and Regency; who by
virtue of these our Saviors words was created, not only chief Pastor of all
other Christians, but even of the Apostles themselves. He then only had
Commission to feed the whole Flock of Christ, taken in a Collective Sense, as
comprehending all Christians, and likewise the Apostles themselves; as I shall
hereafter Illustrate.

Your following Attempt to lessen Peter's Power is, by assaying to take his
Commission from him; affirming Pasce Oves meas to be an Exhortation and no
Commission. This Artifice I find to be made use of by several Modern Protestant
Authors. Dr. Hammond says, All that can by any torture be extracted from it, is
an Exhortation to a diligent discharge of that Office to which he was before
Commissioned. Dr. Stillingfleet in his Part. 2. C. 7. Those words contain no
particular Commission to Peter, but a more vehement Exhortation to the
discharge of his Duty. Dr. Barrow in his Treatise of the Supremacy, These words
are not Institutive or Collative of Power, but rather only Admonitive,
Exhortative to Duty. Thus they agree in their united Verdict: But the words
being pronounced by a Lord to his Servant, Imperatively, have no Lineaments of
an Exhortation, but of a Commission: And accordingly I find the Fathers (whose
Sense I rather choose to follow, than such Authors) to Interpret them; looking
on them as a Command, Commission, Injunction; as a great trust committed to
him, as will clearly appear by the following Quotations, Mandatum de pascendis
Ovibus suis unum idemque ter praecepit. August. Lib. 3. de Consens. Evang. And
in the same place, Petrum ter interrogavit utrum ab illo amaretur, and ei
pascendas commendavit Oves. Dominus respondenti amorem commendat agnos suos,
Sermon. 149. de Temp. Tanquam bonus Pastor tuendum Gregem suscepit. In festo
Cathedrae Petri. Cui pascendas Oves suas post Resurrectionem Dominus
commendavit. Cont. Epist. Manih. And again, Pastor est Petrus, cui pascendas
Oves credidisti, ipse commendasti. Interrogatur amor, imperatur labor. Festo
Cathed. Petri Oves pascere jubetur, Ambr. Lib. 10. Cap. 14. Luc. (...),
Chrysostom. Hom. 87. Johan. He asks thrice, and thrice commands the same things.

St. Bernard, Sermon. 76. Cant. calls it in plain terms, a Commission, Non otiose
toties repetitum est, Petre amas me in Commissione Ovium: By virtue of this
Mandat St. Chrysostom. in his Comments on St. John does acknowledge him, (...),
To have the Government of his Brethren in his Hands: And on Acts 1. that he was
(...), Entrusted by Christ with the Fold: And St. Ambrose says, that he was
made Pastor Dominici Gregis, by virtue of these words.

Thus you may see by the joint suffrages of the Fathers, that it was a Trust,
Mandate, or Commission which was given to Peter after Dinner, it being
customary with our Savior to do great things after Meals, as Maldonate
observes, Res magnas post Prandium aut Coenam fecit Christus. After Supper he
instituted the B. Eucharist; and now having eaten some broiled Fish with his
Disciples, being mindful of the Promise he had made to Peter of building his
Church on him, here he performs it, creating him Supreme Head and Pastor of his
Church, Constituting the Church Government Monarchical. And it is observable,
that as in the Promise he calls Peter, Simon Barjona; so here in the
Performance he calls him Simon Jona, to show that the Performance was made to
the same Identical Person to whom it was promised. The Promise was ushered in
by an Interrogatory, so was the Performance; the Promise was made upon his
egregious Faith, surpassing that of the Rest; the Performance was exhibited
upon his extraordinary Love, surmounting that of the Rest. As for the other
Apostles, they before this, had their Warrant and Authority consigned them when
our Savior breathed on them, Commissionating them, saying, Sicut misit me
Pater, etc. Euntes, Docete omnes Nationes, etc. This was their unlimited
Commission, whereas the first was confined to the lost Sheep of Israel, the
Samaritans and the Gentiles being excepted: This was the General Commission
given in Common to the Apostolic College, in which every Apostle had an equal
share. Now Peter besides, and above the proportion he had in this Grant,
besides the Power he had jointly with the Rest, receives an Authority proper
and peculiar to himself, Christ superadding something apart to him above the
Rest for the excellency of his Faith, and prefulgency of his Love; the ultimate
end of which Action was to preserve Unity, not only in Church Government, but
likewise in Faith. Quamvis Apostolis omnibus post Resurrectionem suam parem
tribuat potestatem, says St. Cyprian, sicut misit me, etc. tamen ut unitatem
manifestaret, unam Cathedram constituit, and unitatis ejusdem originem ab uno
incipiente sua authoritate disposuit. I shall conclude this Point with a Saying
of Jansenius, Cum prima apparitione Apostolis parem contulit potestatem, etc.
nunc ad tollendum Schisma and ut Ecclesia una monstretur, unus omnibus
praeficitur.

But now after all this, you say it is a sign it was an Exhortation, because,
Peter was sorry for its Tergemination, which he would not have been at the
receipt of a Commission. This your Reason seems to me very pleasant and
divertive; I perceive you would have had him very debonair at this his
Investiture, as you would be upon obtaining a Fat and Unctious Benefice. But
first, I must tell you, he had little Reason to be very chearly; for Christ had
no sooner given him his Commission, but he allayed his Joy by foretelling him
his Crucifixion. But I find you to be guilty of a wide mistake concerning the
Original of his Sorrow, which I conceive to be derived from Springs very
distant from your Apprehensions of it; for Petrus mirabatur and cum quodam
taedio audiebat quoerentem, quem nover at omnia scientem, August. de Temp. 149.
Sermon. Contristatus est quod saepe interrogatus est ab eo qui sciret quod
interrogabat, Sermon. 50. in Evang. Johan. And again, Contristatus est Petrus
quod eum tertio interrogat, quasi ille qui vidit conscientiam negationis, non
videbat fidem confitentis. St. Ambrose glosses much to the same effect, Petrus
doluit quia interrogatus est, Amas me? Quod enim manifestum erat, dolebat quasi
incognitum quaeri, Lucae Lib. 6. 7. And on the last Chapter of Luke he says,
Contristatur Petrus quia tertio interrogatur, Amas me? is enim interrogatur de
quo dubitatur. And on Psalm. 90. enarrat. Taedio affectus Petrus, quasi
dubitaret Dominus noster de amore ejus: This may suffice to satisfy you
concerning the true Reason of his sorrow.

One thing I shall add more on this matter, and that is, concerning Dr. Barrow,
who affirms, the words Pasce Oves meas, to be (...), A Renovation of the
Apostolate formerly granted; as if by these words he had recovered it again
after he was fallen from it by his denial: That the words did include his
restoration to his Apostleship I grant; but that they implied no more than
that, which the Doctor would from thence infer, I deny. And to make this fully
understood, I will suppose some Favorite of a Prince, who had a place at
Court, through some misdemeanor incurring his Masters Displeasure to lose it,
and after the decurrence of some time, to be so happy as by regaining his
Princes Favor to be promoted to a higher Office than before: This Favorite may
be said to have acquired his former place, though indeed he be advanced above it
to a higher Dignity. The same was Peter's Case, who after his Fall, purchasing
Christ's Favor by a speedy Repentance, was not only readmitted into the Society
of the Twelve, but was exalted to a higher degree, so as to become the Prince
and Pastor of that Company. This is the Real Sense of the Fathers herein, Post
lacrymas Pastor assumptus est, and alios regendos accipit, qui seipsum prius
non regerat, says St. Ambrose de Paenitentia Petri. And Enarrat. Psa. 43.
Petrus Ecclesiae praeponitur, postquam tentatus a Diabolo est. Majorem gratiam
reperit quam amisit, tanquam bonus Pastor tuendum Gregem accipit, says St.
Austin Fest. Cath. Petri. And Arnobius on Psalm. 138. says, Major gradus
redditur ploranti quam aufertur neganti. (...). Chrysostom. Lib. 6 contra
Judaeos. Peter after that heinous denial of his, because he presently bethought
himself of his Sin, and wept bitterly, he so washed away that Sin, as to become
the Prince of the Apostles, and to have the whole World delivered into his
Hands.

The last thing you take notice of on this Matter, is, That I said Pasce Oves
meas was spoken to Peter thrice upon his trine Negation; but you suppose I will
not say he merited it for his threefold denial: This supposition of yours might
very well have been omitted as unnecessary; and I may very well wave it, as
undeserving any notice should be taken of it; what I said was this, That our
Savior asked Peter thrice, suitable to his trine denial (as St. Austin
observed, Additur trinae negationi trina confessio) whether he loved him, etc.
This seems not at all amiss, or obnoxious to any exception, but you had a mind
to carp at every thing. Now though such parvitudes as these are not worth the
defending, yet because you Cavil at them I shall not desert them as
undefensible; for I believe I can produce better Authority to maintain them
than you can to impugn them, Ter me negasti timendo: Ter me confitere amando,
Ambros. Psalm. 90. Enarrat. And in his Apol. David. Cap. 9. Vt trinae lapsum
negationis professio Charitatis toties repetita deleret. St. Austin, Sermon. 50.
Secund. Johan. Vt trina confessione amoris deleret trinum peccatum negationis.
Theophyl. on John 21. gives two Reasons of our Saviors asking thrice, (...);
Both manifesting what a great care he took of the Faithful, and withal, by a
trine Interrogation and Confession he cures his trine Negation.

The next that encounters my view, is your Quotation out of St. Austin, by
which I perceive, that the drift and scope of your design is to prove the words
Pasce Oves meas, to be spoken to the Rest as well as to Peter: This is the
White at which you level; the words are these, Cum illi dicitur, ad omnes
dicitur, si amas me, pasce, etc. This is all you quote; but upon examining the
place out of which these words were taken, I find the foregoing words to be
these, Non sine causa inter omnes Apostolos hujus Ecclesiae Catholicae personam
sustinet Petrus, huic enim Ecclesiae Claves Regni Caelorum datae sunt, cum
Petro datae sunt; and cum ei dicitur, omnibus dicitur, Pasce Oves meas; August.
de Agone Christiana. Here you are to understand, that in his Judgment Peter
only of all the Apostles personated the Catholic Church, and that the Keys are
said to be given to her when they were given to him; namely, as to its Head,
Primate and Rector, as I have already proved out of his Writings: In this only
Sense I have already fully proved, that those words which were originally and
immediately spoken to Peter are said to be spoken to the Rest, they being all
Epitomized and comprised in him as their Chief: In this Acceptance I grant,
that Pasce Oves meas, might be spoken to all the Disciples, and in no other
aspect. Now this does not at all hinder, but that these words were spoken
primordially to Peter solely; and this is acknowledged by St. Austin himself,
in his Book de Pastoribus, where speaking of our Savior, Tunc ideo commendavit
Oves, quia invenit Petrum; imo vero in ipso Petro unitatem commendavit; multi
erant Apostoli, and uni dicitur, Pasce Oves meas. And again in the same Book,
Petro dixerat, Pasce Oves meas: quid ergo faciemus? Cum Petro commendantur
Oves; non ibi dixit Dominus, Ego pascam Oves meas, non tu, sed Petre, Amas me?
Pasce Oves meas. And again, Sic certe a Domino ad Beatum Petrum dicitur, Petre,
Amas me? and ille, tu scis, Domine, quia amo te. Et cum tertio fuisset
interrogatus, and trina responsione fuisset subsecutus, repetitum est a Domino
tertio, Pasce Oves meas.

Your following attempt is to prove those words to be spoken to all Pastors as
well as to Peter, by your Saying cited out of St. Basil, Consequenter omnibus
Pastoribus dictum est, etc. But this your Quotation does you no Service at all,
it amounting to no more than what I frankly grant; for I do, as well as you,
believe the words to be consequently derivatively, extensively spoken to every
Pastor, all being Figured and Represented in the Supreme Pastor St. Peter, as
Austin avouches, in festo Petri and Pauli. In uno Petro figurabatur unitas
omnium Pastorum, sed bonorum. Now the most inferior Pastor is as really one as
a Bishop, though his Sheep be not so numerous, nor his Fold so large; and I
grant, that these words were in a subordinate secondary Sense, spoken not only
to the other Apostles, but to all lawful Pastors; for Peter, though he were the
Chief, was not the Sole Pastor, Pastor bonus Christus, quid Petrus? Nonne
Pastor bonus? Quid Paulus, quid caeteri Apostoli, quid Beati Episcopi,
Martyrs, quid Sanctus Cyprianus? nonne omnes Pastores boni, non mercenarii? as
St. August. affirms in his 50th Sermon. Evang. Johan. Neither did he feed the
Flock alone, but had the Apostles his Coadjutors, and Compresbyters, whom he
exhorts to feed the Flock, not the Universal, but the Particular one, Pascite
gregem qui in vobis, the Prerogative of feeding the Universal Church, including
both the Apostles and other Christians, being delegated to Peter only, as
Supreme Pastor of the Church; I therefore affirm, that the words were
principally, immediately, and initially spoken to him alone; but I acknowledge
likewise, that in a Proportioned Adequate Sense, In quodam Modo, they suit and
quadrate with all true Pastors: For as Salmeron affirms, Quod summo Pastori
dicitur, id suo modo and proportione servata, aliis minoribus Pastoribus dictum
est; Because they who are called as Fellow Laborers into part of the Pastoral
Function and Solicitude, are to exscribe and imitate the Form that Peter used
in Feeding, Loving, Cherishing, and Defending his Flock. But I shall now come
to your Quotation out of St. Basil, which I found to be in his Book de Vita
solit. Cap. 23. and upon my examining it, taking in those words which were
Introductive to it, I discovered it to be the most destructive and fatal thing
to your purpose, that was imaginable; the previous words which you suppressed,
making wholly against you; they are these, (...); For a Governor is nothing
else but one that represents the person of our Savior; and this we are taught
by Christ, constituting Peter the Pastor of his Church after himself, for he
says, Peter, do yon love me more than these? Feed my Sheep. Here St. Basil does
remarkably affirm what I go about to prove; namely, That Christ created Peter
the Pastor of his Church after himself by virtue of these words. But what shall
I think of your concealing these Lines? Certainly the Action was unworthy and
disingenuous; especially in you, who pretend so much to Truth and Honest
dealings; and you could herein have no Reverence for the Author, or Kindness
for me, whom by such deeds you cannot pretend to instruct, but impose on. I do
not wonder to see the Fathers so copiously quoted by you, now I see it is your
practice to Cull out here and there a Line, without perpending its relation,
either to the foregoing or following Matter, Ends without Beginnings,
Beginnings without Ends. Interpretes falsi extrema ponunt, and superiora
praetereunt, partis immemores and partem subdole comprimentes, says St.
Cyprian, De unitate. And St. Chrysostom. to the same effect, (...), De Verbis
Isaiae Sermon. 1. To cut off words from what follows, to draw them from their
Relation, to take words naked and destitute of the assistance of the
praecedaneous or subsequent Matter. The best palliation I can make for you, is,
that you did not consult St. Basil, as you once fancied I did not Theophyl. but
that you gleaned it up out of some Author ready trimmed for your purpose, and
being first deceived your self, endeavored to deceive me; this is a branch of
what the Apostle says, Decipientes and decepti: Therefore for the future be
cautious what Authors you trust.

Now besides what has been already alleged to prove Pasce Oves meas, to be
primitively spoken to Peter only, I shall in lieu of a Mantissa add the ensuing
Authorities. St. Chrysostom. Hom. 87. Johan. (...), etc. (...); Jesus says unto
Simon Jona, Do you love me more than these? Feed my Sheep. Why did he pass by
the rest, and speak to him about the Sheep? because he was the Prince of the
Apostles, the Mouth of the Disciples, and the top of the Society. Theophyl. in
his Comments on St. John 21. (...); After Christ had concluded his Dinner, he
delivered into the Hands of Peter the Government of all the Sheep, he delivered
them to this Man, not to any other. By these Quotations it is manifest, that
Christ spoke only to him, directing his Order solely to him, and that he said
nothing to the Rest although they stood by, having given them their Commission
before. Theophyl. gives two Reasons of this; the main and principal was, (...),
Because he was the Prince and Mouth of the Apostolic Order. (...), Then to
show him he ought to be of good courage, as having the Sin of his denial
expugn'd,

(...), St. Cyril on St. John, He only asks Simon, although the other Apostles
stood by.

CHAP. VI. That St. Peter 's surpassing love to Christ was the Foundation of
his Prelation. That Peter by virtue of Pasce Oves meas had Universal
Jurisdiction. Several nice Distinctions answered. That the words Oves meas
included the other Apostles. That St. Peter was the only Supreme Pastor: With
an Apostrophe to him.
BUT besides the Authority of these Fathers, the Context highly favors my
Opinion, perspicuously evidencing these words originally to be spoken to Peter
only, and my Argument runs thus, To him only it was replied Pasce Oves meas,
who was asked, Diligis me plus his? But Peter only was asked that Question;
therefore the Reply was directed to him solely, the other Apostles being most
visibly secluded and shut out by the Comparison Plus his: But besides this, the
following Discourse 'twixt our Savior and him, further illustrates this with a
Meridian Ray; he only being said to be Contristated; to him only Crucifixion
was foretold; to him only it was said Thou, when thou growest Old, etc. But if
this be not a sufficient Mercuries Rod to chase away your Cavils; Do but weigh
in just Balances the Reason why our Savior said these words to him, and you
will find it discordant to Reason to admit the other Apostles equally with him
concerned in them. For if Christ had designed him to be no more a Pastor than
any of the Rest by virtue of these words, the Question had been more rationally
stated thus, Simon Jona, do you love me as much as any of the other do? But our
Savior asking him, whether he loved him more than the Rest, did by the shape
and frame of the Question intend him a particular Superiority above the Rest:
He then loving Christ more than they, had a larger Commission, a more diffused
Authority, a particular Jurisdiction and Grant to feed Christ's Sheep more than
they had. This is Maldonatus Sense of it, Hic Christus a Petro singular
quiddam requirit, quod caeteri non habent; aliquid ergo vicissim illi dare vult
proprium and singular, quo caeteris antecederet. This seems to me most
serenely to be the Native and Genuine meaning of our Saviors Question,
disarray'd of all Heretical Depravations, otherwise I desire to know, to what
purpose and designment was the Interrogation of a greater degree of love; why
not of an equal portion, if the Reward were to be equal? Now that this his
egregious Love, was the Motive that induced Christ to grant him this
Commission; and that it was a necessary and essential qualification for the
obtainment of it, seems clear, and the words may be Paraphrased thus, If you do
love me more than these, feed my Sheep, if you do not, I will not have you feed
them. Peter's Modesty would not permit him to say, that he did love Christ more
than the Rest; but he did submissively appeal to our Saviors unerring Judgment,
who knew the secret Recesses and Affections both of his, and of the Hearts of
the Rest. Christ by Commanding him to feed his Sheep, did declare him the
Greatest Lover. This Explication of the place is facil, natural, and openly
lies upon the Surface of the words, and is agreeable to the Sense of the
Fathers.

(...); Chrysostom. de Sacerd. Lib. 2. Christ discoursing Peter, the chief of the
Apostles says, Peter, do you love me? He confessing that he did; Christ
subjoins, If you love me, feed my Sheep. And again, (...), If you love me
preside over your Brethren. St. August. de Temp. Sermon. 149. Dom. Jesus
respondenti amorem, commendat agnos suos. Et ad Fratres in Eremo: Sermon. 28.
Quia amavit meruit and amari, meruit audire, Pasce Oves meas. And Lib. 4. de
Consensu Evang. Postremo, suas Oves Petro se amanti, eumque amorem ter
consitenti commendat. Ideo commisit Christus Petro ut pasceret gregem, quia
charitatem ejus agnovit, Enarrat. Psalm. 18. Ambrose.

Considering then, that according to the Sense of the Scriptures and Fathers,
Love was the occasion of his Advancement to this sublime Eminence; according to
the proportion and measure of his Love, was the extension and latitude of his
Power: And thus it is irrational to admit the Rest to be equal sharers with him
in this Pastoral Commission, for the Authority of feeding, being the recompense
of his Love, he loving more than the Rest, exceeded them in that Commission; it
being most unreasonable to imagine, that any could equalize him herein, without
loving Christ equally to him, which they did not, as has been already
determined by our Saviors Umpirage: Peter then surmounting them all by his
Ardent Love, had this glorious Prerogative above them, to be by Christ himself
constituted his Supreme Pastor. And herein St. Ambrose affords his Symphony,
Lib. 10. Cap. 14. in Lucam: Dixit ei Jesus, Pasce Agnos meos: Been conscius sui
non ad tempus assumptum, sed jamjudum Deo cognitum, Petrus testificatur
affectum: quis est enim alius qui de se hoc facile profiteri possit? and ideo
quia solus profitetur ex omnibus, omnibus antefertur; major enim omnibus
Charitas. Here St. Ambrose clearly acknowledges, that the Reason of his
Prelation before the Rest, was, because he loved more than they; and that he
did so, is the Sense of other Fathers as well as his. Hence Chrysostom. calls
him, (...), a Raging, Ardent, Mad Lover of Christ. And in his Hom. 1. de
Paenitentia, he says, That he had (...), More love for Christ than all the
Disciples besides. Nazianzen calls him, (...), A greater Lover of his Lord,
than the other Apostles. St. Hierom on Matt. 16. Nimii ardoris, amorisque quam
maximi fuit Petrus in Salvatorem. St. Austin Tract. 124. John. Sciebat Dominus
non solum quod diligeret verum etiam quod plus illis illum deligeret. And in
the same Tract, Quod Petrus plus aliis dilexit Christum possunt multa documenta
proferri.

This excessive love toward his Lord, made him generous, and forward in his
Promises and Protestations to him; and likewise adventurous in exposing his
life for him. When Christ was seized on by Judas's Company, he only drew and
fought for him: And after his Resurrection he could not conceal the Ardour of
his Affection, nor the Gallantry of his Spirit, he being the only Person (all
the Rest continuing abroad) that upon the first Intelligence of Christ's
appearance on the Shore, impatient of the dull progress of the becalmed Vessel,
hastening to his Lord, threw himself into the Sea. And although St. John was more
quicksighted, and saw Christ first; St. Peter was more ardent, and arrived to
him first, As Nazianz. affirms, (...).

Mr. Cartwright knowing Peter's surpassing Love toward Christ to be very
considerable, and that it would make a great inclination of the Balance to his
advantage, had a mind to elude it, by reviving an old Cheat which was extant in
St. Augustin's days. We may deny (says he) that the Comparison here is made
between the Love of Peter, and the Love of the Rest; but between the Love he
bare to Christ, above that he had to his Ship, Nets, and his present Friends:
This St. Austin looks on as a cunning Interpretation, Vafre diligis me plus
his, i. e. plusquam hi diligunt me; sed diligis me plus his, i. e. plusquam hos
diligis; But de Sanctis Petro and Paulo, he discovers the Forgery herein, non
simpliciter dixerat Dominus, diligis me; sed addiderat, plus his diligis me, id
est, plus me diligis quam isti.

The next thing that the Palate of your Fancy seems to disrelish, is my
affirming Peter by virtue of these words Pasce Oves meas, to have received
Authority over the whole World, and over the Apostles themselves: All that you
allege in opposition thereto, is this, But Christ said, Pasce Oves meas, not
tuas, and Pasce Oves, not Pastores; likewise confirma Fratres is not confirma
Filios or Subditos. By these ingenious and subtle distinctions, you fancy to
have overthrown what I wrote on this matter; but to me those distinctions seem
to be only whiffling and versatile. Could any Vafrous Proteus transmute himself
into more varieties of shapes only to make an Evasion? But pray, now you have
done shuffling, give me leave to cut, the Expression is proper enough, for the
Greek word (...) in St. Timothy, which is translated to divide right, signifies
properly to cut right. I do believe, and assert, that the words Oves meas, do
impale and infold all Christ's Sheep in general, as well the Apostles as other
Christians, all were recommended and delivered over to Peter's care and
prefecture; the words being delivered indefinitely, in an unlimited manner;
there being no Exception, Restriction, or Distinction: And herein I proceed
according to the Rule of St. Basil, (...), That which is indefinite compre
hends all: This was likewise St. Bernards Sense, Lib. 2. de Conf. ad. Eugenium,
Si me amas, Petre, Pasce Oves meas, inquit: quas, illius vel illius populos
Civitatis, aut Regionis, aut certe Regni? Oves meas inquit: cui non planum non
designasse aliquas, sed assignasse omnes? Nihil excipitur, ubi nihil
distinguitur. Thus you see according to his Opinion, Peter's Power was not
confined within the limited Tropicks of any particular Kingdom or Regions; but
without any Boundary or Horison to terminate it, without any Shores or
Frontires to restrain it, was stretched and extended over the vast Universe.
This I shall likewise prove out of St. Chrysostom. and Theophyl. for St. Bernard
will be excepted against, as living in the time of Antichrists chief
exaltation, and therefore not to be regarded, says Dr. Fulk; or as Dr. Whitaker
has it, he lived in those times, quando Papatus splendore, acies
perstringebatur animorum.

St. Chrysostom. Hom. 87. in Johan says, (...), Christ foretold St. Peter great
things, and delivered the World into his Hands. This his Ecumenical
Jurisdiction he acknowledges, Hom. 1. de Paenit. (...), Christ delivered into
his Hands the Government of the Ecumenical Church. And on the 16th of St.
Matt. he confesses him to preside, (...), Every where in the World. Hence he
calls him, (...), The Master of the Universe. Theophyl. likewise in his
Comments on Johan 21. (...), Christ delivers to Peter the Government of the
Sheep of all the World. And again, (...), Follow me, delivering into your Hands
the whole World. I shall add no more Testimonies now on this Point, intending
to prosecute it further in my Second Part.

I am obliged now to take some small Cognizance of your several nice
Distinctions, your first was, that Christ said, Oves meas not tuas. I wish you
had explained what you meant by this Criticism, that I might have shaped a
pertinent Reply, which otherwise it may be, I shall not. I find the Archbishop
Spalato to make a cunning Interpretation on Oves meas, i. e. says he,
Israelitas, because Christ declared, he was not sent but to the lost Sheep of
Israel; and because St. Paul calls Christ Minister Circumcisionis, by this
Gloss he designed to rob Peter of the Prefecture of the Gentiles, limiting him
to the Jews, which Error I shall confute in my Second Part. St. Austin in his
Sermon. 123. in Johan. says thus, Si me diligis, non te pascere cogita, sed Oves
meas: Et sicut Oves meas, non sicut tuas: Gloriam meam in eis quaere, non tuam:
Lucra mea, non tua: Dominium meum, non tuum. Here St. Austin explains what he
meant by his Distinction; what you designed by it to me is wrapped up in Clouds,
unless you fancy that our Savior delivering his Sheep into the Hands of Peter,
lost his propriety in them: But I fancy Christ no more lost his Claim and
Interest in his Sheep, when he recommended them to Peter's Government, than a
King loses his Royalty and Jurisdiction in those Subjects, over whom he
constitutes a Viceroy: For neither Peter, nor any of the Apostles set up for
themselves: Neither did they lay any other Foundation but Christ, and their
united endeavors were to make Men Christanos, not (...) or (...), as
Epiphanius calls them. You may then, now understand Peter's Jurisdiction to be
derivative from, and subordinate to our Savior, and though in respect to the
other Apostles and Christians whatsoever, he was chief Pastor, yet in relation
to Christ (who is the only Supreme Independent Pastor) he is but a Sheep; yet
the Noblest, most Honorable, and Excellent of the Flock, as St. Chrysostom.
says, in Apost. 12. (...); as such a Sheep he is governed and fed by Christ.
This St. Austin Sermon. 62. Johan. 2. affirms, Commendabat Christus Petro agnos
suos pascendos, qui pascebat and Petrum. Yet it does not at all follow, but
that Peter, after Christ's relinquishing this World, was the Pastor of all
Christ's Sheep, but by Authority from him, and as dependant of him; and herein
you may see St. Austin's Judgment in his Book de Pastoribus, Nam and ipsum
Petrum, cui commendabat Oves suas, quasi alter alteri, unum secum facere
volebat, ut sic ei Oves commendaret, ut sit ille Caput, ille figuram Corporis
portaret, id est, Ecclesiae. And again, in the same Book, Non ibi dixit
Dominus, Ego pascam Oves meas; non tu, sed Petre, amas me? Pasce Oves meas.
Here Christ is said not to feed his Flock (that is visibly) but Peter.

Your other Criticism is, that Christ said, Pasce Oves. not Pastores; but the
difficulty of this Distinction, may be removed with great facility, for it is
very easy to explain how Pastors may be fed, even to the lowest Capacity,
(...), But that it may be more intelligible, I will make it out to you by this
Simile. You who are a Minister of such a Parish, in relation to your Flock and
Parishioners are a Pastor; and they are your Sheep, receiving from you
Spiritual Food and Pasture: But you, on the other side (this Janus having a
bifront aspect) in relation to your Bishop, are a Sheep, and he has Power to
exercise his Pastoral Government over you when he sees occasion: And to rise to
an higher Ela, a Bishop, Archbishop, or Primate are Pastors, in consideration
of those Sheep which are in subjection to them; but being balanced with a
Patriarch, they are Sheep themselves. Thus it was with the Apostles; they in
reflection to the whole Christian World were Pastors, Governors and Princes,
but in comparison with Peter, the Head of the Apostolic Senate, and Supreme
Pastor immediately next to Christ, they were Sheep: And to this intent our
Savior seemed to have changed the words in his Commission to Peter, as St.
Ambrose observes in his Lib. 10. Cap. 24. in Luc. Denique tertio Dominus non
jam diligis me, sed amas me interrogat? Et jam non agnos ut primo, quodam lacte
pascendos: nec oviculas ut Secundo; sed Oves pascere jubetur, perfectiores ut
perfectior gubernaret. And the same Author, in another place says thus, Petro
committi incipientes, proficientes, perfectos. Hence Eusebius. Emissenus Sermon. De
Not. St. Johan. says, Non solum Pastorem; sed Pastorum Pastorem eum constituit.
And Arnobius on Psalm. 138. calls him a Bishop of Bishops, which is equipollent
to a Pastor Pastorum: Ecce Apostolo paenitenti succurritur qui est Episcopus
Episcoporum.

The next thing I am to regard is, your Asterisk and Note on Confirma Fratres,
that it was not said, Confirma Filios, or Servos, or Subditos, but Fratres. I
have no design to endeavor to alter the least tittle of the Text, but shall
liberally grant you your Observation: And now what will you infer out of it,
that they were therefore equal, because they were called Fratres? This surely
must be the design of your Criticism, but I deny the Consequence; for you will
find our Savior to call his Disciples Fratres, as Matt. 20. 10. Nuntiate
Fratribus, ut eant in Galilaeam; and speaking to Mary Magdalen, he says, Vade
ad Fratres meos, etc. I hope you will not conclude the Apostles equal with him
upon this account. St. Paul in like manner calls the Corinthians Fratres in his
Epistle to them. Et ego Fratres non potui vobis loqui quasi spiritualibus. Hoc
itaque dico Fratres: But notwithstanding this Appellation, he had Spiritual
Jurisdiction over them, and exercised it too; as appears by delivering one of
them over to Hell's Jailor. And in Cor. 4. he says, Quid vultis in virga veniam
vobis an in Charitate? This Virga was a Symbol of Power. Oecomenius on the
words Viri, Fratres, in the 2. Acts Apost. gives this account, (...); They did
not say Fratres, by way of Equality; as if by such a term they had equaliz'd
themselves to them, but to show how familiar they were with them. Now the
reason why Christ spoke to Peter to strengthen his Brethren, was according to
Theophyl. because he looked on him as their Prince, (...). And Cyril
accordingly on the same words, Postquam me negato ploraveris, corrobora
Fratres, cum te Principem Apostolorum deputavero. St. Ambrose does clearly
confess, that by virtue of these words spoken to him, Christ made him their
Supreme Pastor, in Psa. 43. Ecclesiae praeponitur postquam tentatus a Diabolo
est, ideoque ante significat Dominus quid sit illud quod postea eum elegit
gregis Dominici Pastorem; nam huic dixit, confirma Fratres tuos.

Having thus removed these your slender Objections with as much ease as the
Wind puffed away the aged Sybils disordered Leafs. I shall now hasten to
conclude what I have to say more on this Subject, and to show you how fair an
Antagonist you have of me. If you can prove that the other Apostles were none
of Christ's Sheep, I will exempt them from Peter's Prefecture. This seems to me
an equitable proposal: Now if they were his Sheep they were under the
denomination of Oves meas, recommended to Peter's Shepherdly Government. Now
that which enforces me to believe that they were comprehended under those words
and that Christ meant them when he said so, is, because he often calls them
Sheep; I Will strike the Shepherd and the Sheep shall be scattered. My Sheep hear
my Voice. Behold I send you as Sheep. And accordingly in the 10th of St. John,
Christ says of himself, Ego sum Pastor bonus. Theophyl. on Mark 14. gives the
reason why they are called Sheep, (...), He calls his Apostles Sheep, because
they are harmless: Besides St. Chrysostom. interprets Oves meas on Peter's
Brethren, which were the Apostles, in his Hom. 87. on St. John, (...), Christ
says to Peter, If you love preside(...) over your Brethren. And again, (...),
He delivers into his Hands the Government of his Brethren. Theophyl. says,
(...), He delivered into Peter's Hands the Prefecture of all the Faithful. So I
hope you will not exclude the Apostles from that number. Besides this, you will
find the unanimous consent of the Fathers attesting Christ's whole Flock, which
must necessarily enfold the other Apostles to be recommended to Peter. Thus St.
Ambrose Sermon. 47. Tanquam bonus Pastor tuendum gregem accepit. And in his Fifth
Book de Fide, he acknowledges him to be the Wise Steward, whom Christ placed
over his whole Family by virtue of Pasce Oves meas. Quisnam est fidelis servus
and prudens, quem constituit Dominus super familiam suam, ut det illis in
tempore cibum? beatus ille servus quem veniens Dominus ejus invenerit sic
facientem; non vilis hic servus magnus aliquis, esse debet quis sit iste
consideremus: est Potrus, ipsius Domini electus judicio qui tertio meretur
audire, Pasce Agniculos meos, Pasce Agnos meas, Pasce Oviculas meas.

St. Chrysostom, Acts 1. says, that he was (...), Entrusted with Christ's Flock.
Epiph. in his Ancorat. (...); This is he who heard Christ himself say to him,
feed my Lambs: This is he who was entrusted with the Flock. Hence St. Basil
calls him, (...), The Shepherd next after Christ. St. Chrysostom. in Inscript.
Act. Apost. calls him, (...), The Head Pastor of the Apostles. But in his
Second Book de Sacerd. he manifestly declares Peter by virtue of the Words
Pasce Oves meas, spoken to him to be invested in Power and Authority, and to
excel the rest of the Apostles, (...).

St. Austin Quaest. 73. Vet. and Novi Testam. confesses him to be constituted
Head of the Apostles, to the end he might be Pastor of the Lords Flock, Ipsum
constituit Caput eorum, ut Pastor esset Dominici gregis. Hence Arnobius on
Psalm 138. affirms, That none of the Apostles, but Peter had the Title of
Pastor from our Savior. Nullus Apostolorum nomen Pastoris accepit, solus enim
Dominus Jesus Christus dicebat, Ego sum Pastor bonus: Hoc ergo nomen Sanctum,
and ipsius nominis potestatem, post Resurrectionem Petro Paenitenti concessit.
Hence you see that Peter only was honored by Christ, with the glorious Title of
Pastor; not but that the other Apostles were Shepherds, but because Peter was
the Chief, not the Vnicus but Vniversalis, not the Solus but the Summus, the
only (...).

This most August Honor was not undeservedly conferred on him, but for the
constellation of his incomparable Endowments, for that rare triumvirate of
Qualifications which adorned the Temple of his Breast. St. Austin gives an
account of them, Bonitatis gratiam testatur Aeneas debilis claudus ab infantia:
probaverunt ejus severitatem Ananias and Sapphira; de scientiae ejus
perfectione quis ambigat, qui Christum Dominum vivi Dei filium esse, de Coelo
sibi revelante Patre cognovit? Quia Bonitas, ac Disciplina, Scientiaque non
deerat, pascendas illi Dominus suas commendavit Oviculas. Hom. 4 The happy
Union of these rare Embelishments made him the most resplendent amongst the
Apostles, the most Prefulgent (...), of the holy Dozen, therefore culled out of
that Illustrious Society by the discerning Eye of Christ, as the fittest Person
amongst them to be his Vicar and Supreme Pastor; to whose Pastoral Care and
Vigilance he recommended the whole Flock of his Universal Church: And this was
done as St. Hierom observes on Mark 16. VT SIT VNA FIDES SVB VNO PASTORE. Our
Blessed Savior having purchased to himself his Sheep at a rigorous rate, by the
Spargiment and Effusion of his Sacred Blood, was pleased upon his departure out
of this World to entrust the care of them to Peter, as to a Faithful and
Vigilant Guardian; and not only to him, but to his Successors after him, as
Chrysostom. affirms in his Second Book de Sacerd. (...); For why did Christ shed
his Blood? that he might acquire to himself those Sheep which he delivered into
the Hands of Peter and his Successors after him.

(...); Hail Peter Prince of the Apostles, Hail Peter Rock of the Church, Hail
Peter Celestial Porter, Hail Peter Supreme Pastor of Christ's Flock. It is not
in the power of any Person whatsoever to despoil thee of any of those glorious
Prerogatives which the Blessed Jesus invested thee with. Neither can any
Virulent Tongue, though bathed in the Decoction of Venom; or any malicious Pen,
though dipped in the strongest Infusion of Gall, be now injurious to you, sitting
aloft in the Starry Palace of Heaven, Crowned with unfading Diadems of Glory,
enrob'd with bright Vestments of pure refined Light, Embroidered with your
Illustrious Titles. Free from the Stratagems and Petitions of that Satan who
once requested to Winnow you; and safe from the bitings of your Spiteful
Adversaries, who snarl at thy Lustrous Splendour, as Wolves bark at the Moon,
when adorned with her clearest Refulgency she travails in Pomp through her
Fields of Light. But I, in the mean time, most Blessed Saint, will pray to thee
to pray for me, Sancte Petre, Ora pro nobis: And thus I conclude my First Book
of your Supremacy, most humbly begging, that if I have wrote any thing worthy
of your Approbation, you would be pleased to accept of it as flowing from a
Heart devoted to your Honor, pardoning the imperfect Characters of a Pen
vanquished by the Greatness of so Sublime a Subject.

FINIS.

