The Grand Expedient FOR Suppressing POPERY EXAMINED.

OR The PROJECT of EXCLUSION Proved to be contrary to Reason and Religion.

By Robert Clipsham, Canon of Chichester.

To the Excluders. Are your minds set upon Righteousness, O ye Congregation,
and do ye judge the thing that is Right, O ye Sons of Men? Ps. 58. 1.

LONDON, Printed for William Freeman over against the Devil-Tavern by
Temple Bar in Fleetstreet. 1685.

To the Honorable Sir John Farrington, Knight, one of his Majesty's Justices
of the Peace for the County of Sussex.
SIR,
THat I have prefixed your Honored Name to this Discourse, will not (I am
confident) be displeasing to you, for as much as in it I plead that Cause, for
which you have expressed so great a Concern: When the Enemies of the Royal
Family were at the highest, puff't up with the vain hopes of gaining their so
much desired Point, the Exclusion of his Royal Highness, When they reviled and
treated the Opposers of that wicked Project at their pleasure: even then, as
became a Person of Eminent Courage and Loyalty, you declared your just
Indignation against, and condemned it as a most impious Device.

And seeing one great design of this Discourse, is to prove the Bill of
Exclusion to be as unjust as you have always thought it, to whom with greater
Reason can this that I have writ address it self for protection, than to a
Person of such known and unquestioned Loyalty, you being One of those Brave and
Loyal Persons, that truly honor and heartily desire the Felicity of the King
and his most Glorious Family, and this in so high a degree that you have
suffered for it, been most unjustly deprived of a considerable part of your
Birthright for no other cause at all, but your Devotion to your Prince, and
Zeal for his Service? But hereby you will be no looser in the end, because God
Almighty, I am sure, will bless and prosper you, and all good men do, and will
love and honor you.

Besides, your good opinion of this Discourse that it will be serviceable to
the Great Ends I writ it for, encouraged me to make it public, and to put it
into the World under your Patronage, not doubting but you will accept that,
which you were pleased to entertain such favorable thoughts of.

Hereby also I have an opportunity openly to acknowledge my great obligations to
you, and beseech you to receive this as a Testimony of my Gratitude for the
many and undeserved civilities with which you have treated me, which if you
please to do, I shall ever own it an high favor to him, that has the greatest
reason to Subscribe himself,

Sir, Your most humble and devoted Servant Robert Clipsham.

To the READER.
WHat Entertainment the following Discourse will find with Two sorts of Men, is
no hard matter to foretell: They will Cast all the Contempt and Reproach they
can upon It, and the Author; Muster up all the Calumnies and Slanders, Attaque
me with all the Wrath, Bitterness, Clamours, and rude Language, which they that
reprove Men's Errors (though for no other end but that they may be persuaded to
reform them) are commonly assaulted with. One of the Factions will call me
Heretic, the Other Jesuit or Papist at the least; That will be angry and
revile me for declaring against the Errors of the Church of Rome: This will be
enraged and rail at me for charging some of the same crimes upon it, especially
for Condemning that they admire, and are so fond of, their beloved Bill of
Exclusion. But the great Searcher of hearts will, I am sure, acquit me from
both those hateful Imputations, because he knows me to be neither Heretic nor
Papist, though I confess indeed with St. Paul, that after the way, which they (
of the Church of Rome) call Heresy, and those of the Separation as falsely call
Popery, so Worship I the God of my Fathers; I am, that is, of the Excellent
Religion by Law Established amongst us, and by the help of God resolve to live
and die in it, and therefore can be neither Heretic, nor Papist, and shall
laugh rather than be troubled at them that call me either. Though I have given
neither of the Factions just cause to call me so, because I have done them no
wrong, but fairly represented their Opinions, and faithfully showed them their
Errors, that (as becomes men calling themselves Catholics and Christians)
they may reform them: and therefore they ought rather to thank me for my
charity than be angry with me: They are to be blamed for running into such
Errors, and doing such evil things, not I for proving them so to be.

If Rome be a dangerous Church for men to venture such a Treasure as their
Souls in, I did not make it so, but only call upon all that please to read me,
to choose a safer, that they may be sure to obtain that Immortal glory and
happiness, the hope of which is the great joy of our Life, and our only comfort
and support when we are to dye, and the enjoyment of it so desirable and
unspeakable a good, that none but the most foolish, and the most faithless men
can be careless and unconcerned about it.

And if the Bill of Exclusion be unjust, and therefore contrary to the
Excellent Laws of Christ, the Authors, Promoters, and Admirers of it are to be
blamed for fixing upon such a sinful Expedient, not I for proving it so to be.
That God who has done it hitherto, is still able to protect our Gracious King,
and Excellent Religion from the designs of all their Enemies, and it is mine
(and every good man's) daily Prayers, he will be pleased to do it. Why then
should any so far distrust his goodness, as to do an unworthy thing to secure
them, which are as safe already under the shadow of his protection, as they can
possibly be? And if this Project of Excluding his Royal Highness be unjust, as
I suppose I have proved it, if it were put in practice it would rather deprive
them of the safety they have already, than procure them any more, this being to
renounce the Providence and the Defense of the Almighty, which are endeared and
assured by Righteousness, and to make Sin our Refuge, which as he forbids, so
it must needs highly provoke him.

For my part, I bear no hatred nor ill will to the persons in either of the
Factions, but wish them all happiness, and show them the way to obtain it, that
is, by renouncing their Errors, and all those Practices, that are therefore
Dangerous, because Contrary to sound Doctrine and common Honesty.

Nor was it an itch after vain glory, or a desire to be in Print that prompted
me to write this Discourse; I had no such mean inducements in my thoughts, when
I resolved upon this Subject, for if that had been my design, I could have
chose one less obnoxious to censure and misunderstanding.

The Truth is, I saw the King endangered for refusing to pass this unjust Bill,
the Kingdom miserably divided and Distracted about it: I perceived it to be a
bone of Contention, because there was so much snarling about it, and was very
apprehensive of the dreadful consequences of it, and therefore I thought my
self obliged to contribute my endeavors to undeceive the People, by showing
them the Evil and Injustice of it; it being the duty of every good Subject to
bring Water to quench the Flames of Sedition and Contention, which this Device
had kindled: And I had, as I apprehended, great encouragement, and weighty
reasons to prompt me to undertake this Subject. The first, because The Right
Honorable the House of Lords cast out the Bill as an abominable thing, and all
the Loyal Gentry had publicly protested against, and declared their abhorrence
of it, and indeed all of the Church of England that I converse with (though
they heartily abhor, and pray against Popery) did freely own their great
dislike and hatred of it, which satisfied me that it was not my singular
Opinion, that it is unjust, but that I had therein the suffrages and consent of
all good men. The reasons too that moved me to it were weighty, which are these.

To vindicate the Justice of my Sovereign, by showing he had the highest reason
to reject this Bill, and consequently to stop the mouths of those that are so
profane as to blame his Sacred Majesty for refusing it.

To assert and defend the Right of an Injured Prince, to show them that were so
unjust and unchristian as to Treat him so despitefully, and to offer him such
hard measure, the evil of their doings, that they may repent, and humbly beg
pardon both of God and Him.

To do honor to the Church of England, both by protesting in its name against
this Project; and by proving it teaches the right way to Heaven (which will
certainly lead all that follow it, to the Immortal Joys and Felicities of that
blessed place) to reprove the folly and wickedness of those fugitives, that run
from the Communion of it, either into Popery or Fanaticism.

To caution or warn all that love the Establsh'd Religion, not only to have no
hand in, but to abhor and oppose the Bill of Exclusion, as that which will be
an indelible stain or blemish to it, make it (if it should expire at any time)
go out in a snuff, leave an ill savor behind it, and hinder its happy
Resurrection.

To allay the heats, and calm the passions it has put men into, and to let
them see, if they please to open their eyes, what an evil, and wicked thing it
is they admire so much, and therefore unworthy of the value they put upon it.

These are the reasons that moved me to undertake this Subject, and are
sufficient in my apprehension to justify the doing of it; so that if any blame
me for it, I shall answer them in the words of David to his peevish Brethren,
What have I now done? Is there not a cause? wherein have I transgressed or
offended? What have I done unbecoming a Christian, or a Protestant in writing
upon this Subject? Had I not great cause, just and cogent Reasons for it?

But I hope I have given no offense thereby to any honest Man, I am sure I did
not intend it: And as for the censures of all that are otherwise, I scorn and
think them below my notice or observation, let them censure me as they please,
I shall never trouble my self about them.

All that can require an Apology, is that which I am very apprehensive of, that
I have wronged this great Argument by my low and unskilful manage of it. I wish
with all my heart I could have done it better, it being in my apprehension a
Case of very great moment and concern, though I must say, it was my endeavor
to speak reason in the case, and I hope what I have done will find acceptance
with all good men, and conduce to the great ends I designed it for.

And seeing we all call our selves Christ's Servants and Disciples, I thought it
the fairest and most equal way to compare this so much admired Expedient with
some of the prime Laws of Christianity, by which we shall all be judged at the
last day, and have made it appear (I think) to be an open defiance and
contradiction to them, and therefore not to be done by a Nation professing his
most just and merciful Religion, which commands us to do good to all men, and
injury to none.

That which may be thought by some a great omission, is, that I have not
considered that which is alleged in the beginning of the Bill, as the prime
Reason of their Resolve to Exclude his Royal Highness, That by his turning
Papist great encouragement has been given to the Popish Party to conspire the
Destruction of the King, and Government, and the Extirpation of the True
Protestant Religion. This indeed I said nothing to, not because it is
unanswerable, but in truth because I thought it deserved no Answer: for unless
they can prove he turned Papist with that intention, their taking encouragement
from it to conspire against the King, does not involve the Duke in their guilt,
nor make him justly punishable, because Wicked and Traiterous People are glad
of any occasion to do mischief, and encourage themselves to attempt it when no
motive or inducement is offered them, and it is most unreasonable as well as
uncharitable to believe he had any such intention: unreasonable because no
Prince will be a Proselite to that which he believes to be a Traiterous Church,
This being to put himself into the hands of his Enemies, and to run wilfully
upon his own Destruction. If his Royal Highness be of the Romish Communion
(which I do not believe) to be sure he thinks it an holy and a loyal Church,
and upon that persuasion joined himself to it: If so? he could not possibly
intend to encourage that Faction to attempt the Kings Life, because he believed
them honest and loyal People, that heartily abhorred such wicked and cruel
practices: but if he was deceived in his Opinion of them, and those whom he
thought to be Sheep, be Wolves, ravening and blood-thirsty People, and those
whom he took to be Saints, be really Devils, this is their crime, not his, and
therefore he is not answerable for it, and to punish him with the severity the
Excluders designed upon this supposal, is the most execrable Injustice, because
it is to punish him for other men's Crimes, to deprive him of his Birthright,
because the Zealots of the Church he is of, are (though he neither knew nor
believed them so to be) Traiterous and Cruel.

This will appear more plainly and convincingly to some, if we put the case
thus; suppose the next Heir to the Crown, thinking theirs to be the best and
purest Religion, and such as would conduct him most safely to eternal Glory and
Happiness, should turn Fanatic, and that Faction Encouraged by his being their
Proselyte, should Conspire the Death of the King, and the Destruction of the
Church, which horrid Conspiracy being by the goodness of God discovered, the
Church party to preserve the King, their Religion, their Lives and Estates from
the Rapine, Oppression, and Cruelty, of that Faction, slighting all other means
of safety, should resolve upon this as the only sure Expedient for that end, to
Exclude the Fanatic Successor: In this Case he by becoming their Convert
intended only to save his Soul, or go the right way to Heaven, but the wicked
Faction (thinking they should never have such an opportunity again to set up
their Discipline and way of Worship) took encouragement (though he meant to
give them none) from his joining himself to them, to Plot the Death of the
King, and the Destruction of the Church. I demand then, if it would be just for
this reason to Exclude this Prince? How would the Faction take it? Would not
their mouths be Opened and their pens Sharpened against the Authors and
Promoters of such a Bill of Exclusion? Would they not Fill Heaven and Earth
with complaints and cries against such Injustice, and Injury done to a Prince
of their Persuasion? no doubt they would! why then do they offer that hard
measure to a Prince of another, that they would not have done to one of their
own Church? For if it be unjust to Exclude the Fanatic, it must be equally so,
to Disinherit the Popish Successor, because he no more intended by turning
Papist to encourage his Party to Conspire against the King, than the other by
turning Fanatic designed to animate his Party to the like wicked attempt.

So that to Exclude his Royal Highness for this reason, because his being (as
they suppose) a Papist, has encouraged the Papists to conspire the destruction
of our King and Church, is most unjust, because (as I observed before) it is to
punish (and that most severely) the Innocent for the Guilty, to ruin one man
for the Sins of others: For that he intended by turning Papist (if he be so) to
encourage that Faction to attempt such execrable things, as it cannot be proved
(because it is known to none but the great searcher of Hearts) so it is the
highest and most horrid uncharitableness to suppose that the Duke in defiance
to God, common Honesty, natural Affection, every thing that is Great, Good, and
Just, should turn Papist on purpose to prompt and exite that Faction to murder
his Royal Brother, that he might Fill his Throne. They that harbor such black
thoughts of a Prince so Just in all his other actions, and so great a lover of
the King as he is known to be, must needs be odious to God, his Angels and
Saints in Heaven, and to all good Men upon Earth, and without such a purpose or
intention, their taking Encouragement from his being a Convert to their Church,
to conspire the Destruction of the King, and our Religion, does not, cannot
make him justly punishable.

Their other Pleas and Arguments for this Project of Exclusion, I have
Considered in the Discourse it self, and given, I suppose, full and rational
answers to them.

If any where my pen has slipped, I hope Reader, thou will be either so
ingenious as to pass it by, or so charitable as to show me my mistake, that I
may reform it, for I am none of those stiff and obstinate people, that resolve
to adhere pertinaciously to their own Sentiments or Opinions, be they right or
wrong, but shall ever account it a greater glory to amend an Error, than to be
able to defend it.

One favor more I beg of all my Readers (which they cannot well deny me) that
they will please to read the whole Discourse, before they pass Sentence upon
it, because that which may look like an Objection in one place, may be answered
or taken off in another. I have no more to add but my hearty Prayers to
Allmighty God, that he will graciously please to lead us all into the Paths of
Peace, Piety, and Loyalty, that we may be happy now, and blessed for ever.

Amen.
The Grand Expedient FOR Suppressing POPERY Examined. OR The PROJECT of
EXCLUSION Proved to be contrary to Reason and Religion.
WHen great and extraordinary dangers steal upon People, and give them no
notice or warning at all of their approach, they produce in them strange
Disorder and Confusion of Mind, a mighty Tumult or Hurry of Thoughts, then, as
the Psalmist speaks of men tossed in an angry and tempestuous Sea, they are at
their Wits ends, and know not what to do, fain they would according to the
dictate and inclination of nature, preserve themselves, decline the impending
evil, and the danger which approaches them with an Aspect so menacing, or full
of terror, and the first Act of their mind upon the apprehension of it, is to
decree and determine that it must be avoided; this is so great an evil that we
cannot bear it, if it comes we are undone, it does certainly bring ruin and
destruction along with it; therefore we must, and will (if it be possible)
prevent, or stay its approach, block up all the avenues and ways by which it
may make its passage to us. Whilst they thus resolve, every thing that offers
it self as a means of safety, and comes with fair pretenses of security, is
welcome, and received with all expressions of love and joy, they applaud and
hug it as their Friend and Deliverer, and their minds are so pleased and
transported with it, that they are not at leisure to consider whether it be
just and lawful, whether God and his law allow them to preserve themselves by
such means; to enquire, whether the safety it offers them at present, be not
attended with more, and greater dangers hereafter: Whether that which they
resolve upon as a means to save them now, be not inconsistent with their
eternal happiness, and such as will ruin, or destroy them for ever.

For if either Reason, or Religion might be heard, they would satisfy and
convince men, what a wild attempt it is to decline temporal dangers by such
ways as lead to eternal miseries; to make use of such Arts to save them from
suffering here, as will expose them to the wrath and vengeance of God
hereafter; that no evil, unjust, or wicked thing is to be done, though
according to the rules of humane policy it might preserve and secure us at
present, because it is of infinite hazard to our Souls, and will be their
eternal undoing.

When we can by fair and innocent ways provide for our safety, we are unjust to
our selves if we do it not, but when these fail, and we are reduced to a sad
necessity either to Sin, or Suffer, if we choose rather to sin then suffer, we
are profane and wicked, have no Religion nor Fear of God.

But in great dangers there is no room for such thoughts or considerations as
these, but every thing (by some People) is accounted good and lawful, or
however, excusable, that promises safety and security, and when their
Religion, their Lives, and Estates either are (or are apprehended) to be
endangered, they hope God will not be extreme to mark what they do amiss for
the safeguard and defense of them.

These seem to be the sentiments or opinions of the Authors and Promoters of
the Bill of Exclusion, otherwise they would never have fixed upon this as the
only Expedient to obviate and disappoint the black and bloody design of the
Church of Rome: An Expedient so highly and apparently unjust, so dishonorable
and reproachful to our Religion, that tended to blast and brand it with eternal
infamy, and make it the scorn of all the wise and honest world. Blessed God!
Whither do pale and ghastly fears, and blind or furious zeal hurry Men? Had not
our Nation incurred shame and contempt enough from Men, as well as the dreadful
displeasure of God, by the barbarous murder and untimely fall of that
incomparable Prince, King Charles the First, who was deposed, and murdered, and
hurryed to an hasty grave by the Fears, Jealousies, and Suspicions of Popery,
which the Enemies of his Royal Virtues and Greatness buzzed into the ears and
minds of his People? For what moved them to leave their quiet dwellings? to
loath the peace and plenty they enjoyed? What drew them into the field of War,
but Fear of, and Zeal against Popery? They were told by those, who they thought
would not deceive them, that the King was turning Papist, that the Queen ruled
all, that most of the Ministers of State, and the great Men at Court were
Popishly affected and waited for a change, and if they let them alone the
Romans would come and take away their Place and Nation. An accusation, though
as false as the Devil, and such as had nothing to color, or make it seem
probable, yet all that wise and good Prince could do to confute the slander, to
wipe off such an odious and lying imputation, all his excellent declarations,
showing his High Esteem, his Royal Affection, his Prudent Zeal for the
Protestant Religion; his frequent and learned disputations with some of the
most Eminent Papists, who (to their astonishment) found themselves silenced and
confuted by him, and unable to defend their Church against the mighty and
convincing Arguments with which this incomparable disputant shattered and beat
it down; not his solemn protestation before a great concourse of People at his
receiving the most Blessed Sacrament, nor any thing else he could either say or
do, could clear him from the suspicion of Popery, or satisfy Multitudes of his
People that he was not gone off from the Reformed Religion; but so deep root
had the calumny took in their hearts, that they persisted in the belief of it,
and that excited their rage, and so inflamed their zeal, that in defiance to
God and his Law they offered themselves as freely to fight for the Faith, as
the Christians did in the Primitive times to suffer Martyrdom for it, and would
not lay down their Rebellious and Unchristian Arms till they had beat him in
the Field, seized his Royal Person, and by the Mockery of Justice condemned him
to die: But when they heard him in his last words and dying speech profess and
declare himself a Protestant (that being no time to dissemble either with God
or the World) then (tho too late) all of them that had any remains of honesty,
or fear of God, perceived their error, and said in the bitterness of their
Souls, what have we done? How have we been cheated into Rebellion by Fears
Jealousies and Rumors of Popery, and stained our impious hands with Royal and
Innocent Blood? Wicked men, Sons of Belial, have blasphemed, and slandered the
Lords Anointed, accused him to us as a Papist, and an enemy of the true
Religion, and we were so wicked and credulous as to believe them, and
contribute our accursed endeavors to depose and destroy him.

After such an horrid crime, and tremendous wickedness as this, had rendered our
Nation and Religion odious and contemptible to the World, and we had
endeavored to make some reparation for it, by our impatient desires and
longings for the return of our present most Gracious Sovereign, by
Congratulating his arrival with the loudest acclamations and expressions of
joy, by doing justice upon those execrable wretches that were the prime actors
in that black Tragedy, and with solemn penitence begged Pardon of, and
reconciled our selves to God, so that hereby we began to recover our lost
honor, and the good opinion of our neighbor Nations: After all this, I say,
to return to our vomit again, to be so frighted out of our Wits and our
Religion, by the news of Popery, and the discovery of the Cursed and Cruel
design of the Papists to destroy our King and Church, as to overlook and
despise all lawful means of safety, and to resolve upon a wicked and barbarous
Bill of Exclusion, as the only Preservative, or Expedient to save them? What is
this but to rave, and be mad again? To brand our selves with new Infamy and
Reproach? To proclaim the Injustice and Impiety of our Nation? To draw the
eyes, and curses, and Arms of all the Christian World upon us? Nay to defy
Heaven it self, and all the Thunder Bolts of the Almighty, or as the unjust
judge confessed of himself, neither to fear God, nor regard Man?

Sure this Popery is some horrible monster, a dreadful bugbear, that it can at
every turn, thus fright our English People out of their Wits, prompt them to
the wildest and most unreasonable practices? That the very suspicion of it
could exasperate and inrage them so against their lawful King, who had the
Devotion of an Angel, the Piety and Innocence of a Saint, and more then humane
Mercy and Goodness, as to bring them to that Impious Resolution, which the Jews
took up against our Blessed Lord and Savior, we will not have this man rule
over us. And if not that, yet a probability of his being a Convert to the
Romish Church, should provoke our Commons, and some few of our Peers in so high
a degree, as to put them upon disinheriting and excluding a Son of such a
Father, and forgetting all the Virtues and Glories of his Renowned Ancestors,
treat him as a public Enemy, and take from him all possibility (as far as a
Law could do it) of wearing the Crown that encircled and adorned their Wise and
Royal Heads.

Such premises as these must needs infer one, or or both of these conclusions;
That Popery is a vile thing, or they exceeding wicked men, that seek to
prevent, and block up its passage to us with such Rampires and Bulwarks of
Injustice, with the greatest Wrong, and Robbery, and Oppression. For my part I
am no advocate either for Popery, or them that make such wicked and unchristian
use of it, but renounce and abominate them both. That, it is certain, is an evil
and impious thing, but yet the fears and apprehensions of it, must not, ought
not to provoke or instigate our People to do any unjust or sinful thing to keep
it out, because this is to dread and fly from damnation one way, and to run
into it another. But that their hatred of it is most just, appears from the
causes of it, which are the Errors and Corruptions of the Romish Church in
Doctrine and Worship, and the intolerable Rapines, Exactions, and Cruelties of
it.

The Errors and Corruptions of its Doctrine and Worship, our People know very
well that the Church of Rome locks up the Holy Scriptures (which contain that
most precious Treasure, the words of eternal life) in a foreign language which
they do not understand, and casts the greatest contempt upon them, by denying
their sufficiency and perfection, by enlarging the Faith which they propound,
by setting up such a way of worship as they forbid, and say God abhors, and
against which they denounce the most dreadful curses, and horrible punishments;
by giving Men Dispensations to do what they condemn, and to omit what they
require. These, and their other Errors are such an heap of dirt and rubbish,
as has made not only our People, but other Nations hate so foul a Church,
which being often reproved and chidden for it, will not reform or cast it out
of doors, but retains or keeps it as tenaciously, as if it were an heap of
Silver, or pure Gold. Our People have no mind to worship Images, to creep to a
Crucifix, to pray to Saints that can neither hear, nor help them, to kiss and
fall down to their moldy Relics, nor to adore a consecrated Wafer, but would
fain (that they may please God, and save their Souls) keep themselves from
Idols, believe, and live, and worship their Creator, as he commands them in the
Holy Scriptures, and therefore they abominate the Church of Rome, because it
would not allow them (if they were Members of it) so to do, but would force
them to make shipwreck of Faith, and a good Conscience, and that which is the
result of these, Eternal Happiness and Salvation.

The other things that disgust our People, and render them such implacable
enemies to the Romish Church, are its intolerable Rapines, Exactions, and
Cruelties. Our People are not ignorant (nor is it possible they should, so long
as we have so many Records and Histories relating them) what spoil and havoc
the Romish Clergy made of the Estates of their Forefathers, cheated them of
their Money by selling them Pardons and Indulgences, by telling them they might
be redeemed, if not from Hell, yet from Purgatory (a Prison of the Popes
making, and in a manner as disconsolate and uneasy, for the time the poor
captives stay there, as Hell it self, if they were to be believed) with
corruptible things as Silver and Gold. How they exhausted the Treasure, drained
away the wealth of the Nation by Peter Pence, and First Fruits, and Tenths, and
Fees for Dispensations, and investing Bishops, and Appeals, and I know not how
many other ways; so that the Kingdom groaned under their insatiable avarice,
and begged of God, and his Anointed to ease them of such an intolerable burden
and oppression, not to suffer our Silver Thames (as it is called) to be the
unhappy Channel to carry out the English Treasure, and cast it upon the banks
of Tyber, to support the pride and grandeur of a Foreign Patriarch.

And indeed, the Flux was so violent, that if it had not been stopped in time,
it would have destroyed the Body Politic, have let out the Blood and Spirits
of the Nation, discouraged their industry, and thereby beggared the People, for
seeing their land devoured by Strangers, and Foreigners reap the fruit of
their labors, being forced to send great sums abroad, and haunted continually
with lazy Monks and begging Friars at home, the miserable People had no
encouragement to employ their time and labor to get Wealth for such
Caterpillars to Devour.

And if Popery produce such oppressions, lay such grievous or heavy burdens
upon them, it is no wonder that the People are no fonder of it, and being by our
Laws freed from such ravening Wolves, as the Romish Clergy were, when they had
the Rule or Authority here, have no mind they should return any more, lest
their long and forced abstinence render them more hungry then formerly, and
whet their appetites so, that a moderate morsel or revenue cannot satisfy them.

But Money is not the only thing they thirst after, for they delight in Blood
and Cruelty, think they do God good service, and offer him the most acceptable
Sacrifice, when they kill those, they falsely call Heretics, and root them out
of the Land of the Living. Men of such a fiery or burning Zeal, that when they
have Power in any measure equal to it, they make Living Bonefires, or Burnt
Offerings of all that dissent from them, and will not truckle to their
Superstition. Their horrid Massacres in France, their savage Executions by Duke
Alva, and others in the Low Countries, their Inhumane Butchering, and cutting
Peoples Throats in Ireland, their Gunpowder Plots, their Racks and
Inquisitions, the Fires they make for the Living, and their Damning the dead
Saints or Christians (as far as the Popes Anathema's or Curses can do it) to
the everlasting Flames of Hell, are sufficient Instances and Monuments of their
bitter Zeal, and barbarous Cruelty: These have enlightened and convinced a
great part of the Christian World, that they are not of Christ (have none of
his good Spirit in them) who came not to destroy men's lives, but to save them.

Their Law against Heretics (as the Learned 1 Epist. ad Wading. Jesu Ant.
Chap. 8: Page 126.
Episcopis observes) is so Cruel, Bloody, and Nesarious, so contrary to the
mild and merciful Genius of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and that Royal
Law of Charity, which he would have extended to our very Enemies, that I doubt
not to affirm, that cannot be the Holy Church (as they call and would have it
believed to be) in which so barbarous a Law, so cruel a Discipline, so
inconsistent with right reason, and common humanity, is in force and practice.

These things have created in our People a mighty aversion to and hatred of
Popery, and if their hatred kept within its due bounds, and showed it self in
just and lawful ways, they would deserve great honor and commendation for it,
but to be so inflamed at every discovery of any Popish Plots or Designs, or by
the impious frauds and artifices of the Seditious (who are always spreading
false rumors of Popery to do mischief) as to cast off the Loyalty, Justice,
and Honesty, which our Lord requires of all that profess his Religion, this
instead of haters of Popery, proves them to be the Enemies of Christ, and equal
Criminals with the worst of Papists, for every wise and good man therefore
hates Popery, because it prompts the Zealots for it, to do such evil and wicked
things as are destructive of Salvation, but if Zeal against Popery put men upon
any sinful, and therefore damnable Practices, these are certainly as bad (if
not worse) then those, and both of them go to the dreadful Regions of eternal
misery and ruin: And however some may delude themselves, they that let their
fears of, and zeal against Popery, incite them to any Traiterous or Unjust
Actions, have really no Religion, or fear of God.

And yet those Fears and that wild Zeal have had such direful influence upon
our People in former times; and what a fright, hurry, and fury the discovery of
the late Popish Plot put them into, to what violent counsels it prompted some
(I believe) well meaning persons, and how it animated the Seditious to attempt
against the Government, are as manifest as any thing can be. This also put the
House of Commons upon Excluding his Royal Highness, as the only Expedient for
suppressing Popery, an Expedient so much admired and applauded by them, that
one or two Dissolutions could not oblige them to desist, or give it over, but
the more it was opposed the fonder they were of it, and adhered to it with a
most firm and immovable resolution. And though the King, like a most wise and
just Prince, told them the mischiefs, showed them the evil of it, and let them
know how impossible it was he should ever give his Royal assent to so unjust a
Bill, and to divert them from it, Graciously proposed other Expedients, and
offered to do any thing, that was just, they should desire to remove their
fears of Popery, and secure the Established Religion, yet nothing else would
satisfy them, but with great Importunity and Resolution they urged, and stood
for their Bill of Exclusion, thinking to tire out the Royal Patience by their
obstinate adherence to it, and presuming his necessities at long run would
force him to yield to it, not caring how they dishonored, so they could by any
means oblige him to pass it.

And so high an esteem had it obtained, so great an Idol was this Bill become,
that to question the Justice, and dispute the Lawfulness of it, to say any
thing to stop its growing fame, to represent though never so modestly, how
reproachful it would be to our Religion, and how mischievous to our Nation, and
to speak civilly and respectfully of the Duke, exposed a man to the rage, and
scorn of the People, brought upon him the hateful name of a Papist, if not of a
Jesuit: Thus the Prophets words were inverted, and the woe he denounces
against them that call evil good, became the doom of them that would not do it,
they that expressed any dislike of it were reproached, and run down with
clamours and calumnies, but the Bill was cried up as an Act of Heroical zeal
for the Protestant Religion, and the only expedient to save the King, and the
Nation, and the Admirers of it threw down the gantlet, and offered to maintain
against all comers, that his Royal Highness by turning Papist has made himself
incapable of the Government, and that there is no other way to preserve the
King, and to secure our Religion, from the dangerous attempts, that Faction are
encouraged to make against them by the Duke's becoming a proselyte to the
Church of Rome, but by excluding, or disabling him to succeed the King.

This is the great case I have undertook to consider, and shall do it
impartially, that if it be unjust, as I doubt not to prove it, the Authors,
and Promoters of it may see their error, and repent of so impious a project,
and undertaking.

SECT. II.
First, Then I affirm, that to deprive any innocent person of his Right and
Property, is unjust, and inconsistent both with the Laws of our Religion, and
the Rules of common Honesty, and every man is to be so accounted, till he has
committed such a crime or offense as forfeits his Right: This is so execrable
an injury, that God forbids, right reason condemns, and all civilized Nations
have, and do, and will so long as they continue such, abhor, detest, and show
their hatred of it by severe, and exemplary Punishments: This if it be done by
private persons is Theft and Robbery, if by Magistrates it is Oppression, or
perverting of Justice.

In those the crime is so great, that these must punish it, otherwise they do
not answer the end of their Institution, which is to preserve the Society over
which they preside, to protect and defend all the Regular and Obedient Members
of it, and by inflicting exemplary punishments upon them, to be a terror to
the injurious, and unjust, and the evil doers: In these (the Magistrates that
is) the offense is so abominable, as to draw down the horrible curse, and
vengance of God upon their guilty heads; it is to violate the trust, to abuse
the power the great Governor of the World has committed to them, and
consequently to affront Heaven it self, and set it at defyance: Instead of
Patriots this declares them to be Pirates and Robbers, Men of no conscience nor
honesty, who are so far from taking the fair and equal rules of Justice for the
measures of their Government, that they proceed Arbitrarily, and make their
will their Law. And the injustice is the more Criminal and Flagitious because
it is without remedy or helps; for every man by the dictate of Nature, and the
Law of self preservation, is sufficiently Authorized to defend himself, as far
as he can, from private violence or wrong, if Thieves will venture to assault
or rob him on the Road, or attempt to break and rifle his House, he needs no
Warrant to seize or Kill them in his own defense, the violence and injury they
offer, is a sufficient commission to justify his repelling, or resisting of it.

But there is no place for this in public injury and violence, for if the
Magistrate forgetting God and himself, will oppress those whom he should
protect, and instead of guarding and securing, invade their Rights and
Properties, they may not, must not defend themselves by force, Romans 13. 1, 2.
because God has forbidden it, There is no Power but of God, the Powers that
be, are ordained of God; whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists the
Ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to themselves Damnation:
In this case, Prayers and Tears (those now so much scorned and derided Weapons
of Christians) are their only Remedy: They may complain to God, and show him
what wrongs they receive from his Deputies and Vicegerents, and beseech him to
convert or turn them from unrighteousness and oppression, they may bewail their
Sins that provoked him to set an unjust Ruler over them, and reconcile
themselves to him by repentance, but they may not take Arms, nor use any
violent methods to right themselves, or cast off that Load of oppression they
groan under, this being to contract at least an equal guilt with that they
complain of, and suffer by, and to lose all the reward they would obtain by
innocent and patient Suffering.

But though they may not right themselves, yet God will do it; for Vengeance is
mine, says he, I will repay it; and mighty men, men in Power and Authority, if
they pervert Justice, and oppress the Innocent, invade the Rights of those,
that should be guarded and defended by them, shall be mightily punished; for
Greatness, or Eminency of Authority (whatever some may think of it) is so far
from lessening, that it aggravates or heightens the guilt of the oppression
which they that are possessed of it commit, and they should consider that
Magistracy places them near to God, that they are his prime Ministers, received
their Power and Commission from, and judge for him, and therefore are obliged,
by the honor he has conferred upon, by the trust he has reposed in them, as
they expect his blessing and protection, and would decline his anger and
displeasure, to judge righteous judgment. Be wise therefore, oh ye Princes, and
Rulers, be Learned ye Senators, and Magistrates, and Judges of the Earth? Learn
that which God requires of, and has ordained you for, and which the dignity of
your office exacts at your hands; Learn, I mean, to do justly, to preserve, not
violate, the Rights of any that have not forfeited them by great and wilful
crimes; for this is not only the Personal Glory of them that Govern, but the
Honor and Reputation of the Government it self, the Integrity, or Uprightness
of them that perside, brings the Kingdom or Nation into Credit and Esteem with
other States and Nations, for the Fame of their Justice invites Foreigners to
desire their Friendship, to enter into Leagues and Compacts with them, they
fear no injury from a just Government, are confident it will never be drawn to
any base or dishonest enterprise, will never be induced to violate the Faith,
to break the Peace, to renounce the Amity it has contracted with any of its
Allies or Confederates, unprovoked: They have the same Opinion of it that
Pyrrhus had of that brave Roman, Fabritius, who said, that a Man might as soon
turn the Sun out of his course, as turn him from the truth and honesty: And
they that enquire into the causes of the greatness and prosperity of the Roman
Empire, will find that nothing made it flourish more, or helped so much to
raise it to its admirable Grandeur, as the generous Justice and Honesty of its
Government; the Fame and Renown of this invited many small States and
Principalities to incorporate themselves into it, as being sure they should be
safe under the shadow of its Protection from the violence, and rapines of the
unjust and injurious, and that the Roman Eagles would be ready to revenge the
wrongs that were done to any of their Friends and Allys. This made Rome the
Queen and Mistress of the World, and gained her more, and better Subjects then
all her great Generals, and valiant Legions: This persuaded dying Princes to
commit their Royal Offspring to her Care and Protection: This rendered her
People so safe and happy, was so sure a guard and defense to their Persons, and
Estates, that they who were not free of her by birth, were hugely ambitious to
be so by donation: But when that Justice which raised her to, and supported her
greatness declined, her glory was soon obscured, and she fell by degrees into
reproach and ruin; so certain is that of Solomon, Righteousness (Justice that
is) exalts a Nation (raises it to honor Pro. 14. 34.
and greatness) but Sin (that especially of Oppression and Injustice) is a
reproach to any People.

Those Magistrates that banish Justice out of their Cities, and Dominions,
bring them in a little time to Ruin and Destruction, drive away that, which is
both their Ornament and Safety, their Glory, and Defense: It Is that great
thing, Justice, that makes any Government beloved at home, and revered abroad,
that secures it of the Esteem, and Obedience of its own People, and procures it
the honor and Admiration of other Nations; but where Injustice Reigns, and
Men's Rights are Violated, there Ruin and Desolation abound, hinc civitatum
gemitus and ploratus, hence come the complaints and tears of Cities, the
murmurs, outcries, curses, and frequent insurrections of the People, or, if
not open attempts to cast off the Government, yet secret flights and escapes
from it, and removes into other Nations, where they tell sad stories, make
doleful Narratives of the Injuries, and Oppressions they suffered at home, that
forced them to seek for Safety and Protection abroad, which easily obtain
credit with those to whom they fly, it being reasonable to believe that such
numbers of People would not exchange their native Country for a Foreign Land,
but that the intolerable wrongs they endured, constrained them to it: So that
their being there is a continual Libel and Invective against their own Nation,
and the Government that receives and protects them, can have no Invitation or
Inducement to desire the Friendship, make Leagues, have any Commerce with such
a State, for being Treacherous to its own People, how can they expect it should
keep Faith with them, or hope it will be honest to Strangers, that was so
unjust to the Natives? But I think it needless to argue this any farther,
because they are so Evident, that all Men who have any use of their reason will
readily grant me these two things; That it is unjust to deprive any Innocent
Person of his Right, and that every Man is to be so accounted, till he has
committed such a Crime or Offense as Forfeits his Right.

SECT. III.
The next thing to be considered is the Dukes Right, which is so plain and so
certain, that it needs neither Explication, nor Proof; to Explicate it, is to
tell my Readers what they know already, for none of them can be ignorant that
he is next Heir to the Crown: What may be hereafter I dispute not, it being
possible that our present most Gracious Sovereign (whom God Almighty Crown with
a long and happy Reign) may have Issue, if not by this, yet by another Queen.
But, setting that aside, His Royal Highness is at present Heir apparent to
these Kingdoms, there being no other that now appears so but he, and he has
the greatest Right or Property of any Subject in these Kingdoms. With us the
Crown is Hereditary, nay Immortal, for the Law says, The King never dies, but
when he quits his Earthly for an higher (that is, an Heavenly) Throne, the next
of the Blood Royal ascends, and fills the Chair of State.

It is so certain too, as to need no Proof; if it did, the Excluders afford
Plenty of it, by attempting to take it from him, for if the Duke has no Right
to succeed the King, what need is there of a Bill of Exclusion to put him by
it? The want of that Right is of it self a sufficient Exclusion? What madness
is it to attempt to take that from him which he has not, to disinherit him, to
whom the Inheritance does not belong? What need they trouble either the King,
or themselves to bar his Claim or Title, if he have none? To make a Law that he
shall not Reign, is a plain confession that he has a Right to do it, if he
survive his Royal Brother, otherwise the Law is needless, and fights with a
mere Chimera or Shadow.

Besides, the Bill of Exclusion is in its own Nature, and the Intention of the
Authors of it, either a Cautionary and Preventive, or a Penal Bill, or both: a
Cautionary and Preventive Bill to keep a Papist (whether real or supposed, I
here dispute not) from the Crown, if so, it strongly asserts the Dukes Right,
because without such a Prevention, if he be the longer Liver, the Crown will
regularly, and de jure devolve upon him: or else a Penal Bill, designed to
punish his revolt from ours to the Roman Church; but what sense is it to punish
him with the loss of that to which he has no Right. This is as wise as if the
Venetians upon some Offense committed by their Duke, should make a Law that he
should never be King of France: it is brutum fulmen, an empty noise, and
insignificant sound; it is a Law Penal, and yet inflicts no Punishment; a
Diminution, and yet the Person is no way lessened nor degraded by it. His Royal
Highness then (the Excluders themselves being Judges) has a Right to succeed
the King, and that the Injustice of their attempt to take it from him, may the
better appear, I shall briefly consider the greatness of this Right, or the
value of the thing they would deprive him of.

It Is an old saying, de minimis non curat Lex, the Law takes no care about
trifles and petty things, but overlooks them as below its notice and concern:
But a Crown sure deserves to be reckoned inter maxima, amongst them that are
greatest and most precious, and that Law that takes no care to secure it to the
Right owner, much more that would Rob, or deprive him of it, ought to be
abhorred and branded as summa injuria, the highest Injury, it is not properly a
Law, but Impudent Tyranny and Oppression, a Conspiracy or Combination of unjust
Men to degrade a Prince, and divest him of the greatest Right, for such the
Royal Dignity has ever been Esteemed by Mankind, and their high Value and
Admiration of it appear from their Envy at them that have it, and their bold
attempts to Invade and Usurp it.

The greatest Enemies of Kings have been, are, and will be, such as are
desirous to be so themselves: The Rich and Orient Jewels that adorn a Crown,
cast such a tempting Luster, and look so Lovely in the Eyes of Corah and all
his Sons, that their murmurs and complaints against those that own it, do
commonly proceed from a Vehement desire to wear it themselves, who being misled
by their Ambition, think it a Glorious Theft to Steal a Crown: A prize so Rich
and Valuable in their Opinion, that they will seize it (if they can) upon any
terms, run the greatest hazards, expose themselves to the most dreadful Dangers
to obtain it, attempt it as Jason did the Golden Fleece, though watched by
Dragons, and guarded with all the Artillery of Heaven and Earth. Bewitched and
dazzled with the splendor of a Royal Throne, mad Corah will venture to invade
it, till oppressed with the burden of his Pride and Folly, the Earth grows
weary of, and swallows him up, Flattered with the delusive hopes of ascending
this, Foolish Absalon, forgetting the Piety and Duty of a Son, seduced the
mutinous Tribes from their Allegiance to His Royal Father, and by their Arms
endeavored to Depose him, whom Heaven it self had invested with the
Government, and nothing could reclaim the Traitor, till he and his Ambition
were buried together.

Search all Histories, look out the best, the bravest Prince that ever wore a
Diadem, a Prince adornd with the noblest and most lovely Virtues, enriched with
all those admirable perfections that can endear him to God and men, yet these
cannot secure him from the Tongues and Conspiracies of Traitors, but with
Impudent Calumny they will slander him to his People, endeavor with cursed
Lies to stain his Innocence, blemish his virtues, and to blast his Glories,
that they may rob him of the love and esteem of his People, bring them by
degrees to a dislike both of his Person and Government, and so prepare them to
take Arms against, and depose him. What Prince was ever more Merciful and
Compassionate then King David, as being fashioned and framed wholly according
to his Heart, who is the God of Mercy and Compassion. Yet wicked Sheba the Son
of Bichri lifted up his Hand against him, and blew the Trumpet of Schism and
Sedition to rent his Kingdom from him. That peaceful and moderate Emperor
Augustus, honored by his Enemies for his God and the King Pa. 3d.
Princely Virtues, was assailed ten several times by Conspirators. Vespasian
even composed of Mildness and Clemency had daily Treasons against him, and his
Son Titus, for his Pleasing and Amiable virtues termed by Suetonius the Love
and Delight of Mankind, wanted not a Traiterous Caecina. Our Martyred
Sovereign, King Charles the Blessed, that Mirror of all Virtues, in whom all
the Glory, and Perfections of his Illustrious Ancestors met and were United,
how was he Blasphemed, Dishonored, Ruined by them that envied and aspired
after his Royal Dignity, and said with those Wicked men in the Gospel, This is
the Heir, come let us kill him, and seize his Inheritance.

Were Tyrants only subject to the Clamours and Mutinies of the People, their
misgovernment might justly be accounted the Sole cause of them, but seeing the
best, the most just, and mercyful Princes are equally assaulted by them, it can
be nothing but Envey or Ambition that prompts the chief Rebels and leading
Mutineers to enterprise against them. They think the Royal Dignity so
Superlative a Glory, such a transcendent Felicity, that they repine and are
grieved any should enjoy it but themselves, and do what they can to jostle him
that is by wright possessed of it out of the Throne, that they may Seat
themselves in it. For though all Rebels pretend the common good, yet they all
intend their private Profit, Honor and Advancement; this is the mark they aim
at, that is only the Color or Pretense with which they wheedle the People, and
draw them to their assistance.

The People, it is certain, cannot be better nor happyer then under the
Protection of a wise and good Prince, under his Wings they are safe, and free
from Violence and Oppression: Here then all Rebels begin their Base and Wicked
attempts against their Prince, this is their first work, to persuade the People
(who are not so wise as to know when they are well) that their Prince is not
the Person they take him for, neither Loves nor cares for them, seems to be
tender of their Rights, only to make them secure, that when opportunity serves
he may seize them into his own Hands, and spoil them of all they have. Or if
the Princes Justice be so great that it cannot be blasted, and no aspersions
will stick upon it, then they call his Piety in question, say he is not
Orthodox in Religion, but a friend or favourer of the corrupt Church, and
Popishly affected, because they know this will open the Mouths, and inrage the
minds of all the Zealots against him, and consequently expose him to the
greatest Dangers.

So that the transcendent worth, value and greatness of this Right appears from
the mighty esteem and admiration that Men have for it; that which all the
ambitious envy the owners for, vehemently desire themselves, will run all
Hazards, expose themselves to all Dangers for, venture their Lives, nay their
Souls, to obtain, must needs be a great thing! such is a Crown on Earth, which
evil Men prefer before one in Heaven, and good men think has nothing which
exceeds it but that.

Consider also the peculiarity, and separation of this Right, how few there are
amongst all Mankind that have any just Claim or Title to the Royal Dignity; it
is not like the lower honors dispensed to any great number of Men, but
impropriate or reserved to a few Persons, and Families: the commonness of other
things abates their value, and lessens our esteem of them, but a Crown is so
great a rarity that it is justly accounted the most Glorious thing upon Earth,
and therefore it is the highest Injustice to to rob a Prince of such a Jewel.
It would be remembered also who is the Donour of this Right, and we may say of
it as our Lord did of St. John's Baptism, Is it from Heaven, or of Men? does
God give Crown's, or the People? If they be not in his Donation, Daniel was
much mistaken, who affirms, That the most high rules in the Kingdom of Men,
and gives it to whomsoever he will, and all the holy Writers Chap. 4. 25.
Err strangely, who call all Kings Gods Anointed, and Ministers, the Sons of
God, and the Children of the most high, and say he sets them on the Throne, and
that they Reign by him, receive their Power and Authority (that is) Immediately
from him, that he removes, and sets up Kings, and is wonderful amongst
them: they tell us also that Saul, and David, and Solomon were chosen by him to
be Kings over, and Govern his People, and that the Prophets had Commission from
him to go and Anoint such an one King, and Ahija spoke in the name of God, when
he said to Jeroboam, I will give the Kingdom unto thee. Nor does the Gospel
make any change in this great affair, for our Lord himself owned Pilat's power
to be from above, and St. Paul affirms not only Government it self to be Gods
Ordinance, but that, the Powers that be (the Kings and Princes that then
Governed the World) to be ordained of God, that is, as the Learned Grotius
observes, Authoritatem suam (a Deo) accipere, In Romans 3. 13. (...).
non minus quam si Reges illi per prophetas Uncti essent, to receive their
Authority from God no less then if those Kings had been Anointed by Prophets,
were equally that is Constituted or Ordained by him, as if God had bid a
Prophet go and Anoint them. And if they were so then, they are and must be so
now. Nor does St. Peter contradict his fellow Apostle when he calls upon the
Christians to whom he writ To submit themselves to every Ordinance of Man, for
by submitting to every humane Creature or Ordinance, he means, says Grotius,
the being Subject, Ordinationi isti quae inter homines in terris agentes locum
habet, and habere debet, to In 1 Pet. 2. 13.
that ordinance of God which has, and ought to have place amongst Men that
live upon the Earth, not which Men have set up, but which God has placed
amongst them, and the sense of the Apostle is plainly this, Submit your selves
my Brethren to every Prince or Ruler, whom God has set over that Kingdom or
Province wherein you live, you are not, and therefore do not think your selves
excused from paying all Loyalty and Subjection to such a Prince because he is
an Heathen, and you are Christians, for that God whom you serve has given him
his Authority, his Power is from him, and therefore you must Submit to him for
his sake. If this be not the Apostles meaning, his argument does not enforce
the Submission he requires, for what sense is it to say, Submit your selves to
every Ruler that Men have set up (whether he be Supreme or Inferior, a King or
a Viceroy) for the Lords sake, it should be rather for the Peoples sake, that
you may please and gratify them; that they may not be angry or offended at
you, as despisers of that form of Government which they have Ordained or set
up: but his urging them to Submit for the Lords sake, must infer (as a Dr.
Faulkner Christian Loyalty page 412.
learned person observes) that those Men who Govern the World do not act only
by an humane Right, since if Government were not by Gods Authority, and
Constitution, obedience to it could not bear a respect to God himself. And as
the Holy Scriptures affirm Kingly Government to be Instituted by God, so this
is the sense of Antiquity, as is proved by that Author, to whom I refer the
Reader, and shall only transcribe Christian Loyalty chap. 2d. Sect. 5. page 419.
out of him, those words of Paulus Orosius, That all Power and Government is of
God, is that which they, who have not read the Scriptures do think, and they
who have read them do know.

And if God be the Donour of Crowns, if he gives the Royal Dignity to, and
takes it from whom he pleases, we ought to submit to his wise disposal, and be
content that he should order this great Affair as he thinks fit. For when he
will have a Prince to Reign, it is not in the Power of Men to hinder it, though
the People struggle and oppose it all they can, and come to that Resolution, We
will not have this Man Rule over us, though they make Laws, enter into Leagues
and Associations, bind themselves by Oaths and Engagements to oppose and keep
him from it, yet when they have done all they can, he shall Ascend the Royal
Throne, and Enjoy the Crown which Heaven has designed for him: And on the
other side, when God will not have a Prince Reign, all his Friends, Counsels,
Endeavors, how numerous, Powerful, Politic, diligent soever, shall not profit
or avail him any thing; the great Disposer of Crowns and Kingdoms opposes his
Exaltation, and therefore he must be content with a lower Station: In this Case
there needs no Bill of Exclusion upon Earth to bar his claim, because there is
one passed in Heaven, that cannot be repealed.

The Duke then has an undoubted Right to succeed the King, and being so great
a Right, a Right to that which is admired, and accounted by all Mankind the
Richest Jewel, and most Glorious thing upon Earth, and has the God of Heaven
for the Donour of it, I leave it to the Consciences of the Excluders to
determine, what high and horrid Injustice it is to deprive, or take it from
him, if he have not forfeited this Right; which is now to be Examined or
inquired into.

All I know, that is pleaded for the affirmative, is his changing his Religion
or turning Papist, and the Dangers thence proceeding to our most Gracious King,
and excellent Religion: here then two things are to be enquired into; First,
Whether the Duke be a Papist? Secondly, If he be, whether that forfeits his
Right.

SECT. IV.
First, Whether His Royal Highness be a Papist, revolted from ours to the
Romish Church and Religion? I may have leave I hope to put the Question, and no
good Man will be offended at me, if I have that honor for a Grandchild of our
English Solomon, King James, who was so zealous an Opposer of the Romish
Superstition, for a Son of the Royal Martyr, who Lived and Died in the Holy
Apostolical Faith, professed in our Church, for a Brother, the only Brother of
our present most Gracious Sovereign, who is the Great Patron and Protector of
the Reformed Religion, as not rashly to conclude him guilty of such a change, a
change so reproachful to them, and Injurious to himself.

The Excluders I know will laugh at, nay be angry with me for putting the
Question, it being (as they affirm) Notorious that he is a Papist, and they
believe him so to be, as verily as they believe any Article of the Creed; but I
confess, I do not think it so notorious as is pretended, but look upon it as a
doubtful Case, because his Royal Highness has so much reason to dissuade him
from such a change, and because the Arguments for the Affirmative, that he is a
Papist, do not as I apprehend, prove him so to be.

There is nothing, which they that are serious in it, use to adhere to, with a
more firm, stable, and immovable Resolution, than the Religion in which they
have been educated this, if it have nothing else to endear, and recommend it,
ingages their constancy, and fixes them firmly to it, like the magnetic needle
to the North: even a false Religion having the advantage of prepossession, will
keep its ground against the true, though it comes with the clearest reason, the
most convincing Arguments, and such unanswerable Proofs of its Divine Original
and Authority, as may justly not only persuade, but Command Admittance and
Reception. This detained the Heathens in their Abominable Idolatry and
Superstition, it was the Religion they had been brought up in which they sucked
in, (as we say) with their Mothers Milk, and they were resolved to follow their
Ancestors in it, as they had happily done those that went before them, and
they pleaded in defense of their refusing Christianity, that it was a new
Doctrine and an upstart Sect, not known, nor heard of in the Days of their
Forefathers, and they asked the Christians in the greatest scorn, where was
your Religion before Jesus Christ? And it has ever been accounted a mighty
Dishonor and Reproach to any Nation, or Persons, to change their Religion, but
upon the greatest, most weighty, and pressing Reasons and Motives, and
therefore God upbraids his People with it, Has a Nation Jeremiah 2d. 11.
changed their Gods, which are yet no Gods? but my People have changed their
Glory for that which does not Profit: Never any Nation was so absurd and
unreasonable as to change their Gods, though false, and but supposed ones, till
they were fully or thoroughly convinced that they were not what they took them
for: As wild an Error and oversight is it for Men to change their Religion,
unless there be the biggest reason, and the greatest necessity for it: It
argues great Lightness, Ignorance, and instability of Mind, to be of an
Ambulatory, and gadding Humor in a matter of such moment and concern as
Religion, shows the Persons guilty of it, to be of a weak and Childish temper,
Like Children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every Wind of Doctrine:
It reproaches their Wisdom, Arraigns their discretion, that they should embrace
a Faith or Religion they dare not be constant to: such considerations as these
do commonly keep Men firm and steadfast in the Religion they first embraced,
though a better be offered and proposed to them: But this is Foolish and Wicked
Obstinacy, a blind and dishonorable Constancy, it being as St. Ambrose well
observes, nullus pudor ad meliora tranfire, no shame, no reproach at all to
change for the better, to quit errors for the truth, a corrupt for a Pure
Church, a dangerous and sinful for a safe and holy Religion: but to turn from
the truth to error, from a pure to a corrupt Church, to exchange a safe and
holy, for a lewd and dangerous Religion, is a great shame, and such a Sin as
without Repentance must needs be Damnable, if any Man thus draw back, my Soul
says God, shall have no Pleasure in him.

They therefore that say, the Duke has changed his Religion, reconciled
himself (as they call it) to the Church of Rome, must say he did it either with
Reason, or without; that he had great and considerable motives to induce him to
it, or he had not.

If they say he had not, but did it without Reason, they put the greatest slur
and abuse upon him imaginable, charge him with the highest imprudence, make him
a Child, not a Man, cast a greater Calumny or Reproach upon him, than that base
slander, for which he brought his Scandalum Magnatum against the impious
impairer of his Honor, this being to say, that he would in a sullen and
unaccountable humor Create his Royal Brother (a Brother so tender of his
Honor and Interest) so great danger, Vexation, and Trouble, put the Nation
into such horrid Tumults, Disorders, and Confusion, bring upon himself so many
Dangers, incur the Clamours, Obloquies, Hatred, and contempt of all the
Factious People without any cause or inducement at all?

If they say his Royal Highness had reason for this change, considerable
motives to induce him to it, these must be, either his Interest and Advantage
in this World, or his Salvation in the other, because these are the greatest,
and most momentous reasons that could be offered to move him to such a change:
but to turn Papist I shall prove, is neither for his Interest and Advantage
here, nor his Happiness and Salvation hereafter, both these being better
secured and provided for by his stay in ours, then they can be by joining
himself to the Church of Rome.

His interest and advantage in this World; for what can a Prince, whom Heaven
is pleased shall Reign, desire more then all the Authority, Privileges, and
Prerogatives belonging to the Royal Dignity, a Loyal and Obedient People, their
Welfare and Felicity, with all that Honor and Renown, Fame and Glory that
these are always attended with: Every wise Prince, if he was permitted to choose
his happiness, would have it Compounded or made up of such excellent, and
desirable Ingredients as these.

First, I say he would enjoy his full Authority, Subsect. 1.
all the Privileges and Prerogatives belonging to his Royal Place and Dignity,
all the Rights that God has annexed to it, he would be a King, not an Image of
one, exercise his Regal Power in the full latitude or extent of it, not have it
restrained or limited to a few things and those the meanest and most inglorious
parts of his sacred Office.

This he cannot have in the Church of Rome, for there the Mitre Perks up above
the Crown, the Pope, I mean, is Lord over the Prince, claims a Superiority,
pretends to a Power and Jurisdiction over all Kings or Sovereign Princes by
Divine Right, a Power to Excommunicate and depose them, to declare them fallen
from all Dominion and Rule, to dispose of their Kingdoms, and give them to whom
he pleases, to unty the bonds of Obedience, or absolve and discharge their
Subjects from their Allegiance.

The first, that is, the Popes pretended Superiority over him, impairs and
lessens the Princes Honor, makes him a Subject instead of a Sovereign Prince,
degrades him from the high Station, thrusts him lower than Heaven has placed
him, renders him not Gods but the Popes Vicegerent or Deputy, makes him a
Servant to him, who is but a Fellow Servant with all the Bishops of Christ, and
is as strictly and indispensably bound as they are, by the express Command of
St. Paul, to be Subject to the higher Powers (that is, Kings and Sovereign
Princes.) Let every Soul be Subject to the higher Powers, every Man (that is)
whether he be of the Clergy or Laity; if of the Clergy, though a Prophet, an
Apostle, an Evangelist, a Patriarch, a Metropolitan, a Bishop, all are included
in it, and must be Subject to the higher Powers, so was St. Paul, nay St. Peter
himself (from whom his Holiness claims Superiority over Kings) unto that Cruel
Emperor, Nero, both of them suffering Martyrdom under him: and so far was St.
Peter from claiming that Supremacy, which his pretended Successors have so
proudly challenged, so unjustly usurped since, that he gives it to Kings,
Commanding the Christians to whom he writ, to submit themselves to every
Ordinance of Man for the Lords sake, to the King, as Supreme, as the chief, or
highest Minister of God upon Earth: And if every Sovereign Prince be Supreme,
or the highest Minister of God within his own Dominions, as St. Peter calls
him, how can he have any Superior?

To make two such (as they of the Church of Rome do) in every Kingdom, one to
superintend the Affairs of Religion, the other, Civil Rights, or Matters of
State; besides that it is impudently and faucily to divide and separate the
Powers that God has joined together, Kings and inferior Magistrates (as the
Apostle exhorts) being to be prayed for, That we may lead quiet and peaceable
Lives in all Godliness and Honesty, but how absurd is it that we should pray to
God, they may do that (which according to the Doctrine of the Romish Church)
they have no Commission, nor Authority from him to meddle in, that is, to
provide that their Subjects may lead quiet and peaceable Lives in all
Godliness, as well as Honesty, to take care that their People not only deal
Justly one with another, but also Worship God aright, profess the true Faith,
and the Holy Religion of Christ, and be taught to lead their Lives according to
it: Besides, I say, the guilt of dividing the Powers that God has conjoined or
united, it is the very dregs of contradiction to make two Supreams in one
Kingdom, for how can one be Summus or Supremus, the chief or highest, if the
other be equal to him, it is as evident as the Sun when it shines brightest,
that these are inconsistent, one cannot be the greatest, if the other be as
great, nor one the highest, if the other be as high; and therefore to give the
Pope a Supreme Power in all the concerns of Religion, is (however it may be
colored or gilded over) to make the Prince his Slave, to give him not an
equal, but a subordinate and dependent Authority, for he that Rules Religion
must needs Rule all, and therefore the Assertors of the Popes Supremacy, as
they give him a direct and absolute Power in Spirituals, so they give him an
indirect and relative Power in Temporals, in order to Spiritual, and Religious
concerns, when the Interest of Religion requires it, he may Exercise a Temporal
Power or Jurisdiction over Princes, Excommunicate or Depose them, give their
Kingdoms to others, absolve their Subjects from their Allegiance, give them
Commission, or Warrant to take Arms against them, nay to Murder or Destroy
them: So that the Pope (where he has the Supremacy) is really the Kings
Master, and absolute Lord over him, his Dominion is but precarious, during the
pleasure of his Holiness; for so long as he behaves himself humbly, and
dutifully toward his Holy, or Spiritual Father, Executes all his orders,
observes all his injunctions, though never so barbarous, bloody, and inhumane,
so long he shall have his Blessing, and enjoy his Favor: and being so
dependent, he must needs have a tottering Throne, and an uncertain Authority,
the Crown sits loosly on his Royal Head, ready at every turn to drop or fall
off: If he dispute the Commands of his great Master (the Pope) complain of his
Exactions, remonstrate against any of his proceedings, though never so
modestly, if he express any sorrow for the intolerable oppressions of his
People, if he be unwilling to Butcher, and Cut their Throats like Sacrificed
Beasts, or to make Bonefires of Innocent and harmless Men, merely for
professing the True Faith, and obeying the Holy Religion of Christ. If the
Divine Goodness be pleased to inlighten his Royal Soul with the knowledge of the
Truth, and by the splendor of that Light he see, and condemn the errors and
corruptions of the Romish Church, then he is an Heretic, and they say of him
as the Jewish Zealots did concerning St. Paul, Away with such a Prince from the
Earth, for it is not fit that he should Live, Excommunicate, curse him with
Bell, Book, and Candle: then it is meritorious to kill him, and his Holiness
has a Ravilliack, or a Jaques Clement, or some such Villain to assassinate, or
murder him, wholf he effect the execrable Parricide, shall be well rewarded
upon Earth, or if he Perish in the attempt, be made (as far as the Pope can do
it) a Saint in Heaven.

Consider then what Charms or Allurements such a Church can have to invite a
Prince into its Communion? These certainly are so far from being attractives,
that they are the strongest disswasives imaginable, and instead of drawing him
to, must needs deter, and drive him from it? A Prince that knows and has had
Communion with a better, must first run out of his Wits, before he can join
himself to such a Church: A Church, in which he cannot ascend his Royal Throne
without a Rival! a Rival, did I say, nay a most imperious Master, that is very
hard to please, and yet if he be not pleased and humored in all things, it is a
thousand to one but he will jostle him out of it, and lay his Honor in the
dust: A Church, in which he can Exercise but a part, and that the meanest, and
most ignoble part of his Authority, that only which concerns the Civil Polity
and Rights; for he may not meddle with Religion nor the Ministers of it, who
are exempt from his Jurisdiction, and Sworn Vassals to his Superior, and as
such ready to revenge the Injuries and Affronts the Prince offers to their
great Masters, if he dares be so rash, and unadvised as to be guilty of any;
but of that afterward. A Church, in which he that is Gods Image and
Representative, less only then God, must sneak and truckle Meanly to an Upstart
and Usurper, a meteor drawn from the Earth, and raised on high by Pride,
Avarice, and Cruelty.

What Temptation then could his Royal Highness, who is a wise Prince, of a
brave and generous Spirit, and so exceeding tender of his Honor, that he must
needs in the highest manner resent the least Violation of his Right, all
diminution or lessening of his Power, all invasion and usurpation of the
Privileges and Prerogatives belonging to it, both by Divine and Humane Right,
if the Crown should descend to him? What Temptation, I say, could such a Prince
have to join himself to a Church in which he shall be so degraded and
dishonored, be a Vassal and Underling to one that unjustly, insolently, and
profanely exalts himself above all that is called God, that is, all the Kings
of the Earth? Especially if we consider, that the Church he forsakes or goes
from, Courts his stay by giving her Kings their full Authority, all the
Privileges, Prerogatives and Preheminences belonging to them: in this (that
is, the Church of England) the King is declared Supreme not only in Temporal,
but in all Causes Ecclesiastical, superintends Religion, as well as Civil
Rights, governs the Clergy, chooses the Bishops, convenes them when he sees
cause, to make Canons, and Constitutions, Authorizes and Impowers them to
consult, and debate, to order and conduct the Circumstances of Religion (the
Essentials of it being determined by God in Scripture) and what they agree
upon, he does at their humble Petition (if he approve of them) by his Royal
Edict, confirm, or pass into Laws Ecclesiastical, and when they have effected
what he called them together for, he dismisses or dissolves the assembly. Here
the Kings Power within his Realms and Dominions, is affirmed, and declared to
be the Highest Power under God, Canon 1 of the Canons Anno 1603.
to whom all Men as well Inhabitants, as born within the same, do by Gods Laws
owe most Loyalty and Obedience: And whosoever shall deny or oppose the Royal
Supremacy is to be Excommunicated Canon 2.
ipso facto, and not to be restored but only by the Archbishop after his
Repentance, and public Revocation of those his Wicked Errors.

So that they must be blind, or wilfully shut their Eyes, that do not see a
vast difference in this great affair, between ours and the Church of Rome, in
this the Pope is Supreme Governor in all causes, and over all Persons
Ecclesiastical, nay in Temporal too, so far as they concern Religion; in that
(our Church I mean) she Supremacy is given entirely to our Kings, whose Power
is expressly declared to be the highest under God, and their Authority extended
to all Persons, as well Clergy as People, and to all causes, as well
Ecclesiastical, as Temporal: In the Church of Rome, if the Prince claim the
Supremacy, which belongs to him by Divine Right, he is Reputed and Treated as
an Heretic, that is, Excommunicated, and Deposed, and if any of his Subjects
dare to assert, and openly maintain his Supremacy (as in Duty and Conscience
they are bound to do, because it is their Princes undoubted Right) they are
Condemned to Dye, and Adjudg'd Guilty of such a Crime, as cannot be purged but
by casting them into the Fire: In our Church all the Clergy are required to the
uttermost of Canon 1.
their Wit, Knowledge and Learning, purely and sincerely (without any color or
dissimulation) to teach, manifest, open, and declare four times at least every
Year, That all Usurped and Foreign Power, forasmuch as the same has no
Establishment, nor Ground by the Law of God, is for most just Causes taken away
and abolished, and that therefore no manner of Obedience, and Subjection within
His Majesty's Realms and Dominions is due unto any such Foreign Power, but
that the King is Supreme Governor Canon 55.
in all his Realms and Dominions, in all causes, and over all Persons, as well
Ecclesiastical, as Temporal: Or as it is expressed in the excellent Canons of
the Year 1640, A Supreme Power is Canon 1.
given to this most excellent Order (that is, of Kings) by God himself in
Scripture, which is, that Kings should Rule, and Command in their several
Dominions all Persons of what Ranks or Estates soever, whether Ecclesiastical
or Civil, and that they should restrain, and punish with the Temporal Sword,
all stubborn and wicked doers: The Care of Gods Church is so committed to Kings
in Scripture, that they are commended when the Church keeps the right way, and
taxed when it runs amiss, and therefore her Government belongs in chief unto
Kings, for otherwise one Man would be commended for another Care, and taxed
for another Negligence, which is not Gods way.

And if any of our Clergy, or Laity dare to impugn, or oppose the Royal
Supremacy, they are Anathematized, or decreed to be Excommunicated, which is
the greatest Punishment the Church can inflict, and the most dreadful one any
Man can suffer in this World.

It Is most apparent then that our Church gives and secures to the Crown that
great, and most precious Jewel, the Supremacy, which is the chief Glory and
Ornament of it, which the Church of Rome so unjustly steals from and Robs it
of: Here the Prince has no Rival nor Competitor, none to insult or Domineer
over him, as in the Romish Communion, no Lord at all over him, but the great
Governor of all the World, God Almighty, to whom it is his Glory, as well as
Duty to be Subject, and submit himself in all things.

And as our Church does not diminish or lessen the Power of her Kings, so it is
so far from pretending any Jurisdiction, or coercive Authority over them, that
it abhors and detests it, declares it to be Treason both against God and the
King for any to claim or challenge such Authority over them.

For any Person or Persons to set up, maintain, or a vow in any their said
Realms, or Territories Canons of 1640. Canon 1.
respectively, under any pretense whatsoever, any Independent, Coactive Power,
either Papal or Popular (whether directly, or indirectly) is to undermine their
great Royal Office, and cunningly to overthrow that most sacred Ordinance which
God himself has Established, and so is Treasonable against God, as well as
against the King.

In the Oath of Allegiance, which all our Clergy take, the Superior at their
Consecration, the Inferior at their Ordination and Institution, they do
profess, testify, and declare, that the King is Lawful, and Rightful King of
this Kingdom, and of all other his Dominions and Countries: That the Pope
neither by his own, nor any other Authority can depose him, dispose of his
Kingdoms, nor give Authority to any Foreign Prince to invade his Dominions:
That he cannot discharge his Subjects from their Allegiance, nor give License
to any of them to bear Arms against, or to offer any Violence to his Person,
State, or Government: By this Oath they bind themselves, notwithstanding any
Declaration, or Sentence of Excommunication, or Deprivation, or Absolution,
that they will bear Faith, and true Allegiance to the King, His Heirs, and
Successors, and defend him and them to the uttermost of their Power against all
Conspiracies and Attempts whatsoever, which shall be made against his, or their
Persons, their Crown and Dignity, and will do their best endeavor to disclose,
and make known to the King, his Heirs and Successors all Treasons, and
Traiterous Conspiracies they shall know, or hear of, to be against him, or any
of them; That they do abhor, detest, and abjure, as Impious and Heretical, this
Damnable Doctrine or Position: that Princes which be Excommunicated, or
deprived by the Pope, may be deposed, or murdered by their Subjects, or any
other whatsoever: Lastly, they declare also, that they believe and are in
Conscience resolved, that neither the Pope, nor any Person whatsoever, has
Power to absolve them of this Oath, or any part of it: So that our Princes have
all the Honor and security they can desire.

What Motives or Inducements then could his Royal Highness have to forsake such
a Church as this? A Church that is so tender of the Honor of her Princes, so
zealously asserts, maintains, and defends their Royal Authority, all their
Rights, Privileges, and Prerogatives, gives them no offense at all, is in
nothing injurious to them, but next to the great Giver of Crowns, the Glorious
Founder of their Order; Honors, Reveres, and Obeys them.

It Is apparently the Dukes Interest to stay in this Holy and Loyal Church, to
lend his helping hand to preserve, support, and defend it from all its Enemies,
as his Renowned Grandfather, his Immortal and most Glorious Father did so
carefully in their Days, and his brave and Royal Brother does with such
admirable Courage, Wisdom, Watchfulness, and Diligence in this Stubborn,
Factious, and Schismatical Age.

It Is no wonder, if a Prince that knows no better, truckles to the Church of
Rome, bears all the burdens, injuries, and oppressions it lays upon him, is
content the Pope should Domineer, or Lord it over him, sneaks, and behaves
himself as submisly to him, as if he was the meanest of his Domestic Servants,
his Groom, or Stirrup-holder, as some Princes have been, his ignorance is the
Mother of this Spanish slavish Obedience, and Devotion: but there is no place
for this in his Royal Highness, he has heard enough of the Insolences,
Encroachments, and Misdemeanors, the Treasons, Cruelties, and Outrages, which
the Pope and those of his Faction have committed against Kings, he was Born and
Educated in a Church that abominates, detests, and declaims against such
Impious and Unchristian Practices; that Teaches all its Members, and People to
Fear God and the King, and not meddle with them that are given to change, and
therefore cannot be so unmindful of his Honor, and Interest as to make so
unreasonable a change, to quit the Brave and Glorious Freedom of ours, for the
base and reproachful Vassalage, or Slavery of the Church of Rome.

This is the first part of a Princes happiness in this World, to enjoy all the
Authority, Privileges, and Prerogatives belonging to his Royal Dignity, which
I have proved he may do in this, but cannot do in the Church of Rome, and
therefore can have no Reason, nor Temptation upon this account to run from
ours, to join himself to that.

The next great branch of a Princes Happiness upon Earth, is a Loyal and
Obedient People: Subsect. 2.
The Crown sits easy on his Head, and the Government is a Pleasure rather then
a burden to him, when his Subjects have an high Esteem and Veneration for him
in their Hearts, Love and Reverence his Person, Rejoice in, and are pleased
with his Government, Pray for his Life, willingly Obey his Laws, cheerfully Pay
him the Subsidies, and Tribute due unto him, Afford him such supplies as will
support his Royal State and Dignity, enable him to defend himself, and them,
from all the attempts of his, and their Enemies, and are ready to guard his
Sacred Person with their Lives as well as Estates: Such a People are the chief
Jewels of the Crown, the Treasure of the Prince, and the prime part of his
Happiness: without such a People he is broken with Cares, distracted with
Fears, disturbed with frequent Tumults and Seditions, endangered by
Conspiracies, does not sit safe, nor sure upon his Throne, and therefore must
needs be miserable: Such a Loyal and Obedient People are all the true Members
of the Church of England, all those Christians I mean, of this Nation, both
Clergy and People, agreeing in that Faith, Government, and Dean of St. Paul's
Vnreas. Separ: pa. 299.
Worship, which are Established by the Laws of this Realm: There is not in all
the World such a Society of Loyal Souls, of Brave and Faithful Subjects to be
found, that do so highly Honor, so Heartily Love, so Cheerfully Obey, and
Serve their Prince: They have got such an habit of Loyalty, it is so endeared
to, and so deeply rooted in their Hearts that it cannot without great
difficulty be plucked up, it is built upon a Rock, the sure Foundation of
Christ's most Just and Holy Religion, they therefore Love, Honor, Obey, and are
Faithful to their Prince, because God requires all this of them, and Commands
them so to be, and because he is Gods Minister, Governs for, and receives his
Royal Power and Authority immediately from him: And till they have unlearnt
these Grounds and Reasons of it, they cannot be other then Loyal and Faithful
to their Prince, which they can never do so long as they continue in the Church
of England, because they are a prime part of the Doctrine of it, which is
constantly pressed, inculcated, and urged upon them: no Church in all the
Christian World does so strictly, and carefully, and sincerely observe that
great and weighty Charge of St. Paul in both the parts of it. Put them in Titus
3. (...) Church Catechism.
Mind to be Subject to Principalities, and Powers, to Obey Magistrates, to be
ready unto every good work: They are put in Mind of it in their Childhood, in
the explication of the fifth Commandment, taught that it is their Duty to
Honor and Obey the King, and all that are in Authority under him. Every time
they come to Prayers, the Loyal Supplications, Intercessions, and (upon special
occasions) Thanksgivings of our excellent Liturgy, for the King, and the Royal
Family, and the Inferior Magistrates remind the People of the true Obedience
and Subjection they owe, and must pay to them, and humbly beseech Almighty God
to give them Grace to do it: If they read the Pious and Venerable Homilies of
our Church, there the^ Divine Original and Institution of Kings is fully
proved, the necessity of Obedience demonstrated, the horrid guilt, the dreadful
mischiefs, the woeful Calamities of Rebellion explicated and detected, the heavy
Wrath, and Vengeance of God upon Rebels and Traitors in this World, and the
horrible Damnation that attends them, when they pass from hence, Faithfully
represented, and described in a most Lively manner, that all who Read them may
Heartily abhor, and carefully avoid so execrable a wickedness.

Nor does the Loyalty of our Church lie Dead in the Books and Writings of it,
but Lives and Reigns in the Hearts of all the true Members of it, and exerts or
shows its Life and Vigor in their undaunted Courage, Resolution, and readiness
to stand by, and defend the Sacred Person, Honor, and Authority of their
Prince, against all that dare be so impudent, and wicked as to assault the
first, to impair the second, or to infringe the third: I challenge all the
World to show me one true Member of our Church, that so long as he continued
so, was found guilty of any Disloyal Practices: No, so far are they from that,
that the numbers cannot soon, nor easily be told that have Sacrifiz'd their
Lives, and Estates, and every thing that was dear to them in the Cause and
Service of their Prince: His and their Enemies could, and did in the late times
Deprive them of their Liberty, Plunder them of their Goods, Sequester their
Estates, strip them of all things else, but their Loyalty they could not take
from them, this they preserved pure and untainted in the midst of all the
Oppressions, Cruelties, and ill Usage they endured, and when they were
permitted to Live no longer to give any farther Testimonies of it, bequeathed
it as the Choicest and Richest Legacy to their Offspring and Descendents, nay
by their true Christian Patience, and Undaunted Courage at their Death (a
Glorious Death to them) to which they were Condemned for serving their Prince,
did Recommend it to many, that came to see them Dye: A Loyalty not Limited or
Conditional, that Dies if it be not cherished and kept alive by the Princes
peculiar Favor and Bounty, and continues no longer then he Pleases and Humors
them, but absolute, and inconditional, that cannot be shaken nor removed by any
wrongs or ill usage, but is the same when he Frowns upon, as when he Favors
them: If he Oppress them in their Estates they Submit, if he cause the Sentence
of Death to be unjustly passed upon them, they refuse not to Dye, nay do it
with the Meekness, Patience, and Charity of the Primitive Martyrs, they will
not lift up their Hands, nor open their Mouths against him let him use them as
he pleases.

The Fires of Queen Mary could not consume nor burn up their Loyalty, nor scare
them from their Allegiance, she had never gained the Crown, if the Loyal
Protestants had not assisted her, and the great Opposer of her Advancement to
the Royal throne, was the Duke of Northumberland, who though he pretended to be
a Protestant, yet was really a Papist, for so he declared himself to be upon
the Scaffold at his Death.

Such a People make a Prince happy, are his greatest Safety and Security, and
nothing but a guard of Angels from Heaven can be a better defense to him, which
by their Pious and Holy Prayers they are careful to call down to Protect him,
that no harm nor danger may happen to him.

And being sure by continuing in our Church to have such a Loyal and Obedient
People if the Crown should descend to him, what Reason, Motive, or Inducement
could his Royal Highness have to forsake it, and join himself to the Papists?
People that are Infamous all the World over for Killing Kings, Plotting
Treasons, Raising Seditions and Rebellions against them: That are Obedient to
their Prince no longer then he is a Slave to the Pope, for how often did they
Mutiny, make Insurrections, and Rebellions against King Henry the Eighth for
renouncing and casting off the Popes Usurped Authority, and resuming the
Supremacy, which belonged to him by Divine Right as a Sovereign Prince? Though
he was a Zealous Professor, and maintainer of the Romish Religion, yet he was
Alarmed by frequent Tumults and Seditions, and his owning that could not keep
the Catholics (so they call themselves) in Obedience to him, unless he would
be altogether a Slave to him that pretended to be the prime Minister of it: And
though a Prince Study to Please and Humor them all he can, yet their Loyalty
must needs be very fickle and precarious, because the People of the Romish
Communion have a mighty Dependence upon, and are wholly at the Devotion of the
Clergy, and the Clergy are exempted from the Princes Jurisdiction, and Sworn
Subjects to the Pope: The People are wholly at the Devotion of the Clergy, who
manage and govern them at their Pleasure, and they must needs be so, because
they believe they can forgive their Sins absolutely whilst they Live, and pray
them out of Purgatory when they are Dead, by forcing them to come to Confession
they have Opportunity to know all their Errors, Sins and Follies, nay all
their Thoughts, Purposes, and Intentions, which renders them very Subject, and
Dependent: Their Power also of Inflicting Penances, and denying them Absolution
if they do not please and humor them, keeps the People in great Slavery to
their Priests, because they think God will not, if they do not forgive them, so
that the People are absolute Slaves to them, and do every thing they require of
them: And the Clergy that thus Govern the People, are wholly at the Popes
Devotion, they own him for their Lord and Master, Swear Obedience to, and
depend upon him as their great Patron and Benefactor, all their Preferments
being, if not in his Donation, yet such as depend upon his Approbation, and
Confirmation, so that if they do not receive them from his Bounty, yet they
Enjoy them by his Favor, which is Tantamount: This makes them flatter and
adore him as the chief, if not sole Monarch, and despise their Prince as an
underling, or mere Cipher, that signifies nothing: And at every little quarrel
or disgust between his Holiness and him, the Prince is sure, to feel the sad
effects of their Power with the People, either in the Disturbance they cause in
the State, or the attempts they make upon his Person, for if they cannot run
him down with the pretense and Accusation of Herisie (which they may easily do,
because they are the Judges of it; and may call every thing they please so) yet
they will be sure to do it with the charge of unprofitableness, he is no longer
useful to the Church, that is, his Holiness is weary of him, and that with them
is, a Just and Sufficient cause of Deposition; and when they pronounce that
Sentence upon him, they only take from him the Name or Title of King, because
they had Robbed him of all the Power and Authority before, for how can he be a
King that does not Rule and Govern his People, and if the Pope Commands the
Clergy, and they Rule the People, for Gods Sake who does the Prince Govern or
what Authority has he? none, none at all! his Empire is but Imaginary, a mere
Chimera, or feigned thing: I appeal then to all the Wise and Rational World,
whether the Romish Clergy deserve the Name of Subjects, much less of Loyal
Subjects, that neither Obey the Prince themselves, if he refuse to be a Subject
to the Pope, nor suffer the People to do it any longer than he is constant to
be their fellow Subject to the Pope, his Throne must needs totter, and his
Authority be a poor and precarious trifle, that is sure of the Obedience
neither of the Clergy nor People.

And if it be a Princes Happiness to have a Loyal Obedient People (as
undoubtedly it is) it is against the Dukes Interest to leave our Church, all the
true Members of which are eminently so, and to join himself to the Papists, who
are Notoriously known not to be so, this being to exchange Sheep for Wolves,
Doves for Vultures, and consequently to underdo, and make himself miserable if
he come to the Crown.

I confess indeed there is a Generation of Men amongst us, that call themselves
Protestants, and would be thought the best and purest part of the Reformation,
that have equaled; if not outvy'd the Jesuits themselves in their Treasons,
Seditions, and Rebellions against Kings, these were they that took Arms against
and Murdered that Incomparable Prince King Charles the First, of Glorious and
never Dying Memory: These abjured and exiled our Present most Gracious
Sovereign, and since his Happy Restoration have Created him so great Vexation,
Trouble, and Disturbance: These too with the new Converts and Proselites they
have gained from the Church, and poisoned with their Seditibus Principles,
Headed by some of the Great Men that either had cast off Religion, or being
Malcontent because they had not all the Honors, and great Offices they
desired, or being promoted to them, did not enjoy them as long as they would
have done, but for their Misdemeanors were justly deprived of them, that they
might be conferred upon more deserving Persons, with others Alarmed by the late
Popish Plot, and Excited by their hatred of the Romish Religion, are the
Enemies of the Royal Family, known Authors and Promoters of the Bill, and the
late more damnable and accursed intended Exclusion.

But then I desire it may be considered, that these are not of the Church of
England, but Fugitives and Runnagates that have withdrawn and separated
themselves from it, they renounce the Church, and the Church renounceth them,
they will not own her for their Mother, nor she them for her Children; they are
so far from being Members, that they are the Sores and Ulcers, the pest of the
Church, as well as of the Crown, and that they are equally hateful to them, is
Evident, because they destroyed the King and the Church together, or rather the
Church first, that this being taken away, which was the support of it, they
might more easily and readily overthrow the Monarchy, and verify that which
King James in his great Wisdom foresaw would certainly be, No Bishop, No King:
And therefore none can with any appearance of Justice charge the Insolences,
Mutinies, Seditions, Teasons, and Misdemeanors, of that Stubborn Generation
upon our Church, this being to blame it for the Crimes and Offenses of those
that are professed Enemies to, and open Dissenters and Separatists from it, nor
in Reason expect Loyalty and true Obedience from them, so long as they continue
such, for how should they Learn to Reverence and Obey their Prince, that refuse
to come into our Assemblies, where such great, and useful, and concerning
Duties are Preached to, and pressed upon the Hearers: Or if at any time they
vouchsafe to be present at our Churches, it is never till the Loyal, as well as
most Pious Prayers of our Liturgy are over, and then too if either the Text, or
the Sermon have any smatch of malignancy (so they called Loyalty in the Days of
old) or as the new Word is, Toryism, away they run as if they were frighted out
of their Wits, or the Preacher had vented some damnable Heresy, which their
Ears tingle, and their Souls are astonished at: These are Duties that are never
taught in their Conventicles, if they had any mind to it, the Apostles of the
Separate Churches have not the face to put their Hearers in mind of Obeying
their Prince, because their Preaching, and the People coming to hear in those
Places, are Acts of great, Scandalous, and Sinful Disoobedience: And if the
seeds of Obedience be not sowed in their Hearts by Learned and Constant
Preaching, how should Loyalty as the precious Fruit thereof grow up in their
Lives and Actions? They that prefer the Opinion of that Scotch Villain David
Blake, who said all Archbishop Spots Woods Hist: Church of Scotland pa. 423.
Kings were the Devils Bearns, before that Affirmative of God, I have said ye
are Gods and you are all the Children of the most High, and that assertion of
St. Paul, who writ by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, There is no Power but
of God, the Powers (Kings) that be, are Ordained of God, and neither desire to
be (nor care to come) where they may be better informed, and Preached out of
such Damnable Principles, cannot possibly be good Subjects: Do Men gather
Grapes of Thrones, or Figs of Thistles? As unreasonable is it to expect Loyalty
from these People, who have not hitherto been Taught, and have still no mind,
or desire to Learn any, and do therefore cast off all Obedience to the King,
and do all they can to tear or rend the Government from him, because like the
Bramble they would fain be so, that is, Govern all themselves.

It Is then apparently the Interest, and consequently ought to be the Care of
the Government to reduce, or bring back to the Church these People that are
gone from it, because whilst they continue separated, or divided from it, they
are open and professed Enemies to the Government, and there is no other way to
make them good Subjects: To grant them Toleration, is a sure way for the
Government to Ruin and undo it self, because it is to give them not only
opportunity, but License and Commission to Preach Treason, and dissiminate
their Seditious Principles with Impunity, to strengthen and increase their
party, to gain every Day new, and numerous Converts and Prosselites (the
ignorant People being exceeding fond of, and greatly delighted with their
impudent, and Enthusiastical way of Praying and Preaching? and when the Terror
of the Laws does not restrain, run after them with as much an eagerness, as
they do the most pleasing pastimes and entertainments) till they grow strong
enough to overmaster and depose the Prince, and therefore they that advise him
to grant them Toleration, do neither better nor worse then persuade him to be
Felo de se, to Ruin and Destroy himself: But the Mischiefs and Dangers of
Toleration are so fully proved by the excellent Author of the late
Eccesiastical Dr. parker.
Polity, that I need say no more against it, but only desire all that Love the
King, and have any Authority under him, and wish the Peace and Prosperity of
the Nation; to Read that Learned, Eloquent, and most Rational Discourse, which
will convince them (if Reason can do it) that the Government cannot stand, if
these People be Tolerated.

As for those kind and good humored Gentlemen that propose Terms of
Accommodation, and would Unite or bring them to us by removing some of those
things which they dislike in our Church: This I must tell them is rash and
erring Charity, for they do not consider the surly, peevish, and insolent
temper of the Dissenters, nor mind what their Designs and Persuasions are: For
is it probable they who believe their Discipline to be the Scepter of Jesus
Christ, and say all the Kings and Rulers of the Earth must and ought to Obey,
and Submit to it, and if they do not, are the Enemies of the Lord Jesus, and
will not let him Rule over them: And that their way of Worship only, is
agreeable to the Purity and simplicity of the Gospel, and are so stiff, and
peremptory in the belief of these things, that no Arguments, not all the Reason
in the World can persuade them from it: Is it probable (I may say, possible)
that Men who believe these things with such immovable Resolution, will ever be
gained to our Church (which explodes and condemns them as impudent Errors and
Lying Pretenses) by removing a Ceremony, Abolishing (suppose) the use of the
Sign of the Cross after Baptism, kneeling at the receiving of the Lords Supper,
the Surplice, or any other harmless Rite, which the Grandees of the separation
are convinced to be Innocent things? No, no this will not do the work, they are
for a through Reformation, the Common Prayer is an Idol, an Abominable Idol:
The Order of Bishops not only a Superfluous or needless thing, not only an
unprofitable burden of the Earth, but Antichristian, and an unlawful
Government in the Church, which they have solemnly Covenanted or Sworn to
Abolish and extirpate, and will the shaking off a few Leaves, (casting away two
or three harmless Ceremonies) either satisfy or divert them, that have laid
the Axe to the Root of the Tree, because they think it Cumbers the Ground: They
have the same thoughts of our Church Government, as that Famous Scotch
Presbyter Mr. Andrew Melvill had of theirs, who affirmed, That Arch Bishop
Spots: His: Church of Scotland. pa. 275.
the Corruptions crept into the State of Bishops were so great, that unless the
same were removed, it could not go well with the Church, nor could Religion be
long preserved in Purity: And therefore amongst other things which the
Presbyters of that Nation proposed to the Bishops for Reforming the Corruptions
of their Order, they urged (according to their wonted Modesty) That the Bishops
should be content to be Pastors or Ministers of a Idem pa: 303.
Flock (that is, of one particular Congregation) and that they should not
Empire over Presbyters but be Subject to the same: Very good! this is it they
would have, either no Bishops (for to confine them to one Congregation, is to
make them not Bishops, but Parish Priests) or if any, such as will truckle, be
Subjects and Underlings to them: A Blessed Reformation indeed, to make the
Fathers Submit, or be Subject to their Sons, them that stand in the Place of
St. Paul, and possess the degree of St. Peter, are (that is) the undoubted
Successors of the Apostles, do homage to them that succeed the Seventy
Disciples? Which is to invert or turn the Ordinance of our Lord upside down:
You are deceived, ye Charitable Souls, that think to bring the Dissenters into
the Church, by casting the Ceremonies they except against, out of it, it is not
that; but the Pre-eminence and Superiority they contend for, they would be
uppermost, Rule all both in Church and State, this is the point they would
gain, for this they whine and wrangle, stir up strife and Sedition, Plot
Treason from Age to Age, from Generation to Generation, for this they make
Schisms, and set up new Churches, and scare the People from the Old, by
declaiming against the Ceremonies, and crying cut of Popish Prayers, Vestments,
Rites, and Bishops, and bawling upon every Occasion (as if they would tear
their Throats) Popery, Popery: It Is not Conscience, but Interest that puts them
upon these extravagant courses, they are not so silly (I mean the leading Men
amongst them) as to believe it a Sin to Communicate with our Church in all the
parts of its Worship, though they are such Knaves as to tell the People so,
that they may draw them from it, and having got a party strong enough, destroy
the Church, and with it the Monarchy, that they may Reign as Kings, and enjoy
their so much courted Empire and Soveraignity: Wipe off the Paint and Varnish,
the Colors and pretenses with which they endeavor to cover and conceal it,
till a fit Opportunity, and every Eye (that is willing to see) may discern this
to be the great Design they are Engaged in.

Another Expedient I find tendered by a Charitable hand for reducing the
straglers to the Church, is Instruction, that they be showed the Innocent and
Lawfulness of the things they scruple in our Church, and that they be fully
Explicated, as also the Sinfulness of their Schism, or Separation from it,
together with the mischievous and dangerous consequences of it: This is a good
way indeed, but then the question is how it shall be put in Practice: I know
but these three ways, Preaching, Writing, and Conferences: Preaching cannot do
it, because they will not hear our Clergy, it is a rare thing to see any of the
Dissenters come to our Parish Churches, when they may safely go to their own
Meeting Houses, or if any of them be pleased at any time to come, if the Sermon
tend to justify the Constitutions of the Church, to refute the Cavils and
Objections that are made against them, to reprove though with all Gentleness,
and the softest words, the Sin, and Error of those that separate from it, they
are sad, nay angry at such sayings, go away highly provoked, and offended, and
will not be so civil as to hear the Preacher out: And as Preaching cannot,
unless they be forced to hear, and the just Correction of the Laws drive them
from their Conventicles, to our Assemblies; so Writing has done no good upon
them, all the excellent Books that have been written both formerly and of late
Years by the excellent Divines of our Church, in which all their exceptions
against it have been fully answered, all their scruples satisfied, all their
Pleas and Apologies for their Separation thoroughly confuted, and the Authors of
them put to all the shame and silence Men of their Confidence are capable of,
yet they are never the better, but persist stubbornly in their wicked Schism,
and prove to all the World that they are such as hate to be Reformed, the
crafty seducers tell their Credulous followers, that such are Lewd and ungodly
Books, and that frights them so, that they dare not upon any Terms give them
the Reading; all that their guides think fit to do in the case, is to employ
some Pragmatical Fellow to write an Answer, which, how silly or impertinent
soever, is admired and applauded by the whole Faction as an Incomparable piece,
and the Author hugd and caressed by the Brethren, and Holy Sisters as a very
precious Man.

Nor can any better success be reasonably expected from the other way, that of
Conference, because if they will not hear our Clergy Preach, nor Read the
excellent Books they have writ in defense of the Church, they will be as averse
(especially when they have their Liberty) to private Conference, be with great
difficulty brought to admit the Charitable Person that comes to undeceive them,
or if they do, they are generally so ignorant, and so conceited, that it is
very hard to make them understand the nature of the things disputed, what
Schism is, and how exceeding Sinful, and if this be done, they are so highly
conceited of their own Gifts and Godliness, as to think themselves Wiser and
Holyer than he that offers them Instruction: Besides, they are such Slaves to,
so wholly at the Command of their own Guides and Teachers, that if they tell
them their separate Meetings are Innocent and Holy Assemblies, and those of the
Church so impure, or defiled with Popish Prayers, Ceremonies, and other Humane
Inventions, that it is not safe for them to venture their precious Souls in
them, they believe such lying words as firmly, as if they were Divine Truths,
and adhere to them in spite of all the Scripture and Reason that can be
brought against them.

These therefore, and all other vain projects laid aside; the Government (if it
will be safe and happy) must with great and earnest care endeavor to reduce
them to the Church, which can be effected no other way but by a strict
Executing the Laws upon all Dissenters, and an unwearied persisting in it,
letting them see that if they dare be so impudent as to Affront, Transgress the
Laws, and defy Authority, that both will and dares do Justice upon such bold
Offenders: This in time will make them leave their Fooling (to give it no worse
Title) Teach the People to shun the Meeting Houses with the same caution and
waryness as they do the Dreadful and Disconsolate Places, where Misery and Ruin
dwell: This will put them upon serious Thoughts and Considerations, Oblige them
strictly to Examine the Cause for which they Suffer, prompt them to ask
themselves such questions as these, what harm or venom is there in the
Ceremonies of the Church that we should be so afraid of them, as to run from
the Communion of it? Do not our own Guides and Teachers confess the Doctrine of
it to be pure, or agreeable to the Scriptures? Are there not abundance of
Learned, Pious, and Holy Men that Live and Dye in the Communion of it, and can
we think that such Men are not Saved? And if they be? Why will not the same
Faith, the same Doctrine, the same Prayers and Holiness carry us to Heaven? Are
not the Doctrine, Government, and Worship the same that were Taught, exercised,
and used by those brave and Holy Men that with such admirable zeal, and courage
suffered Martyrdom in the Reign of Queen Mary? How can that be Popery now,
which was practiced by them, who would rather burn at a Stake then turn Papist,
and are we Wiser, or more Conscientious than they? The Wise Merciful Correction
of the Laws will by degrees bring the Offenders to a sight and abhorring of
their Errors, and produce in them such good Thoughts as these, and
consequently engage them to return from whence they are fallen, I mean to our
Holy and Excellent Church, which will put an Happy end to all our Schisms and
Divisions, and the People by coming constantly to our Pious Loyal Assemblies,
will in a little time Learn to Fear God, and the King, and meddle no more with
them that are given to change; But if this great means of reducing them be
waved, or neglected, or coldly prosecuted, such a Blessed and desirable
Revolution can never be attained, but our fewds and contentions will be
Immortal, and we shall be as the scorn of, so the most Miserable and Distracted
Nation in the World.

Without this nothing can reduce them, but in Conjunction with, and
Subordination to it, there are other things that will contribute very much to
it, as the Exemplary Piety, and strict Conformity of the Clergy, and the
putting them into such a Condition that they may not depend upon the
Benevolence of the People for their Maintenance.

Their Exemplary Piety, that none be suffered to Dishonor our most pure and
holy Church by their Evil and unsuitable Lives, for though it is certain we have
the most Learned, Pious, Unblamable, and therefore Excellent Clergy in the
World, yet if there be any irregular Persons amongst them (as it is possible
there may, in such a great Body of Men, be here and there one that forgets
himself) that care be taken, and means used to Reform them, that they give no
Offense, Minister no Occasion to any to Reproach the Church, or to speak Evil
of our most Holy and Undefiled Religion: We see how cautious and careful the
Schismatical Preachers are to seem Holy, that they may gain the Esteem and
Veneration of the People, and lead them by the Noses whether, and to what they
please, and if the shadow in them, to be sure the Substance of Holiness, a
Virtuous and unblamable Life in all our Clergy, will gain them great Authority
with the People, and convince them that must needs be an Holy Church, that has
so Pious, Regular, and Excellent a Clergy.

The next is their strict Conformity, that all of them be compelled to observe
all the Orders, and Constitutions of the Church. Unless this be done the People
can never be drawn off from their prejudices against, and misperswasions
concerning them, but will think them unlawful Impositions; because some of the
Clergy do not observe them, and they will admire, applaud, and follow those
that do not observe them, as the most Moderate, Pious, and Conscientious Men,
but despise, censure, and withdraw from the strict Conformists, as violent, and
Superstitious, and Persons Popishly Affected: but when they all agree or join
in the Observation of them, not only speak the same thing, preach the same
doctrine, profess the same Faith, Worship God with the same Prayers (the Holy
Prayers of our Incomparable Liturgy) use the same Rites, Gestures, and
Vestments in the Administration of the Blessed Sacraments, and all their Holy
Offices, and walk all of them by the same Rule; This will satisfy the People
of their Unity or Agreement, and convince them of the Innocence and Lawfulness
of the things which so many Learned, Grave, and Pious Men concur in the
Practice of.

But then all Wise or Intelligent Persons will readily apprehend, that this
general Conformity will very difficulty, if at all, be effected, unless the
Clergy be put into such a Condition as to have no Dependence upon the People
for their Maintenance and Support: Many of the Clergy by reason of the poorness
of their Benefices are greatly tempted, if not constrained to humor and comply
with the People, to Preach such things as they Love to hear, and to omit such
as they dislike, that they may not loose their Benevolence and Contributions,
without which they cannot Live: nor is this the Condition of some Country
Villages only, but also of great and Populous Towns, in which there are Swarms
of People that Dissent from, and are Enemies to the Church of England, and such
a poor Stipend for the Clergy, the Tyths being impropriare and in Lay Hands,
that they are forced in a manner to turn the Church Assemblies into
Conventicles, and the poor Vicar or Curate dares not for his Ears Read all the
Prayers, nor wear the Surplice, nor which is abundantly worse, reprove the
Irreverence and Rude Behavior they are guilty of in the House and Service of
the great God, nor show them the Sinfulness of their Schism, nor the Wickedness
of their Murmurs, Complaints, and Tumults, against the Government, nor Preach
up Loyalty, put them in mind (fully and effectually) to be Subject or Obedient
to the King, and all that are in Authority under him, all that the most
Courageous Person (under such unhappy Circumstances) dares venture to do in
these great, and for the present Age most necessary points, is but to touch at
them in transitu, as he passes to other things (as I have heard some do in
London it self) or as the Dogs at the River Nilus, only lap and away, for fear
of being snap'd by the Crocodiles; for if these things be pressed and insisted
on, the Preacher disobliges the Fanatic party, and drys up all the Streams and
Emanations of their Bounty, they will not receive him into their Houses, nor
bid him God Speed, and it is well if he escape so, and do not feel the weight of
their Protestant Flayls.

This is a great Injury both to the Church and State, abates the Honor and
Esteem of the Clergy, and renders them less Serviceable to the Government, than
they must, and would be, if they had a Liberal and Honorable maintenance, and
such as depends not upon the pleasure and Benevolence of the People, but such
as they may demand of them as their Right, not receive as their Alms, which
they may give them if they please, and deny them if they think fit.

These things in my Judgment (which I humbly submit to all those great and wise
Persons that are in Authority) added to the Just Correction, which the Laws
inflict upon them, would in a short time awaken and reduce those of our People
that are gone out from us, effect such a Blessed change in them, that they
would return to their Loyalty, to the King, and to the Communion of the Church.

And seeing all the true Members of the Church of England are Eminently Loyal
already, and those of our People that are otherwise at present, may in time by
these means be made so, it is against the Dukes Interest and Happiness, if the
Crown devolve upon him to be a Papist; because this would be to exchange good
Subjects for bad, a Loyal People that own no Prince but him, for such as have
been guilty of frequent Treasons, and are professed Subjects to a Foreign
Power.

And next to his own honor, safety and happiness, Subsect. 3.
all that a Prince can desire in this World is the Welfare and Felicity of his
People: And then it is well with any People, and they are happy, when they Live
in Piety, and Peace and Safety, are encouraged and required to profess and
practice the true Religion, and to Worship God Aright, that is, according to
the the Scriptures: When they are protected in their Estates from Rapine and
Oppression, and in their Persons from Violence and Cruelty, Blessed are the
People that are in such a Case. And it is both the Duty and Glory of the Prince
to provide or take Care that this be the Condition of his People or Subjects:
His Duty, because, this is the great end of Government, and the prime Reason of
Gods Investing him with the Royal Authority: When David was Psalm 78: 71.
chosen by God to be King of Israel, it is said, That he took him to feed Jacob
his People, and Israel his Inheritance: To seed, (that is) protect and preserve
them from mischief and Injury, not to Worry or Devour, to Destroy or Hurt, but
to Defend them from harm and violence. And because he had been so to them, and
they hoped he would have Lived long to be so to them still, they bitterly
lamented the Death of good King Josiah, saying, The Breath of our Nostrils, the
Anointed of the Lord, was Lamen. 4. 20.
taken in their Pits, of whom we said, under his shadow we shall Live among the
Heathen: he was a shadow and defense to us, under his protection we were safe,
and guarded from all our Enemies. This is also asserted by St. Paul, Rulers are
not a Terror to good works, but to the Rom: 13. 3, 4.
Evil: They are not so in the purpose or intention of God, were not instituted
or ordained by him for such an evil, unjust, and unworthy end, to Injure,
Punish, and Destroy good Men, they have no such Power from him, and if they do
it, they abuse their Authority, and go beyond their Commission. A Terror they
may and must be, but it is not to the good, but to the Evildoers: Will thou
then not be afraid of the Power? Do that which is good, and thou shall have
Praise of the same, for he is the Minister of God to thee for good. The Prince,
or Ruler is employed by God, to protect and defend the good, and this is, or
ought to be the great Design or Intention of all his Laws, that they be a
safeguard and security to such, and a terror or restraint to the Evil and
Injurious.

And if the Prince must not suffer others to wrong his People, to be sure it
must needs be sinful and unlawful for him to do it: To Execute Thieves and
Murderers and yet be Unjust and Cruel himself. It Is true, if he be so, his
People may not, must not revenge the wrongs, nor resist the Violence he offers
to them, because the Apostle tells them what the dreadful Punishment of that
resistance will be, They that resist shall recieve to themselves Damnation; And
because God is the only Judge of Kings, and he so Righteous a Judge, that he will
be sure to Punish them, if they abuse their Power. When David was unjustly
pursued, and Injuriously dealt with by King Saul, he did not study Revenge, but
abhorred it, saying, God forbid that I should stretch forth mine hand against
the Lords Anointed: 1 Samuel 26. 11.
He remitted or left him to his proper Judge. David said furthermore, As the
Lord Lives, the Lord shall smite him, or his Day shall come to Verse. 10.
Dye, or he shall descend into Battle and Perish: But as for me, I have no
Commission nor Authority to cut him off, and therefore God Almighty keep me
from committing so Audacious and Execrable a Crime or Wickedness.

But the Peoples having no Power from God to Revenge the wrongs done them by
their Prince, is no encouragement for him to do them, because, as they are
contrary to his Duty and the abusing his Authority, he is answerable and
accountable to God for them, and must expect from him a Punishment equal to
them. And that they may Faithfully perform this Duty, consult and provide for
the good and welfare of their People, the Apostle requires, that Supplications,
and Prayers, and Intercessions be made for them, for Kings, and all that are in
Authority, that we may lead quiet and Peaceable Lives in all Godliness, and
Honesty.

This, as it is the Princes Duty, so his Honor and Glory, when according to
the Ancient Title of Kings, he is a Common Father to his People, has a
Paternal care of, and Affection for them, Loves them, and is tender of their
Lives and Properties, is so far from Destroying the Innocent, that he is
unwilling to Condemn and Execute the Guilty, and would not do it, but that
those cannot be safe, unless these be cut off, had rather save one Subject than
Destroy a Thousand Enemies, and thinks himself Rich enough, if his Loyal
Subjects be so, and instead, of Impoverishing them by needless Wars, encourages
Trade, and Studies to keep them in Peace and Plenty.

It Is as impossible for wise and good People not to Love such a Prince, as it
is for them to hate themselves, or not to be concerned for their own Interest.
They look upon him as their chief Patron and Benefactor upon Earth, and the Sun
it self is not dearer to them, than he is: They Love and hate as he does, they
that are his Friends they account theirs, and those that are his Enemies, they
abhor as if they were their own. They have the highest esteem and Admiration
for him in their Hearts, which they express in their words, and Actions: In
their words by filling all Places with his Praises, and speaking nothing but
Panegyricks and Encomiums of him: In their Actions by treating him with the
greatest reverence and respect, receiving him in Triumph, and with all possible
expressions of Joy, wherever he comes, as if some Glorious Angel was descended
from the Heavenly Regions, and come to Bless them with his presence: By obeying
his Laws, and observing all his Royal Injunctions, doing every thing he
Commands with a ready, cheerful, and willing Mind. Such a Prince, as he is
admired and beloved in his Life, so he is truly Lamented at his Death, and his
Subjects pay their Tributary Tears at his Royal Sepulcher, weep over him, and
say as Elisha did at the departure of Elijah, my Father, my Father, the Chariot
of Israel, and Horsemen thereof: And though he be gone to take possession of a
better Kingdom, and to receive a brighter Crown, yet amongst all his Glorys
above, they cannot forget to Praise and Honor him upon Earth; not only think,
but call him Blessed, raise the fairest Monuments to his Memory, inscribe his
Royal Virtues, and Glorious Actions in never Dying Records, that his Fame and
Renown descend to after Ages, and all Generations may admire and call him
Blessed. So that the providing or taking care for the welfare of his People is
a considerable part of the Princes happiness.

Let us enquire then, if this be not also lost by the Dukes being a Papist, if
the Crown should descend to him.

If he come to be King, and be of the Romish Religion, he must set up that, or
not: if he do it not, he Frustrates their Expectation, disobliges that Party,
and thereby incurs their Rage and Displeasure, which must needs be very Fierce
and Cruel, because ever since Queen Mary left the World, it has been their
study and endeavor to get a Catholic into the Throne.

This has cost them so much Labor, put them upon so many Conspiracies, for
this so many of their Zealots have been Executed, found a worse Purgatory here,
than that they talk so much of after this Life: And having gained their point,
as they thought, got a King of their Religion, for him to be content with Mass
in his own Chapel, and let his People openly profess and enjoy the Reformed
Religion, which they call Heresy, and hate worse than they do the Devil! What
an unpardonable Injury, Affront, and Disappointment is this? This is to rouse
and irritate the Angry Lions, to deny the hungry Wolfes the Prey, they have
been so long hunting after? his Holiness, though he be Indulgent enough to
other Sinners, and sells them Pardons at as Cheap and Reasonable Rates, as they
can well desire, has no Mercy in store for such a Transgressor: Sons will
sooner pardon those that Kill their Fathers, Fathers those that Murder their
Innocent Children, and enraged Husbands them that Ravish their beloved Wives,
than he will forgive such a crime as this: A crime that robs him of his so much
admired Sovereignty, of his dear, and most desired Profit, of his first Fruits,
Tenths, Peter Pence, Fees for Investing Bishops, Indulgence Money, and all his
other ways of getting Wealth, by which (as our Histories relate) he drained a
mighty Treasure out of this Kingdom, and which if the Prince deny him, his
Reign will be short, and his days few, for if the Traitorous Priests and
Jesuits that are about him, do not Poison or Stab him before their great Master
has declared him Unprofitable, and Consequently unworthy of the Royal Throne,
to be sure he (having first for Fashion sake Admonished and Exhorted him to be
Zealous of, and mind the good of the Catholic Cause) will proceed to Sentence,
Declare him Incapable of, and fallen from all Dominion and Rule, and then every
one that Kills him, thinks he does God the most acceptable Service, and such as
Merits from him the bigest reward, and the brightest Crown, provided inthe
Regions above, for his most faithful Servants.

So that a Popish King cannot be safe unless he sets up that Religion, he must
be a Zealous Assertor, Promoter, and Maintainer of it, or else his own Party
will depose and lay his Honor in the Dust, down he must come, (unless a
special Providence Guard him) descend into his Grave by a violent and untimely
Fate, if he do not Employ all his Power and skill to advance or set up that, if
he refuse to do this, he Ruins and undoes himself; for being of that Religion
he must have some of its Priests to perform the Sacred Offices of it, which
gives them access to his Person, and consequently Oppertunity to Dispatch him.

And therefore if his Royal Highness be a Papist, and as such, comes to the
Crown, by refusing to set up that Religion, he will expose himself to the
fiercest Rage of that party, and Consequently to the greatest Danger, though
that rage of theirs will be most unreasonable because unprofitable to them, all
the rest of the Royal Family being known and professed Protestants, so that no
advantage can accrue to them by his Deposition or Death. Besides it is very
probable that he may have no fear or Apprehension at all of it, for if he be a
Convert to that Church, to be sure he has a good Oppinion of it, and thinks
them honest Men, or else he would never have joined himself to them, and being
so Persuaded, how can he apprehend any danger from them, if he do not set up
that Religion, which he agrees with them in their Profession of? He may think
he does the Romish Faith Honor enough by the open owning of it, and sufficient
Service, as his Example is a great allurement to invite others to embrace it,
and he may Consider that to set it up by force will produce such Cruelty, and
Oppressions, let in so many Miseries, that his Clemency and Goodness may oblige
him to abhor the thoughts of doing it: If it be said that every Man desires to
Propagate and Advance his own Religion, and therefore the Duke if he be King
will have the same desire to Promote his, I grant it, but then I say every Man
will not make use of unjust and cruel Methods for that purpose, but endeavor
to win Men to it by Arguments and Persuasions, he will do the Religion he is of
all the Right and Service he can, without wronging others, he will by fair and
lawful ways gain all the Converts he can to it, but he will not make Sacrifices
of those that refuse it, and no Man knows but this may be the Dukes Resolution,
if he come to be King, and be a Papist. To say he will think that God requires
him to set it up, and that he cannot be Saved unless he do it, is to say that
he will think God requires him to make three Kingdoms Miserable, to commit many
Oppressions, Cruelties and Murders, and that such Horrid things as these (which
God forbids and declares to be Damnable) are necessary to his Salvation, which
are most Unreasonable for any man, that is truly Religious, to think. If the
Duke think the Roman to be the true Religion, he will think God requires him to
believe and profess it, and to Endeavor by all Lawful means to Convert his
People to it, but if those do not Prevail, he must in reason think himself
Obliged no farther, because the using cruel, and unlawful means, to that
Purpose, is Apparently Destructive of that Salvation, which he designs to
obtain by Embracing that Religion. And being assured God will not be Displeased
with him, if he do not set it up, because it cannot be done, without doing
those things, against which his Wrath is revealed from Heaven, he may either
Apprehend no danger from the Professors of it, or if he do, despise it relying
upon the Divine Protection, which his Consulting the safety and welfare of the
People is a great Endearment of: For if he set up the Romish Religion, the
People must either become its Proselytes, or not: If they do, they lose Heaven:
If they do not, they are sure to be Miserable upon Earth.

For Men to profess known Errors, and to Practice Gross and known Sins, must
needs be Damnable, but all Protestants know and are Convinced in their
Consciences that the Romish Church is guilty of many and great Errors, Sins,
and Impietys: Errors in Doctrine, Impieties, (Heinous Impieties) in Worship,
such are the Images they make of God, and the Divine Honor or Worship they
give unto them, as also their Praying to Saints, Adoring their Images and
Relics, and the Elements in the Eucharist, with diverse other Abominations
which they are Guilty of, and therefore for them, that are convinced of the
Sinfulness of these things, to turn to that Church must needs be to shut
themselves out of the Kingdom of Heaven.

But if that be too great a good to be so parted with, then to secure it, they
must resolve to undergo all the Miseries, and Cruelties, and Sad things which,
upon their refusing the Romish Religion, will break in upon them, for either
they must fly from the Storm, become voluntary Exiles, leave their Native
Country, their dearest Friends and Enjoyments, go seek their safety, and some
of them, their Maintenance in other Nations: which is a great and sad
Calamity, or else stay and be Executed as Heretics at home: And seeing these
will be the Lamentable consequences of his setting up the Romish Religion, I
desire those that are so forward to believe he will do it, to consider what
advantages can accrue to his Royal Highness by such violent and Tragical
actions? can it be any Pleasure to him to hear the Groans of Dying Men, or to
see the Funeral Piles of them that are Sacrifiz'd for the Faith of Christ,
Blaze before him. Or can it be for his safety to destroy many of his best and
most Loyal Subjects, and by the Terror and Severity of their Sufferings to
force others to turn Papists? this is to drive them from a Loyal to a
Traiterous Church, and how can he expect they should be true to him, whom he
Compells to be Unfaithful to their God? Is it for his Honor to Execute the
Bloody and Inhumane Sentences of Rome upon his good Subjects, to be the Popes
Instrument to commit what Cruelties he pleases in these our British Islands.
Is not Murder an Heinous Sin? and will not Innocent Blood, the Blood of those,
that will be Slain (if Popery be set up) for professing the true Faith and Holy
Religion of Christ, cry aloud to the Righteous God for Vengeance, and Provoke
him to punish him here with a short Reign, with the Terrors of a guilty
Conscience, with one Plague and Judgment after another, till he pass from Hence
to the other World, and instead of the Glorious Crown the Pope, and his
Priests, flatterd him with the hopes of, he find an Horrid and Intolerable Ruin.

Search all Histories, Examine all the Annals of the World, and you will find
that of the Philosopher to be a great truth, That Tyrants seldom live to be
Old, the Saints pray, their Blood and Sufferings cry to Heaven against them,
and God Abhors, and the Earth Groans under the burden of their Crimes, and
Hell is ready for them. How then can it be for the Dukes Honor or Felicity to
be one of them, to live (and that but for a little time) Abhorred by God,
dreaded and forsaken by all good Men, to die Unpityed and Unlamented, to depart
this World not with the Tears and Praises, but with the Joy and Thanksgivings
of his Subjects, that by his Death they are delivered from the Miseries and
Oppressions his Reign was attended with, to have the story of his Life (there
being some that delight to Record the Actions of Princes) transmitted to future
Ages, stained with so many Executions, Cruelties, and Oppressions, which his
setting up the Romish Religion will occasion, and to be remembered no otherwise
when he is Dead and gone, than Plagues, and Wars, and the most dreadful
Calamities are, that is, with Horror and Amazment.

How unreasonable is it then to believe his Royal Highness (if he come to the
Crown) will thus ruin and undo himself for no Reason or Inducement at all:
Common Prudence will not suffer him to be so much his own Enemy And therefore
they that upon idle Rumors, or mere Suspicions entertain such unbecoming
thoughts of him, do great Injury to, and extremely wrong, so brave a Prince,
who is confessed by his very Enemies to be Highly just and has ventured his
Life in defense of his Country, and therefore in reason and justice ought
neither to be accounted, nor treated as its Enemy, that has any intention to
Ruin, if it be the will of Heaven that he Reign over it.

It Is certain then, that it is not for the Duke Interest in this World to turn
Papist, and therefore if he be so, that cannot be the Reason of it.

The only Motive therefore he could have to Subsect. 4.
persuade him to such a change must be his Happiness and Salvation in that
which is to come. This indeed is the great End, the Highest reason any Person
can propose to himself in the Choice of his Religion, that it be such as will
conduct him safely to Eternal Happiness.

Now if I can prove that there is no danger of missing this in the Communion of
the Church of England, and that there is great and apparent Hazard of losing it
in the Communion of the Church of Rome, then this can be no Reason for, nor
Inducement to such a change, it being most Absurd and Imprudent to Exchange a
safe for a dangerous Church, a Church wherein there is a certainty, for one
wherein there is at most but a bare possibility of Salvation.

The enquiry then must be, if the case be not thus between ours, and the Church
of Rome, whether in that there be not a Certainty, in this at most but a mere
Possibility of Salvation.

God the Supreme Lord of Men, as he made them to Serve and Glorify him here,
and to enjoy or live with him in Immortal Glory and Happiness hereafter, so it
must needs belong to him alone to appoint what Service they shall Perform to
him, to declare how, and in what instances he will be Honored and Glorified by
them, to prescribe measures of Obedience, and the terms or conditions upon
which he will admit them to the Participation of that Supreme and Sovereign
Happiness; for being the greatest good that God can give, or they desire, it is
most unreasonable to believe it Inconditional, promised absolutely either to
all, or a select part of Mankind, so that they shall be sure to have it, though
they do nothing toward the Obtaining of it. And if it be proposed upon certain
Terms or Conditions, as it evidently is, God alone must determine and propose
these; determine them, because that transcendent Felicity being his Kind and
Bountiful offer, none has any Right but he to appoint the things that must be
done by Men for the acquiring of it: Propose them, because 'till he has
Revealed them, none can know what they are. To leave Mankind to their own
Fancies and Conjectures in a matter of such Moment and Concern (to offer them
Eternal Happiness, and not tell them how to Obtain it) would have been a
disparagement to the Divine Goodness, because it would have been to Mock and
Delude them with the discovery of a Treasure more precious then all the World,
whch they knew not how to possess themselves of, and if they guessed, at the
way of doing of it, it would be great odds but they would mistake and guess
wrong, leave the true Paths or means leading to so lovely and desirable a
good, and follow false ones, as we see all the Heathen World did in that prime
part of Religion, the Worship of God. So that one of these two things must
necessarily follow, either that God had no Purpose or Intention to save or make
Mankind Eternally Happy, or if that be Inconsistent with his Mercy, and the
Benignity of his Nature, that he did reveal or declare not only that he would
do it, but also upon what Terms or Conditions he would be pleased to do it:
which Revelation of his Royal Pleasure in both the parts of it, being of the
greatest Moment or Concern both that Men might know and admire the Transcendent
kindness of the Gracious Author of their being toward them, and be
sufficiently Instructed how to Express or Declare their Gratitude for it, in
fit and acceptable returns of Obedience and Duty to him, ought in Reason to be
kept as the most precious Treasure, and carefully preserved from all Change and
Injury, that it might descend safe and Entire to all Ages and Generations of
Men, and so afford them full and Perfect Instruction, what they must believe
and do, how they must live or behave themselves in this, that they may obtain
the Eternal Felicity of the other World.

To transmit or hand down this Revelation from Age to Age, from Generation to
Generation, through all Succeeding time, from the first Publishing of it to the
end of the World, by Oral Tradition, or word of Mouth, was not possible without
continual Miracles, both to Preserve it entire in the Minds and Memories of the
Relators, and to aslure those that received it from them, that they had neither
by fraud, nor forgetfulness Corrupted or changed it any way, added nothing to
it, nor kept back any part of it: and seeing this might be secured another way
by his common Providence, why should God multiply Miracles continually to no
purpose; for without these such a Treasure could not be safely committed to
such a way of Conveyance, Oral Tradition being a very hazardous and uncertain
way of delivering things to others, especially at any great distance of time,
and therefore the greater Moment the things are of, the more dangerous is it to
trust them to such a Treacherous and Precarious way of Communicating them. We
see how strangely the Ancient History of the World, and the greatest
Transactions of it, whilst they were thus Transmitted were Depraved and
Corrupted, so intermixed with Lies and Fables, as they passed down the Channel
of Time and Ages, that the truth of things was either quite lost, or very
difficultly to be found out, being covered, or in a manner Buried under such an
heap of Dirt and Rubbish, that the Wisest and most Sagacious minds, after all
their care and endeavors to search it out, were very doubtful, and could not
come to a full Determination what to believe, or what to reject: some things
they saw had an appearance of Truth, but then the Fables mixed therewith,
disgraced, and rendered them so Suspicious, that they knew not what to think of
them.

And therefore the All-wise and most Merciful God, as he was pleased to offer
Immortal Happiness to Mankind, and to tell them upon what terms or conditions
he would admit them to, and bless them with it, so he took care to have these
most weighty things Conveyed down to all Ages and Generations of Men in the
safest way, requiring those he employed to deliver his Laws to Mankind, to
commit them to Writing, nay delivering some of them, the Ten Commandments (that
is) to Moses Inscribed or Written upon two Tables of Stone: Exodus 32. 16.
which way of Transmitting them is most durable or lasting, and therefore the
safest; and they that say the contrary, Reproach and Disparage the Wisdom of
God, because he thought fit thus to Convey them to us: and when these Writings
were completed by the Addition of the New Testament to the Old, nothing could
be wanting to instruct Mankind in all the parts of their Duty, and to tell them
all the terms or Conditions of their Eternal Happiness and Salvation.

To say they are imperfect, and do not give Men sufficient Direction for the
attaining this great end, is to Blaspheme the Glorious Author of them, to
Arraign his Wisdom, to revile his Goodness, and to contradict these Sacred
Writings, which call upon us to search and study them, and invite us to perform
the Duties they require of us, with the offer of Salvation if we do it, and the
Denunciation of Damnation if we refuse to do it: Now if all those things united
or conjoined cannot bring the observers of them to the Salvation they promise,
then the Scriptures do not say true, and therefore God is not the Author of
them.

This the Church of Rome does not, dares not say, but owns the Truth of all
they say, and confesses them to come from God, only it says they are
insufficient and obscure, that is, do not speak enough, tell those that consult
them, all things necessary to Salvation, nor speak so plainly, and intelligibly
as to be understood without an infallible Interpreter to declare the true, and
full Sense or Meaning of them.

The first cannot be, because if the Scriptures say, do these things and thou
shall live, be Eternally happy, and Blessed; As for Instance, believe in
Christ, Repent of thy Sins, keep the Commandments of God, and tell us what they
are, as it is apparent they do, and promise Salvation to them that so believe,
Repent, and keep the Commandments of God, then they speak fully to the purpose,
tell him or them that Read them, enough to save them, if they perform it, and
consequently must be sufficient, and then to add I know not what unwritten
Verities (as they are called) as Supplements to them, is both a Wicked and a
Vain thing; it is Wicked both as it invades Gods Authority, will not let him
prescribe and appoint all the Terms or Conditions upon which he will give
Eternal Life and Glory to his Church and People: Wicked also as it disgraces
his Laws, and charges them with defects they are not Guilty of. It Is vain too,
and altogether needless, like Lighting up a Torch or a Candle, when the Sun
Shines in all his Glory, for they that cannot see, or find the way to Heaven by
the Glorious Light, or Direction of the Holy Scriptture, will never do it by
the help of the dark Lanthern of Oral Tradition: this is apter to seduce, or
draw those that follow it out of the Right way, than to guide them into it:
That cannot deceive any, because it gives them a full and perfect Description
of it, tells them, This is the way, walk ye in it.

And as they speak fully to this great point, give an exact and perfect Answer
to every one that asks them that Important Question, What shall I do that I may
have Eternal Life? So they speak plainly and intelligibly to it, and every
Reader may, if he brings with him an humble and Teachable Mind, Learn and
understand all his Duty, his Duty as the Apostle divides it, to God, his
Neighbor and himself: to God in Acts of Piety, to his Neighbor in Acts of
Justice and Charity, to himself in Acts of Temperance or Sobriety.

It Is very Foolish, as well as Sinful, for Men to cry out of the Obscurity or
Darkness of the Scriptures, only to serve a Worldly Interest by it, when those
parts of them that describe our Duty, are said to be a Light, a Light unto our
Paths, and a Lantern to our Feet, those must needs be Blind that cannot see
the Light, because it is the Nature or Property of it to be Visible. It Is true
indeed there are degrees of Light, one Light being greater and more Radiant
than another: thus the Law was a Light, but yet weak and dimm in Compare with
the Gospel, which is so great and Illustrious a Light, that the Apostle says,
If it be hid, it is hid to them that Perish, that are so in Love with their
Sins as to resolve to persist though they Perish in them, and therefore shut
their Eyes against the Gospel, which comes as a Light to show them their Error.

They that say the Scriptures are Obscure, and unintelligible, must say that
either God could not, or would not declare his Mind, so as to be understood by
Men: If they say the first, they degrade him, because if he could not do it, he
has not the Wisdom or Intelligence of a Man, and therefore cannot be God,
every Man of Common Sense, that is able to speak, being also able to speak his
Mind, so as to be understood. If they say the other, they Vilify and Disgrace
him, for if he would not speak so that Men might understand him, then it is
mere mockery to offer them Eternal Happiness upon such Conditions as they do
not, cannot understand, and hateful Cruelty to threaten them with Everlasting
and Intolerable Punishment, for Transgressing such Laws, and omitting such
Duties as are above their apprehension.

To say as the Papists do, that God has took care to remedy this Obscurity of
the Scriptures by appointing an Infallible Guide or Interpreter to explicate or
unridle the meaning of them, and that he cannot Err in the doing of it, is to
say that which all the World can never Prove: for how does it appear that God
has Constituted or Commissioned him to be the Sole Expounder of Scripture,
more than any other Bishop, or Doctor of the Church? Does not our Lord say to
all the Apostles, nay to the seventy Disciples, He that hears you, hears
me? Did not he speak to them all, when he said, Go ye into all the World and
Preach the Gospel to every Creature? How then came his Holiness to have the
Monopoly, or Sole power of Interpreting Scripture? Did it descend to him from
St. Peter? that cannot be, because he never claimed, never pretended to it,
never had it Solely himself, and the Successor cannot without Usurpation
challenge a greater Power nor plead a larger Commission than he had whom he
pretends to Succeed. It Is certain that all the Apostles received an equal
Authority, and the same Commission from Christ, and therefore all Bishops now,
being the undoubted Successors of the Apostles, have an equal Power and Right
to Interpret Scripture: and there is by Divine Right no difference at all
between them; what is, is either by Humane Constitution, or by Usurpation and
Incroachment.

And if he connot show a Patent from God to prove him to be the only
Authoritative Interpreter of his Laws, how will he make good the other proud
Word which he prefixes before it, That he is the only and Infallible Expounder
of Scripture: He knows very well that a great, and the wisest part of the World
deny his Infallibility, and Laugh at him for pretending to it.

How then will he convince them that he has it? by Reason? no, no! that gives
no Testimony to such a gross and palpable Absurdity, Reason says to be a Man,
and to be Exempt from all Possibility of Error, are Inconsistent. Will he
prove it by Scripture? some Texts are brought from thence for fashion sake to
color the business, as those that contain the promise of our Lord to his
Apostles, to send them the Holy Ghost to guide or St. John 16. 13.
lead them into all Truth: but this promise either proves too little, or too
much to do the feat: for either it is a Peculiar promise belonging to the
Apostles only, who needed an Extraordinary Assistance from Christ, that they
might Transmit his Doctrine full and entire to Succeeding Ages, and then was
Personal and Expired with them, and so does not concern his Holiness, for
though the Holy Ghost guided them into all Truth, yet he, either not having the
Holy Ghost, or Refusing to follow his guidances, may run into all Error.

Or if it was not a Personal or Peculiar promise belonging to the Apostles
only, but Equally to their Successors, then it proves more than he would have
it, That all the Bishops in the World are Infallible; for the promise was made,
not to St. Peter only, but to all the Apostles, and therefore what nonsense,
and Ridiculous Partiallity is it to Restrain a general promise made to the
whole College of Apostles, to the Successors of one of them; for if they that
Succeed St. Peter be Fully and Perfectly lead into all Truth, then the
Successors of all the Apostles are so, and consequently all the Bishops in the
World are Infallible, and then his Holiness will have but a bad Market for his
Expositions of Scripture; for few People will be at the trouble to go to Rome
for them, because they may have them from their own Bishops. Well, but does not
our Lord say to St. Peter; Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will Build my
Church, and the Gates St. Mat. 16. 18.
of Hell shall not Prevail against it. These are certainly the Words of Christ,
but they confer no peculiar Privilege or Prerogative upon St. Peter, nothing
but what was equally given to all the Apostles, for the Rock Signifies either
his Confession, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God, which is the Rock,
the great and Verse 16.
Fundamental Article of the Christian Faith, upon which the Church is Built: or
if it concern his Person, that he should be an Excellent Instrument (as the
other Apostles were, and therefore are also called Foundation Stones) to bring
in Converts and Disciples unto Christ, and to raise or Build him up a Church in
the World, which the Gates of Hell, all the Power and Policy of the Devil
should never be able Totally to ruin or destroy.

These Words then speak nothing for the pretended Infallibility. And indeed the
greatest Champions for it, are so far from thinking it fully proved in
Scripture, that they are not agreed about it. To fix it in the Popes Person
they dare not, because the many and gross Errors of his Life, would confute
and shame them, and therefore as a Man they confess he can, and may, and does
Err: To ascribe it to his Chair, either to his Office or Dignity as Bishop, or
to him as Bishop of Rome, and Successor to St. Peter in that Patriarchal See,
is silly, for if he could Err before, he can do so still, because his being
made Bishop does not change his Nature, but his Office: and being the same Man,
why may he not be the same falliable or erring Man he was before? The place he
is Bishop of can make no Difference in the case, because no reason can be given
why the Bishop of Rome should be more Exempt from Error, than the Bishop of
Munster.

To place the Infallibility in the Pope and a general Council is as
unreasonable, because if they can Err apart, they may united, and they confess,
that a general Council may Err, if it be not Confirmed by the Pope, and it is
plain they think the Pope without it may Err, or else it is idle to add a general
Council to him, but the uniting or putting two Erring parties together cannot
make them Infallible: To say that a General Council Confirmed by the Pope
cannot Err, is unanswerably confuted by this argument of a great and excellent
person: The Pope never Confirms, a Council till it be finished, Archbishop
Laud against Fisher pa. 274.
when it is finished, before the Popes Confirmation be put to it, either it
has Erred, or not Erred, if it has Erred he ought not to confirm it, or if he
do, it is a void Act, because no power can make Error or falsehood to be
Truth: if it has not Erred, then it was True before he Confirmed it, and so
his Confirmation signifies nothing. And not withstanding all the stir they make
about the Popes Infallibility, they do not believe it themselves, for the
Schoolmen and Writers of Controversies, as that Author observes, put the case,
whether the Pope coming to be an Heritick Pa. 269.
may not be Deposed, and the Common Law (as he adds) says expressly, That he may
be Deposed for Heresy: now if he can fall into Heresy, and may be Deposed for
it, then he cannot be Infallible: And as the Scriptures give no testimony of
it, so neither reason, nor any thing else can prove his Holiness to be
Infallible, because he is not, and there is no need that either he or any other
Bishop should be so, because God has fully and clearly propounded to us in the
Scriptures all things necessary to Salvation, as I have already Proved, and for
that part of them that is obscure, we are certain we may be Saved, without the
knowledge of it, otherwise the Merciful God that loves us, and desires our
Salvation, would have made it plain to us.

Now, to bring this Discourse home to the great Point in hand, if Eternal
Happiness and Salvation be the kind offer or Proposal of God, and this cannot
be had but upon certain Terms or Conditions, which must be determined and
revealed by him: determined because that is his Right, and none but he has
Authority to do it: revealed, because unless he declare upon what Terms he will
save them, Mankind can never know them, nor consequently obtain the proposed
happiness; and those Terms or Conditions be fully and entirely, plainly and
intelligibly delivered in the Scriptures, then that, and none but that, is the
true Church (in which Salvation may certainly be had) that adheres or cleaves
to the Scriptures, and follows them as the great and only Rule of Faith and
Manners, of all things (that is) necessary to Salvation. This is the only sure
Mark of the true Church that may be relied upon, without this all other Signs
are false Fires and deceitful Lights that mislead their unwary followers, but
he that chooses his Church by its Profession of the Christian Faith and Doctrine
contained in the Scriptures, is safe, and in such a Society where nothing is
wanting to Salvation: but if he leaves that he may wander up and down the World
in vain, seeking Rest but finding none.

All then that will be necessary to make good my Assertion in both the parts of
it, that there is a certainty of Salvation in the Church of England, and at
most but a Possibility of it in the Church of Rome, is briefly to show the
agreement of ours, and the Repugnancy of theirs to the Scriptures.

That Church which affirms that the Holy Scriptures Comprehend all things
necessary to Salvation, and that nothing but what is contained in them, is to
be pressed or required as such, and receives them as its sole or entire Rule,
agrees fully and perfectly with them, but our Church affirms those, and does
this, therefore it adheres, or keeps close to the Scriptures: Holy Scripture
(it says) contains all things necessary Article the 6.
to Salvation, so that whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved
thereby, is not to be required of any Man, that it should be believed as an
Article of the Faith, or be thought requisite or necessary to Salvation.

Unto a Christian (it declares) there can be nothing either more necessary, or
profitable than the knowledge of Holy Scripture, forasmuch as in it is Homily
the 1.
contained Gods true word, setting forth his Glory, and also Man's Duty; and
there is no Truth, nor Doctrine necessary for our Justification, and
Everlasting Salvation, but what is (or may be) drawn out of that Fountain and
Well of Truth. In Holy Scripture is fully contained, what we ought to do, and
what to eschew, what to believe, what to Love, and what to look for at Gods
hands at length.

This is as full a Declaration of the perfection and sufficiency of the
Scriptures as can be made; and that our Church receives them as the sole or
entire Rule of Faith, is so Evident that the Church of Rome confesses it, by
making it an Accusation or Objection against it (though this be to upbraid it
with that which is its Glory, I mean its strict adherence to the Scriptures)
and if they did not confess it, it might be unanswerably proved by comparing
the Doctrine of our Church with those Sacred Writings, which whosoever does,
will find a most perfect Union, or agreement between them, that it observes,
and follows, and adheres to them in all things, as if the same good Spirit that
Inspired the Holy Prophets and Apostles to Pen them, did in a more than
ordinary manner guide and direct our Reformers to the same Faith or Sum of
things to be believed, the same Rule of Life, or Paths of Piety and Holiness,
the same Object and way of Worship, the same Sacraments, and all other things
which they propound to Mankind either as the Terms and Conditions upon which
God will save them, or Dr. Potter Answer to Charity mistaken. pa. 13. Page 14.
as helps and means to enable them to perform those Conditions: So that no
Church (as a Learned and excellent Person speaks) does afford more Plentifully
the means of Grace, nor more abound with all helps and advantages of Piety,
than this of ours. The word of God is diligently Preached amongst us, the
Sacraments of Christ Reverently Administered, Abuses in both are removed, the
two Extremes of Religion, Superstition and Profaneness are avoided. The
Ignorant are Instructed, the Disorderly admonished, Comforts are applied to the
Afflicted, Terrors to the Impenitent, Censures and Punishments to the
Obstinate. In our Liturgy, Policy, and Ceremonies, in the Government of our
Prelates, in the Diligence of Inferior Pastors, in the whole Face of our
Doctrine and Discipline, we have a most near and fair Resemblance of Reverend
Antiquity: All tending to the gaining of Souls to Christ, and to guide them in
the way of Peace.

As great Assurance Assurance then as any Christian has that the Scriptures
are true, so full and absolute a certainty is there of Salvation in our Church;
because it teaches and requires all those things, and no other, that the
Scriptures teach and require as necessary to Salvation, and to the Performers
of which, they promise Eternal Life and Happiness; and therefore if the
Scriptures say true (as all Christians acknowledge they do) there can be no
doubt or question at all of being saved in the Church of England, unless Men
will either not believe and Live as it teaches and Commands them, or if they
do it, will not persevere or continue in so believing and Living to the end of
their Lives.

And therefore that none who are Members of this most Holy and Excellent
Church, may deprive themselves of so great a good, as that Immortal Happiness
is, by their Evil and Unsuitable Living, I shall conclude this Discourse with
that admirable Exhortation, which their Mother the Church gives them to obey or
keep the Commandments of God their Father, which is this,

Wherefore as ye have any Zeal to the Right and Pure Honoring of God, as you
have any Regard to Homily of Good Works Part. 3. p. 35.
your own Souls, and to the Life that is to come, which is both without Pain,
and without End, apply your selves chiefly above all things to Read, and hear
Gods word, mark diligently therein what his Will is you should do, and with all
your endeavor apply your selves to follow the same. First, you must have an
assured Faith in God, and give your selves wholly unto him, Love him in
Prosperity and Adversity, and dread to offend him evermore: Then for his Sake
Love all Men, Friends and Foes, because they be his Creation, and Image, and
Redeemed, as you are: Cast in your Minds how you may do good unto all Men unto
your Powers, and hurt no Man; Obey all your Superiors and Governors, Serve
your Masters Faithfully and Diligently, as well in their absence, as in their
presence, not for dread of Punishment only, but for Conscience Sake, knowing
that you are bound so to do by Gods Commandments: Disobey not your Fathers and
Mothers, but honor them, help them, and please them to your Power: Oppress
not, Kill not, Beat not, neither Slander, nor Hate any Man, but Love all Men,
speak well of all Men, help and Succor every Man as you may, yea even your
Enemies, that hate you, that speak Evil of you, and that do hurt you: Take no
Man's Goods, nor Covet your Neighbors Goods wrongfully, but content your selves
with that which ye get truly, and also bestow your own Goods Charitably, as
Need and Case requires: Fly all Idolatry, Witchcraft, and Perjury, Commit no
Adultery, Fornication, or other Unchastness in Will nor Deed: And Traveling
continually (during this Life) thus in keeping the Commandments of God (wherein
stands the Right Trade and Pathway unto Heaven) you shall not fail, as Christ
has promised, to come to that Blessed and Everlasting Life, where you shall
Live in Glory and Joy with God for ever.

It Is as impossible as any thing can be, that they who do these things, and
continue in them to the end of their Lives, should miss of Eternal Glory and
Happiness: To say that such a Faith, such Obedience, such a Life (as our Church
propounds and Teaches) persisted in till they pass out of this World, cannot
(through the Merits of Christ) Save Men, is to Damn the Blessed Apostles, and
all the Primitive Saints and Martyrs, who, if they went to Heaven at all, went
thither by believing and Living according to the Scriptures, and call upon us
to follow their Faith, their pure or unspotted Lives, considering the end of
their Conversation, the Glories in which they shine in the Blessed mansions
above: This is the Rock upon which we of the Church of England Build our hopes
of a Crown of Glory: this is a Guide that cannot deceive, but will lead us
safely to the Blessed place we aspire after: they that walk by this Rule (the
Rule of the Holy Scripture) are in a sure way to Salvation, and if they
persevere, cannot miss of it.

But if we remove our Thoughts now to the Church of Rome, it will be Evident
that there is at most but a Possibility of Salvation in the Communion of it;
because of its disagreement with, and repugnancy to the Holy Scriptures.

So far is this Church from doing them the Right and the Honor as to confess,
that they comprehend all things necessary to Salvation, that it affirms the
contrary, that they do it not without the help of Traditions, which they of
that Communion receive and Honor with an equal Devotion and Reverence: So
says the Council of Trent expressly, Sacrosancta oecumenica and generalis
Tridentina Synodus in spiritu sancto Session the 4th. page 19:
Legitime congregata, etc. This Holy Ecumenical and general Council of Trent,
being Lawfully called together in the Holy Ghost, having this ever before their
Eyes, that all Errors being destroyed, or taken away, the very purity of the
Gospel might be preserved in the Church, which being promised before by the
Prophets in the Holy Scriptures, our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, with
his own Mouth first published, and afterward Commanded it to be Preached to
every Creature by his Apostles, as the Fountain of all saving Truth, and
Discipline, or Instruction of manners, and knowing this Discipline and Truth to
be contained in the written Books, and in Traditions not written, which being
received by the Apostles from Christ's own Mouth, or by the Apostles themselves,
the Holy Ghost prompting them to it, as it were handed down are come to us:
This Council following the Examples of the Orthodox Fathers, does with equal
Devotion and Reverence receive and honor, all the Books of the Old and New
Testament, because the same God is the Author of them both, and the Traditions
themselves belonging both to Faith and Manners, as delivered by Christ, by word
of mouth, or dictated by the Holy Spirit, and kept by continual Succession in
the Catholic Church.

So that their Rule of Faith consists of two distinct parts, the Scriptures and
Traditions, the word of God written, and the word of God not written, but
transmitted by word of Mouth, from Age to Age, from Generation to Genertion.
Now though it be certain that the word of God be equally true, and equally
obligatory to all Persons, whether it be written or not written, which way
soever it be propounded or conveyed to them, yet how shall it appear or be
proved that what they call the Unwritten word of God, is really so, and not a
wicked cheat and imposture? They say it is his word, we say it is not, the
Primitive Church says nothing at all of it, but asserts and maintains the
sufficiency or fullness of the Scriptures, or written word of God, that is,
that it contains all things necessary to be believed and done to the obtaining
Eternal Life and Happiness, as is fully proved by many Protestant Writers; And
when the Ancient and Orthodox Fathers speak of Traditions, and call upon any to
observe and obey them, they either mean by those Traditions, the Doctrine of
Christ delivered to the Christian Church in the Writings of the Apostles, or
the Ordinances made, either by the Apostles themselves, or the Bishops that
succeeded them in their Apostolical Office, for the decent and orderly
performance of Gods Worship.

The first is indeed the Word of God, but then it is his written word; the
other are not the word of God at all, but humane Constitutions, and no farther
Obligatory, than they are agreeable to the General Rules the Scriptures give
for Conducting the Circumstances of Religion, the Church having Power (as Ours
truly affirms) to Decree Rites and Ceremonies, and Authority Article the 20.
in Controversies of Faith, though it be not Lawful for the Church to Ordain
any thing that is contrary to Gods word written. This is all the Ancient
Fathers mean by Traditions, when they speak of, or require the Observation of
them, but they make no such Distinction as this of the written and unwritten
word of God, neither do they say, that the first is imperfect, or does not
sufficiently instruct Mankind to Salvation, unless it be supplied with the
other. This is a Blasphemy which the Apostate Church only is guilty of, but was
never heard of in the Primitive times: Besides, the Holy Scriptures, or written
word of God, (as I remarked before) call upon us to search, and study, and
meditate in them, nay to believe and obey, or Live according to them, and
Promise Eternal Happiness and Salvation to all that do these things: but they
make no mention of the word of God not written, do not Command any to enquire,
or search after, or trouble their Heads about any such thing as the Unwritten
word of God: It Is true indeed St. Paul praises the Obedient Members of the
Church of Corinth, that kept 1 Cor. 11. 2.
the Traditions or Ordinances which he delivered to them; But these were no
part of the word of God either written or not written, but things in their own
nature Indifferent; That the Men should Pray in public with their Heads
uncovered, and the Women with their Heads covered. Verses 4th, and 5th.


He gives this charge also to Timothy, hold fast the form of sound words, which
thou have heard of 2 Timothy 1. 13.
me, in Faith and Love which is in Christ Jesus: Which form of sound words was
either the Creed, which the Apostles agreed upon as a summary of the Chief
things, that were to be believed, and professed by all Christians; or else the
whole Doctrine of Christ containing all things to be done, as well as believed,
to Salvation; which if not then, were before the Apostles left the World
entirely written for the Instruction of all, that should Embrace the Christian
Religion. But does not Christ tell his Apostles, I have yet many things to say
unto you, but ye cannot bear them now: By which, says the St. John 16. 12.
Church of Rome, it appears, That Christ spoke many things that were not
written, and it is not credible, that the Apostles would not deliver these by
word of mouth to the Church: To which a Reverend Bishop of ours gives this
Satisfactory Answer, that Christ does not say, Bishop Davenane de judice and
norma fidei page 18.
Multa habeo, quae non potestis in posterum scribere, I have many things to say
unto you, which you cannot hereafter write, but which you cannot now bear,
Postea autem Spiritu sancto illuminati, and portare ea potuerunt, and
praedicare mundo, ac demum scriptis toti Ecclesiae Commendare, but afterward
being enlightened by the Holy Ghost, they could both bear them themselves, and
Preach them to the World, and at last in their writings Commend and Transmit
them to the whole Church: But let us grant (says he) that these things were
such as are not written, yet who is so impudent and rash, as to dare to
specify, or assign what those things were? This is such Transcendent
Presumption, that none but the Church of Rome dares venture on, which takes the
boldness to Father all her Dreams, Fables, and Errors upon God, calling them
his Traditional or Unwritten word. As for those words of St. John, which they
insist so much upon, There are also many other things, which Jesus did, the
which if they should be Chap. 21. 25.
written every one, I suppose that even the World it self could not contain the
Books that should be written: These neither prove the necessity, nor Authority
of their Traditional or Unwritten word of God, Fatemue enim multa esse quae
fecit Jesus, quae tamen ab Evangelistis scripta non fuerunt, for we Page 18.
confess (says that Learned Author) that there were many things, which Jesus
did, that are not written by the Evangelists, but these many things were not
Doctrines necessary to Salvation, but Miracles, or sayings which we may be
ignorant of, without any detriment to Religion, or Salvation; so St. John
himself tells us, And many other Signs truly did Jesus in the Chap. 20. 30. 31.
presence of his Disciples, which are not written in this Book, but these are
written that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, and that
believing ye might have Life through his Name: Which utterly destroys the
necessity of their Unwritten word of God; for if what is written be enough to
persuade Men to believe in Christ, and that believing be sufficient to save, or
bring them to Eternal life that do it, then no more can be necessary, but St.
John affirms both these, therefore the Romish Traditional, or Unwritten word of
God is, at best, a needless, or superfluous thing.

Besides, it is, and must be, with all thinking Men, a mighty Objection against
this Unwritten word of God (as they call it) that the Church of Rome has the
sole Custody or keeping of it: the Primitive Church, after the Canon of the
Scriptures was completed, says nothing at all of it; for all the Fathers cry
up, and maintain the Perfection and Sufficiency of the written word of God, and
all the Reformed Churches adhere to this in Opposition to that Unwritten Word;
How then came Rome by it? Is God so partial, such a Respecter of Persons, as to
Communicate it to that Church, and not to others? Or is it a Cheat, or Artifice
of the nequam ingeniosi, the witty or Crafty Deceivers to help at a dead lift?
This is the very Truth! Many of their Doctrines and Practices, they plainly
perceived, did openly clash with, and contradict the Holy Scriptures, or
written word of God, and therefore there was no way to defend them, to acquit
their Church from Error and Impiety, but to cry up Tradition, and make it of
equal Authority with the Scriptures: But this will not do it, for does God use
to contradict himself? There are that say, he has two Wills, the one secret,
the other revealed, and that the one is contrary to the other, which is neither
better nor worse than downright Blasphemy; the Church of Rome with equal
Blasphemy affirms, that God has two Laws or Words, the one contained in the
Scriptures, the other transmitted by Oral Tradition, and they plead this in
Defense of those Doctrines which are contrary to that, being beaten from the
Scriptures, and having no shelter or protection for their Errors there, they
Fly for refuge to Tradition, as if that could bear them out, or support their
Cause, and so they make the infinitely Wise and Righteous God contradict
himself, which he must needs do, if he has declared his will to Mankind two
several ways, (that is,) by Scritpure and Oral Tradition, and this affirms
things which that deny's and gainsays: They had rather, if they could do it,
prove the points in controversy by the Scriptures, as the most satisfactory and
convincing proof; but not being able to do that, they are constrained either to
confess their Errors, or to pretend Tradition to vouch and countenance them:
That they will not do; because it is against their Worldly Interest,
inconsistent with their Honor and Profit: This they had better not do, because
the Cheat is so Evident, that none but weak Persons will be gulled and deluded
by it; for we know that must needs be an Abominable Cheat, which they call the
Unwritten word of God, because by this they evacuate or make the other voy'd
and of no Effect, Command what in the Scripture God forbids, and forbid what he
Commands, condemn what he allows, allow what he condemns, make that necessary
which he leaves Arbitrary or Indifferent, and that Indifferent which he makes
necessary, using the Scriptures as one Procustes a Theevish Innkeeper in
Germany, is said to have Treated his Guests, who having but one Bed for all
Comers, if he that was to lie in it was too long for the Bed, he would cut off
his Feet or Legs till he had made him of an equal length for it, if too short,
he would rack and stretch him out, till he had made him of a fit size for it:
Thus does Rome by her Traditions enlarge and alter, add to and take from,
pervert and wrest the Scriptures to her own, and the Destruction of Multitudes
of those that give up themselves to her Conduct.

For I desire it may be considered, what an horrid injury and affront it is to
the Laws of God, to those Sacred Books, that contain so Choice and most
Precious a Treasure, as the Words of Eternal Life which they propound to us,
must needs be, to use them thus: Nay what abominable insolence and contempt of
God it is to accuse them of Inperfection, to affirm they do not give Men
sufficient Instruction to Salvation, which they say they do? Is there any thing
that Princes do more highly resent, or more severely Punish than the contempt
of their Laws, and Royal Edicts: when instead of paying a ready and cheereful
Obedience to them, any Persons censure and carp at them; Falsely call them
obscure and defective Institutions, that do not reach the ends or designs they
were made for, and take upon them to forge new ones, to put out Counterfeit
Edicts and Mandates in the Princes name which he knew nothing of, and gave no
consent to: Just thus does the Church of Rome treat the Great Lord and Ruler of
all the World, accuses his Laws (contained in the Scriptures) of Imperfection,
says they are obscure and defective, dark and unintelligible Institutions in
themselves, and forges new ones which it calls his Traditional or Unwriten
Laws, and is Fonder of, or Prefers them before the other, which must needs
provoke his Anger, and bring down his most fearful Judgments upon it, even all
the Woes, Plagues, and Curses denounced in Scripture against them that commit
so Insolent and Heinous a Wickedness.

And as they affront and dishonor the Scriptures by receiving Traditions with
equal reverence and devotion, so in defiance to them they have Enlarged the
Faith, Multiplied the Sacraments, Changed all the Principal parts of Religion,
which they propound to the Christian Church: They neither Believe nor Worship
God according to the Scriptures, but to the Faith once delivered to the Saints,
they have added new and false Propositions, and instead of the Pure and Holy
Worship God requires, disgrace and provoke him with their Images, and leaving
the old Paths, and the good way of his appointing, they have invented new means
and conditions of Salvation; For all the points Controverted between Them and
Us, are plainly and evidently Repugnant to the Scriptures, as would appear by a
particular Examination of them: But this is not proper to the Subject I have in
hand, and has been so fully and Unanswerably proved by many Eminent Divines of
our Church, Famous in their Generations, Men of Renown, the excellent Bishop
Jewel, Dr. Field, the two Whites, the Archdeacon in his way to the true
Church, and his Brother the Bishop of Ely in his Defense of it, By Archbishop
Laud in his admirable Book against Fisher, by the Reverend Bishop of Down in
the Defense of his Disswasive from Popery, (to the Learned and Excellent
labors of which worthy Men, I refer the Reader) that it is needless for me to
do it again: But if any of the Church of Rome think I wrong their Mother by
charging her with forsaking the Scriptures, I am ready to make it good, when
they require it of me, and will prove the points in Debate between the Church
of England, and theirs, to be contrary to Scripture; and therefore most
dangerous Errors and Innovations.

And if they depart from the Scriptures, (as it is certain they do) which only
are able to make Men wise unto Salvation, and by which all Christians shall be
judged at the last and great Assize of the World, there must needs (as all the
Reformed Churches truly believe and teach) be great peril of Damnation in the
Communion of that Church: They are out of the way which God commands all Men to
walk in, that would obtain the Immortal Glories and Felicities of his Heavenly
Kingdom; and therefore if they be Saved it must be by extraordinary ways or
means. It Is possible that God (whose Mercies are Infinite) may save the
Ignorant and well meaning People amongst them, that follow the Romish Guides in
the Dr. Potter Answer to Charity mistaken. page 78, 79.
Simplicity of their Hearts, Who either have not (as a learned Person of our
Church observes) sufficient means to find the truth, or else after the use of
the best means they can have, find not Sufficient motives to convince their
Conscience that they are in Error. It Is possible also that they who lived all
their days in the Communion of the Church of Rome, may repent at their Death,
humbly beseech God to pardon all their Sins and Errors known and unknown, and
so find Mercy from him, who is not extreme to mark what is done amiss: But if
that Ignorance, or this Repentance do not help them, though we take not on us
to pass the Dreadful doom upon them, yet our Charity to their Souls, obliges us
to tell them, their Condition is exceeding Dangerous.

It Is therefore great Uncharitableness to himself, for any Man that Considers
what a Blessed and Desirable thing Eternal Happiness is, that thinks what it is
to live with God, his Angels and Saints in Glory unconceivable, in joys
unspeakable and endless, to venture his Soul in the Romish Communion, where
there is the greatest hazard of losing it, and at most but a poor Possibility
of saving it.

A Church which I cannot better describe than in the Words of the Person I last
mentioned, who was a learned and a moderate Man: She brings forth Children unto
God by their Baptism, but then Poisons them in their Breeding: Dr. Potter,
pages 14, 15, 16.
When they ask for Bread, she gives them a Stone, and Serpents instead of
Fishes. To the Word of God she adds and equals her own Traditions, she reads
unto them that Word, but in an unknown Tongue: teaches them to Pray, but in
Latin, which they understand not: directs them to call upon God, but withal
upon Saints and Angels: to Worship God, but also dumb Blocks and Images. She
sends them to Legends and Pictures for much of their Instruction: and for
Direction of their Conscience to such Casuists, as their own Men say, have
Dishonored Christian Religion with their Abominable Lessons. She feeds them
with a dry Communion, and bids them obey Jesus Christ and the Pope, if they
will be Saved. She has also her Bishops, Priests, Masses, Monks, Monasteries,
but such as have nothing almost common with those of the Primitive times, save
only their Names. In brief, with all possible Artifices, she labors to keep
her poor Laity Hoodwinckt in Ignorance, for Blind Men are more Tractable and
Obedient unto their Leaders. She tells them, it is Creed enough for them to
believe only the Catholic Church, that is, to Resign up to her self their
Understanding: but if any of them be farther Curious to know more, Especially
if they will be Prying into that Dangerous Book, the Bible, she sends them into
the Inquisition to be there better Catechized. Thus she deals with her own. But
for all Us that are (in her Opinion) Heretics, if her power were answerable to
the Malignity of her desires, no Remedy, we should all pass through the
Inquisition into Hell.

To go from a safe Church as Ours is (wherein there is a Certainty of
Salvation) to such a Dangerous Church as the Roman is, (wherein there is but a
mere Possibility of it) is a wilder and more unaccountable Error or oversight,
than if a Man that was to Sail in a Rough, Dangerous, and Tempestuous Sea, full
of Rocks and Sands, should refuse a stout and well built Ship, that had
Skilful, Careful, and Honest Pilates, and choose one that is Crasy, and full of
Leaks or Breaches to let in the angry and devouring Billows, and is steered by
such Pilates as are either Treacherous or Careless, Ignorant or Knavish.

His Royal Highness then had no reason to change his Religion upon this
account, his Eternal Happiness and Salvation being certain and undoubted by his
stay in our Church, (that is) by believeing and living as it teaches and
requires all its Members to believe, and lead their lives; But exceeding
doubtful and hazardous, no more than possible in the Romish Communion. And
being neither for his Interest in this, nor his Happiness in the other World,
to turn Papist, his Royal Highness could have no just Motive or Inducement to
do it.

These Arguments, as they prove the Duke ought not, so they will Oblige all
that consider them, to question whether he has changed his Religion, for being
a wise Prince, how can he be Guilty of so Deplorable an Error, as to do that,
which is against his interest now, and his Happiness for ever, that will make
him Inglorious whilst he lives, and Miserable when he is Dead and gone.

But the Excluders will say, this is to doubt whether the Sun Shines, when he
appears in Subsect. 5.
his highest or noon day Glory, to question matter of Fact, for did not his
Royal Highness refuse the Oaths and Subscription against Popery, and do not
Colemans Letters speak of his Zeal for the Romish Church and Religion, and if
he be not a Papist, why does he not declare himself, and satisfy the Nation
that he is of the Established Religion? these things they say make it Evident
to all, that will not shut their Eyes, that the Duke is a Papist.

As for the first, his Refusing the Oaths and Subscription against Popery, That
is no evidence of his being a Papist, because he might have reasons for that
Refusal. He might think it a dishonor to him, being a Prince of the Blood,
and next Heir to the Crown, to take the Oaths, and make the Subscription, which
every Justice of the Peace, and every Captain in the Militia, and persons
inferior to these, were by that Law Obliged to do. Is there any thing that a
brave and generous Prince, such as his Royal Highness is, Is more tender of,
than his Honor? And would it not have been a lessening and impairing of that,
a descending from his greatness, a stooping much below himself to take those
Oaths, and Subscribe as every person that has any Office Civil or Military, is
by that Law required to do? Sure there is some difference to be put, and some
distinction to be made, between a Prince and Men of lower degree, between a Son
of the late, and a Brother, the only Brother, of this present King, and other
Subjects.

It Is true indeed, the Duke whilst the King lives, is but a Subject, but then
he is the highest, the greatest Subject, next to the King both in Blood and
Dignity, and has such a property, and capacity as no other Subject has, and
therefore what may be Honorable enough for other Subjects to do, may look
meanly in him, and be in his own Apprehension, if not in the Opinion of others,
a lessening his Esteem, and impairing his Honor.

The Dukes Refusal too might proceed from a just dislike, and aversion to the
great Contriver and Promoter of that Law, which required the taking those
Oaths, and the making that Subscription; a Man Popular, Ambitious, Busy, and
Designing, and, as since appears, most Traiterous and Disloyal, who had
misbehaved himself toward his Royal Highness, and without any Provocation was
become his Enemy, and openly professed or declared himself so to be; the Duke,
I say, might justly hate the Child for the Fathers sake, refuse to observe a
Law Contrived and Promoted by his open Enemy; to comply with, and do those
things at the Motion of Such an One, being both dishonorable in it self, and
that which would encourage the Man to more, and greater rudeness and sauciness
toward him, and set his invention a work to frame new Impositions, and lay
greater Burdens upon him, there being no end of some men's Projects and
Impertinencies, and if they be humored in one thing, they will demand an
hundred, and grudg if they be not satisfied, and if you do not let them lead
you by the Nose as long, and as far as they please, your first compliance is
Slighted or Contemned as a thing of no worth, nor merit; and therefore the best
way to be freed from such Troublesome and Imposing persons, is to withstand, or
give them a repulse at the first; for if they find a Man resolute, and not to
be wrought upon, they will be discouraged, and in time give over their
Impertinent and Saucy attempts.

Besides the Dukes taking the Oaths and Subscribing could not have acquitted
him from the Suspicion of Popery with them, that were desirous he should be
reputed, that they might treat him as a Papist; for so long as his Holiness
pretends a power to grant Dispensations, and is willing to exercise, or put
that power into practice, which he will do as long, as he has any Zeal for the
Catholic cause, or any Concern for his own gain and profit, so long they that
love to brand others with the hateful name of Papists, will think, or call
them so, notwithstanding all the Oaths they can take, and the Subscriptions
they can make against it, because it is possible they may, and easy to say, nay
to persuade Credulous People, they have Dispensations from him to do such
things.

But Colemans Letters (they say) speak of the Dukes Zeal for the Romish Church
and Religion, therefore he is not only a Papist, but a Zealous one: the
inference is not certain, because though those Letters say so, yet they may
speak falsely. What are Papists so great lovers of Truth, as to make any
Conscience of telling a Lie? Do not the Excluders think them a Faithless and
Deceitful Generation, and Men that have no truth in them? Do they not believe
that the Jesuits, and others (nay Coleman himself) that were Executed for the
Popish Plot, who asserted their Innocence, and denied themselves to be Guilty
of, or Privy to any such design, at their Death, do they not believe, I say,
that these Men Dyed with an Impudent and Notorious Lie in their Mouths? And if
they dare do that at their Death, to be sure they are not afraid to do it at
other times, when they apprehend no harm nor danger near them.

They that are so Prodigal of the Blood of Princes, as to think it Lawful, nay
Meritorious to kill them, will make no Conscience of Blaspheming and Slandering
them, of speaking all Words that may do them Harm and Injury, blast and stain
their Honor, render them Suspected to, and Rob them of the Love, Esteem, and
Reverence of their People. Was not that glorious Prince King Charles the Martyr
(as I observed before) Reproached and Ruined by the Odious name of Papist,
which his Enemy's falsely cast upon him? and can any Man think the Jesuits, and
other Zealots of the Romish Faction were careless or backward to spread so
Mischievous a Rumor, to publish such a story as would Expose him to the Hatred
and Contempt of a great part of his People? for knowing him to be so Zealous
and Resolved a Protestant, that he could never be gained to their Church, their
Malice and Reveng prompted them to call, or report him a Papist, that they
might Inrage and Provoke his Subjects to take Arms against him.

But there can be no Color nor Pretense for this, the Excluders will say,
because Colemans Letters were not writ to Protestants, but Papists, and
therefore tell a true, not feigned Story. Supposing them to be writ to Papists,
why may they not only declare Colemans Opinion of his Royal Highness? Or else
be an Artifice or Trick of Colemans to get Money of the French Kings Confessor.
Declare the Opinion he had of the Duke; for Men of that Church are very
Credulous (otherwise they would not be of it) apt to believe any thing they
either desire or fancy: if a Man show them the least Kindness, chance to speak
any thing in Favor of their Church, though it be little and inconsiderable,
and he have no Thought nor Intention ever to be a Proselyte to it, they believe
presently he is theirs, and tell it far and near what a Convert they have
gained, when no such thing is, and it is probable will never be done, and
therefore what those Letters speak of the Dukes Zeal for the Romish Church, may
be no more but a vain glorious Brag, or confident Fancy of him that penned them:
or else a crafty Trick, or Wheedle to get Money from France, or Rome, or Both,
by the Confessors interest in both those Courts, to carry on the Plot in
England, Coleman knowing very well, that such a Story as this of the Dukes Zeal
for the Romish Religion, would be a mighty Motive or Inducement to prompt his
Holiness, and all the Zealots of that Communion to a great and Liberal
Contribution, the Design they had in hand being so expensive, that it would too
much exhaust and impoverish the English Catholics to manage, or carry it on at
their own Charge.

Well, but if the Duke be not a Papist, why does he not say so? Why does he
keep the Nation in Suspense? Why does he not declare himself of the Church of
England, and publicly profess the most Holy and Excellent Religion Established
in it? To these Queries diverse Answers may be given: That he has declared it;
for in his Speech to the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City of London, he said
(if my Intelligence deceive me not)

My Lord,
I am sure I am the first Man that can demand October the 21. 1679.
Property in England, and have the greatest Property of any Subject in England,
and therefore have the greatest Reason to defend it: any other Man may have
private Interest, but I can have none, for I know very well that as long as
this City, and this Nation are well, I shall be so, and that I can be so no
longer: And I do assure you, My Lord, that no one Person in all this Assembly
can ever Venture his Life more freely in the Defense of this Nation, and City,
and the Government thereof as it is now by Law Established, than I will, and
have been always Ready to do, as I hope is well known.


If this be not plain enough, His Royal Highness has declared since (if my
Information be true, as I believe it was) That he was satisfied this Monarchy
had no true Friends but the Church of England. And if he be so persuaded of is,
(as he has the highest reason to be) how can he be of any other Church? Will a
Prince that is next Heir to the English Crown, depart from a Church he
confesses to be the only true Friend to it, and join himself to one which by
consequence, he acknowledges to be no true Friend to it? This is too
unreasonable to be supposed.

But these, if they be admitted, they will say, are but private Declarations,
and not so generally known, nor so satisfactory as a public Declaration would
be. The first was public enough being made to the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of
London. Would they have him declare it in Parliament; He may do so if he
pleases; but it would be to no purpose to do it in an Excluding Parliament, for
if he tell them never so seriously that he is no Papist, they will not believe
him: Should he make the most solemn Protestations, take all the Oaths and
Tests that can be devised, Vow, Swear, receive the most Blessed Sacrament upon
it, call the Pope Antichrist, and Heretic, give him all the hard words, and
infamous Appellations he could invent, it would be in Vain; for the Excluders
would not believe him, but say he had a Dispensation to say and do all these
things: And therefore, if he be never so desirous to declare it in Parliament,
Common Prudence will oblige him to stay, till the Excluders are shut out of it,
and Men of better Principles, and a more moderate temper are elected in their
stead. To do it before, would be to tell them that which they have no Mind to
hear, and no Faith to believe, and what can it be but lost Labor, and a vain
Attempt to go about to satisfy Men that will never be satisfied? A time may
come, and I hope it is approaching, when such a Declaration will not only be
believed, but received with the joyful Acclamations, and grateful
Acknowledgments of both Houses, and if it be thy Blessed will, Oh God, let such
a time (a time so much desired by all good Men) come, and that quickly.

But for my part, I do not think it civil or decent for those that are
unacquainted with the greatest affairs of State, to take upon them to prescribe
to his Royal Highness, or to tell him when, or in what manner, he should
declare himself, because this would Savor of Rudeness and Presumption, and
therefore they must leave it to his own Prudence, and the Wise Determinations
of those Great and Honorable Personages, that understand and conduct the
weighty concerns of the Government, it being for Them to know the times and
seasons of so important an Action, and not for Men of privacy, and low degree.

Stay a while then, and consider what you are doing, be not too confident, Oh
ye Excluders, make not so much have, nor such a stir to shut the door upon a
Prince, that you are not sure is gone from you, believe it possible for you to
Err, or be Mistaken in your Opinions of him: you see he has no Reason to be a
Papist, and the Arguments for it are insufficient, do not prove it, therefore
be not too confident he is so.

SECT. IV.
So far I have considered the first Question, Whether his Royal Highness be a
Papist? The next and great Enquiry is, Whether if he be so, that Forfeits his
Right? That it does not, I assert and am now to prove: In order to which I
affirm, That it is possible for a Good, Conscientious, and well meaning Man,
one that desires to go the Right way to Heaven, to turn Papist. Error may look
so like Truth, and Superstition be so adorned with the paint and fair colors
of true Piety, that Men of good understanding, and great integrity may be
deceived and deluded by it. Thus the excellent Chillingworth, a Pious and
Learned Man, was seduced to the Romish Church, though by the Grace of God he
saw his error, returned to our Church, and lived and died in the Holy and
Apostolical Faith which it professes, and not long after his return to it
(mindful of that sacred precept of our Lord to St. Peter, when thou art
converted, strengthen by Brethren) writ his excellent Book, St. Luke 22. 32.
in which he fully and unanswerably proves that which is the Subject or Title
of it, That the Religion of Protestants is a safe way to Salvation, (a Book
highly meriting the perusal of all, that either need, or desire satisfaction in
that Great and most weighty point.) In the Preface to it he tells his Readers
the Motives that persuaded him to turn Papist, which though they were (as he
truly calls them, and to which he there gives full and satisfactory answers)
silly Sophisms, and false Suppositions, yet they so abused that good Man, as to
Proselyte him to the Church of Rome. And why may not others as Pious, Prudent,
and Conscientious as he, be deceived and misled into Popery by these, or such
fallacious Arguments or Reasons? It Is very well known that the Jesuits and
Missionaries of the Roman Church, are Persons Learned and Subtle, trained up
by the most expert Masters, and not suffered to go abroad, till they are
thoroughly skilled and instructed in the controversies between them and us, and
furnished with all manner of Arts and Abilities to seduce, and deceive People.
And cannot Persons so prepared and fitted for it, make gross errors, and the
foulest practices look fair and plausible, varnish them over so with Apologies
or Excuses, extenuate their guilt, pare off the Absurdities adhereing to them
with Distinctions, and set them out to such advantage, that an honest Man shall
not only think them Innocent things, such as have no harm nor venom in them,
but be very much enamored of or taken with them? They that read their Books
must acknowledge (if they will speak the truth) that nothing is wanting in them,
that either Wit or Zeal can invent, to defend, or put a fair gloss upon the
errors of their Church: and though what they plead in Justification of them be
false or deceitful Argumentations, poor and idle Sophisms, mere Paint and
Varnish, no better than Gilding a Rotten Post, or Clothing Error in the dress
and vestments of Truth, yet they seem so plausible, look so fair and inviting,
that a Good, Conscientious, and well meaning Man (as I said before) may be so
abused, and deluded by them, as to become a Proselyte to the Roman Church. And
being so, is he not a Christian? A Papist, I suppose, cannot truly be denied to
be a Christian, because the Church, of which he is a Member, is a Christian
Church, though lapsed into great Errors and Impieties: a Christian Church it
must needs be, because it makes Profession of the Faith and Religion of Christ,
ascribes enough to him to secure to it self the Glorious Title and Denomination
of Christian; for the Council of Trent, in the Explication of the Article of
Justification, gives this account of it, Hujus Justificationis causae sunt,
etc. Session 6. cap. 7. page 35.
The Causes of this Justification are these: The Final Cause is the Glory of
God, and of Christ, and Eternal Life. The Efficient Cause is the Merciful God,
who freely washes aod sanctifies, signing and anointing with the Holy Spirit
of promise, who is the the earnest of our Inheritance. The Meritorious cause is
the most beloved, and only begotten Son of God, who when we were Enemies, for
his great Love wherewith he Loved us, did by his most holy passion upon the
Cross Merit Justification, and give Satisfaction to God his Father for us: By
which it is Evident that the Church of Rome holds, That the Merits of Christ
are the moving or procuring Cause of our Justification, so absolutely necessary
to it, that as that Council speaks a little after, Nemo possit esse justus nisi
cui page 36.
merita Passionis Domini nostri Jesu Christi Communicantur, no Man can be Just
or Righteous but He to whom the Merits of the Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ
are Communicated. Now they that acknowledge or own this Great and Fundamental
Truth, that we are justified by the Merits of Christ, and consequently that he
is our only Savior, and do adore him as the Christ, or Son of God, which they
cannot be denied to do, though that Acknowledgment, and this Worship of theirs,
be mixed and accompanied with many, and those very dangerous Errors, must be
acknowledged to be a Christian Church: And if the collective Body be such the
particular Members must be so too.

I suppose then it will be easily granted me, by the greatest Zealots against
Popery, (it being but a reasonable concession, and such as I shall not take for
a favor to have yielded to me) That a Papist is a Christian, though an Erring
one, and then all the dispute between the Excluders and me in the great Case
before us, comes to this, Whether an Erring Christian does by being so, Forfeit
his Birthright.

To say he does, is an hard saying, and such as can never be Justified or
Defended; for a Christian, as all other Men may do, may Err either in Judgment,
or Practice, or Both. Error in Judgment, if it rests there, can forfeit no
Man's Right, because it is injurious to none but the Erring Person himself, and
cannot be known to any but the great Searcher of Hearts, and therefore no
humane Laws can Punish it.

If any Error then forfeits a Man's Right, it must be Error in Practice,
because this is both open or manifest, and may be mischievous or hurtful to
others: but every Error in practice (every Sin that is) cannot forfeit a
Common or Ordinary Right, much less so Great, Transcendent and Extraordinary a
Right, as this to a Crown.

To say it can, or does, is a sure way to deter all Men from being Christians;
for who will be so, if by doing any Evil Action, he forfeits all his Happiness
in Heaven, and all his Enjoyments and Expectations upon Earth? That indeed is
recoverable by Repentance, but it is uncertain whether any Repentance can
restore a Man to these, being once forfeited, and as such alienated or taken
from him; because it is doubtful whether he that has them in possession will
ever restore them to the first Owner. And therefore no Man, that considers the
Frailty of his nature, the great and manifold Temptations to which he is
exposed, and the necessity and usefulness of that Estate or Property (to his
comfortable subsistence in this World) which he has either acquired by his
Labor and Industry, or descends to him by Inheritance, will ever be a
Christian, if by being so, every Sin he commits does forfeit that Estate or
Property.

So Injurious to the most Holy and Excellent Religion of Christ, and that which
tends to the utter Ruin and Destruction of it, is that Originally Popish, and
since by Adoption Presbyterian Principle, That all Dominion is founded in
Grace: that no private Person has any Right to his Estate or Property, nor any
Prince or Monarch to bear Rule or Authority over others, any longer than he is
an Holy and Gracious Person, and in the favor of God. Upon this Principle the
Pope proceeds when he Excommunicates, and Deposes Princes, that profess the
Reformed Religion: that Profession in his Opinion makes them Heretics, and
their Persisting in it declares them Obstinate, or such as will not be
Reformed, which are (he thinks) two great Sins, to deny that which he calls the
Faith, and to continue stubbornly in that denial, by which (in his Judgment)
they forfeit their Royal Dignity, which being lapsed to him, the Supreme
Minister of Christ upon Earth, is absolutely at his disposal, so that he may
give it to whom he pleases. Upon this Principle also the prosperous Rebels in
the late times seized the Government, and the Revenues of it, plundered,
sequestered, deprived the Loyal party of their Estates, called them Malignants,
said they were great Sinners, Persons either void of, or fallen from all
Grace, and being so, their Estates were forfeited, which they (being the Saints
and People of God) might justly take possession of, and convert to their own
use. So glad are men Knavishly inclined of any Religious pretense or color for
their Rapines and Injustice: but I shall endeavor to strip them of this
covering, that it may never more be a Cloak for their Avarice and Oppressions.

That this is a false, as well as wicked and mischievous Principle, may be
proved diverse Subsect. 1:
ways: For first, if now under the Christian Religion, Dominion be founded in
Grace, it must be so founded by the Decree and Declaration of Christ himself
contained in the new Testament, but that gives us no notice nor information at
all of any such decree or appointment of his, therefore there is, there can be
no such thing. Search all the four Gospels, and all the Sacred Writings of the
Apostles, and there will be nothing found in them to countenance or favor so
wild a Principle. It Is true indeed, our Lord has intermixed some few Temporal
promises with his great and noble offers of Eternal rewards and enjoyments,
that our obedience to his excellent Laws might be excited, and encouraged with
the expectation both of present and future advantages, such is that, when
charging his Disciples not to be too thoughtful or solicitous for the things of
the Earth, he said, seek ye first the Kingdom of God, St. Math. 6. 33.
and his Righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you: never
afflict, nor trouble your selves about these mean and despicable things, let it
be your constant study and endeavor to obey my Laws, and to lead the pure and
virtuous lives they enjoin you, and then you may be confident, you shall want
nothing, either necessary or convenient for you in this World: he that clothes
the Lillies in such brave and splendid Vestments, and feeds the young Ravens
that cry unto him, will take care of, and extend his Royal Bounty to you his
devout Worshippers, and faithful Servants. And to this great promise, I suppose
the Apostle refers, when he says, That Godliness is profitable unto all
things, having promise of the Life that now is, as well as of that which is to
come; but by this promise no man has any new Right to any Temporal
possessions, which he had not before, but it only assures him of Gods Blessing,
that he will by his gracious providence and bounty supply him with all things
necessary for his present support, which may be done by prospering his labor,
and diligence in an honest Calling, or by exciting others to extend their
Bounty and Charity to him: but Christ does not say, obey my Laws, live up
exactly to the Rules of my Religion, and I will enrich you with the Wealth and
Estates of those men, that either oppose my Doctrine, or, if they profess, do
not observe or act according to it; assure your selves that notwithstanding all
I have done to convert them, many will not believe in me, nor all of them that
do, obey me; and the want of Faith in the one, and of Obedience, exact and
entire Obedience in the other, will forfeit all their temporal properties and
possessions, which I bequeath as my Royal Donative to you, and to my Saints for
ever. Such a Declaration as this would have made it clear, that Dominion is
founded in Grace; but he has said nothing that in the least measure looks like
any such thing, unless that promise to the meek, may seem to some to have an
aspect that way, Blessed are the meek for they shall inherit the Earth: The
meek are opposed to those that are angry and passionate, and they are the mild
and patient people, that are not easily Provoked, not Revengful, Turbulent, nor
Seditious, but of a Gentle, Pleasing, and Complying Temper, these (says
Christ) shall Inherit the Earth, spend their days in great tranquillity, be
happy in the friendship of their Equals, the favor of their Superiors, and
the protection of their Governors: every man is, or may be ashamed to injure
those that are of such a sweet and obliging temper: not that this meekness
gives them a Right to any part of the Earth, or any of the possessions of it,
that belong to others, but preserves them from many dangers and miseries, which
they that have it not, betray and expose themselves to, renders them patient
and contented in all conditions, and will, if conjoined with all other
Christian Virtues, secure to them a blessed portion in the Land of Promise, the
Heavenly Canaan, of which the Earthly (which God promised to the People of
Israel) was but a Type or poor Resemblance, for of that our Lord here speaks,
it being the happy Country which every true Christian desires, and seeks after,
an Inheritance (as Saint Peter calls it) incorruptible, and undefiled, and that
fades not away, reserved in Heaven for him.

And so far was our Lord from saying any thing in favor of this Principle,
that he utterly declined or refused to intermeddle with men's Temporal Rights at
all, unless it was to secure them to the owners; of which we have two
remarkable instances, one in the man that came and said to him, Master speak to
my Brother that St. Luke 12. 13.
he divide the Inheritance with me: the man was modest you see, he did not
desire the whole, but would have been contented with half the Inheritance: To
this Proposal Christ answers by way of Reproof, Man, who made me a Judge Verse
14.
or a Divider over you? Thou art mistaken, I am not come as a Temporal Prince
or Judge to give Estates or Possessions to any in this World, but to propose an
Heavenly Kingdom and Immortal Happiness to all mankind, and to tell them upon
what Terms or Conditions they may obtain them. This, is the great concern I am
employed in, and if thou will consult me herein, I will soon give thee full
Satisfaction. That the Man who made this Motion had no Right to the Inheritance
seems Evident to me, both by the smart Reprehension Christ gives him in these
words, Man, who made me a Judge, or a Divider over you? I will not meddle in so
Unjust a thing, as to bid thy Brother divide his Inheritance with thee: and
also by the Admonition he gives him in the following words, Take heed Verse 15.
and Beware of Covetousness, for a Man's Life consists not in the abundance of
the things, which he possesses: Thy desire of wealth, and endeavor to
increase thy own by lessening thy Brothers Possession, is a great Sin in thee,
and of such mighty danger, that it ought to be avoided with the highest Care
and Caution; for though Estates and Possessions are useful to sustain Life, yet
no Man can prolong his Life, nor make it really the more happy by possessing
Superfluous Wealth.

The other Instance is the Question proposed to him, by the Herodians, What
think thou? Is it Lawful to give Tribute unto Caesar? To St. Mat. 22. 17.
which (having first reproved them for their Treachery and Hypocrisy) he
Answers, Render Verse 21.
unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's: Pay your Prince the Tribute that is
due to him, do not defraud or wrong him of any thing that belongs to him, far
be it from me to Advise or Counsel any to detain the Emperors Right from him,

If our Lord had designed to found Dominion in Grace, here had been a fit
Oppertunity to have done it; for when they said, Tell us, is it Lawful to give
Tribute unto Gaesar? He might have replied, no, it is not, Caesar is an Infidel
or Heathen, or Wicked Man, and as such is fallen from all Dominion, and
therefore has no Right to Demand Tribute of the People, nor they any
Obligation upon them to Pay him any: But so far was Christ from giving them
such an Answer, that he Acknowledged Tribute to be Caesar's Right, and Commanded
it to be paid unto him; and though he was the Son of that God, from whom
Caesar received his Imperial Power and Authority, yet when the Officers
Demanded it of him, rather than he would deprive him of his Right, he wrought a
Miracle, that he might have wherewith to pay it: which shows the admirable
Justice and Integrity of our Lord, in that he was careful to secure and
preserve all Men's Rights and Properties. If any Man refused to Submit unto his
Excellent Laws, and to come over to his Religion, he told him, he should have
no part nor portion in his Kingdom, but then to avoid mistakes, he declared
that his Kingdom was not of this World, not an Earthly, but an Heavenly
Kingdom, and all Right to this he affirms is founded in Grace, that it is the
Free and Royal Gift of God, and the Purchase of his Meritorious Holiness, and
Sufferings, there being nothing in Men to Merit so great a Good, the things he
requires of them being necessary Dispositions to qualify, or fit them for the
Enjoyment of it, not the Cause moving God to confer it upon them.

So that though a Pious and Holy Conversation be the great Condition of a Crown
hereafter, and so absolutely necessary, that it cannot be obtained without it:
And though it be an Ornament and Security to him that has one upon Earth, an
Ornament, as it Gives an admirable Luster to his Greatness, and Renders him
Excellent in his Person, as well as upon the Account of his Royal Office: A
security, as it Indears the Providence of God, and Ingages his tender care of
him, as it Discourages Wicked and Traiterous Men from attempting or
enterprising any thing against him, whose Piety makes him Dear to Heaven,
renders him so highly the Joy and Delight of the Blessed Angels, that they are
Ready to offer themselves as a Guard and Defense to him; and as it procures him
the Love, Honor, and Admiration of all good Men; yet the highest Piety or
Holiness gives no Man a Title to that Dominion or Sovereignty upon Earth, to
which he had not an Antecedent Right, nor does the Want of it deprive him that
has it of that Right Christ offers, Indeed an Heavenly Kingdom, upon Condition
of a good Life, but an ill one Forfeits no Man's Right to an Earthly. And seeing
our Lord has said nothing in Favor of this Tenure, but on their contrary that
which overthrows and destroys it, It cannot be true that Dominion is founded in
Grace; for he having not founded it so, who is the great Law giver to his
Church, no humane Authority can do it, without invading his Prerogative, nay
(as I observed before) without destroying his Religion; because Experience
shows us, most Men are mightily biased or led by their Interest; for though
some have been such generous Lovers of him, as to forsake all to follow him,
Houses, and Lands, and Possessions, nay, and what were more precious to them
their dearest Lives too, yet to make every Sin a Christian Commits (whilst he
endeavors to Obey his Laws, and to Imitate his Holy Life) through Weakness,
Ignorance, Surprise, or Inadvertency to forfeit all his Temporal Rights and
Possessions is to deter or drive all Men from his Religion, to scare them from
putting their Necks into such a Cruel Yoke, to make them suspect, that under
pretense of Saving them hereafter, it intends to Beggar and Ruin them here,
offers them great things in Reversion, on purpose to cheat them of all they
have in Possession. But thanks be to God, though some Men for their own Ends
are so Impious as to teach such Knavish Doctrines, yet our Lord is more Just
and Reasonable than to Render Men's Temporal Rights so Precarious and Uncertain,
as the Assertors of this Wild Principle would make them.

Besides, If we suppose this Principle to be true (as it is most certainly
false) yet upon diverse Accounts it is not Practicable; For either it must be
left to every Man's private Judgment or Opinion who has Grace, and who has
not, who is a Child of God, and who is not, who is a Saint, and who a
Reprobate, and consequently, he must have Power to seize the Rights and
Properties of those he believes to be Sinners and Wicked Persons: Or else there
must be some public Judge to Conduct this great Affair, and to Determine or
Decide all the Controversies about it.

To assert the first, to make every Man a Judge in the Case is Intolerable, the
Mother of all mischief and confusion, it is to set all Mankind together by the
Ears, or to put them into a State of War: For will not every Man think himself
a Saint (when it is so much for his Gain and Advantage to be so persuaded of
himself) and his Neighbor, that has a better Estate, and a fairer Fortune, a
Sinner? Titius (suppose) has large Possessions and a goodly Heritage,
Sempronius is Poor, but highly conceited of his Sanctity, thinks himself very
Pious Religious, and dear to God, but his Neighbor Titius to be a Reprobate,
and Gods Enemy, and upon that Presumption seizes or possesses himself of his
Estate: Valerius seeing what Sempronius had done, and Judging it a ready way to
get Wealth, Entertains the same Thoughts of him, and Treats him as he did
Titius; Fabius being a Spectator of these Practices, smiles and takes the next
turn, sets upon Valerius, and forces the Rich Booty out of his hands: And so
they run on in an endless Circle of Cheating and Robbing one another, and turn
the World into a Den of Holy and Religious Thieves: A place so miserable, that
no good Man could have any Temptation to stay in it, or else because he cannot
Dye Innocently when he will, be forced to exchange Cities for Woods and
Deserts, and the Society of Men for the Company of Beasts, as the better and
more Innocent Creatures. So mischievous to Humane Society, so Destructive of
all Justice and Honesty, so Productive of all Confusion and Disorder, is it to
make every Man a Judge in the Case, and to invest him with Power to seize the
Rights and Properties of those he thinks to be void of Grace and Godliness.

To say there must be a public Judge to Manage this great Affair, and to
Determine all the Controversies about it, is to talk Idly; for seeing Christ
has appointed no such Judge or Officer, who shall choose or give him Commission
so to be? The People? Alas the Major part of them have no Grace themselves, and
therefore if they had any Right to choose such an Officer, their being fallen
from Grace, and Sinners in many Instances, Forfeits that Right: But suppose all
the People to be Holy, (though they never were, never will be so) how shall
they know which of all the numerous Competitors that stand for so great and
gainful an Office, has Grace, and is a Child of God? he whom they think a
Sheep may be a Wolf in Sheeps Clothing, the Man they suppose to be a Dove may
be a Vulture, and he whom they take for an Angel of Light, may prove a Devil.
The Hearts of Men are known to none but God; the People therefore (if they were
allowed to choose this great Officer) can only Judge of him according to
Appearance, by the Profession of Religion and Holiness he makes, and by his
outward Actions and Behavior, which may be wholly Feigned and Hypocritical;
for will not the greatest Rogue in the World look as Demure, talk as Godly,
seem as Holy as ever he can, whilst he stands Candidate for so profitable an
Employ, if he do it not, he is a very silly Wretch.

Suppose then this great Judge or Officer to be chosen, Being invested he is
either a Gracious and Holy Person, or not: If not, his Election is Null or
Void; because he holds his new employ by Grace, which being destitute of, as
soon as it appears by any Evil or Sinful Action his Office is void, and the
Persons concerned must proceed to a new Election. But if on the other side the
Person Elected be really Holy and Religious, when this Office is conferred upon
him (though that cannot be certainly known) yet there is no assurance that he
will continue so; for he may either fall into Personal Sins, or abuse his Trust
by passing wrong Judgment, by a False or Erroneus Sentence he may Condemn them
as Graceless and Wicked Men, that are truly Holy and Religious, and so deprive
them of their Rights and Properties wrongfully, or call them Gracious and Pious
Persons that only seem so, and adjudg those Possessions to them, which they
have no Right to. For does he pronounce them Saints and the Children of God,
whose outward Actions and Demeaner appear to be agreeable to the Laws of
Christ? This may be a great mistake, because those may be pure Dissimulation,
mere Hypocritical paint and varnish, for a cunning and wary Hypocrite will so
Personate or Act the part of a Saint (especially when it will be so Beneficial
to him as this Principle makes it) that the most watchful and strict observer
shall not be able, at least of a considerable time, to discover or find him
out. And how Abominable is it to Rob one Sinner to Enrich Another? to take from
him that Misbehaved himself, or did an Evil Action, that Estate and those
Possessions, which he either acquired by his Labor and Industry, or descended
to him by Inheritance, and give them to a dissembling Knave, that is careful
only to seem, but desires not to be Holy and Religious. He may Err too in the
Sentence he passes upon Offenders, for those he takes to be Reprobates, may be
the Children of God, and the Evil Actions he supposes to be Mortal and Heinous
Sins, may be the Spots of Sons, and proceed not from a Total Destitution or
Want, but from weakness of Grace, they may be Slips and Frailties, not wilful
or deliberate Crimes, though they sometimes ensnare and surprise him, yet the
Man may heartily Abhor, Repent of, and Strive against them, be earnestly
Laboring after that habitual Holiness, and proficiency in Piety and Virtue,
that will in time render him Victorious over all Sin, and Wickedness. What
horrid Injury is it then to such a Child of God as this (that heartily Loves
his Heavenly Father, and sincerely endeavors to do his Will) to Condemn him as
a Reprobate, and as such to deprive him of all the Possessions he has upon
Earth?

So that if any Sect, or Society of Men had Power to Elect such a Judge or
Officer, unless when they have chose, they can make him Infallible, or give him
Unerring (that is) Infinite Wisdom, still they would be never the better;
because he could not Execute his Office without committing the grossest, most
mischievous and pernicious Errors and Mistakes, without passing such Sentences
as will Condemn and Ruin the Innocent, and on the other side Justify and
Enrich the Guilty and the Wicked.

I know indeed that those two great Rivals, who claim a Right of Judging in the
Case, that is the Pope and Presbytery, do both pretend to be Infallible, the
first Directly or in Express words, the other by Consequence: As for the Pope
he professes to have an Infallible or Unerring Judgment in all Cases, and the
Presbytery say they have the Spirit, which is to say the same thing his
Holiness does, though in other Terms: Now here being two Parties contending for
this Judicature, and both of them, for the due managing of it, pretending to be
Infallible, and neither of them willing to quit their Claim or Title, or to
resign it to the other, the Question is, Which of them must be acknowledged
Judge in the Case? The Presbytery are Evidently the Younger, and but of
Yesterday in compare with the other; for the Pope will plead that several
General Councils have owned and asserted him to be the supreme Judge, upon
Earth, in all Causes belonging to Religion, but the Presbytery can alledg no
such thing, never had any Council to declare for them, unless they will be so
Presumptuous as to call the sneaking Synod of Dort so. And therefore till one
of these Pretenders Renounce his claim, there can be no supreme or sole Judge in
the Case, and to place this Judicature in them both, would make mad work;
because the Pope has adjudged the Presbytery to be Heretics, and therefore
void of Grace, and consequently such as have no Right to Judge in the Case. And
the Presbytery on the other side call the Pope Antichrist and Man of Sin, and
the Church of Rome over which he presides, the Great Whore, the Whore of
Babylon, and therefore not only fallen from, but past all Grace: And those whom
he declares to be Saints and good Catholics, they pronounce to be Reprobates,
or Sinners of the first Magnitude: Those also whom he calls Heretics, and
Anathematizes as the most Flagitious Criminals upon Earth, they admire and cry
up as the Peculiar People and Dear Children of God. So that if the Accusations
and Indictments, they prefer one against another, be true, they are both such
Impious Graceless Persons, that they are not capable of being Judges in the
Case, and the gross and abominable Errors both of them are so Notoriously
Guilty of, Shame, and Prove the Infallibility they both lay claim to, to be a
most insolent and lying Pretense.

And being neither taught in Scripture nor Practicable in it self, this
Principle must needs be false, and the Invention of Cheats, who say as the
Gnostics did of old, That Gain is Godliness. If Christ had founded Dominion in
Grace, he would have inserted this degree amongst his other Laws, which his
Blessed Apostles have Transmitted to us in their inspired Writings, but there
is no mention of any such thing, and he having not so founded it, no Authority
upon Earth can do it: And because he took Care by his Strict and Excellent
precepts of Justice to preserve and secure Men's Rights and Properties, as they
can be none of his Disciples, that Violate and Invade them, so upon what
Pretense soever they do it, they must expect the dreadful Punishment, which his
Laws Denounce against the Unjust and the Oppressors; and therefore I conclude,
That Dominion is not Bp. Tailor Ductor Dubi. p. 543.
founded in Grace, but as a Reverend Person Observes, in Law and Labor, in
Succession and Purchase.

And if Dominion be not founded in Grace then a Christian may Err in Practice,
(that is) do some Evil things and not forfeit his Temporal Right or Property,
be it Ordinary or Extraordinary, a Right to a private Estate, or as this under
debate, to succeed to the Royal Dignity.

The next Inquiry then must be, what Errors in Practice Forfeit a Man's Right,
These must in Subsect 2.
Reason be such as are Repugnant to, and open Violation of some great Design or
Intention of his Being, but no Man was Born for himself alone, but for the
public good, and to be serviceable to Humane Society, of which he is a part or
Member, which he is obliged to promote with all his Care and Industry, and to
Contribute his Endeavors to the Preservation of, For the Effecting of which
these three things (as the Learned and Excellent Bishop, Sanderson observes)
are absolutely necessary; The Defending our Country against Foreign Force and
Invasion: The Administration of Distributive Justice, that the Good be
Protected and Rewarded, the Evil and Unjust Punished according to the Laws:
Care of Commutative Justice, of Trade Praelectio Quinta Sect 19.
or Commerce, and all kind of Contracts; the welfare and safety of Mankind
being so concerned in these things, that unless they be secured, they must
needs be involved in Misery and Ruin; for all places will be filled with
Thefts, Murders, Frauds and Injuries, and the Lives and Estates of the most
Innocent Persons be exposed to the Avarice and Cruelty of the Great or Mighty.

The Crimes therefore that Forfeit a Man's Right, must be such as are
Destructive of Humane Society, which are Thefts, Murders, and Treasons: But
then he that commits these, or any of them, does by our Laws Forfeit his Life
as well as Estate: the Royal Clemency indeed, may if it sees Cause, Pardon
those that Commit these great Offenses, which Pardon Restores them entirely to
all they had Forfeited, but without that they are Dead, and Deprived of all
their Possessions by Law: It being Just that he who steals another Man's Goods,
should loose his own, that he who will not let his Neighbor Live to Enjoy his
Estate, should Forfeit both his Life and Estate, and that he or they who
attempt any thing against the Sacred and most Precious Life of their Prince, be
not only Punished as the highest Malefactors, by a Death peculiar to such
execrable Criminals, but that they suffer in their Posterity too, those that
descend from them not being permitted to enjoy their Estates, but that they be
Vagabonds and Miserable in the Earth, thar others may see and fear, and not
dare to do so Wickedly, as to Rebel or Conspire against their Prince. There are
in all Ages all Places of the World some desperate Villains that can be content
to venture their own Lives, if they can but Imbroyl Kingdoms, and Assassinate
or Murder Princes; and therefore it is Just that not only Death, but Forfeiture
of Estates and all their Possessions be the Punishment of Traitors, because
this will many times Restrain those from such Detestable Practices, which that
cannot deter them from, for they that are so mad as not to care for their own
Lives, will yet be tender of their Innocent Children, and take heed how they
Ruin them.

Thefts then, and Murders, and Treasons are such Errors in Practice, as
Forfeit both the Lives and Properties of those that commit them; because these
Crimes are so pernicious that if they be not Punished with such Severity, they
will Ruin or Destroy any State or Society; for no Man could enjoy his Life or
Estate, and there would be no Peace nor Government, but continual Oppressions,
Wars, Murders, Tumults, and Seditions, which must needs Ruin or lay any Kingdom
Waste.

And if these be all the Crimes that Forfeit Men's Rights and Properties, his
Royal Highness cannot have Forfeited his Right of Succession, because he is so
Innocent from all these, that his greatest Enemies (the Excluders themselves)
have not laid any of them to his Charge.

Supposing then the Duke to be a Papist, that is, an Erring Christian, yet that
making no Forfeiture of his Right, To take it from him is to Oppress and Ruin
an Innocent Prince, and therefore the highest and most execrable Injustice: To
Rob a mean Person of his Right is Theft and Knavery, to Deprive a Prince (in
Defiance of all the Laws of Heaven and Earth, of God and Men) of such a
Treasure as a Crown, of such an Inheritance as a Kingdom, nay as three
Kingdoms, is so great an Injury or Oppression, that I want words to express it.

To say the Bill of Exclusion is Cautionary or Preventive, designed to Disable
a Popish Prince from doing the Mischiefs, which as such he may do, if he gets
into the Throne, instead of mending the matter makes it worse, this being to
Punish a Prince with great, if not the highest Severity, not for doing things
meriting such a Punishment, but for fear he should do them, which is a new sort
of Justice, and such as was never before heard of in the Christian World, and
can be no where matched unless it be amongst the Turks, where the Custom is for
the new Sultan to strangle his Brothers, for fear if they were suffered to
Live, they should Conspire against, and Attempt to take the Empire from him.
This sort of Justice, if it was pursued to all the purposes to which it equally
serves, would make mad work in the World, fill it full of Violence and Cruel
Practices; for by the same Reason they may deprive Honest Men of their Rights,
their Estates and Possessions, not because they have already, but because they
may hereafter put them to Ill and Dangerous uses. The old Justice is a dull and
slow thing in Compare with this, That stays, till Men have Offended, or
Committed things worthy of Punishment, and then it Strikes, but This is so
Quick and Expeditious that it Punishes before they have Transgressed, Draws out
the Destroying Sword, not only before a Man be Convicted, but before he be
Guilty; than which way of Proceeding nothing can be more Impious and
Unrighteous, and consequently more to be Abhorred, Execrated, and Avoided by
every one that pretends either to Common Honesty, or Christian Piety. For to
say as the Men of the New Morals do, That a bare Suspicion of Injury from
another makes it Just, or Lawful to disable the Person so suspected, to do it,
is to expose the Lives and Estates of the most Innocent Persons to the Avarice
and Cruelty of every Suspicious Villain, that has Power or Opportunity to
invade them: For the more Wicked any Man is, the more Suspicious he must needs
be, That being the inseparable Companion of Guilt: And if this Maxim be
admited, it will Animate him that receives it to the most Savage Practices,
Encourage him with Solomon's Madman to cast Firebrarnds, Arrows and Death, to
Murder this, Rob that Man, and Undo a third, and to repeat such Outrages as
often as he can, and all this, because he is such a Rogue as to Suspect,
without any Ground or Reason at all, that the first will kill, the second
rifle, the third ruin him. Upon this Principle a Prince may seize the Estates,
and cut the Throats of all his Subjects, whom he suspects to be Disaffected to
him, and the People Beggar and Butcher one another as often as they please. And
then it is in vain to talk of Government, or Laws, or humane Society, This being
a perfect state of War, to lay aside that Mercy and Justice which are both the
Ornament and Happiness of Men, and to put on the Fierceness and Barbarity of
the most Savage Beasts: It Is not then injury Suspected, but Acted, the having
Done wrong to another, not his Fear or Apprehension that it will be done, that
makes a Man justly Punishable.

And I cannot more Effectually shame, and Subsect the 3d.
reprove this new Justice, than by Comparing it with some of the Principles of
the Christian Religion (of which we all make Profession) delivered to us by our
Lord and his Apostles. With that great Precept of Justice, All things
whatsoever ye would that Men should do St. Mat. 7. 12.
unto you do ye even so to them: This is so excellent and equal a Rule for us
to act by in all our Intercourse and Dealings with others, that it was admired
and applauded by the very Heathens, the Emperor Severus was so pleased with
it, that he had it often in his Mouth, Reverenced the Christian Religion, and
the Glorious Author of it for the sake of this Precept. Had our Lord said, do
all things that are Just, he had given indeed a General Rule, Comprehending all
the Special Precepts of the Law of Nature, but he had said nothing by which we
Espiscopius in locum.
might have certainly known, what in all Affairs and Transactions is Just, but
when he said, All things whatsoever ye would that Men should do unto you, do ye
even so to them, he gave us such a Rule, by which in every Case and
Circumstance we may be sure, what is Just; for as we cannot doubt what we would
have others do to us, so neither can we doubt what we our selves ought to do to
others: Every Man in his Wits, would receive no Injury or Wrong from others,
but Enjoy his Life and Estate, all his Rights and Properties, without Damage
and Diminution, and therefore he must offer no Injury to any Man, nor attempt
to Dispossess, or Deprive him of any thing that belongs to him.

Every Man would have others deal fairly and sincerely, keep their word and
promise with him, not Circumvent nor deceive him with Id. Instit. Theol: lib.
4: pa. 249.
lies, fraud, or falsehood, pay him what is due to him, or if he owe another
any thing, he would not have him be rigorous or severe with him, but forbear or
allow him some time, till he be able to pay him, if he be in any Want or
Misery, he would be Relieved and Assisted by the Counsel, Help, Comfort, and
Prayers of others, and therefore is obliged to do all these things to others.

And this Rule extends to all Orders and Degrees of Men, Superiors, Equals,
and Inferiors: They that have any Superiority over others, expect from them
the Honor and Obedience due to them, and therefore must pay the same Respect
and Submission to those that are possessed of an higher Station. Every Man
looks for Friendship and Fidelity from his Equals, and consequently must be
Kind and Faithful to them. They that are Inferior to, and have any Dependence
upon others, would Enjoy their Favor, Clemency, and good Will, and Receive
from them Help, Relief, and Counsel in their need, and therefore must afford
the same to those that are Below, and Depend upon them. He that is a
Magistrate, if he were a a Private Person would be protected both in his Life
and Estate, have no Man suffered to do him Wrong or Violence with Impunity, and
therefore must so discharge his Office, and behave himself to all Men that come
to him for Justice. So that this one Rule gives us full and sufficient
Direction how to Order all our Intercourse, and Dealings with Men, that they
may be Just and Equal. And if the greatest Zealots for, and Admirers of it,
will please to Compare their Project of Exclusion with this Excellent Rule or
Law of Christ, they will soon perceive the High and Horrid Injustice of it. Do
they Treat, or do to his Royal Highness as they themselves would be done to?
Would any one of them be content to be deprived of his Birthright merely upon
the Account of his Religion? No, so far are they from being willing to be so
used themselves, that to prevent or take away all possibility of it, they would
deprive the Duke of his Inheritance: They Love themselves so well, that they
would not Suffer at all, have no Harm nor Danger happen to them, their Hatred
to his Royal Highness is so Cruel and Implacable, that they would make Him
Suffer the greatest Wrong and Damage. To make a true Judgment in the Case,
Mutanda est Persona the Person must be changed: Let then the Fiercest and most
Zealous of the Excluders suppose himself in the Dukes Place, that he was Heir
to such a Jewel as a Crown, to so Rich and Valuable an Inheritance as three
Kingdoms are, and that he had done nothing, which either by any Divine or
Humane Law yet extant, made a Forfeiture of that Right and Inheritance, and
that those whom he had never Injured, or offered any Just Offense to, were
Confederate against him, and contended with all their Zeal and Industry to have
a Law made to Bar his Claim, and Deprive him of the Possession of it, if it
should by course of Nature descend to him, how would he take such usage? What
would he think of them that Treated him so? would he not fill Heaven and Earth
with his Complaints? Cry out that Justice and Honesty had left the World, and
Appeal to Heaven for Succor, saying with the Royal Prophet, Help me Lord, for
there is not one Godly Man left, for Ps. 12. 1,
the Faithful (the Just and Honest) are minished from among the Children of
Men: Surely thou have seen it; for thou beholdest Ungodliness and Wrong. That
thou may take the matter into thy Ps. 10. 15: 16
Hand, the Poor commits himself unto thee, for thou art the helper of the
Friendless. Will thou have any thing to do with the stool of Wickedness, Ps.
94. 20.
which imagines mischief as a Law? Suffer me not, Oh Lord, to be Oppressed and
Ruined by the Counsels and Combinations of Wicked Men and Unjust, but stir up
thy strength and come and help me. And if these would be his Thoughts and
Resentments of such usage, when offered to himself, how abominably Wicked and
Unjust is it for him and his Brethren to offer it to the Duke? This is
apparently to Contemn and Violate this most equal, and therefore excellent Law
of Christ, to do that to another which they would be most impatient of, if done
to themselves.

Our Laws indeed Punish all sorts of Recusants, but then the Punishments they
Inflict are Moderate, intended to Reform, not Ruin them: they deprive none of
them of their Birthright, and all their Possessions, but only of some part of
them, and those Punishments are Just, and agreeable to this Rule, because they
offer that Contempt and Disturbance to the Government, which if they were in
Authority, they would not have others do to them. It Is certain that neither
Popery nor Presbytery, where they are Established, will give Toleration to any
that Dissent from them; and if they will grant none to others, with what Face
can they expect it themselves? Besides it is Evident that both these Factions,
both formerly, and of late, have practiced against the State, been guilty of
horrid Treasons and Seditions, Murdered the Glorious Father, (to go no higher)
Plotted the Death and Destruction of the most Excellent Son, our present most
Gracious Sovereign, which is the highest Violation of this Sacred Law of
Christ; for would any of them, if he was King of these Nations, be content to
be so used, as they Treat their Prince? would he be willing to have his
Subjects take Arms against, and Conspire his Death? when he had given them all
manner of Demonstrations of his Love and Care of them, sought to Oblige and
Indear them by a Just, Merciful, and Peaceable Government? would he take it
well to see them requite his high Affection with deadly Hatred, his tender care
with contempt, his Royal Mercy and Justice, with Barbarous Cruelty and Villainy?
yet these things, this hard measure, have both the Papists and Fanatics
offered to their Prince, and therefore the Punishments which our Laws inflict
upon them are Just, and they have no Cause of complaint against the Government;
because it Corrects them with Mercy and Moderation, Punishes them less than
their Crimes Deserve. it is Death indeed by our Law, for any of the Romish
Priests and Jesuits to be found in England, but that Punishment is not
inflicted on them for their Religion, but for their Irreligion and Wickedness,
their frequent and execrable Treasons, their restless attempts against their
Lives and Government, awakened and made it necessary for our Kings by Capital
Punishments to deter such Traitors and Murderers from entering their Dominions,
who came upon the most Bloody and Mischievous designs, either to Assassinate
their sacred Persons, or to Seduce their People from their Allegiance, and
Animate them to Rebel or take Arms against them. And therefore if the Romish
Priests and Jesuits, who have nothing to do here, will venture to come, they
can blame none but themthemselves, if they suffer for it, they receive the
Reward of their Sin and Folly, but have no Injustice done them: If they stay
away they are safe, but if they will Run into Danger when they need not, they
Destroy themselves, fall into the Pit, are taken in the Snare, which they came
to dig, and lay for their Prince, whose Natural Subjects they are, though they
become Voluntary Vassals to a Foreign Power, that imploys them against their
own Prince, for whose Safety and Preservation, they ought by all Laws both
Divine and Humane, to expose themselves to the greatest Dangers, freely Venture
their own Lives to save his.

And seeing the Excluders attempt, and would do that to his Royal Highness,
which our Laws do to no Ordinary Subject, merely for his Religion, and which
they would not have done to themselves, that attempt must needs be a manifest
Affront to, and Violation of this Law of Christ, and therefore most Wicked and
Unjust.

To say they are of the true, and the Duke (as a Papist) of the false Religion,
makes no difference in the Case, because Christ excepts no Man, but Commands us
to do to Men Indefinitely, that is to all Men, whether they be Orthodox, or
otherwise, believe Aright, or Err from the Truth, Christians or Heathens, All
things whatsoever we would that they should do unto us. And also because no Man
that owns the Principles of Natural Religion, that believes there is a God, and
Eternal Rewards and Punishments after this Life, will be a Disciple of that,
which he is persuaded is a false Religion, and Renders the Salvation of them
that are of it hazardous and doubtful; and seeing he thinks the Church and
Religion he is of, to be true, and the best, though he be deceived and thinks
amiss, it is to lay aside both the Justice and Mercy, our Lord Requires of us,
to Treat such a Person with the Rigor and Severity, which the Excluders offer
to his Royal Highness, because he follows the best Light he has, his
Conscience, duly instructed by Scripture, explained and applied (as he
apprehends) by Right Reason; for it is certain a Man can use but his best care
in the choice of his Religion, that is, he can but Pray, and Read, and
Meditate, and Obey, as far as he understands, and Consult the Learned, or
Advise with those he thinks best able to direct him: but because all the
Learned of the World are not of one Opinion, he must employ his Reason to Judge
which of them is in the Right, and if he do it sincerely, though he chooses
amiss, mistakes his way, yet he is to be Pitied, not Ruined, to be Restored in
the Spirit of Meekness, not Degraded nor Undone for following his Conscience.
God (it is certain) will be Merciful to a Christian so Erring, and therefore if
Men be extreme to Mark what such an one does amiss, they Treat him as they
would not be used themselves, and so bid Defiance to this great Law of Christ,
all things whatsoever ye would that Men should do unto you, do ye even so unto
them.

Compare it Secondly with that Noble Precept of our Lord, which requires all
Christians to Love their Enemies, and you will soon see the Impiety of it, I
say unto you, Love your Enemies, St. Mat. 5. 44.
Bless them that Curse you, do Good to them that Hate you, and Pray for them
which Despitefully use you, and Persecute you; this is my Will and Pleasure,
this I enjoin you, that you Love not only your Friends, or those that Love you,
as the practice of the Jews and Heathens is, but your Enemies, what are our
Enemies is fully declared in this Law, even they that Curse, and Hate, that
Despitefully use, and Persecute us: Every Man thinks him his Enemy, that offers
any of these things to him, but he that does them all is the worst, most Cruel
and bitter Enemy any Man can have, and yet how bravely every Christian is to
behave himself toward such an Enemy, our Lord tells us; he must Love or bear
him good Will, desire his Welfare or Happiness, do him all the Good and
Charitable Offices he can, Pray to God to give, or bestow all manner of
Blessings upon him, and to Forgive all the Wrongs he has done him. This,
because it is a Duty that has some Difficulty in it, he presses us to the
Performance of, with the most weighty and persuasive Arguments, Love your
Enemies, That ye may be the Children Verse. 45.
of your Father which is in Heaven, for he makes his Sun to Rise on the Evil,
and on the Good, and sends Rain on the Just, and on the Unjust; hereby you
will prove your selves be the Children of God, show that you resemble, or are
like that most excellent Being, who is kind and bountiful to all Men, even the
most Profane and Wicked, that are his Enemies, and Discover themselves so to
be, by their wilful and open contempt of his Laws, who though they received
their Being, and all their Enjoyments from his Bounty, will hardly give him a
good Word, or pay him any Respect at all, but Blaspheme oftener than they Praise
him, Curse him more than they Pray unto him, Affront him oftener than they Adore
him, and yet so admirable is his Goodness, that he not only lets such Vile and
Ungrateful Wretches as these Live, and Enjoy the Light, though they are
Unworthy of it, but showers down his Blessings upon them, gives them an equal
share at least, if not greater Plenty of these outward Enjoyments, than he
Communicates to the Good and Righteous; Propose therefore his great example to
your selves, think it your Glory to Love and do Good to your Enemies, because
the God you Worship is pleased to Treat his so, and cannot but take great
Delight in those brave and generous Souls that Imitate him therein, own them
for his Children, and give them a Blessed Portion in his Heavenly Kingdom; but
if you refuse to do this (says Christ) you Dishonor me, and Degrade your
selves, For if ye Love them which Love you, what Reward have ye? Do not even
the Publicans the same? If you confine all your Love and Kindness to your
Friends, to them that bear you good Will, and do you good Offices, you can
expect but a small Reward from my Father and Me for such Love as this, it being
that to which Nature it self inclines, and Common Gratitude prompts you:
Besides, this Low and Abject Charity, which is produced and preserved by Mutual
Offices of Friendship and Respect, Ranks you amongst the Worst and most Impious
Men, the very Publicans, whom all the Pious Men of your Nation think such
Scandalous Sinners, that they will have no Civil Commerce, much less any
Religious Communion or Society with them. Thus our Lord Commands us to Love our
Enemies, and these are the weighty Arguments with which he urges us to the
doing of it.

Suppose then his Royal Highness be a Papist, and as such, an Enemy to us that
profess the Reformed Religion, (though neither of these is Certain) must we not
as our Lord here commands us, Love, and Bless, and do him Good, and Pray for
him? yes certainly if we will be Christians, obey the Command of our Lord,
imitate our Heavenly Father, and obtain the blessed Portion and Inheritance,
which he has provided for all his obedient Children. Consider then, you that
would Exclude him, is your Black Bill, by which you would degrade him from his
Honor, deprive him of his Birthright, banish him his Native Country, any
token of your Love to him? If this be your Kindness and Good Will, how cruel
and implacable is your Enmity or Hatred? Christian love or charity, as St. Paul
tells you, suffers long and is 1 Corinthians. 13.
kind, disposes and obliges the Soul in which it is, to suffer or bear
injuries from others (especially his superiors) with patience and submission,
will not allow him to think any evil of, or do any to them, but endeavor to
melt and overcome them by kindness and good offices, by fair carriage, humble
deportment, and respectful behavior toward them: seeks not his own safety
by another danger, and rather suffer himself, than cause another to do it
unjustly, is so far from giving any unjust offense to any man, that he is slow
to wrath, and not easily provoked himself, or if he be so at any time, he is
very placable, ready and willing to be reconciled. But your Charity (if it may
be so called) would make the Duke suffer, and that most unjustly, that you may
not do it your selves, would lay the most intolerable Burden and Oppression
upon him, that you may bear nothing your selves; and therefore is unkind and
cruel, seeks your own safety by his ruin, your own gain and benefit by his
loss and injury, is so highly provoked upon bare suspicions and fears as not
only to think and imagine, but to attempt and endeavor to do him the greatest
evil or wrong that can be offered to him. So that instead of loving, you hate
him, instead of doing him good, you do him all the evil you can, and would do
him more if you could, whereby you wilfully transgress and contemn this Noble
and Royal Law of Christ, prove your selves not to be the Children of God, to
have none of his Mercy and Goodness in you, because he gives the Sun and the
Rain, temporal Blessings and Enjoyments to his Enemies, but you (if you could
bring your purpose about) would take from his Royal Highness (whom you suppose
to be your Enemy) that temporal Right and Inheritance, which undoubtedly
belongs to him, if he survive our present most Gracious Sovereign: Thereby also
you that are by profession the best of Christians rank your selves amongst the
Publicans and Sinners; for they love their Friends and hate their Enemies, and
so do you, And if ye love them that love St. Luke 6. 32.
you, what thank have ye? for Sinners also love those that love them.

Besides in this Law Christ commands us to Love those that are our Enemies, do
actually Hate, and Curse, Dispitefully use and Persecute us, but the Duke has
done none of these things, has not yet declared himself your Enemy by doing
any of you any Injury and it may be never will; so that in Reason and
Conscience you are obliged to Love, Honor, and Treat him as your Friend: But
instead of that, you have most Uncharitably suspected him for your Enemy, when
he gave you no cause to think him so, and upon that suspicion, behaved your
selves so Unjustly and Unhandsomely toward him, as is enough to make him your
Enemy though he were not, never intended so to be. Is this just and equal? Is
this Christian practice, first to suspect or suppose a Prince to be your Enemy,
and then offer him such Injuries and Indignities as are so far from being
Expressions of that Love, which Christ requires all that profess his Religion
to bear to their Enemies, that they are Demonstrations of the blackest Malice,
and most implacable Hatred? You should have stayed till his Royal Highness had
declared himself your Enemy, made it appear he Hated you by some Injurious or
Unjust action, and when he had done it, you should not have suffered your
selves to have been overcome with Evil, but have endeavored to overcome that
Evil with Good: You should have remembered what our Lord here requires of you,
and seeing you profess your selves his Servants and Disciples, have done
accordingly; for this New Way of loving your Enemy, by preferring a Bill of
Exclusion against him, that is, by attempting to ruin him, is such a Token or
Expression of your Love such a Pledge of your Kindness to him, that the Duke
has no reason to thank you for it, and is I am sure none of that love which
our Lord requires us to bear to our Enemies. If this be your behavior toward
a suspected, how would you treat a known and open Enemy.

To say your Project of Exclusion is an act of real Charity to the Duke, as it
would disable him from doing that injury to himself and others, which as a
Papist he would do, if the Crown should descend to him, besides, that it is to
Reproach him, is also to talk Idly, because Christ commands us to love our
Enemies, that is, those that bear us ill will, and do us Ill Offices, that hate
us in their hearts, and injure or wrong us in their actions, but by attempting
to Exclude the Duke, instead of loving him as your Enemy, which is to all men
of common sense a strange way of loving an Enemy, to take from him all power or
ability so to be: and yet this is all the Kindness you have for his Royal
Highness, that you would tie his hands, put the chains and fetters of Law upon
him, and thereby instead of an Enemy make him your Friend, whether he will or
no. This Love, if the Primitive Christians had been acquainted with it, would
have saved abundance of their Lives, but alas it is New and of Yesterday, and
therefore was not known nor heard of in their Days: The good Men Prayed for
their Enemies, Implored the Divine Goodness to Convert and Forgive them,
patiently endured the Wrongs and Cruelties they offered them, like their
Dearest Lord and Master, when they were Reviled, they Reviled not again, when
they Suffered they Threatened not, but Committed themselves to him that Judges
Righteously: or as St Paul describes their behavior 1 Cor. 4. 12, 13.
toward their Enemies, being Reviled we Bless, being Persecuted we Suffer it,
being Defamed we Entreat: Not a word in all this of a Bill of Exclusion to Tame
the Fierceness, Restrain the Cruelty of their Enemies, and take from them all
Power to hurt them, this is the New Mode of Loving Enemies, or rather
themselves. Speak the Truth then (as the old saying is) and shame the Devil!
Why should you dissemble with the World? It Is Evident you have no Kindness for
the Duke, but as Plain as any thing can be, that you Love your selves so
unreasonably, that you care not what becomes of him, can be content that he be
Miserable and Ruined, so your own Dear selves be but Safe and Happy. It is
indeed both Natural and Lawful for Men to Love themselves, but then they must
so manage and conduct that Love, that it be without Injury or Harm to others,
that whilst they are Kind to themselves, they be not Cruel and Unjust to, and
thereby Haters of their Neighbor, as you prove your selves to be by this
Project of Exclusion; and therefore call it, what it really is, not Christian
Charity, but Injurious Emnity or Hatred: You would be ashamed (I believe) to
Love all the other Papists, (which as such are your Enemies as well as the
Duke, supposing him to be one) in this manner, to Love them so as to deprive
them of their Birthrights; If not, this would Increase the Number of your
Enemies, and make them more Desperate and Implacable against you, but it would
be no Expression or Token of any true kindness to them, and if this be the Love
which our Lord requires all Christians to show to their Enemies, they would
have thought themselves more beholden to him, if he had Commanded them to Hate,
rather than to Love them in this manner.

Consider it Thirdly, in Reference to that great Duty, which our Lord makes the
Condition of our being his Servants or Disciples, If any Man will come after
me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross, and follow me. If any Man will
be a Christian, he must Renounce or Deny every thing that offers to tempt or
dissuade him from the Practice of that Piety and Holiness, which I require of
him, and be content to undergo any Sufferings or Afflictions, that befall him in
my Service, to part with every thing that is Dear to him in the World, when he
cannot keep it without Violating my Laws, or any part of them, nay to submit to
Death it self how shameful, Cruel, or Accursed soever it be, when he cannot
Live without Sinning against me: This I expect of every one that Imbraceth my
Religion, and whosoever performs this shall be no Loser by it, for I will
Reward him with a glorious Crown, and perfect Happiness, and a never Dying Life
in that Blessed place whither I go, when I have Finished the Work for which my
Father sent me into this World.

But the Excluders instead of denying themselves, Renouncing or Quitting their
own Right, Safety, or Profit, seek to secure it by denying the Duke his,
instead of bearing the Cross, they would lay it upon him, make him Suffer, that
they may not Suffer themselves, which is plainly to Renounce their Christianity
to declare openly that they are none of Christ's Disciples, for if any Man
(says he) will come after me, (be my Servant or Disciple, that is, a
Christian) let him deny himself and take up his Cross and follow me, Cheerfully
and Contentedly undergo any Sufferings or Afflictions, even Death it self, when
he cannot avoid them without Sinning against me: But they are so far from doing
it, that they would shift the Cross from themselves, and lay it upon his Royal
Highness, choose rather to be Persecutors, than the Persecuted, and so instead
of obtaining the Blessing promised to these, incur the Curse denounced against
them; for all Persecutors, all that Oppress, Injure, and Unjustly punish any
Person, are cruel and wicked Men, no good Man is, or can (whilst he continues
so) be a Persecutor, It being Impossible to be good, and to hurt good Men, at
the same time, and therefore he spoke well and wisely that said, Boni viri
Episcop. Syn: Dor. Crudelis Iniquitas p: 9:
Martyrs non faciunt, sed fiunt, good Men do not make Martyrs, but are made
so, it is the property of Wolves to Hurt, Tear, Dissipate, and Destroy, and of
the Sheep to be Torn and Destroyed, and by being hurt themselves to profit and
do good to others, which is also the property of true Christians, to be willing
to profit others, and not only not to do hurt to any, and to preserve others
(as far as they are able) from harm and injury, but also to do good to them
that hurt them, and to overcome that Evil with Good.

But the Authors and Promoters of the Bill of Exclusion are so loath to be made
Martyrs themselves, that they would make his Royal Highness so, if they could
have their Wills, he should be the only Sufferer, bear all the load of their
Injustice, and Oppression, and so they incur the Woe denounced by our Savior
against the Scribes and Pharisees, who Oppressed others to Ease themselves,
bound heavy Burdens upon Men's Backs, which they would not touch so much as
with one of their Fingers. These Men are so far from being willing to endure
hardship as good Soldiers of Christ Jesus, that they are for leading a soft
and easy Life, are continually upon the Watch to observe which way the Wind
blows, or Danger threatens them, that they may, by any means Just or Unjust,
block up all the Avenues, by which they have any Suspicion, it may make its
approaches to them. No longer than Christ Hugs and Embraces them, Dandles or
sets them in his Lap, will they be his Disciples, if they be not Caressed and
Treated with all possible Expressions of Love and Indearment, away they Run
from him, as if he was their greatest Enemy. They Suffer for Christ? They
Aspire after the Crown of Martyrdom? They take up the Cross? They may do it
that will for them, it is an Honor they are not Ambitious of, they are for
Sleeping in a whole Skin, had rather never go to Heaven, than pass thither
through much Tribulation, are so Scared at the Cross, that they think the worse
of themselves every time they remember that they were signed with it at their
Baptism, are afraid, lest as it puts them in mind, that they ought to bear it
when it comes, it should also hasten its approach, make it come the sooner upon
them, and so instead of an Imaginary, in the Event of things prove a real Cross
to them.

Have not these Men strange Opinions of our Lord? Do they believe him able to
Reward those, that do and suffer his Will, that Live Innocently, and Suffer
patiently? No, no! they think him such a mean and petty Prince, that he cannot
Remunerate the Faith and Patience of his Servants, and look upon all, that He
and his Apostles have said in Favor of Suffering, as absurd and unreasonable
Assertions, for it is certain that they Pronounce the Pious Sufferers Blessed,
and call upon them to Rejoice, and be exceeding glad of them: Blessed are they
St. Mat. 5. 10.
(says our Lord) that are Persecuted for Righteousness Sake, for theirs is the
Kingdom of Heaven. Blessed are ye when Men shall Revile you, Verse 11.
and Persecute you, and shall say all manner of Evil against you falsely for my
Sake: Rejoice and be Verse 12.
exceeding Glad, for great is your Reward in Heaven, for so Persecuted they the
Prophets which were before you. Behold (says St. James) we count Chapter 5th. 11.
1 Epist. 3. 14.
them happy which endure. And if ye suffer for Righteousness sake, happy are ye
(says St. Peter) and be not afraid of their Terror, neither be troubled.
Beloved think it not strange concerning Chapter 4th. 12, 13, 14.
the Fiery Trial, which is to Try you, as though some strange thing happened unto
you, But Rejoice in as much as ye are Partakers of Christ's Sufferings, that
when his Glory shall be Revealed, ye may be Glad also with exceeding Joy. If ye
be Reproached for the Name of Christ, Happy are ye, for the Spirit of Glory,
and of God Rests upon you. These words had such Influence upon the Primitive
Christians, that they Courted Martyrdom with as Vehement and Longing desires,
as ever the Ambitious did the Honors, or the Covetous the Riches of the World.
When the most Cruel Edicts were Published against them, they did not care to
Fly, or Hide themselves from the Fury of their Persecutors; when the (to
others) Dreadful Sentence of Death was passed upon them, they gave their Judges
Thanks; in the midst of the most exquisite Torments they did nothing but Sing
and give Thanks, and Expired with Praises and Adorations of God. St. Babylas
Bishop of Antioch, as he was led to Martyrdom, broke out into these words of
Joy and Triumph, Return unto thy Rest Oh my Soul! for the Lord Dr: Patricks
Witnesses to Christianity part 2d. Page 646:
has dealt Bountifully with thee. When Liberatus and his Monks, who Defended
the Christian Faith against the Heresy of Arrius, were Condemned to be thrown
bound into a Ship full of Faggots, and there to be burnt in the midst of the
Sea, they Sung aloud this Hymn, Glory be to God in the highest, Behold now is
the acceptable time, behold now is the Day of Salvation, in which we Suffer
Punishment for the Faith of our God. St. Ignatius, as he was going to Rome to
be Devoured by Wild Beasts (that being the Death he was Condemned to, because
he would not Renounce the Faith of Christ) thought the time long, and the way
tedious, and expressed his passionate desire after it, Oh (said he) that I
might come to those wild beasts that are prepared for me, I heartily wish that
I may D: Cave Primitive Christian: part 2d: pa. 182:
presently meet with them, I would invite and encourage them speedily to devour
me, and not be afraid to set upon me, as they have been to others, nay should
they refuse it, I would even force them to it: I am concerned for nothing,
either seen or unseen, more than to Enjoy Jesus Christ: Let Fire, and the
Cross, and the rage of wild Beasts, the breaking of Bones, distortion of
Members, bruising of the whole Body, yea all the punishments, which the Devil
can invent, come upon me, so I may but Enjoy Jesus Christ. When Laurentius the
Deacon espied Sixtus the Bishop of Rome going to his Id. part 2d. page 183:
Martyrdom, he burst out into tears, and passionately called to him, saying,
Whither, Oh my Father, art thou going without thy Son? Whither so fast, O Holy
Bishop, without thy Deacon? Never did thou use to offer Spiritual Sacrifice
without thy Minister to attend thee, what have I done that might displease
thee? have thou ever found me degenerous and fearful? make Trial at least,
whether thou have chosen a fit Minister to wait upon thee.

By this their admirable courage, patience, and constancy, they did the highest
Honor to our Lord and his Religion, Shamed and Confuted all the Clamours,
Reproaches, and false Accusations, that were brought against it, Convinced the
wise or intelligent, that Christianity was a Divine and Holy Doctrine, because
it inspired the Professors of it with such undaunted courage and greatness of
mind, as made them despise, not only the pleasures and delight, but the
terrors and miseries of the World, rendered them, not only content to Dye, but
desirous of, and in love with Death, caused them, not only patiently to bear,
but to Triumph and Rejoice in those horrid Torments, which those that stood by
trembled and were affrighted to see them Endure. This conduced mightily to the
increasing the Church, brought in Numerous, or rather Innumerable Converts to
it, till the greatest part of the World became Christian and humbly adored the
Crucified Jesus. The care and concern of Christians then, consisted but of
these two parts, to live without Sin, and to Dye without Murmours or
Complaints; their Religion was composed of these two admirable ingredients,
Innocence and patience; this was their study, to let their Conversation be, as
became the Gospel of Christ, and to be conformed, as much as they could, both
to the Life and Sufferings of Jesus; They were neither so base, nor timorous,
as to endeavor to shift the Cross from themselves, and lay it upon others,
they scorned to do any unjust thing, to decline suffering, never attempted to
deprive any Prince, because they knew him to be an Heathen, and feared he would
be a Persecutor of them; This, this was their great care to live and dye in the
Lord, to Glorify him by a pure and unspotted Life, and by a Pious or Godly
Death.

Hereby also they gained great Honor to themselves, rendered their names and
memories precious and immortal; for the Church was careful to do all Lawful
honor to the Saints or Martyrs, to those brave and worthy Persons, who living
shined as lights in the World by their Exemplary virtues, and dying sealed the
truth of Christianity with their Blood, had that ardent love for our Lord, that
no dangers, nor sufferings, nor torments, nor miseries, could lessen or
overcome that Zeal for his Religion, which no Injuries, Reproaches, nor
Persecutions could Extinguish. The Christians used to meet at the place where
such eminent Persons Suffered for the Faith, or where their Bodies, that were
Slain for the Testimony of Jesus, were Interred, and make Orations in praise of
them, commemorate their piety and sufferings, praise God for the excellent
gifts and graces he conferred upon them, and Exhort one another to transcribe or
imitate their Faith, and Piety, and Patience.

But this was the least and meanest Part of their Reward, for as by Sufferings
for Christ, they gained Honor in this, so a brighter Crown and greater Rewards
in the other World; for it is Evident that our Lord in the Words I mentioned
before, declares that they which are Persecuted for Righteousness Sake, shall
not only have a Reward, but a great Reward in the Kingdom of Heaven, which must
in Reason signify something more than other Christians have, otherwise they
that are not, would be as Blessed, as they that are Persecuted, nay more Happy,
because they would (without being Miserable in this) obtain Crowns as Glorious,
and Rewards as great as they in the other World: the Apostle also Affirms, It
is a Faithful saying, if we be 2 Timothy 2. 11, 12.
Dead with him, we shall also Live with him, if we Suffer, we shall also Reign
with him, if we Deny him, he also will Deny us: And if they that Suffer with,
or for, shall Reign with him, and they that deny him, to escape Suffering,
shall be disowned or denied by him, every Man, that believes he Reigns in
Heaven, and considers what a Blessed and Desirable thing it is to Reign and be
Glorified there with him, instead of being Affrighted at it, will think it most
Prudent and Reasonable to deny himself, take up his Cross, and follow him, to
part with every thing that is Dear, to Suffer every thing that is Dreadful to
him here, when he cannot keep the one, nor avoid the other without Sin, that he
may obtain such a transcendent Reward, and so admirable or illustrious an
Exaltation: This will Teach him to Reckon with St. Paul, That the Sufferings of
this present time, are not Worthy to be compared Romans 6. 18.
with the Glory that shall be Revealed in him; the present Suffering or
Affliction, as he tells us elsewhere, being Light, and but for a Moment, but
the Glory Great and Durable, a far more Exceeding and Eternal weight of Glory.

And as the Holy Scriptures make such High and Noble Offers to all that Suffer
for Christ, so it is certain the Primitive Church (which was the best Expounder
of Scripture) thought the Martyrs had a greater Reward than other Pious
Christians, an Additional Coronet over and above the great Crown of
Righteousness, and accordingly St. Cyprian speaks of two Epist. Martyribus and
Confess. Christ: ad finem.
Crowns, the one white, as the Gracious Recompense of good Works, of their pure
and unspotted Lives, the other purple, as the Glorious Reward of their Dying
for the Faith of Christ. But however that is, the Apostle puts it out of doubt,
that there are Degrees of Glory, and Different Rewards in Heaven, There is one
Glory of 1 Cor: 15: 41. 42.
the Sun, and another Glory of the Moon, and another Glory of the Stars; for
one Star differs from another Star in Glory, so also is the Resurrection of
the Dead: And if there be different Rewards after this Life, it is Reasonable
to believe the Blessed Martyrs have the most sparkling Crowns, and the biggest
Recompense in the Glorious Regions above, because they gave the highest
Testimony of their Love and Zeal for Christ, by Dying for him.

It Is not then so Miserable and Despicable a thing, as the Excluders think it,
to take up the Cross and follow Jesus, to suffer all manner of Injuries,
Oppressions, Miseries, nay Death it self for his Sake, because he has Promised
great Rewards to them that do it, and having all Power both in Heaven and
Earth, he must needs be able to accomplish, or make good that Promise. It Is
true indeed, no Man ought to part with his Life, or Estate, when he can keep
them Innocently; He Suffers as a Fool that does it, when there is no Danger of
Sinning, if he Suffer not; But to use any Unjust or Sinful Arts to free our
selves from Suffering, such as the Project of Exclusion is, must needs be
highly Impious and Unchristian. For Gods Sake let us keep to the same Laws of
Christ, do the thing that is Right, and leave the rest to his Watchful and
Gracious Providence; then if we Suffer, our Innocence will be our Comfort and
Support, and we shall have the Blessed hope of passing by Death to the Rich and
most Happy Inheritance provided for us in Heaven. Let us Labor to be good, to
lead the Pure and Pious Lives our Religion requires of us, and then we can have
no Just Cause to Tremble or be Afraid to Dye: The Living (says Solomon) know
that they must Dye, and that they can by no Art or Means avoid it: And seeing
we must do it, can we ever Dye more Honorably, Bravely, and Christianly, than
for owning the Holy Faith and Religion of our Dear Redeemer, who gave himself
to Death, the most bitter and shameful Death of the Cross for us? So that we
have his Example to invite, the Noble Army of Martyrs to animate or encourage,
and the great Rewards they are possessed of to engage us patiently to bear the
Cross, when our Lord is pleased to send it.

It Is certain that as the Laws now are, no Man can be deprived either of his
Life or Estate, merely for professing the Reformed Religion; and therefore
whilst they continue we are as safe and secure as we can desire to be: So that
till they are changed, no Man can Suffer for that, and it will be a very
difficult undertaking to change them, because the Laws in Favor of our
Religion cannot be Abolished, or taken Off, but by consent of Parliament, and
it will be no easy thing for a Popish Prince (if at any time such an one comes
to the Crown) to get a Parliament that will do it, because the Knights and
Burgesses that serve in Parliament (without whose consent, according to our
present Constitution, no Laws can be either Made or Abolished) are not chose by
the Prince, but by the People, who are so far from Electing Papists, that they
are too prone to Choose Men of the other Dangerous extreme, and so Ruin us that
way. But if either the Prince should by his writ Summon, or the People so
forget themselves as to Elect any Papists, yet when they are so Called and
Elected, they cannot Sit (as the Laws now are) till they have openly, and in
the most solemn manner Renounced their Religion, which no Men of any Honor or
Conscience will do: If it be said they may have Dispensations from his Holiness
to take any Oaths, and make any Declarations to Capacitate them to Sit in
Parliament, I Demand of them that say so, why the Popish Lords, who left the
House upon that Act, did not make use of that Expedient to evade the Law? there
is no question but they might have had Dispensations to do it, and therefore
their leaving the House satisfies me, that they thought no Dispensations could
Warrant, or make it Lawful for them, so to Renounce and Abjure their Religion.
We are as safe then already as Laws can make us, and they that are so busy to
get new ones, trouble themselves to no purpose, for if those we have at present
cannot secure our Religion, no other can do it. Whilst the Laws then continue
as they are (and for my part I do not apprehend how they can be changed) we
cannot Suffer, but if these (that are a Safeguard and Defense to us) be at any
time Removed, and the Bloody Laws in Favor of the Romish Church Restored, we
must be content, as the Ancient and Modern Martyrs have done before us, to
Suffer for the Truth, not doubting but he that calls us to them, will support
us under our Sufferings, not let us be tempted above what he will make us able
to bear, and Reward us abundantly for them in his Heavenly Kingdom: And how can
we Murmur or Repine to bear that Cross, that will procure an Immortal Crown, or
think that a sad and cruel Death, that will be our Conduct to a Blessed and
Eternal Life?

Besides, this may be a means to restore our Nation to its ancient Piety, to
recover it out of that deplorable Profaneness and Debauchery into which it is
lapsed; for the hypocrisy of the last Age has produced open Atheism and
Irreligion in this, and the merciful God having tried to reclaim us by other
means, and those very Sharp and Calamitous, as War, and Plague, and Fire, which
effecting no cure or amendment upon the major part of the Nation, it may be his
pleasure (before he utterly forsake or cast us off) to see what the patience
and sufferings of Martyrs will do toward our Reformation; for this was the
great instrument of converting the World from Heathenism to Christianity, and
therefore may be very effectual to reduce Christians by Profession, from
Heathen to Christian Practice, to engage them to live up to the excellent rules
of their Religion; for when lewd and vicious Persons see wise and good Men
choose rather to dye, than to do wicked and unlawful things, prefer their
happiness in the other, before all their enioyments, in this World, chearefully
leave all that is dear to them upon Earth, in hopes to reign with their Lord
and Savior in Heaven, though they do at first like those fools the wise Man
speaks of, account their life Madness, and their end to be without Honor, yet
when they come to consider better of it, they will conclude there is great
danger in Sin, because such wise persons would not commit it, to save so
precious Jewels as their lives, but chose rather to dye innocent, than to live
profane and wicked, be convinced there are great rewards provided for the
Righteous after this Life, because Men so intelligent would not but upon good
grounds, and the most rational evidence be persuaded to do so great, and suffer
so dreadful things in hope of obtaining them: And when they see with what
admirable courage, invincible patience, undaunted resolution, perceive with
what transports of joy they go to their Death, kissing the stake, and courting
the flames prepared to consume their Bodies, because they look for a blessed
Resurrection, and believe their souls will ascend by them, like Elijah in his
fiery Chariot, to the Mansions of Glory, This produces in them an high esteem
and admiration of true Piety and Holiness, because they effect such admirable
things, and from admireing them in these, they proceed to love and practice
them themselves, that being holy in all manner of conversation, as he that has
called them is holy, they may be fit to Suffer for, and to Reign with him in
Heavenly bliss and happiness. So that the sufferings of the just are
Instruments to convert the Wicked: and from the Piety they practiced in their
Life; and the patience they showed at their Death, they learn to lead a good
and Christian Life, the casting them into the Fire (though contrary to the mind
or intention of the barbarous Persecutors,) is a means to inlighten others, and
they that came to see the blessed Martyr Dye, go away confirmd or settled in the
Faith, nay resolved to dye for it. Thus the Blood of the Martyrs is the Seed of
the Church, bringing forth by the blessing of God a plentiful Harvest of new
Converts; and therefore, as it is a most wicked, so it is a most imprudent
attempt to endeavor to destroy the true Religion, by Persecuting and putting
the most eminent professors of it to Death, because their Sufferings invite and
allure others to it, and drive none but Hypocrites, and weak or foolish People
from it.

It Is your Wisdom then as well as duty to suffer Innocently, rather than to
decline it sinfully, to bear the Cross your selves, rather than lay it so
unjustly upon his Royal Highness, because our Lord pronounces that blessed,
and promises a great Reward to them that do it, but this has a curse
denounced against it, will bring the most fearful punishment upon them that are
guilty of it; by that you will show your selves Christians, this will prove you
Persecutors; for they that oppress and wrong others, upon what color or
pretense soever they do it, are any thing rather than Christians, and instead
of being numbered amongst the Righteous, shall have their Portion amongst the
Cruel and Unjust, be the objects of his wrath and displeasure, Who ordains
his Arrows against the Persecutors. Ps. 7: 14:


Compare it Lastly with that Assertion of St. Paul, that no Evil must be done
that good may come, and both the Sinfulness and Danger of Rom: 3: 8:
your Project of Exclusion, will be very Evident, for of them that do Evil,
that good may come, the Apostle says, Their Damnation is Just: They shall
(without Repentance) be Punished Eternally for it, and it is Just they be so
Punished. By Evil, the Apostle means Moral Evil, the Evil of Sin, any thing
that is absolutely or in its own Nature Sinful and Wicked, no such Evil as this
may ever be done for the attaining any good whatsoever; if it be, the Apostle
tells them that do it, what they are to expect from God, as their Recompense,
even Just Damnation: We know not any greater good (says that excellent
Casuist, Bishop Sanderson) than the Sermon 2d: pa: 30:
Glory of God, we scarce know a lesser Sin (if any Sin may be accounted little)
than an Harmless, Officious lie, yet may not this be done, no not for that!
will you speak Wickedly for God, and talk Deceitfully Job: 13: 7:
for him. If not for the Glory of God, then certainly not for any Inferior
end, not for the saving of a Life, not for the Conversion of a Soul, not for
the Peace of a Church, and (if even that were possible too) not for the
Redemption of a World, no Intention of any end can warrant the choice of Sinful
means to compass it: But your attempt to Exclude his Royal Highness from
Succeeding his present Majesty, is the committing great and manifest Oppression
and Injustice, the Robbing an Innocent person of his Right, the Doing that to
him, which you would not have Done to your selves, and therefore absolutely, or
in its own Nature Sinful, Wicked, and Unlawful; and it is intended for a good
end, to preserve the King and the Established Religion from the Impious
Attempts of the Church of Rome to Destroy both: So that you do Evil, a great
Evil, an Evil Aggravated (as I said before) by the Dignity of the Person
against whom it is committed, and by the Transcendent Worth or Value of the
Right, or Property you would so Unjustly Rob or spoil him of, This great evil
you do, that good may come; therefore if you will believe the Apostle, without
Repentance, your Doom is Damnation, the Dreadful, but yet as he calls it, Just
Sentence, which you are to expect from the Righteous Judge, who is no respecter
of Persons, but perfectly hates, and will severely Punish all Wilful and
Presumptuous Sin in all the Actors of it, be they Public or Private, Persons
in Authority, or not, whatever they be, if they do Unjustly, the Vengeance of
God will be sure to pursue and overtake them. The Distinction of Papist and
Protestant make no difference in the Case; if a Papist do any Wicked or Unjust
thing, invade the Estate, Assasinate, or take away the Life of any Protestant
as an Heretic, though it be done with an Intention, that good may come, or
accrue to the Catholic cause by it, still he is a Thief and a Murderer, and
therefore the Just God will Inflict the most Dreadful Punishment or Damnation
upon him: And if on the other side, any Protestant, or Company of Protestants,
for the preventing of Popery, do Injury to, or Unjustly deprive any Papist of
his Right and Property, as an Idolater, that, or those Protestants,
notwithstanding the good end they propound to themselves in it, are Injurious
and Oppressors, and must look, that the Vengeance of God will come upon them
here, and that without Repentance their Portion will be amongst the Unjust
hereafter. And if there be any odds in the guilt, it is on the Protestants
side, such an one thus offending being more inexcusable than a Papist, because
he has better means of Instruction, for he has the Holy Scriptures in a
Language he understands to show him the Right Paths, the ways of Justice and
Honesty, and he acknowledges them to be the sole Rule by which he is to order
and conduct his Life and Actions, and therefore if he do any Unjust thing, he
has no Apology nor Excuse for it: But most Papists are deprived of this
advantage, they have not the Scriptures in a Language they understand, and
therefore are not so well Instructed in the Duty that God requires of them,
neither do they own them to be their Rule without Traditions, or the Unwritten
Word of God, which their Guides have both the Keeping and Expounding of, and
therefore they may easily be Imposed upon, told that is Just, or a Part of
their Duty, which is quite contrary to it, and so offend Ignorantly, which does
something extenuate or lessen their Guilt.

Supposing then (what you take for granted) that your Bill to set aside the
Duke would be for the good of the Nation, yet, it being absolutely Unjust and
Sinful, it is to do evil that good may come, and therefore, if St. Paul say
true, justly Damnable.

But what if you be mistaken? What if it be not for the good, but the injury,
and hurt, the mischief, and Ruin of the Nation? If thus, then you do Evil, and
no good comes of it, commit a great Sin to your own Eternal, and the Peoples
Temporal Ruin and Destruction, so that instead of Blessing and Praising, they
will have Just Cause to Revile and Curse you for it.

For let us suppose your Bill of Exclusion passed into a Law, and his Royal
Highness thereby deprived (as far as that can do it) of his Right: Will he sit
down patiently under so great an Injury? I believe him so Brave and Just a
Prince, that such a Wrong (though it would be a mighty Temptation) could not
provoke him to cast off either his Affection or Allegiance to the King; but yet
(if the Duke be, as you suppose him, a Papist) it would exasperate all the
Roman Catholics against the King, excite their Rage, prompt them to Revenge
the Injury done to a Prince of their Religion, make them Desperate, watch all
Opportunities, try all ways to Assasinate and Destroy him. We see to our
Horror and Amazement, how the Kings most Just Refusal to consent to that
Impious Project of Exclusion, has Irritated the Zealous Faction, blown up
their Rage and Malice to that Damnable height, that they had designed a more
Dreadful Exclusion, to send the King himself, and his Royal Brother out of the
World, by a most Cruel and Barbarous Death, that what their Wicked Votes could
not, their Murdering Bullets should Effect, had not the Watchful Providence,
and the Adorable Goodness of our God Preserved the Royal Victims appointed for
the Slaughter, and by a mighty hand Rescued them from the Snare, and the Ruin
laid for them; and I take his Majesty's Deliverance from this Hellish
Conspiracy, as a Remarkable Token of Gods Approbation, and Reward of his Royal
Justice and Integrity in Refusing the Bill.

And if the Kings just denying his assent to it, could so provoke and inrage
the admirers of it against him, how would the passing of it have Irritated and
Roused the Romish Faction? Would they not have filled Heaven and Earth with
Complaints of, and Outcries against it? Have Published Invectives, and
Proclaimed the Wickedness of it to all the Christian World, to the perpetual
Reproach and Dishonor of our Nation, nay have meditated Revenge, entered into
the most Dangerous Confederacies, and took Counsel together to Destroy the
King, for to such Black and Cursed attempts as these, they are, God knows, too
Prone and Inclined, when they have no Just Provocation given them to Instigate
or Prompt them thereunto; But this (in their Apprehension) would have Justified
all manner of Treasons and Conspiracies, made them not only Lawful, but in the
highest Degree Meritorious, they would have thought they did God the best and
most acceptable Service, when they cut off so Unjust a Prince, who was so Cruel
and Injurious as to deprive his own, nay his only Brother, of so great and
undoubted a Right:

It Is certain this would have put them upon frequent Treasons, and Attempts
against the King, and who knows but it might have provoked that God, who Loves
Righteousness, and hates Iniquity or Unjust Dealing, (if not more, yet at
least as much in Princes as other Men,) to withdraw his Watchful Providence,
and Gracious Protection from him, to dismiss that Guard of Angels, which have
hitherto Defended his Sacred Person, and most Precious Life, from all those
Bloody Villains, of what Sect or Profession soever, that have Ventured to
Attempt any thing against it.

So that your Bill of Exclusion, instead of Preserving, would have Endangered
the King, instead of being a Safeguard and Defense to him, would have exposed
his most Sacred Majesty to Popish Rage and Cruelty, nay, which is Infinitely
more Dreadful, to the Divine Anger or Displeasure; And being not for the Safety
of the King, it cannot be for the good of the People.

Besides, as it would be the Mother of Secret Conspiracies, so in all
Probability it would produce open Attempts, Cruel Wars, and Hostile Invasions
of the Nation: For his Holiness would Aggravate the Injury done by it to the
Catholic Faith, and a Prince (as you believe) Converted to it, Employ all his
Interest and Authority with the Princes Professing it, to Revenge the
Indignity, to Unite their Forces to Punish and Destroy so Impious a Nation,
that contrary to all Laws Divine and Humane, all Religion and Honesty, had
Disinherited or Deprived a Brave and Innocent Prince of his Right: So that this
Act would have Robbed our Nation of all its Honor, Safety, and Tranquillity, and
we should have been in continual Fear of Popish Plots and Insurrections at
home, and Invasions from abroad, and must for our Security have had a Constant
Fleet at Sea, and a Standing Army at Land, which would exceedingly Impoverish
and Exhaust the People; for the Distractions would be so great, the Taxes and
Impositions so heavy, that Trade would have been little or inconsiderable; and
the Charges or Expenses high; Soldiers cannot Live without their Pay, and are
apt both to Plunder and Mutiny if they have it not, and how should the People
get Money to pay them, when Trade, that is the only Means to bring it in, is
stopped and decayed. We cannot forget what an Intolerable Burden and Oppression
to the Nation the Rebel Army was in the late times; for many Families were
utterly Beggered and Ruined by it, and others so Sunk and Crushed in their
Estates, that they have hardly yet Repaired the Losses they then Sustained:
That Army like the Catterpillers and Locusts of Egypt Devoured every Green
thing, greatly Consumed or Exhausted the Wealth of the Nation, and when it
pleased God of his Infinite Goodness to Restore his Majesty, what vast Sums,
and a mighty Treasure, were expended to purchase our Deliverance from those
Harpies? But this Bill of yours would have Returned us to our former Slavery
and Misery, it would have been a great and certain Charge, but no sure Defense
or Security to the Nation; For by what Arts or Means could Papists be prevented
or kept, not only from having Commands, but from Listing themselves in this new
Army? It Is true indeed, the Known and Eminent Papists might easily be rejected
or shut out, but are there no Secret Papists, none that Entertain the Romish
Faith in their Hearts, though they do not Confess it to any but their own Party
with their Mouths? How then shall such Recusants as these be Convicted or Found
out? Will you tender them the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, require them
to recieve the Blessed Sacrament according to the Custom of the Church of
England, and to be present at the Public Prayers? For all these things, you
believe, they may have Dispensations from the Pope! And being many of them what
they are neither known nor suspected to be, Wolves in Sheeps Clothing, Papists
in Heart, Protestants in outward Appearance and Profession, they must needs be
the more Dangerous, and have the greater Opportunity to do mischief, and so we
shall give Men wages to Destroy us, Arm our Enemies instead of our Friends, who
instead of using them in Defense of the King, will Employ them against him.

But suppose none of all this to happen, but all this new Army, when they are
Listed, be true to the King, and the Established Religion, yet what Assurance
can there be they will continue so? Did never any Desert their Religion, nor
Depart from their Allegiance in hopes of Gain and Advancement? Are Soldiers
generally Men of that Conscience and Integrity, as to Refuse a Bribe? To draw
their Swords and Kill the Wicked Men, that Tempt their Faith with Golden
Offers, and Tender them ready Money, if they will promise their Assistance,
when it is required? If they be, all Histories be-ly, and he did them great
Injury, that said, There is no Truth nor Honesty in them that follow the Camp.

And if his Royal Highness should Survive the King, would this Bill of yours,
if it were passed into a Law, Scare him from Demanding and Endeavoring to
Obtain the Crown, or Deter the Army (if they had any Inclination to it) from
affording him their Assistance to gain that Right, which was so Unjustly and
Wrongfully taken from him? Would he not have a great part of Europe to join
with him? If he be what you suppose him, Italy, and France, and Spain, would
lend him their Valiant and Numerous Legions to Fight for him, besides all the
Roman Catholics, nay, all the Loyal Protestants in the Three Kingdoms would
Venture their Lives to Seat him on the Royal Throne, which his Renowned
Ancestors filled before him. So that when it came to the Trial, this admired
Expedient of yours would not Answer your Expectations, instead of a two Edged
Sword to cut off Popery, it would prove a Wooden Dagger that could do no Feats
at all: the Duke has more Courage and Resolution than to be Scared with such a
Bug as that, and however you may flatter your selves, you would be too Weak to
make Head against the mighty Forces with which he would Attaque you, the
passing your Bill would in the highest degree provoke and exasperate him, but
do neither You, nor the Nation any Service at all.

Now that which would be so Dangerous to the King, so Chargeable to the People,
put them to vast Expense, and all to no purpose, cannot be for the the good of
the Nation; and therefore your Project of Exclusion would be a doing Evil, not
that Good (as you suppose) but that Evil, Mischief, and Ruin may come, and so
you Transgress or Sin for no Benefit or Advantage, but as most Offenders do, to
your Ruin here, and Destruction hereafter.

It deserves also to be considered, whether this Device would not be so highly
Pernicious and Mischievous as to change the Monarchy, from being Successive, to
be Elective, that is, from the best to the worst sort of Monarchy? I cannot see
but it would; for to pass this Bill into a Law, is in effect to give the House
of Commons the Donation or Disposal of the Crown; for if they Disinherit One,
why may they not Deprive a Second, and a Third of the Royal Family, and make as
many Bills of Exclusion as they Please? for whenever they take Offense, or
entertain Prejudice against the next Heir, it is but prefering such a Bill
against him, branding him with the hateful Name of Papist, Voting him an Enemy
to the Nation, Loading him with Black and Odious Accusations, whether true or
false it matters not, so they do but seem to believe them themselves, and can
but persuade the People to believe them, which is an easy thing to do, because
they are Naturally Suspicious, very Prone to entertain Ill Opinions of those
that do, or are to Govern or Rule over them, and having gained the Multitude,
it is but Watching Opportunities, taking Advantage of the Kings Necessities,
when his great Affairs require supplies, to give him none, till he pass the
Excluding Bill. In this Case what can the King do? If he Dissolves them, and
calls another, the People will Elect them again, and Encouraged by their
adhereing to them, they will be more Resolute, and Importunate, till they gain
their point, and by their immovable Obstinacy tire out the Royal Patience, and
so force it to yield, which they may do as often as they please, and the doing
of it will both entail War and Misery upon the Nation, unless we will be so
unreasonable, as to suppose that the Excluded Princes will be so Cowardly and
Poor Spirited, as to sit down Patiently under so great an Injury, and not
Attempt to recover by Arms that Right, which was so Unjustly taken from them;
and also make the Monarchy Elective, which is upon Diverse Accounts the worst
sort of Monarchy.

First, as it Tempts the Prince Reigning to use all kind of Arts and Means to
Enrich himself, and fill his Royal Treasury; for being uncertain whether any of
his Children and Descendents shall be Elected in his place, when he retires
into the shades of Death, that Natural Affection for, and Care of his Royal
Issue, which is Common to Kings as well as other Fathers, will strongly incline
and prompt him to Watch all Opportunities, to cast about and contrive all ways
to amass all the Wealth and Treasure he can, that if he be desirous his Son
should succeed him, he may leave him Money enough to bribe the Electors, or if
he do not design that, yet that he may provide for all his Children so, that
they may Live in that State, Honor, and Magnifience, which become the
Offspring of a King, and will cast no Contempt nor Reproach upon him, when he
is Dead and gone.

This will produce frequent Oppressions of the People, and the most grievous
Rapines and Exactions, expose all Places and Offices, Sacred, Civil, and
Military, to Sale; so that they who have nothing but Money to Recommend them,
shall be preferred, and Honest and Deserving Men, that have either less Money or
more Conscience than to give Bribes, will be Rejected, or put by, to the great
injury or damage of the State: And they that pay dear for their Places will be
sure to make the most they can of them, both because they cost them so, and
they are uncertain how long they shall hold them, Princes being Mortal as well
as other Men, and when they Dye, most, if not all the Preferments and great
Places they enjoy under, Dye with them.

The public Treasure also, instead of being Employed for the Common good, will
be Converted to the Princes private use: when other Nations do Injury and
Violence to his Subjects, and he seems to be Offended at it, and it may be
really is so, and Aggravates the wrong to draw Money from the People, under
pretense of Revenging of it, yet having got it into his hands, he only talks
high, threatens them that did the Injury, expostulates the Case, upbraids them
with their Unjust Dealing, or it may be demands Reparation, whereupon if they
acknowledge their Error, and promise to be Just for the future, he puts up the
Injury, though never so Grievous or Ruinous to his own Subjects, and fills his
Coffers with the Treasure, that was given him to do them Right. To such mean
and unbecoming shifts are Elective Monarchs tempted, which must needs inrage
their People, and put them upon frequent Tumults and Insurrections, for being
impoverished and exhausted by continual Rapines, and Oppressions they grow
Desperate, Resolve to Venture their Lives, nay, which are infinitely more
precious, their Souls (Rebellion being a most horrid and damnable Sin) to
revenge the Injuries done them by their Prince, who instead of a Father is so
unjust and injurious to them: By which means both the Prince and People Suffer,
They in their Estates and Properties, He in his Honor, Safety, and
Tranquillity. And that must needs be a miserable and distempered State, where
neither Prince nor People are safe and happy, but he makes a Prey of them, and
they watch their opportunity to Depose and Ruin him.

But these mischiefs, and miseries are not so incident to Successive
Monarchies, rightly Constituted, as our is, for when the Prince knows, and is
assured, that the Crown shall descend to his Royal Offspring, (if he have
any,) or to the next of his Family, he has no temptation to oppress his
People, no necessity to use any unworthy Arts to enrich himself, to fill his
Coffers with the Treasures of unrighteousness: He prefers the public good
before his private gain, his Subjects are secured in their Rights and
Properties, protected from the Injuries and Violence of Foreigners, and from
Rapines and Oppressions at home. The Prince is careful by a just and merciful
Government to preserve his own, and the Honor of his Family, that the
admirable Virtues of his Illustrious Predecessors may raise the Expectation,
and indear the Affection of the People to the next Heir, take from them all
doubt or fear but he will prove a brave Prince, because Descended from the best
of Kings, who did not only (as far as Mortals can do it) resemble God in Power
and Greatness, but in Justice, Mercy, Clemency and Goodness, nothing being so
great an Incentive, so mighty a provocation, so prevailing an inducement to
engage a young Prince to be Just and Virtuous, as that his Ancestors were so
before him, and he will blush to Inherit their greatness, if he be not Studious
to transcribe and imitate their Royal Goodness. This has been remarkably
verified or fulfilled in our present most Gracious Sovereign, and the three
foregoing Princes, who did not only transmit the Crown, but their incomparable
Virtues to one another. As for that Renowned Princess, Queen Elizabeth, her
Royal Virtues have imbalmed her Memory, rendered it sweet and precious to the
English Nation, and she will be remembered with Honor by late and still
distant Ages: Some few things indeed seem a little to cloud the Glory of her
Reign, but they are nothing in respect of the Great, Numerous, and Eminent
Blessings the Nation enjoyed under her wise, and wary Government; those
possibly were extorted from her by the difficulty of the Times, and the
necessity of her Affairs, and the misguided Zeal of some of her Favorites and
Counselors, but these made abundant recompense, or reparation for them,
rendered her revered and admired all over the Christian World, insomuch that
one of her Enemies Confessed her to be the Bravest, most Glorious, and
Fortunate Princess in the World.

Descend from her to King James, who Succeeded her, as in her Royal Dignity, so
in all her Virtues, a Prince of admirable Wisdom, Justice, and Clemency, so
great a Lover, so watchful a Preserver of Peace, that in his Reign the Nation
grew vastly Rich, and abounded so in Treasure, as if the precious Mines had
been removed from the Indies hither. What shall I say of King Charles the
First? No Eloquence can describe all his Encellencies, no Commendations reach
his transcendent Virtues, they are fitter for our silent Admiration, than our
imperfect and unequal Praises; never any Mortal approached nearer to Him, who
was more than Man, even God manifest in the Flesh, whilst he Lived he was a
Saint upon Earth, and dying was numbered amongst the prime Saints in Heaven,
His Enemies were such as are always Enemies to God and all goodness, (that is)
the Devil and his Agents, and they that deposed, and took away his precious
Life, would have done the same execrable Violence and Injury to the Son of God
himself, if he had fallen into their Barbarous and Bloody Hands. And our
present most Gracious Sovereign is equal to any of his Renowned Ancestors in
the Princely Virtues of Wisdom, Fortitude, Justice, Mercy, Peacefulness, and
the admirable sweetness and goodness of his Temper. So that I may Challenge all
the World to show me four such Princes, one after another, in any Elective
Monarchy, so Zealous Defenders of the true Religion, so Tender of their
Subjects Welfare, such Bountiful Patrons and Benefactors to them, that they did
what they could to preserve them in Peace, Piety, and Plenty, And if in any of
their Reigns, any of the People Suffered, and were Miserable, it was not the
Princes Injustice that made them so, but either their own, or their fellow
Subjects Stubbornness, Disobedience, and Turbulent or Ungovernable Temper, that
brought Calamity and Ruin upon them. And seeing Elective Princes have more, and
greater Temptations to Oppress and Injure their Subjects than those that are
Successive, the Elective must needs be the worst sort of Monarchy.

And it is so, Secondly, because exposed to manifold Factions, Discontents,
Quarrels, and Dangers: We see to what Heats, Factions, and Disorders, far
inferior Elections are subject, that they who are to choose a Parliament Man
for a County, or a Burgess for a Corporation, cannot all Agtee or Fix upon a
Person, but Run into Parties and Factions, one side being fierce and eager for
one Man, and the other for another, till they grow angry and enraged, hate and
revile one another, proceed from words to blows, and would break out into open
Hostility, were there not a Superior Authority, to which they are accountable
for such disorders, and therefore stand in awe of. How much more apt to Feuds
and Quarrels, to Factions and Discontents may they be reasonably supposed to
be, that have the Disposal of such a Jewel as a Crown, and whose Votes are of
that moment and concern, as to confer so precious, and by all, admired a
Treasure, as a Kingdom, and have none to awe or pacify them, the Electors
(during the Interregnum) being the chief and most courted Persons of the
Kingdom, and may (unless limited by Law) Protract or Spin out the Election as
long as they please, and accordingly as they are Biased by Affection, or
Interest, which may be of Dangerous Consequence to the Kingdom; For if any
Neighboring Prince prompted either by his Ambition, or provoked by Injuries
formerly received, take that Opportunity to Invade them, whilst they are
debating and quarrelling amongst themselves who shall be King, they are in all
probability surprised and ruined, for either they must agree and finish the
Election presently, (which the Prince that invades may easily prevent by
bribing some of the Electors) or else they must employ some great Person to
defend the Kingdom, till they have done it: He, if he succeeds in his
Expedition, and beats the Invader out, if he be not Elected King, calls them
Ungrateful, thinks himself affronted, his good Service slighted or contemned,
and having the Army under his Command may easily work upon them by gifts at
present, and promises of doing great things for them afterward, to afford him
their Assistance to make him King, by which means the Kingdom is imbroyl'd,
stained with the Blood, made miserable by the Slaughter and Destruction of the
Inhabitants, by the Ruin of Cities, and Vastation or Spoil of Provinces. But if
on the other side the Electors choose him King, then the other Grandees are
discontented, and think they have the greatest injury done them, every one of
them in his own Opinion esteeming himself, at least as deserving or worthy of a
Crown, as the Prince Elected, and therefore to revenge the contempt put upon
them, either break out into Rebellion, or invite the Invader to return, with
offer of their assistance to possess him of the Kingdom: So that between
Foreign Force, and Domestic Ambition, and Discontent, the poor People endure
all the Calamities of War, and linger out a tedious Life, made so by frequent
Oppressions, Terrors, and Discontents.

And as the People are miserable in Elective Monarchies, so the Prince is
unsafe, for there is nothing that great Spirits are more Ambitious of than a
Crown, and the Cardinals cannot possibly be more weary of a long Lived Pope,
than most of the Grandees in an Elective Kingdom hate a long lived Prince; the
reason is plain, because the Crown not being peculiar or appropriate to any one
Family, the more frequent Vacancies there are, the greater hopes they have of
being Elected, which is a mighty Temptation to Ambitious and Designing Men; to
use all the Villainous and Accursed Arts they can, by Poison, and other secret
ways, to Destroy, or Take off the Prince, that they may fill his Throne, whom
they have by the basest and most perfidious cruelty deprived of his Life and
Kingdom. The last King of Poland lay under great Fears, and Apprehensions, that
he should be Poisoned, and his Suspicions of it were so strong and vehement,
that all the Arguments his Friends could use, could not put them out of his
Thoughts; what reason he had for those fears, I know not, nor can I tell
whether his Death was procured by such detestable means, or no; but sure I am,
that many think such execrable things lawful, Regnandi causa, to possess
themselves of Empire and Sovereignty, and there is the greatest temptation to
practice them in Elective Monarchies, because upon the decease of the Prince
Reigning, every great Person in the Kingdom flatters himself, with hopes of
Succeeding him.

But the Successive Monarchies are freer from all these Evils and Dangers, for
upon the Death of the Royal Father, his Son, if he have any, or else the next
of the Family, is King, which makes our Law say, the King never Dies, because
upon the Decease of one, the next Heir is immediately King, the Ceremonies of
Crowning and Anointing do not confer the Royal Dignity upon him, but only
declare him to be what he was as soon as his Predecessor was dead, that is,
King, are no more but signs expressing to the People, that he is the person
ordained by God to Govern, or Rule over them, and to whom he requires them to
pay all due Honor, Loyalty, and Obedience. By this immediate Succession all
those Factions are avoided, which often prove mischievous and Ruinous to the
People, and so are all the Dangers and Miseries which attend an Interregnum,
that may happen in the interval between the Death of one, and the Election of
another Prince; no Foreign Enemy can have any encouragement to invade the
Kingdom upon the Death of the King, because the Royal Throne is filled by the
next Heir, who succeeds immediately, and the People have a new Prince ready to
protect and defend them (as the other did) from the Violence and Injuries of
all their Enemies.

Nor are the People only happier, but the Prince also is safer than in the
other sort of Monarchy, for the Crown when he dies descending to his Heirs,
what temptation can any, that is not of the Royal Family, have to attempt any
thing either against his Life or Government? If his Treason against the King
himself should succeed, (as by the just Judgment of God such Villainy seldom
does) unless he could destroy all the Royal Family, what is he the better? Will
not they revenge the Parricide in this, and the righteous God Punish the Actor
of it with the most horrible damnation in the other World? So that unless the
Princes Enemies be those of his own House, and they that have a Title to the
Crown, when he is Dead, conspire against, and make him away, which is more
horrid, unnatural, and villainous than it can possibly be in any other Traitors,
and that which, by the just Judgment of God, will bring the same barbarous and
bloody fate upon themselves, for how can any Prince sit safe or easy upon that
Throne, which he stained with the Blood of his Father, or Brother, or Kinsman?
Will not the guilt and horror of his Fact terrify and distract, make him
afraid with Cain, that every Man that sees will slay him? How is it possible
he should enjoy an happy day, or a quiet hour, that is haunted with an Evil
Conscience, groans under the smart and anguish of it, and has the guilt of
Royal and Innocent Blood lying as an intolerable load and burden upon his
Soul? So that, excepting these, no other Traitors can have any Inducement or
Encouragement to attempt the Princes Life, because they can propose to
themselves no probable benefit, or advantage by it; for if their Treason
prosper, and one of them seize, or possess himself of the Kingdom, he comes in
as a Thief, and Murderer, and Usurper, and as such is abhorred by all the
Honest and Loyal part of the Kingdom, who, to revenge the injury done to their
Lawful Prince, will assist the next Heir against the Usurper, and his own
party, by whose help he Killed, and took possession, prompted either by Envy at
his Greatness, or by Discontent, as not thinking themselves sufficiently
rewarded for the service they did him, will in a little time grow weary of, and
lend their helping hands to destroy him. And being most obnoxious to Factions,
Wars, and Treasons, the Elective must needs be the worst sort of Monarchy.

Now that which is Evil or Sinful in it self, and being done, cannot be
defended without a standing Army, (if that can do it) which would impoverish
and Ruin the Kingdom, and tends likewise to Subvert or change the Monarchy, is
to sin or do evil for evils sake, which is the highest wickedness, and if their
Damnation be just, as the Apostle says it is, that do evil, that good may come,
theirs must needs be more just and fearful, who do evil, that mischief, misery,
and ruin may come both upon Prince and People.

But though this Device be contrary to Christian, yet it is, they plead,
agreeable to Natural Subject 4.
Justice, though the Law of Christ condemns, yet the Law of Nature (they say)
allows and warrants it. This is a weak or idle pretense, for is not
Christianity a perfect Digest or Body of the Law of Nature? does it not contain
all the practical dictates of Right Reason? That it is, and does, may be proved
from the great end of, and the things contained in both these Laws: from the
great end of them, for is it the prime or chief design of the Law of Nature to
promote the common good of all Rational Beings, that is, the Glory of God, and
the Felicity of Mankind? This is equally the design of the Law of Christ, which
takes care, that God have his Honor, and that Men live happily: That God have
his Honor, the Honor of Adoration, Love, and Imitation: The first, as it
requires and directs, tells mankind they must Adore, or Worship the Glorious
Author of their Being, and shows them how to do it acceptably, enjoins the one
with the highest Sanctions, Offers of the greatest rewards, if they pay unto
God the Glory and Worship due unto him, Denunciations of the most dreadful
punishments, if they neglect or refuse to do it: Describes the other (the right
way of doing it) so plainly and intelligibly, that they cannot Err or Mistake
in it, without their own fault, those words of Christ being a full and plain,
both Precept, and Direction, for conducting this great Duty, God is a Spirit,
and they that Worship him must St. John 4. 14.
Worship him in Spirit and in Truth.

The honor of Love, by representing to us the transcendent Excellencies and
Perfections of his Nature, his admirable Bounty and Beneficence to us, and the
perfect Equity or Reasonableness of all his Precepts, that the first may
produce in us a due esteem and admiration of him, the second engage us to the
choice of him, prompt us to the pursuit of him as our happiness, and oblige us
to make him all the grateful returns we are able; the third excite and endear
our Obedience to him.

The honor of imitation, that we transcribe his excellencies and perfections
as far as we can, be mercifully as our heavenly father is merciful, and holy as
he is holy, express in our actions, such a conformity to his Purity, Justice,
Benignity, and universal kindness to his Creatures, especially the Rational,
that Men may See our good works, and Glorify our Father which is in Heaven;
because this shows the mighty value and esteem we have for him, is an open
Declaration, that we think him the most excellent Being, whom it is our honor
as well as duty to resemble, and therefore is the highest Glorification of him.

Christianity too promotes the Felicity of Mankind, and that so fully or
perfectly, that if they would entirely comply with it, they could not possibly
be miserable. Their Happiness single or a part, and as conjoined or united in
Societies: Every Man that obeys or lives up to the Law of Christ, is therefore
happy, because he enjoys the sweetest peace and tranquillity of mind, his
appetites and passions are so restrained, and subdued, as to create him no
trouble nor vexation, they do not lead him into any of those evil practices,
which being done, disturb, and wound the Soul, produce in it amazing fears and
expectations of punishment, the virtues and good works he performs are sweet,
and grateful to him, all their ways are ways of pleasantness, and all their
paths are peace, afford his Soul its desired rest and satisfaction, he is
neither ashamed in public, nor afraid in private, but finds his actions so
fair, and just, and agreeable to the dictates of right reason, that he is
highly pleased every time he reflects upon them.

And as his obedience to the Law of Christ secures his inward, so it provides
for his outward happiness; for every Man, that Lives as Christ requires him,
has his promise to assure him of all those Enjoyments, that are necessary to
his well being upon Earth; his Piety toward the great Governor of the World,
invites his Bounty, and calls down his Blessings upon him, and he that is so
liberal to all the other Creatures, as to open his hand, and fill them with
plenteousness, will not let those Nobler Beings, that Love, Adore, and
Reverence him, want any thing that is good for them.

Besides, the several branches of the Law of Christ, the Virtues it commands us
to practice, have a direct tendency this way: thus Temperance preserves our
Health and Estates, makes our Lives both long, and provided for, and Justice is
not only an Honor or Reputation, but a great Safeguard and Advantage to us;
the Labor or Diligence Christianity enjoins every Man to employ in his
calling, has an apparent tendency, both to obtain these outward conveniences
of Life, and to improve or increase them, and the being Contented with the
possessions that either descended to him by Inheritance, or which he acquired
by the Blessing of God upon his labor and industry, affords him great Comfort
and Delight, as it frees him from the vexations of Covetousness, the
tediousness of Expectation, and Attendance, the grief and torment of
Disappointment, and obliges him to an acquiescence and satisfaction in his
present Enjoyments; he that is continually desiring and pursuing things which
he apprehends to be necessary ingredients in his happiness, or the materials of
which it is composed, must needs be miserable, because he has not attained to,
but is in pursuit of that which he calls his happiness, and is uncertain
whether he shall ever be able to possess himself of it, but the contented
Person is actually happy, because he has reduced his desires to a complacency
or delight in that which he is possessed of. And as these, so all the other
parts of the Christian Law, are a present Blessing and Advantage to the
Observers of them, as well as the Conditions of that Eternal Felicity which is
to commence at the period of this life, there being such a necessary connection
between the Precepts of Christ, and the Rewards of his Kingdom, that they who
obey the one; shall certainly enjoy the other, and they must needs be Blessed
to eternal Ages, that perform those noble things, to which our Lord has
promised that blessedness, both because he is faithful that has promised, and
that is the certain consequence or result of those.

So that considered single or a part, Christianity makes every Man happy that
obeys, or lives according to it. It promotes the felicity of mankind also, as
conjoined or united in Societies, which are either private or public, Families
or Kingdoms.

The happiness of Families, by obliging Husbands to love, and treat their Wives
with due tenderness, and respect, and them to reverence, obey, and be faithful
to their Husbands, and to live together in peace and concord; by injoyning
Parents (as nature prompts them) to take care of their Offspring, to Provide
for, and Educate them in Piety and the Fear of God, and these to Honor, Obey,
and (if by any of the misfortunes of the World they fall into want, as
gratitude obliges them) to relieve their Parents; by requiring Servants to be
faithful and obedient to their Masters, and these to be just, merciful, and
compassionate to them, knowing they have a Master in Heaven, God Almighty, to
whom they are answerable for all their Actions; for in the performance of these
mutual Offices, the felicity or welfare of Families consists.

The happiness of Kingdoms, by obliging Princes to Govern with Mercy and
Justice, to take care, that their People lead quiet and peaceable lives in all
godliness and honesty, that they neither wrong one another, nor be injured by
other Princes or States, but that they be protected both in their Persons, and
Estates, from Violence and Oppression; by requiring the People to honor and
obey their Princes, and all that are in Authority under them, to pray for their
prosperity, to pay them Tribute, to Defend them with their Persons, and
Estates, that no harm nor violence may happen to them; by Commanding all the
People to Love, and deal Justly one with another, not to hurt or injure, but to
Help and Succor, or as they have Oppertunity to do good unto all Men, to put
on Bowels of Mercies, Kindness, Humbleness of Mind, Meekness, long suffering,
forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any Man have a quarrel
against any, which are excellent Preservatives of that Peace and Unity, which
they are Commanded to follow with all Men, and without which they cannot be
happy.

And is not that an happy Kingdom, where the Prince Governs with Justice and
Mercy, Preserves his People in Piety, Peace, and Safety, they Honor, Obey, and
Serve him faithfully, deal Justly with, and Love one another, where there are
no Cruelties nor Oppressions, no Treasons nor Seditions, no Hatred nor
Contentions, but Justice, Loyalty, Peace and Charity Reign or Flourish? this
must needs be an happy Kingdom, and the People Blessed that are in such a Case,
and if Christianity was heartily and universally received and obeyed, it would
make all the Kingdoms and Nations of the World so exceeding happy and blessed,
not only conduct Men to Heaven when they Dye, but turn this Earth into a kind
of Heaven to them whilst they Live.

And seeing Christianity prosecutes that which is the great design or tendency
of the Law of Nature, the Common good of all Rational Beings, the Glory of God,
and the Felicity of Mankind, it is reasonable to believe, that this is contained
in that, That the Law of Christ is a perfect Digest or Body of the Law of
Nature. This might be farther confirmed by comparing things contained in both
these great Laws, but this I need not do, because every Man's Reason will tell
him, that these Laws, having the same Author, and the same end, must be the
same in Substance, and agree in the Means ministering to that, which is equally
the Design of both, for neither can God be Glorified, nor Mankind made happy,
any other way than that which Christianity directs, and the Glorious Author of
it reduces to these two Heads, the Love of God, and our Neighbor, the first
containing all those Expressions of Honor, which the Transcendent Excellencies
and Perfections of the Divine Nature challenge from us, and all those grateful
Returns, which as obliged Persons, we owe to our great Benefactor, the other
comprehending all that Justice, Mercy, Charity, Temperance, and those other
Virtues which conduce to our own, and the Common Felicity of Mankind, and are
so absolutely necessary in order to it, that it cannot be attained without them.

The Absurdities too, that are consequent to the denying of it, argue that the
Law of Christ contains all those Moral Duties, to which Men are obliged by the
Law of Nature, for if it does not, then either the Law of Nature is abolished,
or else God has two contrary Laws in force at the same time: It cannot be
abolished, because it is of Eternal Obligation, Men being for ever bound to the
practice of Piety toward God, and of Justice to one another, because both
these promote his Glory, and their Felicity. But if the Law of Nature be still
in force, and does not oblige us to the performance of that Piety and Justice,
which the Law of Christ so strictly and expressly requires of us, then God has
two contrary Laws Obligatory at the same time, A Law that Commands us to Honor
Him, and to deal Justly with all Men; and, A Law that Allows us to Dishonor
him, and to be Unjust to them: For is not the Law of Nature a Law which God
has impressed upon our Minds? And has not the Law of Christ the same Blessed
Author? And are they not both bound upon us by the same Rewards and
Punishments, Peace and Satisfaction of Mind now, if we obey, Guilt and Horror
of Conscience at present, if we Violate or Transgress them, and by the
Consequences of these, Eternal Felicity, or Misery after this Life? The Law of
Nature and the Law of Christ, have the same Divine Original, God did by Christ
instruct Mankind in all Ages of the World, He (says a Reverend Person) Taught
the Law of Nature to all men, Ductor Dubitan. pa. 180.
and renewed it, and made a perfect Body of it, to last as long as our Nature
lasts, and as long as this World, and his Kingdom abides. And being both of
them his Laws, to say they do not require the same Moral Duties of us, is to
say he has two contrary Laws in force at the same time, which is to revile and
reproach him; for if he requires us to obey two contrary Laws at the same time,
then he requires us to do that which is impossible, and so is neither wise nor
just: I conclude therefore, that Christianity is a perfect Digest of the Law of
Nature, or contains all the Moral Precepts of it: And if so, then whatever is
unjust by the Law of Christ, must needs be equally so by the Law of Nature, and
no Man may do any thing Contrary to that, because if he does, he is a
Transgressor of this.

Besides, Christianity, it is certain, binds Men always to do that which is just
( to do unto others, that is, as they would be done unto themselves,) and if
the Law of Nature does not oblige them to do so too, then God is the Author of
an unjust Law, the Law of Nature being his Law, as well as the Christian, and
then how is he Righteous in all his ways?

And therefore it is most unreasonable to say, the Bill of Exclusion, (if it be
contrary to Christian Justice, as I suppose I have proved it,) is agreeable to
Natural Justice, nothing being Just by the Law of Nature, that is not so by the
Law of Christ.

But the truth is, the Bill is as contrary to the Law of Nature, as I have
proved it to be to the Law of Christ. It Is contrary to the great Design of it,
has no tendency to promote the Honor of God, nor the Felicity of Mankind: not
the first, because God cannot be Honored by any thing that he has forbidden,
and is Repugnant to the Integrity and Perfection of his Nature, but he forbids
all Injustice and Oppression, is Righteous in all his ways, and Loves
Righteousness in others, and it is for ever great and high Injustice for Men to
do that to another, which they would not have done to themselves.

The Bill, if it was passed, would contribute nothing to the Felicity of
Mankind in General, afford them no Benefit at all, but might in the
consequences of it be Injurious to them all; for if one Man be unjustly
deprived of his Right, they that have Power may offer the same Injury to a
second and a third, nay to as many as they can, till at last Injustice and
Oppression Reign every where. Besides, the Sufferings of one Prince expose all
that are of that most High and Sacred Order to the like Danger, and if one
Nation or People Disinherit the next Heir to the Crown, other Nations may take
the same Measures, and offer the same Indignity and Injury to their Princes,
which will fill the World with War and Misery, Blood and Destruction.

It would not be for the happiness of this Nation (as I have proved already)
because it would bring a certain and present evil or mischief upon it, to
remove a remote and contingent one, is too weak a Remedy to effect the Cure it
designs, and instead of keeping out Popery, would bring in War and Confusion,
Desolation and Misery, and therefore is against Prudence, as well as the great
Design of the Law of Nature.

Besides, that which is contrary to right Reason, is Repugnant to the Law of
Nature, to Injure or make any Man Miserable, that has not attempted to use
others so, is contrary to right Reason, to Pass the Bill is to Injure or make
the Duke Miserable (as far as a Law can do it) he has not attempted any such
thing toward others, therefore the Bill is Repugnant to the Law of Nature. To
say he will do it, if he comes to the Crown, is a Rash, Groundless, and
Uncharitable Assertion, because he can have no reason to do it, it being not
for his Honor, nor his Happiness, either in this World or the other, to Injure
or make them he Governs Miserable.

It Is agreeable to that Justice, Candor, and Ingenuity, to which we are
obliged as Rational and Sociable Creatures, to think that Person intends us no
Injury, that neither by his Words nor Actions discovers a Malevolent Mind
toward us, the Duke has neither of these ways discovered such a Mind toward
us, therefore we are obliged to think he intends us no Injury. If it be said,
he holds no Religious Communion with us, and that is a sufficient Indication
that he bears a Malevolent Mind toward us, I Answer, that at most it argues
but a Dissatisfied Mind, or an Erroneous Persuasion of our way of Worship, that
he has such an Opinion of, as to suspend Communion with us in it at present,
but it discovers no hatred of, shows no intention in him to do us injury,
proves him to be a Dissenter from, not an Hater of us, because Honest Men may
be of different Persuasions in Religion, and yet heartily Love, and therefore
neither intend, nor do any Evil to one another. If he thinks us in the Wrong,
he may Pity, and Pray God to bring us into the Right way, and if we believe him
in Error, we ought to Pity, and Pray for him, not deprive him of his
Birthright; because that is Christian and Pious, this Unjust and Barbarous,
and such as is offered to none of the Dissenters.

That which is agreeable to Common Prudence, is agreeable to the Law of Nature,
it is agreeable to Common Prudence for Men weary of a State of War (in which
according to Mr. Hobs, their Nature put them) to enter into Civil Society for
their Mutual Safety and Security, therefore it is agreeable to the Law of
Nature for Men to enter into Civil Society.

That which is Destructive of Civil Society, is a Violation of the Law of
Nature, to deprive Men of their Rights and Properties upon mere Jealousies and
Suspicions, is Destructive of Civil Society, the Bill of Exclusion would
deprive his Royal Highness of Birthright, which is founded in the Law of
Nature, upon mere Jealousies and Suspicions, therefore the Bill is a Violation
of the Law of Nature.

The Duke has de facto done nothing Vissible, that is Injurious to the Nation,
therefore the Authors of the Bill proceed upon mere Jealousies and Suspicions,
and consequently do Unjustly, because they Injure an Innocent Person, for every
Man is to be presumed so to be, till the contrary appears by his Actions.

But self Preservation (they say) is the prime dictate of the Law of Nature, or
that which it prompts all Men to; supposing that, yet Men must not imagine
themselves to be in Danger, that they may have a pretense to oppress and injure
others, Violence must be offered to, Injury done them, or at least be
threatened, before they can reasonably apprehend themselves endangered, or
justly defend themselves, but for Antonius only to suspect that the brave
Albanius intends to do him a mischief, and upon that Suspicion to do him Injury
and Mischief by way of Anticipation, is most unreasonable, and therefore most
unjust.

Besides, every private Man is, and therefore must be considered as a Member of
some Civil Society, and as such he has no Right in all Cases to provide for
his own Safety, in Opposition to the Safety and Preservation of the whole
Society. It Is more for a Man's Safety to follow his Trade, or till the Earth,
than to bear Arms, or go to the Wars, two Armies cannot Fight but some of the
Combatants will be Slain, and though some always Escape, yet no particular
Person has any assurance that he shall not Dye in the Battle: But
notwithstanding the Appendent Danger, Men are bound to Fight in defense of
their Prince and Country, that is, to prefer the public before their private
safety, that being generous and brave, the contrary base and infamous. We see
in the Natural body, the hand will expose it self to danger for the safety of
the head, and therefore some of the members of the body politic are obliged to
expose themselves to danger for the welfare and safety of the whole Society.

But every Nation or Civil Society, has a Right to preserve it self, the Bill
of Exclusion (they say) is for the preservation of this Nation, therefore it is
a pursuance of that Right: The proposition is true (if rightly understood) the
assumption false, for the Bill is not for the preservation of the Nation. The
Duke will either survive the King, or not; if he do not, the Nation is safe
without the Bill, and then to pass it is to do unjustly, to no purpose, for no
benefit at all, nay to our loss and injury, because if the Bill be passed, the
injustice of it cannot be defended without a standing Army, which would be a
vast charge, and therefore a mighty injury to the Nation: But if the Duke
survive the King, the passing the Bill can be no preservative or security to
the Nation, because it is disputed by wise and learned men, whether such a Law
would not be null or void in it self, and because it is certain that no Law can
deter him from endeavoring to obtain the Crown, and therefore the passing the
Bill (if the Duke survive the King) will certainly produce a War, and so be to
the Destruction, not the Happiness or Preservation of the Nation.

That Peace is to be pursued and and preserved, is one of the prime Dictates of
Right Reason, and one of the chief Laws of Nature, because the safety and
felicity of men depend upon it, and therefore whatever is Destructive of Peace,
is a Violation of the Law of Nature, the Bill of Exclusion would Destroy our
Peace, therefore it is a Violation to the Law of Nature.

That of two evils or calamities the least is to be chosen, is a prime
Principle of Nature, here are two evils, a Popish Successor (as is supposed) a
Project to Exclude or keep him out; That but feared, it being not certain that
his Royal Highness is a Papist, or if he be so now, that he will continue so,
it being possible (if the Nation would treat him with the Honor due unto him)
that he may be converted, or if that happen not, that he may leave this World
before his Royal Brother: The other evil is a device to Exclude or deprive him
of his Right (which I have proved to be a moral evil, and being so, is upon no
terms to be chosen, but utterly abhorred and rejected) but if we wave the
sinfulness of it, and consider it in point of prudence, this Device, if passed
into a Law will be a present and a great Calamity, because it will heighten the
confusions and distractions of the Nation, put it to the expense, bring upon it
(as I observed before) the misery of a standing Army, enrage and increase our
Enemies abroad, exasperate, and make those we have at home desperate; so that
the Project of Exclusion (setting aside the Sinfulness of it) is a greater
temporal Evil or Calamity than a Popish Successor, because that is present,
this only feared, and therefore future.

The miseries feared from a Popish Successor may be only feared or imagined,
not felt, he may if he pleases serve God his own way, and let us enjoy the
Religion Established. If not so, yet the miseries consequent to the setting up
the Romish Religion, will not be comparable to the calamities of a War, which
the Excluding him will produce; that way a few (in comparison of what a War
will destroy) may Suffer, this way the whole Kingdom, nay all the Three
Kingdoms will be imbroil'd and ruined, that way some may fall Martyrs and so
dye honorably here, and live gloriously in Heaven, this way great numbers will
be cut off in the damnable Sin of Rebellion, and so perish shamefully here, and
eternally in Hell; so that a Popish Successor is a lesser evil, a more
tolerable calamity than the Bill of Exclusion, and therefore this is to be laid
aside, and that left to Providence.

But every man ('it is said) has a Right to his Plank in a Shipwreck, supposing
that, yet here is no Shipwreck, but what men's idle (if not worse) fears
suggest, and would it not be Egregious Knavery for some of the Mariners to cast
the Pilate overboard, because they have a wild Suspicion, that he will run the
Ship upon a Rock on purpose to sink himself and them. Besides, though every man
be allowed to do all that is just and innocent for his own Preservation, yet
there are some Persons that must not have any injury or violence done them for
any cause whatsoever, because the great Author of the Law of Nature forbids it,
saying, Touch not mine Anointed: No Provocation can ever make it Lawful for a
Son to assault his Father, nor for a Subject to resist his Prince, because that
is contrary to Nature, this destructive to Civil Society, of which he is born a
Member, and which he is indispensably obliged by the Law of Nature to preserve.

The Jews were full of Projects, and had their Grand Expedient to save their
Nation, It is Expedient St. John. 11. 50.
for us (says Caiaphas) that one man should dye for the People, and that the
whole Nation Perish not. The Nation was in no Danger at all, no Storm nor
Shipwreck approaching, no more Fear of the Romans than at other times, only a
danger feigned, that they might have a poor pretense to Destroy an Innocent
Person, to Murder the Holy Jesus: And what was the event of this Politic
Expedient, did it answer their expectations, contribute any thing to their
Safety or Security? No, no! instead of saving, it sunk the Ship, turned their
so craftily pretended into a real danger, involved their whole Nation in the
greatest and most deplorable Ruin or Destruction, and that by the Romans, that
ever any People Suffered, or any History Related, thereby warning all Kingdoms
and Nations to take heed of such wicked Expedients, never to do any unjust
thing for the avoiding any danger how great or real soever, or to seek the
Public Safety by oppressing or injuring any Innocent Person, for God is
Righteous and will be sure to Punish the wrong-doers.

So that the Bill of Exclusion is contrary to the Law of Nature, as well as to
the Law of Christ, and as this forbids, so that condemns it, and therefore it
cannot be agreeable to Natural Justice, unless they mean that of Mr Hobs, who
represents the Humane to be as savage and barbarous as the Brutish Nature, and
affirms that Men have no obligations upon them to do justly, but what humane
Laws lay upon them, but that all Men have a natural Right to do every thing
they please, and that to all Persons, for which, and all his other lewd and
impious Assertions he has been sufficiently reproved and bafled by diverse
learned and excellent Persons: The Bill of Exclusion may be acknowledged (if
that be any honor to it) to be agreeable to this Wild and Atheistical Justice,
but Christianity condemns, and Right Reason abhors it.

This is the true Character and real Nature Subsect. 5.
of your so much admired Project of Exclusion, I have done it no injury, laid
no false colors upon, to render it more deformed and odious than it is, and
deserves to be, but have only examined it by the just and holy Laws of Christ,
and the Dictates of Right Reason, that seeing (what your fears of, and Zeal
against Popery, would not then give you time to consider) the high Injustice
and great Impiety of it, you may be ashamed and repent of it, which with all
humility I conjure and beseech you to do, by all that is dear to you, and which
you have the greatest Reasons, and most pressing Motives to persuade you to.

The Offense you have committed against God: For does not he love righteousness
and hate iniquity, and require that all men, especially Magistrates, do justly,
and love mercy, and walk humbly with him? But this Device of yours is a
manifest contradiction to all these. It Is to oppress and rob an innocent person
of his Right, to offer him that hard Measure, which you would by no means have
done to your selves, and therefore to do unjustly. It Is to treat an erring
person (for such his Royal Highness is, if he be a Papist) with the greatest
rigor or severity, to ruin, or make him miserable in this, because he is become
(as you believe) a Proselyte to that Church, which he (if he be of it) thinks
(though erroneously) will guide him safely to the Eternal Glory and Happiness
of the other World, and therefore is most unmerciful! If any man Err from the
truth, Charity prompts and obliges us to endeavor his Conversion, and to
restore him in the Spirit of meekness, with all mildness and gentleness to show
him his mistake, and represent to him the evil and dangerous consequences of
it, that he may hate and forsake it. But your attempt to Exclude the Duke does
not design his Conversion, but Destruction, leaves him no place for Repentance,
but intends his Ruin, and therefore is Cruel not Charitable.

Amongst the many praises they adorned it with, some of the Admirers of it, I
remember, commended this Device for the mercy of it; An Elogium destitute of
all shadow or appearance of Truth, because the punishment it would inflict is
worse than Death; for a brave and valiant Prince, as his Royal Highness is, had
rather dye than survive the loss of a Crown, which is his Right by Birth, if he
survive his present Majesty, than to be degraded from, and unjustly deprived of
the highest Dignity and Honor upon Earth, to see another leap over his Head,
get into that Throne, wear the Royal Diadem, and possess the Kingdoms he was
born to, must needs be a continual grief, trouble, and vexation to him, and
make him weary of his Life: Such Injury and Disgrace would be intolerable, and
cause him to dye daily, to linger out a tedious Life; but Death would soon put
a period to all his miseries, and conduct him to that blessed place, where they
that suffer wrongfully here, shall be greatly rewarded: when a Man has no just
claim to any thing that the World admires and calls great or glorious, the want
of it cannot reasonably create him any trouble or discontent, but he is as well
pleased with, and thinks himself as happy in his low condition, as others are
in the highest and most honorable stations upon Earth, but to be deposed or
cast down from that Empire or Sovereignty, which his Illustrious Ancestors
enjoyed before him, and not suffered to Inherit the Throne of his Fathers, to
be laid aside as unworthy to possess the Kingdom he was born to, this must
needs be an Hell upon Earth, the greatest or most perfect misery any Man living
can endure, that has nothing to comfort or support, to sweeten or ease it, and
therefore must needs be most rigorous and cruel. If this be mercy, God deliver
every Man from it.

And being a contradiction to that Justice and Mercy he requires, it cannot
possibly be consistent with the other great duty, the walking humbly with God:
For what is that, but to submit unto his will in all things, to resign our
selves to his disposal, to depend upon his wise and gracious providence in the
use of lawful means, in all dangers to hope in his mercy, to put our trust and
confidence in his Power and Goodness, not doubting but he cares for us, and
will, so far as he sees it conducive to his honor, and our good, deliver us
from all dangers and sufferings: This is to walk humbly and religiously, and
so, as all pious and holy Men have in all Ages walked with God. But your
Project of Exclusion is a Defiance to all this, a plain Declaration that you
dare not trust God with your Religion, your Lives, and Estates, nor commit them
to his care and keeping, but prefer your own evil Inventions before his
gracious Protection, admire your sinful Policy more than his holy Wisdom, as
if he was either ignorant of, or unable to save us from the cruel designs of
our Enemies, or cared not what becomes of us, or as if that which is an open
affront to, or violation of his righteous Laws, could Minister to the safety or
defense of the Nation. If this be not an high offense against God, I know not
what is, or can be so?

Nor have you offended only against God, but against his Anointed too, done
all you could to draw the King to be a Partner in your Injustice, courted him
to give his Royal Assent to your Bill, with liberal offers, and when they
prevailed not, attempted to constrain or force him to it, by denying him the
necessary supplies, which his great Affairs required, and the danger the Nation
was in exacted from you. Are not these high and heighnous offenses? Is it not a
great sin to entice or tempt any Man, much more your Prince, to an unjust
action, and when no allurement could persuade, unmindful of all reverence to
God and Him, To attempt to necessitate, or compel him to do it. These things
look black and dreadful, and I need not tell you whose works they are, the
Author of them is easily known, and no Christian sure can be ambitious to
invade his hateful office. The trouble, vexation, and disquiet, which you have
created the King by your resolute adherance to it, deserve to be considered
too: For how many cares, fears, and sad thoughts, has this your undutiful
behavior toward him produced in his Royal Soul? Is this the love you have
for, the requital you render him, for all his Care of, and Royal Favors to
you, and all the Eminent Blessings which God by him has conferred upon the
Nation, to do what in you lies to rob him of all his tranquillity and content,
and to make him weary of his Life? Is this the Honor God commands you to show,
the Obedience he bids you pay to his Anointed, to press and urge him in such an
unbecoming manner to the most dishonorable Act; and to persist Stubbornly in
it, when he reproved you for, and declared his abhorrence of it? It Is as plain
then as any thing can be, that you neither feared God nor the King, but sinned
against both, in pressing with such restless importunity this unjust Device.

It Is to sin against the Duke too, not only as it offers him the highest injury
and injustice, but also as it confirms him in his Error (if he be a Papist,)
and tempts him to be so, though he was none before: Confirms him in his Error,
if he be really a Proseyte to the Church of Rome, for will he not rejoice that
he has withdrawn himself from Men that walk so disorderly, that have so little
fear of God, as to do the unjust and evil things he hates, so little Faith,
that they dare not trust him with their Religion, but seek to preserve it by
base and unworthy Arts, are so cowardly impatient, and unchristian, that they
will do a great and certain Injury to avoid an uncertain one, ruin him now for
fear they should suffer hereafter.

But if on the otherside his Royal Highness was no Papist, the treating him
with such cruelty and unjustice must needs be a mighty temptation to make him
so; for had he not reason to draw this Inference from your attempt to Exclude
him, If Protestants use their Princes in this manner, it is fafer to be a
Papist? My glorious Father was Murdered, my Royal Brother made an Exile by
them, and forced to wander in Foreign Countries, and now their malice is grown
so virulent and cruel against me, without any just cause or provocation at all
(I having Injured none of them) that they would deprive me of my Birthright,
and proscribe or banish me as an. Enemy to my Native Country: I have no way
then to secure my self from the danger that threaten me, but to leave the
Protestants, and join my self to the Papists, who it is possible may treat me as
justly and honorably, as they have done despitefully and cruelly. This
Conclusion is natural from your Premises, though I hope, and believe his Royal
Highness is more Pious, Just, and Prudent, than to be either tempted by it to
such a change, or to impute this Impious Project to all the English
Protestants, as if they were favorers or approvers of it; The Right Honorable
the House of Lords, and all the Loyal Addressers, and Abhorrers have given him
full satisfaction to the contrary, but as for you, it cannot be denied, but you
have given him great Scandal, brought Reproach not only upon your selves, but
all the Professors of the Reformed Religion in this Nation, done enough to make
him hate the very name of Protestant for ever, and thereby incurred the Woe
denounced by our Lord against them by whom Offenses come.

You have hereby also misled the People, or drawn them into dangerous Errors,
taught them to think all things Lawful that tend to keep out Popery, that Zeal
for the true Religion will justify the most unrighteous Actions, that for
their own safety and defense they may do Injury to Princes: Tempted them to
entertain ill thoughts of the King, because he did not pass your Bill which you
admired and cried up, as the only Expedient to keep out Popery: Made them apt
to Mutiny, and break out into Tumults and Seditions. Oh how dangerous and
fearful a thing is it, not only to do evil your selves, but to corrupt others!
What Eli said to his Sons deserves to be well considered by you, Why do ye such
things? for I hear of your evil dealings by all this People: Nay my Sons 1 Samuel
2. 23. 24.
(or rather Fathers) for it is no good report that I hear, ye make the Lords
People to Transgress.

Besides, you have hereby likewise dishonored the Reformed Religion, brought
up an ill report of, cast reproach and infamy upon it, which can never be wiped
off, but by your great and public Repentance. For consider, I beseech you,
what can more effectually open the Mouths, and sharpen the Pens of all its
Enemies against it, than this Device of yours, which is so open an affront to,
and violation of the Principal Laws of Christ? Instead of providing things
honest in the sight of all Men, as the Apostle requires all Christians to do,
this is to do that which is unjust and dishonest in the sight and judgment of
all men, your selves excepted: Instead of Doing that, which St. Peter tells
you, is the will of God, with well doing 1 Epist 2. 15,
(that is true Loyalty, Obedience, and just behavior toward Princes) to put
to silence the ignorance of foolish men, to take from the Adversaries of it
(that watch for pretenses to revile it) all just cause or occasion to speak
evil of the Truth, you by making the safety of Religion the motive to, and
color of your injustice, have turned it into a cloak of maliciousness, and so
rendered it the scorn and derision of the Papists; for how do the Fathers of
the Society insult and triumph at it? Now they say the mask of holiness is
fallen off, and the Protestants show themselves in their true colors, prove
themselves to be Wolves in Sheeps Clothing, they that forsook our Church under
pretense of serving God in greater Purity, and said their Consciences were so
tender, that they durst not Communicate with us in our Errors, can commit the
highest injustice without any fear or scruple. Oh you that abhor Idols, and
think the Images of Christ and his Saints abominable things, do you offer the
greatest violence and injury to Princes, which are the most lively Images of
God upon Earth? You that condemn us for Deposing Kings, would you make Laws to
Disinherit Princes, and thereby practice your selves that which you condemn in
us? what shameful Hypocrisy, and impudent Partiality is this? This, instead of
converting Papists, will in all probability make many, drive more to Rome, than
all the Arguments we can use can draw from it. Now suppose the least that can
be reasonably supposed, that one Soul, who had before a good Opinion of our
Church, intended to leave the Romish Superstition, and join it self to us,
should by a just abhorrence of this Project of yours, change his mind, resolve
to stay in the Roman Communion, and so Perish everlastingly: Or that one
Protestant offended at your injurious proceedings against a Son of the late
most Glorious, and a Brother, the only Brother of our present most Gracious
King, should turn Papist, and thereby fall into eternal misery and ruin: What
an horrid guilt do you thereby contract, which the great Lover and Redeemer of
Souls will call you to a sad account for? Dreadful, I am sure, is the doom
which he denounces against them that do it, Who so shall offend one of these
little ones which believe in me, it were better for him that a Millstone St.
Mat. 18. 6.
were hanged about his Neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the Sea:
A Christian had better Suffer any thing, undergo the most horrid or fearful
Death here, than by Offending, or causing any man to Sin, to bring upon
himself, and him Eternal Damnation; Oh therefore according to St. Paul's
Admonition, Let no Man put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall, in his
Brothers way.

Put all these sad things together, the Offense you have committed against God,
and his Anointed, the Injury you have offered, the Scandal and Provocation you
have given the Duke, the dangerous Errors you have drawn the People into, the
Reproach also and Dishonor you have brought upon the best and most holy
Religion in the World, and you will be convinced that you have offended in an
high degree, and therefore ought to Repent speedily and heartily.

But before I press you to this, I have another most weighty consideration to
propound to you, which (if any thing can do it) will make you tremble at, and
say with the deepest sorrow, and remorse, What have we done? I mean the late
most execrable Conspiracy to Subvert the Government, and to Assasinate our
Gracious Sovereign and his Royal Highness, which some of the Zealous Promoters
of the Bill of Exclusion, with other wicked men, of Base, Bloody, and
Traiterous Principles, had entered into. Thus one Sin draws on another, and a
lesser produces the greatest and most horrid wickedness. These are the known
Arts and Wiles of the Devil, it was neither wise nor safe for him to prompt
them to such an hellish Treason and Murder at first, and therefore he began
with some preparatory Principles, which he knew would by degrees drive them to,
and engage them in this, which were such as these, That the strict Rules of
Justice are to be dispensed with; for the defense and security of true
Religion; That nothing is unlawful that is conducive to so good an end; That a
Popish Prince ought not upon any terms to be entrusted with the Government of a
Protestant Kingdom, what ever Right or Title he may have to it. These brought
on the Bill of Exclusion, put you upon that Resolve, That there was no way to
deliver the Nation from Popery, but to Deprive the Duke of the Succession: and
having come to this determination, all your Wit and Zeal were employed, all
endeavors used to gain the Royal Assent, which not obtaining, what murmurs and
complaints were every where heard? What clamours and outcrys, wrath and
bitterness, and evil speakings filld every corner of the Kingdom? These showed
your indignation and discontent, and made all wise men sadly apprehensive that
some dreadful storm was coming: From hence proceeded that insolent Vote, by
which they were declared Enemies to the Sitting of Parliaments, that lent the
King Money upon any part of his Revenue, which was to Proclaim to all the
World, that as you would raise him none, so none of his good Subjects should
presume to furnish him with any: What was this but to expose the Nation to
inevitable Ruin, if the watchful providence of God had not diverted, and
prevented all open Assaults or Attempts against it, and to disable the King to
defend his People from injury and violence? From hence came also your frequent
Clubs and Consults, in which the violent and eager Men of your Party (as is now
evident) took Council together against the Lord and against his Anointed. These
were the steps by which the wicked Contrivers of it, descended into this Abyss
or Depth of wickedness, these were the Arts and Methods that led to this
detestable Conspiracy, because the King would not consent to the Excluding his
Royal Highness, the bloody Villains resolved to Exclude, or send them both out
of the World by a barbarous Assasination.

I believe diverse of you are Innocent of this black and great offense, and do
heartily abhor it, but it cannot be denied that this Project of Exclusion has
produced, or caused this Treason. To say you did not intend it, may in some of
you be acknowledged to be true, but then you should have considered how
dangerous (as well as sinful) it is to venture upon any unjust or unlawful
means for the attaining any good whatsoever, because error is a boundless
thing, and when men are once drawn into it, they know not where to stop, but
run on still, proceed from bad to worse, fall from one wickedness to another,
and never come into Gods Righteousness.

So that it is the highest wisdom, as well as his indispensable duty, for
every Man to keep innocence, and take heed to the thing that is Right, to do no
evil nor unjust thing upon any inducement, or for any end whatsoever, because,
whatever happens in the mean time, this will be sure to bring a man Peace and
Salvation at the last. God has given us a most just and holy Law to live by,
teaching us, as all Piety to Him, so all Loyalty to his Anointed, actually to
obey all our Princes Lawful commands, and patiently to suffer what punishments
he is pleased to inflict for our nonperformance of those things, which he
requires in opposition to the Law of God, if at any time through Error or
Mistake he impose any such. This promotes the Honor and Glory of God, the
Safety and Felicity of Princes, and the Peace or Tranquillity of the World.
They that keep to this rule can never suffer as Traitors and Evildoers, but if
they suffer at all, it must be for Well-doing, for their obedience to God and
his Laws, and then most happy or blessed are they, because they will have the
joys and comfort of a good Conscience to ease and sweeten their Sufferings, and
God will support them under them, and give them a great reward in his Heavenly
Kingdom. Every Man that does his duty to God and his Prince, that commits
himself to the care and keeping of the Almighty by a just and pious
Conversation, has all the safety and security that can possibly be had, or
reasonably desired in this World, for if God protects any, these in all
probability are the Persons that may expect, and obtain that favor from him.
Besides, what temptation or inducement can Princes have to oppress or injure,
to ruin or destroy good, peaceable, and harmless People, that pay them all due
honor, and obey them as far as is consistent with their duty to God? None,
none at all, which makes the Apostle say, Who is he that 1 St. Pet. 3. 13.
will harm you, if you be followers of that which is Good? Every Man that has
any Religion or fear of God will be both afraid and ashamed to do it, for if he
Persecute and Destroy such Innocent People, they shall be saved and shine with
Christ in Heavenly Glory, but he shall suffer the terrors of an evil
Conscience, ly under the sense of Gods displeasure here, and when he Passes out
of this World, (Cruelty being commonly short lived,) have an intolerable
portion with the Unjust and Oppressors, with the Blood Thirsty and Persecutors,
in the black Regions of Eternal Sorrow and Misery. But when Men seek to save or
secure themselves from dangers (whether real or imaginary) by unjust or
unlawful means (such as this Project of Exclusion is) these instead of
averting, invite and hasten their approach, nay multiply and increase them,
instead of making a way for them to escape, entangle them so, that they grow
desperate, and resolve upon the most bloody, villainous, and wicked Enterprises,
such as this Treason is. For besides that it is an open affront and defiance to
all the Laws of God, the breaking all those Sacred Bonds asunder, with which he
ties the hands of Subjects from doing violence to his Anointed, an insolent
slighting the dreadful Judgments and most terrible Punishments he has
inflicted upon such presumptuous Sinners, as if they thought Heaven had wasted
all its Artillery, spent all its Thunderbolts upon the Traitors of former
times, and had no Vengeance in store for them that now Conspire the Death of
Princes, or else believed the Righteous God was so partial as to discover and
punish none but Popish Traitors, so that they might commit the same execrable
crime in Zeal against Popery, and be, if not innocent, yet safe, and have no
harm, nor danger happen to them, Besides this contempt, I say, of Gods Commands
and Judgments, those forbidding Treason as a crime most damnable, these
confounding Traitors, and hurrying them away to Hell with a swift and dreadful
destruction, how have those of your Party engaged in this barbarous Conspiracy,
shamed all your former Professions and Pretenses? For was not this the great
Plea for your Bill of Exclusion, the mighty Argument with which you pressed the
Passing, and thought to justify or maintain the Lawfulness of it, That it was
the only Expedient, as to suppress Popery, so to save the King, to preserve his
most precious life from the Treachery and Cruelty of that Faction. You made the
Nation believe, that you could be content to run all hazards, to expose your
selves to all dangers, to endure any hardships or miseries, if the King was but
safe, and guarded from the hands of violence, and all the bloody attempts of
the Romish Party. These things looked fair and plausible, and some that loved
the King thought them real, and were deluded into a good opinion of your
Proceedings, but now the Masque is off, and those of you that were engaged in
this Hellish design, have no Cloak nor Covering for their Treachery, for,
though their words were softer than butter, yet they had War in their hearts,
though their speeches were kind and fair, smoother than oil, yet were they very
Swords: They tender of the Kings most precious life, and studious to preserve
him from harm and danger? Who can, or will believe it? If they were so then,
why did they Plot to destroy him since? What has the King done to merit or
deserve their wrath? If they really designed and desired his Preservation
before, why did they resolve to Murder him now? Had not the King as great
Reason as they to consult his own safety, and does not the admirable wisdom he
shows in the conduct of all his great Affairs, demonstrate him best able to
judge what ways and methods would be most conducive to the attaining so
desirable an end? So that their Plotting his destruction since proclaims to all
the World, that they did not realy desire to save him from the Papists then, or
if they did, that it was because they intended to kill him themselves, and that
in the same manner the Papists designed to destroy him, even by surprise, to
come upon him unawares, and cut him off from amongst the living, which is most
Treacherous and Base, Cursed Cruelty and Cowardice joined together. A Brave and
Valiant Enemy would scorn to treat the most hated person so, or to rob any Man
of such a Jewel as his Life in such a vile and sneaking manner; Men of any
Courage or Gallantry (though wicked) could not be so base Spirited as to steal
upon two of the bravest Princes in the World, and knock them on the head: But
this is right Fanatic Practice, for that savage and barbarous Faction is both
most cruel and base, it thirsts after and delights in Blood, the Blood of
Princes, and attempts to shed it by Surprise and Treachery.

And if enquiry be made, what moved them to this execrable Conspiracy, what
irritated or enraged them thus against the King, it will be found to be nothing
but pure Malice, that they had no ill usage offered, no provocation given to
tempt them to such a wickedness; for the King is Inferior to none of his
Renowned Ancestors in Justice, Mercy, Kindness to, and Care of his People, the
Laws are the measures of his Government, he neither exhausts his Subjects by
Arbitrary Exactions, nor consumes them by Needless Wars, but is pleased to make
it his constant Care and Study to Preserve them in Piety, Peace, and Plenty.
What detestable Villainy and Ingratitude is it then, for any of his People to
requite his Love with Hatred, the most Cruel and Deadly Hatred, to Conspire
together not to let him Live, under whose Peaceful, Mild, and Equal Government
they are blessed above all the People of the World, and happy to the admiration
of all their Neighbor Nations.

It Is true indeed, no Injuries, Oppressions, or Cruelties from their Prince,
can ever Warrant, or make it Lawful for Subjects to Conspire his Death, or to
take Arms against him, for if they resist (much more if they invade or assault
him) St. Paul tells them they shall receive to themselves Damnation: But yet
when their Treasons are causless and unprovoked, as this was, they must needs
be most Wicked and Damnable, because they have nothing but the Devil and mere
Malice to instigate the Impious Wretches to them.

And if this execrable Treason had succeeded, what a deplorable Condition had
the People been in? Instead of a most just and merciful Prince, who Loves, and
is a Father to them, they had been Slaves to, and groaned under the Cruelties
and Oppressions of God knows how many merciless Tyrants: The City, in which
Justice used to Reign, would have been full of Blood and Violence: The Country
where the happy People enjoyed their Estates in peace and safety, would have
been turned into a Den of Thieves and Murderers. When this doleful Tragedy had
been noysed abroad, all the Loyal and Good People of the Nation would have been
seized with Horror and Amazement, drowned in Tears, expres'd their deep and
vehement Sorrow with hideous Outcries and Lamentations, have filled Heaven and
Earth with Complaints and doleful Exclamations: Their Ruin too would have been
great and inevitable, their Lives exposed to the armed Violence, their Estates
to the insatiable Rapine and Avarice of those bloody Villains that killed the
King; For they that could have the heart to smite the Shepherd, would they have
took any Pity of, or have Spared the Flock? No, no! The Loyal Party would have
tasted the same bitter fate with their Prince, their bloody Swords would have
made havoc of all that stood in their way, Death and Slaughter would have
Reigned every where, the whole Nation would have been an Aceldama, a great
burying place. The French and Irish Massacres, and all the Cruelties, of
Ancient and Modern times, had been petty things in compare with this black
Tragedy, a Conspiracy so execrable and villainous, that it will exceed the Faith
of the next, as, much as it does the Expression of the present Age.

And if you will according to our Saviors Rule (which is the surest way of
Judging) judge of the Tree by the Fruit it bears, you cannot but see how impious
your Project of Exclusion is, that has brought forth such fruit, prompted some
of the Zealots for it, with other Wicked Wretches, to such a damnable
Conspiracy as this, which would (if not prevented by the Infinite goodness of
God) have cut off the King and his Royal Highness, undone all his good
Subjects, and ruined Three flourishing Kingdoms, that would have Excluded or
Banished all Peace, Piety, and Happiness, and let in Profaneness, Oppression,
and Misery.

So that if you will speak the Truth, you must acknowledge your crime to be
exceeding great, in making choice of such a sinful Expedient, and if you desire
to be forgiven, your Repentance must be equal to your Crime, that is, you must
confess and forsake it.

Confess it to God, and beseech him to forgive the great Offense you have
committed against him.

Go to the King, and humbly beg his Pardon, that you should cause him so much
danger, bring his most precious Life into so great Peril, that you should
advise or propose any thing, that minister'd occasion or temptation to violent
and blood thirsty men, to attempt any thing either against his Person or
Government: or that you should do any thing to create trouble and vexation to
his Royal Soul, or destroy his quiet and tranquillity. Let him know how much
you are grieved for these your Errors and Offenses, and that you should be
ashamed to live, but that you hope his Royal Clemency will forgive, and your
unfeigned Loyalty for the future make reparation for what you have done amiss.

Go to his Royal Highness, and confess the horrid injuries, the high and
shameful injustice you have offered him, that forgetting the Honor due to him
as a Prince, you have treated him most rudely and despitefully, so that by the
Law of Retaliation he might return the same severe measure to you, that you
have tendered to him, that as you have proudly and disdainfully said of him, as
the stubborn Jews did of Christ, We will not have this Man Rule over us, so he,
if he ever come to be King, may say concerning you with the Prince in the
Gospel But those mine enemies, which would not that I St. Luke 19. 27.
should Reign over them, bring them hither, and slay them before me. It Is
certain that by your unjust and unworthy behavior toward him, you have given
the Duke great provocation, which nothing but Repentance can appease, for when
nothing else can do it, Submission and Sorrowful Acknowledgment of the error
or offense committed will pacify a brave and generous person, as his Royal
Highness is. Let this then be your method, go to him, and acknowledge the
injuries you have done him, and humbly beg his pardon, beseech him as Shimei
did King David, not to impute iniquity to you, neither to remember what you did
perversely in the days of fear and danger, when the rumors of Popery, and the
discovery of the horrid Conspiracy of the Papists frighted you almost out of
your wits, tell him that men in a great fright are apt to run into
extravagancies, neither know, nor consider what they do, but say and do such
things, which at other times they would be ashamed of, humbly represent to him
that some allowances are to be made you upon that account, and though nothing
can excuse, yet his generosity can, and you hope will forgive the high offenses
you have committed against him, which if he please to do, you will never more
provoke or injure, but love, honor, and treat him as the Son, and Brother of a
King, and Heir apparent to these three Kingdoms. This is all the reparation you
can make, the best satisfaction you can give him for your past offense, and if
you do this, there is no doubt but he will forgive you. Princes resemble their
glorious Founder, both in their Power to punish, and their proneness to forgive
the injuries and indignities that are committed against them, and as Repentance
renders him Merciful and Propitious, turns away his Displeasure, so it excites
their Compassion, and pacifies their Wrath; but as God will not, so they have
no obligation to Pardon those that against all Reason and Religion Sin against
them, and when they have done it, refuse to Repent. That you have done the
first, highly injured his Royal Highness, is as evident as any thing can be; Be
sure then to make your Repentance as public as your crime has been, and do
not doubt but it will be effectual to obtain your pardon. The Duke can, and
will forgive you upon your hearty sorrow for, and humble confession of your
offense, and you reproach and injure him more, if you think he has, or will
show no mercy, than you have done by your past misbehaviour toward him, though
your Sin against him be high and heinous, yet do not say with Cain, it is
greater than can be forgiven, for this apprehension (I believe) prompted the
Zealots of your Party (whom their guilt made desperate) to conspire his Death,
according to the known Maxim of the wicked Politicians, who say, That bad
Actions must be seconded with worse, and lesser injuries pursued with greater,
the injurious person not thinking himself safe, till he has taken from the
injured all possibility of revenge: What barbarous, nay devilish methods are
these, without any povocation or cause at all to wrong an Innocent Prince, and
then for fear they should at one time or other be called to account for it,
seek to secure themselves by doing him a greater; First against all the Rules
of Justice, the Dictates of right Reason, and the Laws of Religion, attempt to
rob him of his Birthright, and when that wicked imagination did not prosper or
take effect, instead of Repenting of it, consult or agree together to take away
his Life, because the dead cannot revenge the injuries that are done them: But
is there then no God that judges in the Earth? Or if there be, does not he
behold ungodliness and wrong, that he may take the matter into his hand; punish
the accursed Authors of them with dreadful inflictions here, or if for reasons
unknown to us, he forbear them now, with the most horrible damnation hereafter.
Such men as these are so far from making the high and noble Precepts of Christ
the measures of their Actions, that they fall short of the lower Justice,
Mercy, and Integrity of the Heathens; nay proceed according to the wild,
Villainous, and Atheistical Principles of the Leviathan, and instead of
reproving their detestable practices by producing the words of Christ, or any
of his Apostles, I may bespeak them in those of that wise and honest Heathen
Diphilus the Comoedian, (...), look to it you that think there is no God! there
is, there is: If any man do ill (as you have done a great evil) let him think
time is gain, for he shall certainly suffer for what he has done amiss. The
punishment of such men lingers and is deferred for a time, but it will be sure
to come, and that the heavier at last, and by its greatness make amends for the
slowness of its approach. And therefore that neither the horror of your
Offense, nor your fears of Punishment make you desperate, and push you on to
such dreadful crimes as they prompted the Conspirators to, take the first
opportunity to reconcile your selves to his Royal Highness, by confessing the
injuries you have done him, and begging his pardon for them; but then you must
not only confess, but renounce and forsake them, meddle no more, I mean, with
the Succession, but cast your Bill out of Doors, as a monstrous and abominable
Brat, conceived by Fear, nursed by Faction, born to do mischief and bring forth
Treasons, Murders, and all manner of Miseries, Be you its Judges to pass
Sentence, and see Execution done upon it, for nothing can be more just, than to
cast that into the fire which tended so apparently to put the Kingdom into a
Combustion.

Be careful to undeceive the People too, whom by your mighty Zeal for, and
resolute Adherence to it, you have drawn to an high esteem and admiration of
your Projects of Exclusion, and thereby prepared for Tumults, Seditions, and
all manner of violent and unlawful Practices. Your Votes are of such Authority
with all the factious and discontented people, that they think them, if not
equal to Holy Scripture, yet the best Commentary upon it, and will follow your
Marginal Notes rather than the sacred Text: Consider then what a dangerous
thing it is to instill bad Principles into the People, who are of themselves too
prone to run into Errors and Extravagancies, and therefore instead of Goads to
excite, they need Bridles to restrain them from them: That they who are apt to
think justice or honesty a superfluous or needless virtue now under the Gospel,
and persuade themselves that Christ fulfilled all Righteousness on purpose to
free those that believe in him from the practice of it, will be Confirmed in
their pernicious Error, when they see iniquity established by Law, and a most
unjust thing done for the Defense and Security of Reformed Christianity: Nay,
which is more horrid, some will think, that which Men call Religion, no Divine
Institution, but mere Humane Invention, because if it come from God, the
professors of it may safely commend or commit it to his Protection, his Care
and Keeping, it being most reasonable to suppose, that he loves his own
Institutions, and is concerned in honor to preserve them from the attempts of
those that seek to destroy them: But when Men are so busy and forward to
support and secure their Religion by unjust and evil Arts, think it so weak and
helpless a thing that it is not able to shift for it self, to maintain or keep
its ground without the assistance of sinful and unlawful succors, This tempts
the suspicious to think it a mere humane invention; for if it be of God, it
needs no sin to uphold it, and they who do evil in defense of it, incur his
wrath as Uzzah did, who put forth his hand to stay the tottering Ark, which he
apprehended to be falling. Nothing of divine institution can possibly fall or
perish, so long as the Almighty Author of it is pleased to uphold and protect
it, but when he withdraws his support, and it is his pleasure that it fall, all
the power and policy of Men cannot keep it up, though they use the best and
most pious methods to that purpose. Princes and Magistrates it is certain may
and ought to do every thing that is just and innocent, for the safety of the
true Religion, but if they use any wicked or forbidden means to protect and
defend it, these by the just Judgments of God increase the danger, both hasten
and render the fall of it more ruinous and shameful, it dies certainly because
God has determined it shall, and that with reproach, and consequently leaves
an ill name behind it, not by its own Demerit, but by the Errors and evil
Practices of its lovers and admirers.

Now whatever Errors either of Judgment or Practice, this Device of yours
leads any of the People into, and whatever Ruin or Miseries they thereby bring
upon themselves, either in this World or in the other, all these you are
answerable, and will be called to a sad reckoning for, if not before, yet in
that great day when the Righteous God shall bring every work into Judgment,
with every secret thing whether it be good or evil, if you do not prevent it in
time by rectifying their mistakes, and changing their opinions of it, which you
may easily do, by representing to them faithfully and plainly the great
Jnjustice and Impiety of it, that Religion Condemns, Right Reason and common
Honesty Forbids it, that it is Evil in it self, Dangerous to the King, and
Mischievous to the People, and therefore to be abhorred not admired, rejected,
not chosen: Such a Declaration as this from you will recover the People out of
the Error and Snare into which you have drawn them, and reclaim them from
doting on it; but if you do it not, so long as they have your Persons in
Admiration, and cry up your Opinions as Orracles, they will be very
difficultly, if at all, convinced of the Injustice of it, and you omit that
which is necessary to complete your Repentance, and consequently to obtain your
Pardon from all whom you have thereby injured and offended. If you do the
other, God will be merciful, his Anointed forgive, and his Royal Highness be
reconciled to you, then it will be well with you, and happy shall you be.

Well, but you will say, if we lay aside Subsect. 6.
this Expedient, will not the Romans come and take away our Place and Nation?
must our Religion, our King, and all that is Dear to us be endangered by the
Papists, and shall we do nothing for our Defense, and Security? This is an hard
saying who can bear it? As for the Romans there is no doubt but they will
recover their lost Sovereignty, and set up their Religion here if they can
(though it be a great question whether they can do it) and we should be very
much to blame, and perish cheaply, if we do not use all fair and lawful means
to preserve our selves, But as for those that are unjust and sinful (as I have
proved this Project of yours to be) as they will do us no good, so we have no
need to use them.

For first, Is there no God, nor Providence? does not he that made, Govern the
World? Has he no care of, nor concern for them that profess his Truth, and
reverence or obey his Laws? That he is, you do not Question; and you have no
Reason to doubt the other, because St. Peter expressly affirms it, calling upon
us to cast our care upon him, because he cares for us: Has 1 Epist. 5. 7.
our Lord, who, when he was upon Earth, did with so much Labor, and so many
Sufferings purchase to himself a Church and People, who loved and gave himself
to Death, the cruel and reproachful Death of the Cross for it, has he, I say,
no kindness for his Church, no care at all of it, now he is in Heaven? Does the
Glory in which he shines on the right hand of his Father, the Rapturous Joys
and unconceivable Felicities he is there possessed of, divert his thoughts or
render him unmindful of his faithful Servants and devout Worshippers upon
Earth, so that he cares not what becomes of them? or if he bears them good
will, loves and is kindly affected to them, is he so poor, so impotent a
Prince, that he is not able to protect them? What Shame, and Folly, and Impiety
is it to think so meanly and unworthily of him? He that when he was upon Earth,
healed the Sick, raised the Dead, and did so many wonderful works, must needs
now all Power is given him both in Heaven and Earth, be a most mighty Savior
and Deliverer? of his abillity then to help and defend us, there can be no
question or doubt at all: all the dispute is whether he will do it? And to my
apprehension those words which St. Matthew relates as the last he speaks upon
Earth, have a favorable aspect this way, Lo I am with you always, even to the
end of the Chap. 28 20.
world: I am going from you, returning to the glorious place from whence I
came, to take possession of the Throne prepared for me in Heaven, but assure
your selves that when I am there, I will be careful of you, though you have not
my Bodily presence, yet I will afford you my Protection and Assistance, for
those words, I will be with you, signify commonly, will deliver you, as in
that promise to the Prophet Jeremy, be not afraid of their faces, for I am
with thee to deliver thee, says the Lord: and Chap, 1. 8.
St. Stephen speaking of Joseph, says, God was with him, that is, as he
explains it in the following Acts 7. 9, 10.
words, delivered him out of all his afflictions. It Is true indeed, this (as
all other temporal promises are) must be understood cum exceptione crucis, that
Christ will be with, protect and deliver his Church and People from all dangers
and sufferings, so far as is consistent with his Honor and Glory, and the
Interest of his Religion, when their Sufferings are necessary to do him Honor
in the world, to recommend his Religion to others, and gain Converts to it,
then he is With those he makes choice of to be his Martyrs and Confessors to
strengthen and comfort, or enable them to bear their Sufferings with Joy and
Patience, with a thankful and quiet Submission to his good will and pleasure:
And when his Sufferings can either do honor to Christ, or Service to his
Religion, he is unworthy of the name of a Christian, and can expect no portion
in his Kingdom, that repines at, or seeks to decline them by Sinful means. This
was the case of the Apostles, Christ was with them in the first sense, to
deliver them from many Dangers, and all their Enemies, till they had
accomplished their Ministry, preached the Gospel to the World, appointed others
to succeed them in their great and holy Office, left his Religion in such a
condition, that by his blessing and protection it was able not only to keep its
ground, but to make new conquests and spread it self farther in the World, but
when this was done, and the time come for them to confirm or seal the truth of
that, and to glorify him by their Death, then he was with them in the other
manner, to strengthen and support them in their Sufferings, to give them
courage, patience, and resolution to lay down their Lives to give Testimony to
his Truth.

And I see no reason why this promise should be restrained only to the
Apostles, because all true Christians have great need of this presence of
Christ, that he should be with them hoth to protect and defend them from their
Enemies, and to help or support them in their Sufferings, and also because the
time mentioned in it reaches farther than the Age the Apostles Lived in, Lo
(says he) I am with you always to the end of the world, which if it be
understood in the narrowest sense those words, the end of the World, are
capable of, which is the destruction of the Jewish Nation by the Roman Army,
yet none of the Apostles but St. John lived to see that dreadful period, and
therefore it is most reasonably to understand it of the Apostles and the then
Christians, whilst they lived, and of all true Christians in all Ages of the
World, till time shall be no more.

And if we of this Nation will but call to mind the former mercies and kindness
of our Lord, in what an eminent manner he has been with us ever since the
Reformation, how graciously and wonderfully he has guarded us from our cruel
Enemies of the Romish Church, we can have no cause at all to distrust him for
the future. How were the Romish Faction enraged at our Ancestors, because
renouncing their Errors, Superstitions, and Innovations, they returned to the
Pure and Primitive Christianity, and yet notwithstanding all their rage, fury,
and restless endeavors to destroy it, it still continues, and I hope will do
to the last period of the World. It Is true indeed Queen Mary's coming to the
Crown (which she obtained notwithstanding all the Arts and Methods that were
used to Exclude her) obscured and removed it for a time, so that it was
publicly owned only by the Martyrs and Confessors, but that, as was said of
the Julian Persecution, was but a cloud and soon vanished away, for her Reign
was short, and Popery in England died with her. For Queen Elizabeth succeeding
her, Restored, Established, or most firmly Settled the Reformed Religion, to the
great Joy of the Nation, and the indignation of Rome, for that Faction were so
incensed and provoked as to try all ways to destroy that glorious Princess, and
with her our Religion, hence proceeded frequent Treasons and Conspiracies to
Poison and Assassinate her, several Bulls from Rome, to forbid the Catholics
to come to our Churches, to Excommunicate the Queen, declare her fallen from
all Dominion, to Absolve her Subjects from their Allegiance, and Excite them to
take Arms against and depose her. And such was the rage of Pope Pius Quintus
against her, that he declared he would be ready to aid in person, to spend all
St. Peter's Patrimony, all the Chalices and Crosses of the Church, nay his very
Clothes to promote so good a work, as he thought her destruction to be: And
when no clandestine or secret means succeeded, the King of Spain sent his
Invincible Armado as it was arrogantly, and (as appeared by the event) falsely
called to invade, and take her Kingdom from her, but all in vain, for the
gracious and watchful providence of God preserved her, discovered all the
Treasons, defeated all the Attempts that were made against her, so that she
died in peace and full of years.

The same good providence did also protect her most excellent Successor, King
James, and the Parliament, from the Destruction intended for them, they being
all by Romish Treachery and Cruelty appointed as sheep for the slaughter, and
the Conspirators took all possible care to prevent discovery, so that it was
little less than a Miracle that it was detected. and thereby disappointed.

But I need not look so far back, our present most gracious Sovereign being an
Illustrious Instance or Proof of the certainty of those words of the Royal
Prophet, Great deliverance Psalm. 18. 50.
gives he to his King, and shows mercy to his Anointed: For has not a
tender providence shrouded him under its Wings, and conferred the most Eminent
blessings and deliverances upon him? How many dangers has he been in? was he
safe in Scotland, when in the hands of those Men that Rebelled against, and
ruined his glorious Father? Was it not possible for him to have fell at
Worcester by a murdering Bullet, or to be taken as he went off from that
unfortunate Battle? Were there no searchings for, no rewards offered to them
that could give information where the Royal Wanderer was? Was the Oak such an
Invincible fortress, such a sure defense, so safe an hiding place, as to afford
him protection, if the power and providence of the most high had not guarded
and overshadowed him? And has not the same providence that protected him then,
placed him upon the Throne of his Fathers, and preserved him from those two
horrid Conspiracies, that of the Romish, and this of the Fanatic or
Commonwealth Faction?

By all which you may know and see (if you do not wilfully shut your Eyes) that
the Lord helps or saves his Anointed, that the Kings life is most dear and
precious to him: That besides those you see (and so unjustly murmur at) he has
an invisible guard, the Angels of God, to be a Security and Defense to him. How
then can the King be safer than under the Protection of the Almighty, and why
should you doubt of his Future care of him, having such experience of the past
deliverances he has blessed him with? That God, who has been with, and so
miraculously preserved him all his life, will not withdraw his defense from
him, unless the sins of his People provoke him to it: And your pressing His
Majesty to so unjust an Act as the passing your Bill, gives the World just
cause to suspect that you do not really desire his safety, for that cannot be
had without the protection of God, which is to be obtained only by the use of
just and lawful means; And therefore if you sincerely desire it (as in duty and
gratitude you are obliged) be not faithless but trust in God, and depend upon
his Providence, you see he has saved his Anointed, and therefore have reason
to believe he will do it still, especially if you, and all his People make it
their frequent and earnest petition to him.

For Secondly, is there no Efficacy in Prayer? Do the pious and devout
Supplications of holy and good men Prevail nothing with God? Do they Call down
no blessings from Heaven? Conduce nothing to the safety and welfare of those
that use them upon Earth? If not, mankind have been sadly deceived; for in all
Ages and Places of the World the constant custom has been to invocate or call
upon God, and in all their dangers and necessities to make addresses to him, in
hopes to be heard, protected, and supplied by his Infinite Wisdom, Power, and
Goodness, for if this had not been their hope or expectation, they would never
have done the other, for to what purpose should men supplicate such a Being as
has no kindness for, and refuses to help them, takes no notice of, makes no
return to the petitions that are put up to him. It Is true indeed, most Nations
of the World have been so ignorant as to present their Prayers to a wrong
Object, to invocate false and imaginary Deuties, that could neither hear nor
help them, but they thought them to be wise and powerful, and the dispensors of
all manner of blessings, otherwise they would never have gone to their Temples,
nor approached their Altars, nor lifted up their hands, and hearts, and voices
to them. But we, thanks be to God, understand better than to be guilty of such
gross and impious Errors, we direct our Prayers to the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who is pleased to be called (as by one of his most eminent
titles of honor,) a God hearing Prayer, and commands us to make our devout
addresses to him, nay invites us to do it with great and gracious promises, It
shall come to pass that before they call I Esa. 65. 24.
will answer, and whilst they are yet speaking I will hear: So propense is the
Divine Goodness to help all Pious People, that it will not stay to be asked,
but prevents them many times with great and eminent blessings, and therefore
much more will he do it when they humbly beg such favors of him as their
present exigences require. Are they in trouble or danger, Call upon me (says
this most merciful Being) in the time of trouble I will deliver thee, and thou
shall glorify me. And lest any man should think his condition not capable of
help, suppose his dangers or wants too great to be averted or relieved by his
Prayers, our Lord has given us that most large and comprehensive promise,
verily, verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall ask the father in my name,
he will give it you: St. Jo. 16. 23.
Not every thing indefinitely, but whatsoever good thing, holy and good men
rightly ask of him for a good End, he assures us God will give it, if the
persons praying be pious and holy, the things prayed for just and lawful, the
end for which they are desired good, if they be asked in Faith with submission
to his holy will and pleasure, with a pious importunity and dependence upon
him, then the Prayer is within our Saviors promise, and of great efficacy with
God, so St. James affirms, The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man
Chap. 5. 16. Phil. 4. 6.
avails much, is of such mighty Power with God that St. Paul commands us, to
be careful of nothing (not to vex or disquiet, trouble or torment our selves
with dreadful apprehensions of the dangers that threaten and incompass us, not
to say, how shall we escape, what shall we do to decline the rage and cruelty
of our Enemies) but in every thing by Prayer and Supplication with
thanksgiving, let our requests be made known unto God, do but recommend your
selves to God in holy and frequent Prayer, with thankful acknowledgments of his
former Mercies, and you need trouble your selves no farther, but leave the
event to him, who will either give you deliverance here, or that which is
better and more desirable, eternal happiness and Salvation hereafter. The more
and greater our dangers are, the more frequent and fervent our Prayers and
Devotions ought to be, for when all other helps and means have failed, these
have procured the most eminent blessings and deliverances, the Church in all
Ages has experienced the benefit and advantage of them, for the Prayers of
holy men have saved Cities and Kingdoms from Ruin, obtained Victories, done
Miracles, shut and opened Heaven. By the Prayer of Moses the Amalekites, the
most malicious Enemies of the People of Israel were, vanquished; by the Prayer
of Asa the Ethiopians their most numerous Enemies were discomfited; And by the
Prayer of Isaiah and Hezekiah the vast Army of Sennacherib was destroyed by an
Angel, the Seige of Jerusalem raised, and he returned into his own Land, where
he fell by the Swords of his own Sons.

And if the devout Prayers of holy men have been so advantageous and successful
in former Ages, how come they to have lost their power and efficacy now, or to
be of such small credit with Christians, that they dare not trust to them, and
other lawful means, but seek to secure themselves by those that are sinful and
unrighteous? May not we expect the same help and benefit by them, which they
have afforded others in their dangers and distresses? yes certainly! And
therefore let it be our care, as it is both our wisdom and duty, to make use of
these, to put up Supplications, Prayers, and Intercessions; First for the King,
that God will give him along Life, a secure and happy Reign, save or deliver
him from all his Enemies, hide him from the gathering together of the froward,
and from the Insurrection of the wicked doers, discover and defeat all the
Councels and Conspiracies of Traitors, that they may fall into the Pit which at
any time they dig, and be taken in the Snare which they are so Impious as to
lay for him.

For his Royal Highness, that God will preserve him from the hands of Violence,
from the cruel, bloody Zeal of Fanatic Spirits, that he will be graciously
pleased (if he be a Papist) to inlighten him with the knowledge of the Truth, to
convert him to this Pure and Holy Church, that he may be saved in the day of
the Lord Jesus.

For our Religion, humbly beseeching the great and glorious Author of it, that
he will be pleased to preserve and continue it to us, and our posterity for
ever, that though our sinful and unsuitable lives deserve so sad and fearful a
Judgment, yet that he will be merciful to us, not suffer his Truth to fail
amongst, nor his Gospel to be taken from us. And that he will be pleased to
keep us from dishonouring our Religion, by using any unjust or unlawful means
for the Defense and Preservation of it, lest whilst we appear Zealous in such a
way for the true, we run into such errors and extravagancies, as will give the
World just cause to think that we have really no Religion at all.

If these things were piously and frequently recommended to the Divine
Goodness, both in public and private, by all that in this Nation profess the
Reformed Religion, we should soon see the Blessed effects of, and obtain a
Gracious answer to such Prayers. And therefore before we trouble our selves
about any more, let us try this most excellent Expedient, which has in all
Ages done such wonders in the World, let us make our devout Addresses to Heaven
as constant as we apprehend our dangers either are, or may be: Let the Houses
of God, the sacred Places set a part for Prayer or Invocation of his name be
more frequented and resorted to, Let us go into his Sanctuary, and fall low
upon our Knees before his footstool, lifting up unto him holy hands without
wrath and doubting. And let our own Houses be Temples, or Houses of Prayer, in
which at morning and evening, and at noon day, let us be sure to pray, and that
instantly for the safety of the King, and the Royal Family, and the
preservation of our Excellent Religion, as it is now by Law Established, that
we may lead quiet and peaceable lives in all godliness and honesty. Let us be
so wise as to consecrate large portions of our time to, and be frequent in
Prayer, esteem it an high and eminent expression of Love and Loyalty to your
Prince, and of Zeal for our Religion to commend them often to the care and
protection of the Almighty: No Man can have such a multitude or hurry of
Affairs, but that, as Religion obliges him, he may spare some time every day to
be spent in devotion, and it will be no interruption to them if he often
present that short, but most comprehensive petition of our Liturgy to Heaven,
Oh Lord save the King.

But if any think, that as the surly and stubborn Devil in the Gospel could not
be cast, so Popery cannot be kept out by Prayer alone, add Fasting to it, and
see what they will do united; for these two together have ever been accounted
of great efficacy to remove the Miseries that People lay under, and to avert
the Dangers and Calamities they feared. When that dreadful doom was by Jonah
denounced against it, Yet forty days and Niniveth shall be destroyed, the King
Proclaimed a Fast, and the People observed it, heartily bewailed their Sins,
cried mightily to God for Mercy, And he saw their works, and repented of the
Evil that he said he would do unto them, and he did it not. And if we take this
course, humble and afflict our Souls with Fasting, Lament, or be heartily Sorry
for our Sins, our Prayers will be very effectual and successful, such prevalent
Orators in the Court of Heaven, that none of them will return empty, but bring
down the choicest Blessings with them.

Holy vows too do not only express the earnestness of our desires, but enforce
or add Efficacy to our Prayers, when Jacob was to take his Journey to Padan
Aram, he made a vow unto Genesis 28. 20.
the Lord, saying, If God will be with me, and keep me in the way that I go,
and will give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on, so that I come again to
my Fathers house in peace, then shall the Lord be my God, and this stone which
I have set for a pillar, shall be Gods house, and of all that thou shall give
me, I will surely give the tenth unto thee. So may we say (but then as he did
we must be sure to perform our vow) If the Lord will be with us, and keep us
from the Romish Superstition, Cruelties, and Oppressions, then shall he be our
God, him will we Love, Adore, and Magnify, and his Laws shall be so dear to
us, that we will Reverence, Obey, or Live according to them all our days, and
we will express our grateful sense of so high a favor, by setting apart
liberal portions of our Estates to Pious and Charitable uses, there shall be no
want as of Churches to Worship him in, so of Maintenance for his Priests, the
Impropriations which Popish Avarice and Sacriledg alienated, shall by
Protestant Piety and Charity be restored, and plentiful provision made all over
the Nation (if it be not sufficiently done already) for the relief of the Poor,
that our very Enemies seeing our good works may be converted to us.

For to endear the Providence of God over us, and to strengthen or enforce our
Prayers, our care must be to obey our Religion, to lead the most pure and
Christian Lives, that the admirable purity of our Doctrine may not lie hid in
the Books and Monuments of our Church, but display its beauties in our Lives
and Actions. This will be most Acceptable or Pleasing to God, render us his Joy
and Care; Then he will keep us in Peace and Safety, delight to do us Good,
suffer none to do us Harm or Violence, but Destroy our Enemies, and Plague them
that hate us, this is to commit our selves to him in well doing, and will
invite him to be very tender of, and watchful over us.

A Nation of such Livers would be a fair, though imperfect resemblance of
Heaven both in their purity and safety. If there had been but ten such just Men
amongst the mighty crow'd of Sinners in Sodom, God would have spared them all
for their Sakes, their Piety would have been a protection and security to that
brutish Rabble, that not only refused to imitate, but hated and derided them
for it.

They that destroy holy and good men, do themselves the greatest harm and
mischief, not only because they shall be fearfully punished after this Life for
the Cruel and Injurious usage they offered them, have Judgment without mercy
because they showed no mercy, but also because when they, who by their Prayers
and Piety kept the heavy Wrath and Vengeance of God from falling on their
guilty heads, are removed, they will descend upon them in the most dreadful
manner, and with the most destructive fury.

A good Life, setting providence aside, is of it self a great preservative, as
it keeps Men from running into needless dangers, from doing injuries, and
thereby giving provocation to others: Some bring misery and ruin upon
themselves by the Slanders and Calumnies they are guilty of, some by Frauds,
Rapines, and Oppressions, many by Violence and Murders, multitudes by Treasons
and Seditions, others by Lust and Intemperance, some undo themselves by one
Sin, and some by another, besides the fearful and eternal Punishments they
bring upon themselves after this life: all which are avoided by a Pious and
Christian Conversation, and if all men were truly holy and religious, and would
continue so, they would be perfectly safe or free from danger, for all the
sufferings and dangers of the good proceed from them that either cast off all
Religion and Fear of God, or if they profess, do not practice it, but make it a
Cloak of Maliciousness, a Cover for all manner of Injustice, Oppressions, and
Cruelties. These, as they always hate, so they are continually plotting against
the just, and watch all opportunities to do them harm and injury, but God is
their helper and defender, he knows the dangers that threaten, and the malice
of their Enemies against them, and if he take them into his protection, they do
in vain conspire or attempt against them.

To say a Being so wise, and powerful and merciful as God is, that has by so
many and great expressions of his Goodness proved himself a Father and a Friend
to, or Lover of mankind, takes no notice or care of them, is to say the falsest
and most unreasonable of all things, because it is either to deny Wisdom,
Power, and Goodness, or to make them Superfluous, or of no use at all: And if
he protect or take care of any, it is most reasonable to suppose the just and
pious persons are those he extends that favor to, because they do in some
measure resemble him, and are the only Persons he delights in, for, The Eyes of
the Lord (says the Prophet) are over the Righteous, and his Ears are open to
their Prayers, that is, he loves and favors them highly, hears them
graciously, and therefore guards or defends them carefully. This is so certain,
that it is a very hard (if not impossible) thing to find any Nation or People
professing his Truth, and obeying his Laws, whilst they continue in that
profession and obedience, so forsaken by God as to be given up to the will of
their Enemies, to be Ruined (that is) and destroyed by them: Their Zeal for his
Glory, their Reverence for his Laws, their Piety and Holiness must decline and
degenerate before he will cast them off, particular persons though of great
Innocence and Virtues, may, and do frequently suffer in this World, but then
their Crowns are brighter, and their Reward greater for it, in that which is to
come: but as for Societies of pious and good People, if they be not rewarded
upon Earth, they cannot be rewarded at all, their present Peace, Safety, and
Prosperity being all the recompense they can receive from God as a Nation: And
it is a truth attested by the observation and experience of all the World, that
Judgments seldom (if ever) come, Calamity and Ruin rarely fall upon a People,
till their great and general contempt of his Laws provokes the Almighty to
inflict them.

Let it be our earnest care and endeavor therefore to become a righteous
Nation, and an holy People, make it appear that we truly love our Religion by
leading the pure and blameless Lives it requires of us, then we shall be as
safe and happy, as we can possibly be in this World, for the tender Providence
of God will watch over and preserve our King and Us, either make our Enemies to
be at Peace with, or deprive them of all Power to hurt us, then the Truth shall
flourish in this our Earth, and our excellent Religion take such deep root in
the Nation, that no power nor policy either of Devils or Men shall be able to
hurt or destroy it.

These as they are innocent, so they are sure preservatives, which every Man
may, and ought to make use of: And besides these, we have excellent Laws which
are a mighty safeguard and defense both to the King, and the Established
Religion, so that we want nothing for our security, having the gracious
Providence of God to guard and protect us, if we commend our selves to it by
devout Prayer, and holy Living, and such Laws to be a preservative to us, that
it is a vain thing to attempt either to mend or multiply them, because if these
cannot secure us none can.

All that can be done more is to remove the Subsect. 7.
Scandals, or whatever may give his Royal Highness (supposing him to be a
Papist) any cause to be offended at our Church, for though it be not just to
blame that for the Errors and Misdemeanors of them that either are, or
pretend to be of it, because it gives no countenance nor encouragement to them,
yet seeing our adversaries take every occasion to asperse it, it is both prudent
and necessary to take out of the way whatever may have any color or appearance
of a just objection against it, create in him an ill Opinion either of Us, or
the Religion we profess; These may be reduced to Three Heads, The lamentable
Schisms or Divisions that are amongst us, The open Profaneness and Wickedness
into which the Nation is lapsed, The great Injustice and Indignities that have
been offered to the Duke himself.

First, The lamentable Schisms or Divisions amongst us, there being no where
more sharp and bitter contentions, more implacable feuds and quarrels, such
numerous and peevish Sects, as amongst us that profess the most Pure and
Primitive Christianity: for by the just judgment of God (our Adversaries say)
ever since we departed from the Catholic Church (so they call the Roman) like
the Dove that went out of the Ark, we can find no rest for the Soles of our
Feet, cannot agree amongst our selves, nor follow that Peace, without which and
holiness, the Apostle affirms, no Man shall see the Lord, but divide and
subdivide, separate or run from one another, and are become a very Babel or
Confusion. This they object against, and think a mighty reproach to us, nay
take it for a sure Prognostic of the approaching fall and ruin of our Church,
because our Lord affirms, that an House or Kingdom divided against it self
cannot stand, which they use as an Artifice to draw People from us.

To this I answer, that it is true indeed, our Schisms or Divisions are great
and deplorable, that we are broken into Sects and Factions, are a distracted
and divided Nation: But then the Question is, how we came to be so, and what
the causes are from which they spring. That the guilt of them does not ly upon
our Church is certain, because it gives no just provocation to any to Separate
from the Communion of it: it teaches no False nor Erroneous Doctrines, makes no
new Articles of Faith, nor any other Conditions of Salvation, but those
propounded and required as such in Scripture: It sets up no forbidden Way of
Worship, presumes not to enlarge the Essentials of it, or to make any thing a
part of Gods Worship, which he has not enjoined as such. It Is true indeed, our
Church determins the modes and circumstances of it, because all Churches do it,
and they are not determined in Scripture, and are so necessary to be
determined, that unless it be done, the Essentials or Moral part of Gods
Worship cannot be performed, and because the leaving them Arbitrary would
produce endless disorders and confusions: But then these Ceremonies are not
culpable as to their number, unlawful in themselves, as contrary to the word of
God, sinful in their use, as being made means of grace, or having any holiness
ascribed to them, or so highly esteemed as to be thought necessary to
recommend, or render the worship it self acceptable or pleasing to God, nor
made of perpetual obligation, but are declared to be mutable Constitutions, or
such as may be changed or varyed as occasion serves, nay quite abolished or
taken away upon just causes, by the same Authority that Instituted or Ordained
them. The Government also of our Church by the Right Reverend Bishops is that
which is Commended in Scripture, was Instituted by Christ, Settled by his
Apostles, and has Continued in the Catholic Church without any opposition,
till Aerius first, and the Disciples of Calvin since, resisted, and where they
had power, cast it out. I appeal then to all the wise and sober World, whether
the Schisms and Divisions amongst us be not causeless and unprovoked, there
being no just offense given, nothing done by our Church to fright or drive the
People from the Communion of it, or prompt them to set up several Meetings. And
if the Divisions we are afflicted with cannot be truly charged upon the Church,
where must the Blamely, or who shall father the base and mischievous Brat.

They that lay it at the Jesuits door, charge them to be both the beginners and
continuers of the Schisms amongst us, have reason for what they say, because
the Zealots of that Church think every thing lawful that tends to the good and
advantage of the Catholic Cause: And nothing can be more serviceable to that
than our Divisions and Quarrels: divide and rule, is a Maxim approved by all
the Wicked Politicians; If they can but set those they would master at strife
and variance, they conclude they will thereby so weaken and consume one another
as to become an easy prey to them. Such Divisions Produce deadly feuds and
quarrels, implacable hatreds and animosities, and are the Causes of cruel Wars;
for Differences in Religion are for the most part managed with such heat and
passion, that the contenders proceed from words to blows, from disputing to
fighting for their beloved Opinions, or if they forbear that for a time, yet in
any exigences of State or Public dangers, they will not afford one another
that mutual help and assistance, which are necessary for their preservation,
but one party will look on, and see the other subdued, if not lend their
helping hands to destroy them: But the more united any people are, the better
able they must needs be to defend themselves against a common Enemy, but being
broken into Sects and Factions, their strength is Little, and not Sufficient to
repel the assaults of their Enemies. Cyrus, as Herodotus relates, intending to
Conquer Scythia, came to a great River that stopped his march, for as it ran in
one channel or current it would have Endangered his Army, Swallowed them up if
they had ventured to ford it, whereupon he made use of this Stratagem, to cut
or divide it into many parts, rivulets, and sluices, which so weakened its force
that they passed over without any danger at all: This seems to be the Policy of
the Jesuits in dividing us, for if all our people kept within their proper
Channel, our Church, the attempts of Rome would signify nothing, but like a
mighty torrent we should easily bear down all opposition, be strong enough to
defend ourselves against them; but the Sects and Factions they have caused
amongst us, weaken and give them great advantages against us; For hereby many
are Scandalized and turn Papists, because they think the Contentions we are
engaged in will be sure to ruin us at last, and therefore imagine themselves
safer in St. Peter's boat, than in a ship so leaky and full of breaches, as our
Church is. By this means also great numbers are frighted from Religion in
general, become Atheists, concluding that to be a mere Fable, about which there
are so many and such endless quarrels and bickerings, and which the professors
of, after so long time, and so much consideration, are not, will never be
agreed about, and it is indifferent to them that believe all Religion a cheat,
which gets uppermost, for they that are really of none, can and will seem to be
of any Church or Persuasion they can either get or save by, if either their
safety or profit require it, they can creep as devoutly to a Crucifix as they
can kneel to God Almighty. Lastly, by drawing multitudes of People from it, the
Jesuits have great hopes of gaining their so much desired, and so long
endeavored point, The destruction of our Church; for we see how Zealous and
Industrious the Dissenters have been and are to ruin or pluck it down, which
shows them to be set on by the Jesuits, and their Agents, to do their work for
them (though perhaps they know not, do not consider whose servants they are)
for if our Church be destroyed, Popery will certainly rise out of the ruins of
it, there being nothing to make head against it when that is gone, this is the
great Bulwork or Fort Royal, which if they can take either by undermining
Treachery, or open Force, the day is theirs. So that they who charge our
Divisions upon the Jesuits, as the Authors of them, have reason to justify that
charge, and the truth of it is so fully proved by the excellent Dean of St.
Paul's in the Preface to his unreasonableness of Separation (to which I refer
the Reader) that nothing needs Page 1^.
be added to it.

And being the first Sowers of these Tares, the Causers and Fomenters of our
Divisions, when they broak in upon our Church presently after the Reformation,
and which they have with their utmost care and diligence propagated and
continued ever since, with what face can they Upbraid us with, or make them an
Objection against it? for them to set us together by the Ears, and then blame
us that we do not agree, to be the Incendiaries and stir up Strife amongst us
from Age to Age, from Generation to Generation, and then reproach us with our
Contentions, is worse than Heathen Malice and Knavery; this is as barbarous as
if a Man should set his Neighbors House on fire, and then blame him for
letting it burn. We had lived in great Peace and Concord, and there had been no
Schisms amongst us, if they had not helped to disturb the one, and promoted the
other, and our Wounds would be presently closed, we should return to our
Ancient Unity, and live in the happiest Peace, if They and their chief Agents,
the leading Schismatics, that imbroyl and divide us, were (as upon all
accounts they deserve to be) Excluded or Driven out of the Nation. It Is certain
that not only all Protestants, but the Papists themselves at the beginning of
Queen Elizabeth's Reign came to our Churches, and if Pius Quintus had not
forbidden the Romish party to Communicate with, they had not Separated from us,
and his Emissaries the Priests and Jesuits, did under color of setting up a
more Pure and Spiritual way of Worship, seduce many Protestants from the
Church, and cause woeful broyls and dissentions, which put that prudent and
excellent Queen upon such methods as did effectually suppress and quiet them,
and it is most Unreasonable, and right Jesuitical practice, for them to father
their base and wicked offspring upon us, to cause divisions amongst us, and
then reproach us with them.

Besides, they that thus accuse and upbraid us with ours, have many differences
amongst themselves, those of their Religious Orders are notorious, and managed
with great heat and earnestness. There are many bickerings amongst them about
those points in which they differ from us: They are not agreed where to place
the Infallibility, whether in the Pope alone, or a General Council alone, or in
both of them together. They differ about his Supremacy, for some of them affirm
that he has no Authority over Princes, to give, take away or alienate their
Kingdoms, and that he unjustly assumes to himself such Authority; others as
stiffly assert or maintain that extravagant and usurped Power, cry it up as high
as they can, hoping thereby to advance themselves. Some affirm, others deny him
to be Universal Bishop. They are not agreed about the Latin Service, for some
of them hold it would be more for the Edification of the People if it were in
the Vulgar Tongue. They clash about the Worship that is to be given to Images,
and what the due honor is, which the Council of Trent decrees to be given to
them. They differ about the Power of Priests to remit sin, about the necessity
and institution of Auricular Confession. They do not agree in the Doctrine of
Justification, nor of Merit, nor concerning the Sacrifize of the Mass, nor the
Communion under one kind, nor in diverse other things, and how is it possible
they should? for having chosen Opinions that do not cohere or hang together,
they must needs disagree about them, and if their Tyrannical Discipline did not
awe and suppress them, their differences would be as great and irreconcilable
as any are in the World; for when they wrangle loudest, if his Holiness do but
threaten them with the Inquisition, they are as quiet as Lambs and dare not
mutter at all. And if any desire farther satisfaction in the Case, they may
consult the excellent Dean of St. Paul's in his Learned Discourse of the
Divisions of the Church of Rome, where their differences and dislentions are
fully proved and stated, and their false pretenses to peace shamed and
confuted. So that the unity they brag so much of is that of slaves, who are
forced to be quiet for fear of the whip, let the holy Inquisitors scourge them,
not with Rods as peevish Children are corrected, but with Scorpions as
incorrigible offenders are punished. And if their Church was not upheld by
force and cruelty, and the People kept in it like Beasts in a Pound, it would
soon fall to pieces and be the veryest Babel in the World. And till they have
better peace and agreement amongst themselves, they may be ashamed to upbraid
us with those divisions, they are the mischievous Authors and Promoters of.

It Is certain too that our Divisions had never grown so great, nor continued so
long, if the Laws had been duly Executed upon the Schismatics, for the just
corrections they decree against the troublers of this our Israel, and the
disturbers of our Peace, if inflicted, would have obliged them to give over
their wicked and dangerous practices. Such disorders and dissentions (as I
remarked before) by the Instigation of the Romish Emissaries, broak out with
great Violence in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, but by the just severity of her
Laws, duly and impartially Executed, she soon mastered and subdued them, and
her Successor King James by the watchful and diligent use of the same means
might have suppressed them, and settled the Nation in firm and lasting Peace, if
he had pleased, but the favor that was showed them, the mild and gentle usage
they found in the latter part of his Reign, did so multiply and encourage that
dangerous and stubborn Faction, that they were strong enough to bid Defiance
to, and Ruin that glorious Prince, King Charles the First. So lamentable an
Error is it for the Government to show favor and clemency to these People,
who when they have power make it appear by their barbarous Actions that they
have no mercy, and no honesty. If they be let alone there is no end of Peoples
whimsies and extravagancies in Religion, their Ignorance betrays them into the
wildest Errors, they have such odd notions and apprehensions of it as instead
of Civilizing, make them Savage and Brutish; instead of being Just, Merciful,
Humble, Peaceable, and Obedient to their Prince, prompt them to be Saucy and
Stubborn, Traitors, Heady, Highminded, Unjust and Cruel, Turbulent and
Seditious: They have such a mighty admiration for every Factious Fellow that
will but Cant and Whine, talk Impudently, and Sillily, and look Demurely, that
he may govern them as he pleases, they are his obsequious Slaves, and will
venture upon any thing, how base, execrable, and damnable soever that he
prompts them to, and therefore it is the interest of the Government to keep
such Seducers from them, to provide that they be duly instructed in their duty
as to God, so to their Prince, and if at any time they dare to transgress the
Laws, and grow freakish through Religious Zeal, that they be punished for such
dangerous Misdemeanors. This is absolutely necessary both for the Safety of
the Prince, and the Peace of the Kingdom, it is not only doing Justice upon
great and wilful Offenders, but Charity too, as it Keeps them from doing
themselves and others the greatest harm and mischief, Curbs or Restrains the
madness of the People. This is the wise and just method the Government now uses
to Remedy these Evils, to bring the wild Schismatics to their Wits again, to
reduce them to better Manners and a more Quiet or Submissive Temper, and it
will, if duly and diligently followed, put an end to our Divisions; then we
shall live as Christians ought to do, in Love, Peace and Unity, with one mind
and one mouth glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; then our
united Prayers will call down the choicest Blessings upon us, and none can make
our discords a pretense to run from our Church, because that scandal will be
removed; then our Differences will be composed, our Breaches repaired, and the
Divisions we have so long labored under, will be no more an Objection against
us; then our Ruin will be prevented, our Enemies put to silence, and we shall
be an happy People, which that God, who is the Author and Lover of Peace,
mercifully grant for his Sons Sake.

The next Scandal or Offense that would be taken away, is the open Profaneness
or Impiety into which the Nation is lapsed, for all (that do not wilfully shut
their eyes) may see how our Ancient Piety and Holiness are decayed, that though
we profess the best and purest Religion, yet a great part of the Nation are
sadly debauched, lead very impure and vicious lives, which is the more to be
admired and lamented, because, both our Religion and Laws condemn and forbid
such vile and unchristian practice. The professed Atheism, and the open
Scorning or Deriding all Religion, how intolerable are they in a Christian
Kingdom, and such horrid crimes as are sufficient of themselves (if we had no
other guilts) to ruin the Nation by calling down the most dreadful judgments
upon us, and provoking God to cast us off? In former Ages they that were so
unreasonable as to deny the Author of their being, and the great Creator of the
World, were yet so cautious as to conceal their impious unbelief of his
Existence; with their mouths they did not, durst not, though in their hearts
they said with the fool, There is no God: but now such an one is laughed at as
a timorous and sneaking Atheist, as a modest ungentile Infidel, that dares not
set his mouth against Heaven, and tell all the wise and religious part of
Mankind they ly, if they say there is a God. This is such brazen and impudent
wickedness, that the very Heathens abhorred, and severely punished it. What a
shame is it then that such monsters of men should dare in a Christian State
openly to deny the God it Worships, of whose Existence there is so much
rational Evidence, so many mighty Arguments and convincing Proofs (as has been
showed by many learned Writers of our Church) that can permit no man to be an
Atheist, but he whose horrid contempt of Him, and violation of his Laws cause
to despair of finding mercy from him, and to think his crimes so great that he
will not forgive them? It Is certain that all wicked men wish with all their
hearts there were no God to call them to account for their lewd and filthy
living, but their wishing of it will not make him cease to be, who is as
certainly as they deny him, he whom they now renounce and scoff at will one day
reckon with them for all the affronts they have put upon him, who will laugh at
their calamity, and mock when their fear comes, and we might leave them to be
punished by his vengeance and their own debaucheries, but that they are so
mischievous to the state. For setting the provocation it gives to God aside,
this open Atheism ought not to be suffered, because it is most pernicious to
the Government: For is not this the Foundation of all that Honor and
Obedience, which men pay to Sovereign Princes, that they are Gods Vicegerents,
derive their Power and Authority from him, and Govern the World in his stead,
are his Representatives and Commissioners? but they that say there is no God
deny all this, make Empire or Dominion a mere humane creature, and so free men
from the strongest and most effectual obligations to obedience, which Religion
lays upon them, and put those weak ones (which are easily broaken) in their
stead, Interest, want of Oppertunity, fear of temporal Punishment. For such men
will obey the Prince no longer than he heaps his Royal favors and benefits
upon them, than he advances and inriches them, when he turns the streams of his
bounty from them they are disobliged, and watch for an Opportunity to depose
him, and when ever they think it safe to make head against him, or can find a
Powerful Faction to lead, they will be sure to Rebel, because then they fear
nothing from the Prince in this, and believe nothing that Religion speaks of
the Punishments of the other World. But he that believes there is a God, and
Princes to Reign by Him, by his Order and Appointment, that he requires all
their Subjects to Reverence and obey them, and that he will inflict Eternal
Punishments upon all, that for any cause whatsoever Rebel or take Arms against
them, this Man cannot, dares not, so long as he believes these things, refuse
to pay them all due honor and obedience. And therefore for their own Sakes, as
well as for the honor of their Glorious Founder, it is the great Interest and
Concern of Princes to punish open and professed Atheists, as his, and their
most dangerous Enemies, especially those that make it their Common practice to
expose, and render every thing ridiculous that is believed by others to bear
his Name and Inscription, laugh at his Laws which he has given us to direct
our Lives and Actions, as injurious and unreasonable impositions, that require
Men to deny themselves the Pleasures and Delights of the World, to part with
every thing that is dear to them, to endure Poverty and Death, and all the
miseries of the World, and all this to obtain Rewards, and avoid Punishments
which are to commence after this Life. These and all their other Blasphemies
against God, and his Son Christ Jesus, and his most Wise, Holy, and Excellent
Religion, would be severely and exemplarily punished, and one such Decree, as
King Nebuchadnezzar made in honor of God would effectually stop the mouths of
these bold Sinners, and Mischievous as well as Impudent Blasphemers. Therefore
I make a decree that every People, Dan. 3. 29.
Nation, and Language, which speak any thing amiss against the God of Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego, shall be cut in pieces, and their houses shall be made a
dunghill, because there is no other God that can deliver after this sort: Such
a Bill of Exclusion as this, to shut Atheism Blasphemy, and Profaneness out of
the Nation, and the strict Execution of the good Laws already in being, upon
all the Reigning Sins that are amongst us, would conduce mightily to the
security and preservation of our Religion, both as it would prevail with God to
continue it amongst us, and discourage our Enemies from attempting the
subversion and destruction of it.

First, prevail with God to continue it amongst us, for when he sees a Nation
or People have that high honor and esteem for his Laws, as to obey them
heartily, make it their chief study and endeavor to live up to them, prise
them above all Earthly Enjoyments, and admire them as the most precious
Treasure; his goodness will not permit him to take them from such a People,
because they answer all the ends he proposed to himself in the donation of
them, which are his Honor and their Salvation: His honor that he might be
glorified by their Piety and Holiness, by all those virtuous Actions and good
Works which they perform in obedience to them: Their Salvation, that his bounty
and goodness in rewarding them with the Immortal Felicities of his Heavenly
Kingdom, might appear great and illustrious, and be the Subject of their
eternal Praises and Thanksgivings: And if these be the ends of his giving of
them (as no doubt they are) it is reasonable to believe that by obeying the Laws
of Christ, by leading the pure and holy Lives his Religion requires of us, we
oblige and invite the Divine Goodness to preserve or continue it amongst us,
because we put it to the excellent use he intended it for. But if we profane
and dishonor it by lewd and impure living, if we call our selves Christians,
and live like Heathens, the worst and most brutish sort of Heathens, as we
deserve so sad a punishment, so it is most just for God to take his Gospel from
us, it being as our Savior speaks, Casting pearls before swine, to continue a
divine and holy Law to People lapsed into all Impurity and Sensual living, for
the Alcoran is fitter for such vile people than the Gospel, because that allows
them to be as vicious as they please, but this consists of whatsoever things
are true, and honest, and just, and pure, and lovely, and of good report, of
all those excellent virtues that can raise and advance our nature, make us
holy, just, and merciful as our Heavenly Father is, and both requires, and with
the most persuasive Arguments presses us to the practice of them, which if we
refuse to do, as we cast contempt and reproach upon our Religion, so we provoke
God to take it from us, unless we prevent so sad and deplorable a loss by our
unfeigned Repentance, as our Lord admonished the Angel of the Church of
Ephesus, Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, Revel. 2.
5.
and do the first works, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove
thy Candlestick out of his place (take my Gospel from thee) except thou repent.
Let it be the care then of all that are in Authority to suppress the great and
crying Sins, to Exclude the bold and reigning wickedness out of the Nation, and
there will be no fear but God will be With us, and continue his Gospel, or the
true Religion amongst us.

Secondly, this will be an excellent Expedient to secure our Religion, as it
will discourage our Enemies from attempting the Subversion and Destruction of
it, when they see us lead the pure and blameless lives it requires of us,
behold our good Conversation in Christ, they will be ashamed to call us
Heretics, being an holy People, a Pious and Righteous Nation, they will fear
that what Balaam said of Israel will be verified in us, surely there is no
Enchantment against Jacob, neither is there any divination against Numb. 23. 23.
Israel: It Is in vain (they will say) for us to Plot or Enterprise against
them, their Piety makes them dear to God, and their Innocence is their
protection, we may ruin our selves but we cannot hurt them, so long as they
adhere to God he will not forsake them, not suffer them to be cast down, nor
let any harm happen to them, the Arrows we shoot at them will wound our selves,
and we shall fall into the Destruction we intended for them: Nay when they see
us add to our pure Faith a Virtuous and Christian Life, they will be tempted to
admire and think our Church a Lovely Image or Resemblance of Heaven, in which
Righteousness Reigns, and from which Wickedness is Banished or Excluded, and
that admiration will be a powerful inducement to invite or draw them to us,
urge them to leave their Idols and join in the pure Worship we present unto
God, persuade them to turn from darkness to light, from their Sinful and
Disconsolate Superstition, to our Holy Religion, which fills our Souls with Joy
and Comfort now, and leads them to Eternal Bliss and Pleasures. But if we
continue in our present Impieties they will scorn us and our Religion for them,
despise us as humoursome and perverse People that hold the truth in
unrighteousness, the purity of our Doctrine, being covered with the filth and
rubbish of our Vices, will be sullyed and look dim, not appear at all lovely or
inviting to them; they will think they have reason to hate us, because our
wicked Lives have made us hated of God, and will be confident either of his
approbation of, or connivance at their designs and attempts against us, believe
God is not for us, and therefore that they may safely and successfully be
against us. They will call us Hypocrites for finding fault with their way of
Worship, whilst our wilful Sins defile our own: With what face (they will ask)
can you charge us with giving too much Honor to the Saints, when you account
their Lives to be Folly, deny them that which all the Christian World confesses
to be due to them, even the Honor of Imitation, refuse to follow their good
Examples, and have very few Relics or remains of their Piety amongst you? How
dare you blame us for the multitude of our Ceremonies, when you have turned all
Religion into a Ceremony, or mere Complement, saying, Lord, Lord, but do not
the will of God? If it be unlawful for us to assert the merit, how abominable
is it in you to deny the necessity of good works, as it is evident, you do by
refusing to perform them? If our Church be guilty of some Errors, your People
are defiled with many Impieties, and need another Reformation; why then are you
such Hypocrites as to take notice of the mote in our eye, and not to cast the
beam out of your own.

Thus will they upbraid and reproach us, and having so much to object,
encourage themselves in mischief against us, and therefore as it ought to be
the great and earnest care of private Persons to reform what is amiss in their
Lives, so of all that are in Authority both to be Examples of Piety to the
People and by Executing the Laws upon them to be a terror to the evil doers,
that our Religion may neither be dishonored nor endangered by the Impieties of
the Professors of it, that God may not be provoked to take it from us, our
Enemies encouraged to attempt against it, nor any be offended, or tempted to
run from it, because we disgrace it by our unsuitable lives, but that every
thing be removed that may stain the beauty, obscure the glory of it, render men
fugitives from, rather than Converts to it.

The other great Scandal which I desire may be removed, is the high Injustice
and Indignities that have been offered to the Duke himself, it is certain that
he has had the hardest measure, and the greatest injury tendered him, and
therefore in Justice ought to have some proprotionable reparation made him,
which that it may be effected, it is my request to the People that they will
make a better choice whenever the King pleases to call a Parliament. Let it
be your care, my beloved Countrymen, to Elect Loyal and Honest Men, Men that
fear God, and hate Iniquity or unjust dealing, that dare depend upon God in the
use of fair and Innocent means, for the security of our Religion, and every
thing else that is dear to them, and will not do a base or unworthy thing to
save them.

You see what irreparable injury and horrid mischief, the Fanatic Faction,
those great admirers of the Bill of Exclusion, would have done you, took away
the breath of your Nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord, by a most barbarous and
execrable Assasination, they had Plotted (and if the merciful God had not
prevented them) would have killed your King, a King under whose wise and just
Government you live in Piety, Peace, and Plenty, enjoy all the Blessings you
can desire, or Heaven can give you in this World, a Prince that loves you, and
consults your welfare, and is always Solicitious or thoughtful to secure your
quiet and happiness.

His Royal Brother too, should have been murdered with him, and as they are
conjoined in blood and the dearest affection, so the same untimely and cruel
fate was intended for them both, that Life which his Royal Highness had so
bravely ventured for the safety and defense of his Country, should by the most
execrable treachery and baseness have been took from him.

And do, or can you think they that had conspired the destruction of two such
excellent Princes, would, if their hellish design had succeeded, have been
either merciful or just to you? No, no! Multitudes of you had perished by their
bloody Swords, and those that had escaped would have lead a Life worse than
Death, the Life of Slaves, a life made miserable and tedious by continual fears
and intolerable oppressions. The Estates your careful Parents left you, or
which you have obtained by your own Labor and Industry, would have been a prey
to these your new Masters, and when they had been devoured, you must have
drudg'd for more to glut their insatiable coveteousness.

I conjure you therefore by all that is dear to you, by the Honor, Love, and
Loyalty you bear to the King, and as you tender your own safety and happiness,
to choose none of the Excluders, none that gave their votes for that (as I
suppose I have proved it) wicked Bill, or are known to be admirers and
favorers of it, if you do, you are partakers in their guilt, create new
trouble and disquiet, vexation and danger to the King, offer fresh injuries and
indignities to his Royal Highness, cast more reproach and dishonor upon our
Religion, encourage men of Traiterous and Wicked Principles to Plot and Imagine
more mischief, and so bring your selves and the Kingdom into misery and ruin.

Be wise then, and let not remote and distant, if not imaginary, prompt you to
expose the King, the whole Nation, and consequently your selves to present and
real dangers, but take the first opportunity to remedy all these evils: There
is no want of loyal and brave persons (thanks be to God) that are able and
ready to serve him, their King, and you in that high Station, if you please to
make choice of them, you may know them by their fruits, their Addresses and
Abhorrences, that is, by the Declarations they have made of their Loyalty, and
Resolution to stand by and defend the Kings most Sacred Majesty with their
Lives and Estates against all his Enemies, and all Traitors both Popish and
Fanatic, and their protestations of their dislike and hatred of the injurious
Treatment that has been offered to his Royal Highness. These are the men that
must close our gaping wounds, heal our ruinous Dissentions, appease our deadly
Feuds and Differences, and restore us to our Ancient Peace and Happiness: But
the other are Physicians of no value, their Physic is too violent, instead of
recovering it would destroy the Patient, they are not for moderate Counsels,
but run into dangerous extremes, bring fuel to feed, instead of water to quench
the Feuds and Contentions that burn so fiercely amongst us. Be sure then to
leave out these, and choose the other, the Men of Loyalty and Integrity, who as
they hate Popery, so they do heartily love Righteousness, these will please God
and the King, and it will be an high honor and a great happiness to you, and
the whole Nation to have such excellent Representatives.

And hoping the next House of Commons will consist of such worthy Patriots and
Members, I humbly petition that, then, truly Honorable House, that they will
please to do that, which God and all good men expect from them, and their own
loyalty and generosity cannot but prompt them to, that they will make some
grateful and suitable Returns to the King for all his Royal care, watchfulness,
most prudent and happy endeavors to preserve us in Peace, and secure our
excellent Church, and most holy Religion from all the attempts of all its
Enemies. The Ship of State, and all its precious Lading must needs have
perished, when the winds of Sedition blew so loud, and the waves of Faction
raged, and the storms of popular Tumults beat so Furiously against it, if his
Royal hand had not Guided the helm, stear'd an even and a wary course. But, Oh,
what care and labor, how many anxious thoughts, sleepless nights, and painful
days did it cost him to weather the Storm? And can you be so ungrateful as to
overlook his Royal labors to attain this rest, and render him no agreeable
returns for them? It cannot be! your Loyalty will not, your Piety cannot suffer
you to be so unmindful either of your own Duty, or his Princely Care and
Goodness to you. As you have congratulated his deliverance, and paid your
solemn thanks to Heaven for it, and in his your own, so let it be your care to
put his Sacred Majesty into such a condition, by your liberal Supplies, that he
may be able to defend himself, and you, and all his good Subjects from the
Violence and Cruelties of all the Disturbers of the Peace, and Destroyers of
the Happiness you enjoy under his Royal Care, and most prudent Government.

This is a Tribute your gratitude cannot, your wisdom will not deny to such a
Prince, that so tenderly loves, so watchfully protects you; and having filled
Heaven with thanks for the wonderful preservation of his Sacred Person and most
Precious Life, and all parts of the Nation with your admirations and praises of
his incomparable Wisdom, Justice, and Goodness, what an unpardonable Solecism
and Error will it be, to give encouragement to the Wicked and Seditious to
enterprise or attempt any thing against him, by reason of the emptiness of his
Exchequer.

To keep the Prince poor is dangerous to the People, both because it renders
him unable* to protect them, and also abates their fear, and thereby animates
his and their Enemies to attempt against him, and to endeavor the Subvertion
of the Government. And it is very reasonable to believe the late proceedings
had never run so high, but that the Authors of them presumed upon the
necessities of the King, they thought (though with strange Insolence and
Impiety) he would deny them nothing they demanded of him, in hopes of getting
money of them. All which evils it is now in your power to prevent, the Nation by
His Majesty's Providence and excellent Conduct is in a flourishing condition,
the Loyal Party are so willing to give, that if you do not make have, they will
Assess themselves rather than their Prince shall want, and the Disafected can
find money Voluntarily to contribute toward the Subversion and Destruction of
the Government, and therefore should be forced to pay toward the Suport and
Preservation of it. If the wicked Conspirators had prevailed in their late
villainous Design, both your Lives and Estates had been a prey to their
barbarous Cruelty, and insatiable Covetousness, and having escaped so dreadful
a Danger, and such imminent Ruin, take heed how you encourage them to imagine
any more Mischief, by denying the Ring such Supplies as are necessary for his,
and yours, and all our preservation.

Let it be your care also to cover the Pit which the Excluders have dug, I
mean, to make his Royal Highness reparation for the injurious and unworthy
Treatment he has received from them: You have abhorred it without doors,
therefore do it within, cast out the Bill as a wicked and abominable thing, and
shut the door after it, that it may never return any more. Be pleased to do
that, which your great Wisdom and Justice cannot but prompt you to, Go to the
Duke and let him know your deep resentments of the wrongs that have been
offered him, and beseech him not to think the worse either of you, or the
Established Religion for them, because this has taught you, and all the true
Members of the Church of England to abominate the Project of Exclusion as a
piece of high and execrable Injustice. Show him the difference between the
true, and the seeming Protestants, that those have so much Religion and fear of
God, that they dare do injury to no man, much less to their Princes, and had
rather suffer themselves than they should, whereas these have more Zeal than
Honesty, and care not whom they injure and oppress, so they can but secure and
preserve their own dear selves. Treat him with all the honor and respect due
to his Royal Birth and Virtues, omit nothing that may testify your high
esteem and veneration for him, use all the fair and prudent means you can, to
gain his favor and good opinion of you, and to convince him of the justness
and honesty of your intentions toward him.

Such methods as these are Christian and Noble, and fit to be practiced toward
a Prince, and may by the Blessing of God work very much upon his great and
generous Soul (brave Spirits being sometimes courted to that which they will
never be hectored into) and (if he be a Papist) be instrumental to his
Conversion, which will not only be grateful or pleasing to God, his Angels and
Saints in Heaven, but fill this our English Earth with Joy, revive our
languishing Happiness, restore our Nation to its ancient Glory, put a blessed
period to all our Distractions and Confusions, then we shall live in Peace and
Unity amongst our selves, and, unless we be the most ungrateful People in the
World, in true Piety and Obedience to our God, who has done so great things
for us; then it will be well with us, and happy shall we be, and Foreigners
will call these Kingdoms as they did of old, The Fortunate Islands: All which
the great and Gracious Governor of the World, God Almighty, in whose hands the
Hearts of Princes are, Grant for the Merits of our dear Redeemor.

Amen.
FINIS.
Some Books Printed for and sold by W. Freeman by Temple Bar in Fleet Street.
THE Penitent Pardoned, or a Discourse of the Nature of Sin and Efficacy of
Repentance under the Parable of the Prodigal Son. By Dr. Goodman.

Daily Exercise for a Christian. By a Person of Exemplary Piety for his own
use. price, 1. s.

Holy Devotions, with Directions to Pray, also a brief Exposition upon the
Lords Prayer, the Creed, Ten Commandments, Seven Penitential Psalms, and the
Seven Psalms of Thanksgiving, together with a Litany, By the Right Reverend
Father in God, Lancelot Andrews, late Bishop of Winchester. the 7th. Edition.

Means to Preserve Peace in Marriage, by the Author of Rules of Civility, in
Twelves, Price 1. s.

The Manners of the Israelites in Three Parts, First of the Patriarcks, Second
of the Israelites after their coming out of Egypt to the Captivity of Babylon,
Third of the Jews after their Return to the Preaching of the Gospel.

The President of Presidents, or one general President for Common Assurances by
Deeds: Wherein there is an Extract of all the General Learning and Forms of
Presidents now extant. Out of which you may be fitted for most purposes and
cases; and be able to find the faults of any Conveiances, and so Judge of your
Right and Title to your Lands and Goods; here being (upon the matter) the
Effect and Quintessence of all Books of this kind. Of singular use and Profit
to all Men. By W. Sheppard Esquire The Third Edition Corrected, in Octavo.

The Clerks Manual; or an Exact Collection of the most approved Forms of
Declarations, Pleas, general Issues, Judgments, Demurrers, and most kind of
Writs now used in the Court of King's Bench, with necessary Instructions to all
Clerks, Attorneys, Sollicitors, etc. In the use of the same. The Second
Edition. Octavo.

The Practick Part of the Law, showing the Office of an Attorney, and a Guide
for Solicitors in Octavo.

An Infallible way to Contentment in the midst of Public or Personal
Calamities. Together with the Christians Courage and Encouragement against Evil
Tidings and the Fear of Death. In Twelves.

The Court of the Gentiles; Part Fourth, of Reformed Philosophy; Book Third, of
Divine Predetermination, wherein the nature of Divine Predetermination is fully
Explained and Demonstrated, both in the General, as also more Particularly as
to the Substract matter or Entitative Act of Sin: By Theophylus Gale, in Quarto.

Starrons Novels, viz. The fruitless Precaution, the Hypocrites, the Innocent
Adultery, the Judge in his own Cause, the Rival Brothers, the Invisible
Mistress, the Chastisement of Avarice, the Unexpected Choice, Rendered into
English, with some Additions, in Octavo.

Xenophons Histroy of the Affairs of Greece in Seven Books, Being a
Continuation of the Peloponnesian War, from the time where Thucydides ends to
the Battle at Mantinea. To which is Prefixed an Abstract of Thucydides, and an
Account of the Land and Naval Forces of the Ancient Greeks. Translated from the
Greek, by John Newman. (This will be Published in few days) in Octavo.


