THE Clergy's late Carriage TO THE KING, CONSIDERED. In a Letter to a friend.
Allowed to be Published this 2d Day of July, 1688. SIR,
PErhaps I am in the wrong, but I beg your Pardon if I cannot think so, when I
don't know it. On the contrary, I grow more assured in my Opinion, since
the other Night, by all the Reflections I could make upon what past between us.
It seems, I say unaccountable to Good Sense, Duty, Modesty, and every thing
that becomes a dutiful Subject (to say nothing of the Christian) that the King
was not only not obeyed by the Clergy, where it was no Sin to do it, but where
the Obedience was purely Ministerial. Had it been to renounce their own
Religion, or to receive His, it had been something; but when it was to secure
every Religion from Violence and Persecution: Nay, when it was a Declaration of
His Mind about a good Work, and not of Theirs: No new Declaration of Liberty of
Conscience, but a Publication of what He had done last Year; and that what was
New in it, was only the King's Resolution to have a Parliament next Winter, in
order to have that past into a Law, which the Bishops seemed only to dislike
for want of being done by Law and Still to resist their King and Head, I say,
this is something surprising. In short, the Declaration was in its first part
merely Historical, what the King had done April 1687. the last part what He
would do, to wit, have a Parliament in Novem. next at farthest to Establish
this Liberty of Conscience. And as this was in truth the Business of the
Declaration, the other but the Preface to it, so with trouble I say it, that
this makes their Disobedience the more suspected, and unreasonable; for they
refuse to tell the World, the King would have a Parliament to confirm the
Liberty, which yet they profess to be for, in Parliament. I say, this looks
with an ill Air, and carries too great a contradiction for Men of their
Function and Learning; and yet so it must be, or they are insincere in their
Petition. But this is not all; The Reverence these Gentlemen have always
professed for the Monarchy, Their Opinion of the mighty Power of it, The
Character they have fixed on those that have been scrupulous to obey it, in
Cases less clear then this, is an aggravation of their Misfortune; for at this
rate no inseriour Minister is so much as obliged to report the Act of a
Superior, if it is not suitable to his own Judgment: A Clark of a Court may
refuse to read an Indictment, because he thinks the Man Innocent that is
impeached at the Bar by it: No Sheriff ought to read a Proclamation, or execute
an Offender unless his Judgment concur with that of the Prince or the Judge. It
carries (what ever they think of it) the power of Questioning the Commands of
Superiors into all the capacities and relations of Life, even where it is no
matter of Faith. If I bid my Servant go tell a Man I deal with, He has used me
very dishonestly, at this rate he may refuse for this reason, That truly he has
a better opinion of him, and therefore will not go of my Errand. Had the King set
up for Law making, or intended finally to abrogate Laws, or suspend Laws made
against any thing that was evil in it self, or Laws that preserve Property
instead of those that take it away; or that it had touched upon matters of
Faith, or the Worship of God, or intrench't upon any Privilege that belongs to
the Church of England; or if He had required them to read the Opinion of the
Judges about the Dispencing Power, or a Treatise in defense of it, in order to
Endoctrinate the People, they might have had room for some Exception, and yet
in this latter Case perhaps they had been little more then Ministerial too. But
when it was only to tell his Subjects, in the most effectual way (more going to
Church then to Market) that whereas He did emit a Declaration in 1687. for
Liberty of Conscience, (the Historical part) He resolved in November next, at
farthest, to hold a Parliament for the Confirmation of it: Give me leave to
say, without offense, It looks as if the Exception were a Cavil, and not a
Scruple.

By whom else should the Ecclesiastical Head speak to the Ecclesiastical Body?
for it therefore seems to me reasonable that they should have read it in their
Churches, because they are the State Meeting Houses, and the Clergy the State
Mouths. Will they claim their Legal Privileges, and not bate an Ace of being
the Church of England as by Law Established, and yet refuse to let the Head
speak by them the Mouth, His mind to the People, his Ecclesiastical Body? Can
this consist with Ecclesiastical Headship and Obedience? where no Assent or
Consent was exacted from them, nor were they to require it of the People; but
as I said before, a mere Report of the King's Mind, referring to a public
future Act, of which the Peoples Information was requisite for their own
Benefit and Content, as well as the Kings Service. I say, for the Clergy to
refuse their Head, and this Head too, that they so generally and earnestly
desire to wear upon their Shoulders, and at this time of Day, and about a thing
they say they have a due tenderness too, has an appearance as if they would
widen Breaches and highten Animosities, ay, ripen and head them too, instead of
suppressing them. I say, it looks so, for I would fain have a better opinion of
their Loyalty and Conscience then to think they meant it; However this Conduct
goes too far, thus to strive and chicane with their Prince, and by popular
pretenses to raise themselves upon the breath of the Rabble above the duty they
ow Him, this is at least the appearance of Evil, and unbecomes Men of Peace and
Religion, to be sure such as pretend to be the Successors of the Apostles, that
command Obedience for Conscience sake, where Conscience was not imposed upon,
and has been pleaded by this very Clergy against Dissenters, to urge their
Conformity where matters of Faith and Worship to God were concerned.

Tho this, I say, and not Religion, be the Case, yet such is the Malice of the
World, as to say it, and such has been their Weakness, as to give occasion for
it: I confess that has been the uneasiest part to me, that they have acted, I
mean their Mock Martyrdom, to force Suffering and act it to a Farce. What else
can be their Blessing People ten deep of a side, with Have a care of your
Religion, be faithful to your Religion, the Lord strengthen you etc. and whilst
not one tittle of their Religion, but the Liberty of other Men's was the Case:
What shall an honest Man think of this? when the plain English of the matter
was that they went to the Power for not reading a Declaration for settling of
Liberty of Conscience by Law, to hinder them from ever making Martyrs of other
Men any more for Conscience sake. This is the Point before God and Men, after
all the bustle their Non-resisting Principle has suffered them to make; and
it is this I am scandalized at, to see a jest acted so much in Earnest, and
Religion made one, and profain'd too, by such forced pretenses. God give them
Repentance and confirm the King in his wise course of Moderation: For the
Liberty when seftled will shame its Enemies, and save and increase the number
of its Friends, for what ever is suggested by ill Men, it is Liberty of
Conscience that is aimed at. Liberty built upon a Rock and not a Sand: To be
framed to exclude any one Party from the Power of endangering the rest: Can we
honestly fear Popery should break this Liberty, when it even becomes a security
against the more refined Popery of the Church of England? What will prevent the
less cannot admit the greater. The Net which will catch a little Fish, will not
let a greater pass. How unjust therefore are the Jealousies of those, and how
impudent their Words that prejudge that matter, and will not leave it to the
only place where the Trial of the sincerity of all Parties can be made? I mean
a Parliament: To that time I refer the whole Controversy, and do beg all
Parties to prepare to make the Session happy in trying not how to divide, but
unite upon this great Point; where if the Bishops show their conversion to
Liberty, by a tenderness truly due to Conscience in every Party, I shall
heartily change the opinion, their contrary practice, for so many Years past,
has constrained me to entertain about them, but till then I have greater reason
to count their present Zeal A fit of Art, than they have to suspect the Court
of insincerity in the business of the present Declaration: A thought that Seven
Years ago would have been with them Insufferable in a Dissenter, especially
about any Act of power in the Clergy's favor. What then can one call Their
crime, that in the name of Religion, and Law, can bring themselves to contest
their Kings command, upon his Judges Opinions, in a case of so much mercy and
goodness? For such an one this is, and the effect of it Heaven has already
blessed: It is what might have become the greatest, and best of Princes of former
Ages, but it looks as if it had been reserved for the glory of him that now
Sways the English Scepter; and I confesss I cannot refrain hoping this goodness
of his, will give Example, even where his power cannot give Law.

London, Printed for H. L. and I. K. and Sold by most Booksellers in London and
Westminster.


