Methodus Evangelica; OR, THE GOSPEL METHOD OF Gods saving Sinners BY JESUS
CHRIST: Practically Explained in XII PROPOSITIONS.

By the late Learned Dr. ABRAHAM CLIFFORD.

To which is prefixed a PREFACE, by Dr. Manton, and Mr. Rich. Baxter.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Brabazon Aylmer at the three Pigeons in Cornhill.
MDCLXXVI.

IMPRIMATUR
Hic Tractatus de Foedere Gratiae.

Jan. 24. 1675. Gul. Jane Rev. Dom. D. Episcopo Land. a Sacris domest.

Academiac Cantabrigiensis Liber


To the Worshipful and truly Religious Patriot of his Country JOHN STEPHENS of
Overlyppiat in the County of Gloucester, Esquire
SIR,
THough we live in an age wherein Religion is more talked of, than practiced;
and profaneness more in fashion than Piety: Yet (blessed be God) there are
still some among us (and those not a few) who dare not make their lust their
law. What a deluge of errors, in opinion as well as practice, has of late
years, overflowed this Nation, every corner thereof has more cause to bewail,
than skill to cure. Amongst the which, the Solifidian or Antinomian makes not
the least bustle, nor by their specious pretenses do the least mischief, who,
whilst they seem to cry up the noble Grace of Faith, beat down the power of
Godliness. As if pleading for duty, (though but in its proper place) were to
derogate from the freeness of Gods Grace, or allsufficiency of Christ's merits.
But, that these not only may, but must go together (though some there be that
seem to deny the latter) the Author of this ensuing discourse has learnedly
avouched. The work; as (at first) it was, at my request by the Author
undertaken, (though then without the least intention, in either of us, of
publishing it) so being at his death wholly left to my dispose; I held it a
duty incumbent upon me, to do what I could to make the same more public, since
it was so hopefully brought to the birth, especially being pressed thereunto by
diverse knowing Christians (Divines and others, who had got a sight of it.) Many
friends the Author I know had, (Persons of Honor, and others) for whom
(whilst living) he had a great respect, and who had the like for him. Some of
whom may (perhaps) expect to have been here remembered. But since Providence
has so ordered it, as to leave the publishing thereof to my dispose, I must
crave their leave, to let the World know that amongst my many Friends, there is
none for whom I have so great and deserved a respect as for your self, and
therefore since it must abroad, I am bold to send it forth under your favor.
And that upon a double account: first, that being brought up at your feet (as
my Gamaliel) and having the happiness in the morning of my age, to have the
greatest part of my Education under your personal direction: so I am willing
(before my Sun go down, it being now far in the afternoon with me) to leave
some acknowledgment behind me of what respect I owe, not only to your whole
family, but principally to your own Person. And next, for that you are a Person
(without flattery be it spoken) so eminently taken notice of in your Country,
as able to judge of what is herein written, and one that has always been of
the same Judgment and Practice with the Author, of which whoever is not, I
pity his condition, and shall pray for his Conversion, and shall ever remain,

SIR, Your old faithful Servant, John Clifford.


TO THE READER.
Good Reader,
THere are two things of which we would premonish thee as to the ensuing
Treatise concerning the conditionality of the Covenant of Grace, the occasion
of it, and the usefulness. For the first the occasion, we have it from other
hands thus. That the Doctor visiting his Friends in Gloucestershire was desired
to give them a Sermon, but being wholly a Stranger there, inquired after the
state of the Congregation to whom he was to Preach, that he might the better
speak to their edification; and being informed that diverse who were likely to
be his Auditors, were levened with Antinomian Fancies and Conceits, not willing
to hear of any Conditions in the New Covenant, and decrying all enforcements to
Duty and Obedience as Legal Preaching, he thought it his duty to dispossess
them of these errors. Proving with mighty evidence, out of Heb. 5.9. that
Jesus Christ is the Author of Salvation only to such as obey. Which argument
though prosecuted by him with great Learning, Judgment and Affection, to the
great satisfaction of a numerous Congregation both of Strangers and Inhabitants
then present, yet some few seemed to remain still unsatisfied. To remove whose
scruples he first took much pains with them in Private Conferences, wherein
they professed themselves unable to answer his Arguments, yet resolved still to
retain their preconceived Opinions; but he not despairing of their conviction,
after his return thence penned this Discourse, that upon calm thoughts they
might more deliberately weigh the matter, and sent it to his Fathers Brother to
be communicated to any whom he thought fit, but with a strict injunction not to
publish it in Print, and though much solicited by his Uncle and diverse
Ministers and good Christians who had got a sight of it, suffered not his
resolution to be expugned until a little before his death, when giving way to
their importunity, he consented that if God afforded not him time to put his
last hand to it, they might dispose of it at their own pleasure. For the other,
the Seasonableness and Usefulness of it, we can write of that as from our
selves. There have been and still are two extremes in the World, some trust to
their own External superficial Righteousness as the ground of their acceptance
with God, against whom Christ spoke that Parable, Luke 18.9. he spoke this
Parable against certain that trusted in themselves that they were righteous,
etc. these make their outward observances, partial obedience, luster of some
moral virtues their only Plea before God, without any reflection on the Merits
of a Savior; the other extreme is of those who teach Men to look at nothing in
themselves at all, no not as an evidence or condition or means of Application,
have no consideration of Faith or of Repentance, or new Obedience in the
settling of their peace and quiet of their Souls; which what a Salve it is for
impenitent unbelievers, what a reproach to the Gospel, and how derogatory from
the strain of Christianity, is easily evident to those who are any way
acquainted with the Tenor of it; Christ is an able Savior, the Covenant of
Grace is a safe and sure refuge, the dispute is about the sincerity of our
claim; but we will not debate the case here, it is the business of this
Treatise, which we would not let go (especially it being presented to us for
that end) without annexing our consent and approbation.

We are thine in the Lords work, Tho. Manton. Rich. Baxter.


A DISCOURSE OF THE NEW COVENANT.
PROPOSITION I. Of Man's misery by his fall.
MAN being lapsed and fallen from God into a state of sin and misery, beyond
all possibility of recovery, either by means of his own, or the assistance of
any created Power, it then pleased Divine Goodness to take up thoughts, not
only to restore, but to advance him to a more stable and transcendent felicity,
than that in and to which he was at first created. This we have most
emphatically represented in the Prophet, by the resemblance of a newborn
Infant cast out in the open field, in its menstruous blood and uncleanness,
having neither hand to help, nor eye to pity it, Ezekiel. 16.3, 4, 5, etc. These
words, I confess, are spoken with a particular reference to the Primitive state
of the Jews, at which time they were Heathen and Idolaters, being not yet
called out of the World, and brought into the Bond of the New Covenant. But
since they were then in no worse condition, than the rest of the degenerate
Sons of Men; there being at first no distinction betwixt Jew and Gentile, till
Free Grace stepped in and made the difference, this Text commonly is, and without
any violence offered to it, may be taken in a more large and extensive sense,
and so be applied, not only to the Sons of Heber, the Jews; but to the whole
Seed of Adam, Man universally considered. When they and we, and all Mankind,
lay wallowing in their blood and uncleanness, then God passing by, and
beholding us in this miserable and forlorn condition, he was pleased to make it
a time of love. Joh. 3.16. God so loved the World (not only the Jews) that he
gave his only begotten Son, etc. At the same time when God passed by apostate
Angels, and left them in Chains of Eternal Darkness without relief, he then
casts his skirts over degenerate Man, and covers his nakedness, and in
conclusion not only washes him from his blood and pollution, but anoints him
with Oil, and clothes him with broidered Work, and sets a Crown of Glory upon
his head, and makes him (by the Ornaments he at last puts upon him) exceeding
beautiful, as the Prophets expression there is, concerning the Jewish Nation,
to which I here allude.

PROPOS. II. Of Man's recovery by Jesus Christ.
THAT this great Design of Man's Redemption might be carried on, and effected
in a way most agreeable to the just and righteous Nature of God, and most for
the honor and advancement of his Divine Perfections, his Holiness, Justice,
Truth, Goodness, etc. as also, that might lay the surest foundation for the
Faith and Hopes of a guilty and despondent Creature; God was pleased to send
his only begotten Son, Jesus Christ, the second Person in the Deity, to assume
the Humane Nature, that so he might become a fit Mediator and Surety for Man,
who by his obeying and suffering in his stead, might make atonement and
satisfaction for sin, and propitiate God to Sinners* This we have every where
declared in Scripture, as the only way and medium by which God designs to save
degenerate Man: Joh. 3.16. Esa. 53.6. and 10. ver. Gal. 4.4, 5. Ephesians. 5.2. Gal.
3.13. 2 Cor. 5.21. Math. 20.28. 1 Timothy 2.6. 1 John 4.10. Romans 3.24, 25, 26.

From these several places it is plainly evident, that God, being moved by his
own essential Goodness, did so far compassionate the case of fallen Man, as to
give his own Son to be a Ransom and Propitiation for their sins, by being made
under the Law, and bearing the Curse and Penalties threatened by it, thereby
declaring to the world, that he was a righteous God, loving Righteousness and
hating Iniquity, as the Psalmist has expressed it, Psalm. 11.5.7.

And thus God having made sufficient provision, by the Obedience and Sufferings
of his own Son, that his Sovereign Authority over the Creature might be owned,
and the Equity and Goodness of his Law acknowledged; and the Threatenings
therein denounced fulfilled, and his Holiness vindicated, and his Hatred
against sin, and vindictive Justice upon offenders declared, and Man for ever
discouraged from sin by hopes of impunity: This, I say, being effected by the
undertaking of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, he may now freely pardon the
guilty Creature, and readmit him into his favor, and advance him to the
fruition of an Eternal Happiness and Glory, without either offering any
violence to his own Righteous Nature, or weakening the order and foundations of
his Government over the World, or eclipsing the Glory of any of his sacred
Attributes. And as God has hereby abundantly secured his own Honor, so has
he also by the same means most effectually relieved the Creature against his
guilty Fears, and laid a sure and firm foundation for Faith and Hopes in his
Mercy. Man having sinned against God, it is impossible but the sense of his own
guilt and danger should affect his Soul with amazing fears and jealousies,
especially when he should entertain any serious thoughts of the holy Nature of
God, (his Majesty, Power, and Justice) or of the strictness and severity of his
Laws. No sooner had Adam sinned but he runs away from God, and seeks to hide
himself from his presence. I, but when the guilty offender shall now be assured
from the mouth of God himself, that he has found a Ransom, and received full
and abundant satisfaction at the hands of Jesus Christ, his Surety, for all
that wrong that sin had done him, so that now he may at the same time be
merciful to the sinner, and yet take full vengeance upon his sin; or as the
Apostle speaks to the same purpose, that he may be just, and yet the justifier
of them that believe in Jesus, Romans 3.26. Yea that he may now reap as much
Glory to himself, in pardoning humble and repenting sinners, as if he had
executed the Curse and Penalties of his violated Law upon them: When the
sinner, I say, shall be well assured of this, his despondent fears and jealous
thoughts of God must needs vanish, as Clouds and Darkness before the rising
Sun, and his Soul be quickened and encouraged to address it self with Faith and
Confidence to the Throne of Grace, for Pardon and Acceptance. 1 Pet. 1.18.21.
Heb. 4.15, 16. For if God the only party offended and concerned will acquit the
humble sinner, who then shall condemn him? as the Apostle argues, Romans 8.33, 34.

PROPOS. III. Of the Covenant of Redemption.
THIS glorious Contrivance and Design for the recovery of fallen Man, was
transacted between God the Father and the Son, by mutual stipulation and
agreement: The Father promising to his Son a rich recompense of reward upon his
undertaking to satisfy for Man's offense by his death and sufferings; and the
Son likewise engaging to the Father, upon these terms, to make satisfaction.
And this is that which by Divines is now called the Covenant of Redemption, to
distinguish it from the Covenant of Grace, or the New Covenant, as most
commonly styled in Scripture, made with Believers through Christ. A distinction
highly necessary, and consequently not to be past by without a due observation,
in order to our better understanding the Nature and Obligation of this Gospel
Covenant, which is the main thing intended in this whole Discourse: But where
does Scripture, without whose warrant we ought not to admit any Article into
our Creed, mention any such thing as God's covenanting with Christ for his
Redeeming of the World? For this some refer us to Psalm. 89. v. 3, 4.28. etc. to
v. 38. The main Contents of this Psalm, do, I confess immediately relate to
David and his Natural Seed. Nor can this be questioned, since the substance of
what we have here recorded, was by Nathan the Prophet expressly delivered to him
from the Lord, upon his declared intention to build an House to his Name, 2 Samuel 7. 1 Kings 17. All which is afterward particularly applied to Solomon his
Son, who next succeeded him in the Throne, 1 Chronicles. 22.10. 1 Kings 6.12. And
therefore the literal sense of this place, so far as the words will bear it,
ought not to be excluded. But yet, this being granted, 'twill not therefore
follow but that the former interpretation of the words may also be admitted.
Immediately they may respect David and his Seed, and yet ultimately they may
refer to Christ, as prefigured by him. Jesus Christ we know, in the prophetic
style of the Old Testament, is frequently called by the name of David, Jer.
30.9. as Believers also are called his Seed. It Is not unusual therefore, in
this Book of Psalms, to ascribe such things to David and Solomon, being eminent
Types of Christ, as are either proper only to Christ the Antitype, or
applicable to them only as they were some way or other representative of him;
which is a thing so commonly known, and evident in it self, as that I shall not
need to give my self or others the trouble to prove it. And why may not the
Psalmist be allowed to speak here in the same dialect, principally intending
Christ, by what he relates of himself and natural seed? Especially if it be
considered that several expressions here used in this Psalm are such as
signally belong to Christ, as some of his Royal Titles, and Jewels of his
Crown. As for instance, his being The elect and chosen of the Lord, Math.
12.18. Luke 23.35 His Holy One Acts 3.14. His Firstborn, Heb. 1.6. His Mighty
One, Esa. 9.6. Higher than the Kings of the Earth, Phil. 2.9. Upon which
account Calovius is positive in his assertion, that the 19. verse of this Psalm
is spoken unice de Christo, of Christ alone, and not at all of David and his
literal seed. Besides, many of the privileges here mentioned were never in a
literal sense made good either to David or Solomon, or any of their succeeding
Race; though all to Christ: As that his seed should be established for ever,
and his Throne to all Generations, ver. 4. That his hand should be in the Sea,
and his right hand in the mighty Rivers, v. 25. That he should be higher than
the Kings of the Earth, v. 27. That his Seed and Throne should endure as the
days of Heaven, ver. 29.36, 37. But when was David or Solomon, or any of their
Successors higher than the Kings of Assyria or Persia, by whom they were
carried Captives? Or when did they rule from Sea to Sea, from the Mediterranean
to Euphrates? Or how was his Throne and Seed established as the Sun and Moon in
the Heavens for ever? When not long after this Promise here recorded, Coniah,
the Son of Jehoiakim, and in him the whole Race of David, were, for their
violating of God's Covenant, finally rejected, from sitting upon his Throne,
Jerem. 22.28, 29, 30. And by the succeeding Prophet it is more than intimated,
that all this was but to make way for the Messiah, who was principally intended
in the Promise made to David, Ezekiel. 21.25, 26, 27. in whom we find a punctual
accomplishment of all here promised, both as to the establishment of his
Throne, Heb. 1.8. and the extent of his Government, Zech. 9.10. and the
subjection of his Enemies, Psalm. 110.1. and the exaltation of his Name and
Power, Rev. 17.14. and 19.16.

To all which it might be added, that the Pen*men of the New Testament, who
best understood the meaning of the Spirit speaking by the Prophets in the Old,
do apply this Psalm, at least several passages of it, to Jesus Christ, as may
be seen by comparing these places following; ver. 3, 4. with Acts 13.23. ver.
26, 27, 28, 29. with Heb. 1.5.8. ver. 28.33, 34, 35. with Acts 13.34. ver. 36,
37. with Luke 1.32, 33. If this then (which is the judgment of most
Interpreters upon the place) may be admitted to be the Prophets meaning and
intendment in this Psalm, we have here an evident proof of a Covenant made with
Christ, represented to us by that made with David and his Seed. But not to
insist further upon this, Scripture is not wanting elsewhere, though not in
express terms, yet in words to the same import, to bear witness to this Truth.
Hence we read of the Counsel betwixt them both, Zech. 6.13. of a Command
received from the Father for Christ to lay down his life for his sheep, which
were given to him, Joh. 10.18. of his finishing the work which his Father gave
him to do, Joh. 17.4. of a promise of eternal life before the world began, Tit.
1.2. of Grace given to Believers before the Foundations of the Earth were laid,
2 Timothy 1.9. of his enduring the Cross and despising the shame for the joy that
was set before him, Heb. 12.2. and to name no more, of his coming to do the
will of his Father, and having his Law within his heart, Psalm. 40.8. And what
was that but the mediatory Law, which past betwixt him and the Father, for his
assuming the Nature of Man, in order to his making satisfaction for him by his
death and sufferings? And therefore it is said in the foregoing words, a body
have thou prepared me, for so the Author to the Hebrews renders those words of
the Psalmist, mine ears have thou bored, Heb. 10.5. of which more afterward.
But if what has been already said, be not thought sufficient to demonstrate
the truth of this Proposition, let but these following Scriptures be consulted,
and weighed in an equal balance, and I cannot doubt but they will abundantly
satisfy the mind of the most scrupulous in this point, excepting they be
resolved, contrary to the clearest evidence to adhere to their own mistaken
sentiments. Psalm. 2.7, 8, 9. Phil. 2.5. to the 12. 1 John 10.15, 16, 17, 18.27,
28, 29. and to name no more, Esa. 53. The very word Covenant it is acknowledged
does not here occur. But that is not the thing in question, whether this
transaction betwixt the Father and the Son be here or elsewhere (though that
has been already proved) expressly called by that name; for if nothing were to
be owned for Divine Truth, but what is so delivered to us in Scripture, we must
then give a Bill of divorce to many of the grand Articles of our Faith: But
whether it be not expressed by such terms and phrases as do necessarily signify
and import all that which is essential to and is commonly meant and understood
by the word Covenant. For the proof of which, two things we learn from the
Scriptures before mentioned, that are naked and open to every observan^ eye:
First, That Jesus Christ engages in the behalf of those whom the Father had
given to him, to take their Nature, to bear their Infirmities, to be wounded
for their transgressions, and make his Soul an Offering for their sins, etc.
And on the other hand, that the Father thereupon promises to him, by way of
reward, that he should see of the fruit of his soul and be satisfied, that he
would divide him a portion with the great, and the spoil with the strong, and
that he would exalt him, and make him head over all Principalities and Power,
and give him a Name above every Name, that every knee should bow and every
tongue confess him to the glory of God the Father, etc. And as upon this
consideration he was comfortably supported under, and joyfully triumphed over
all his sufferings* Heb. 12.2. So likewise having perfectly accomplish^^ the
work he undertook upon these terms* he pleads it with his Father as the reason
why he should be exalted and reassumed to Glory, Joh. 17.4, 5. And what can all
this signify less, than what we commonly understand and express by the word
Covenant? And when the thing it self is so evidently declared in Scripture, why
should we scruple to call it by that name? any more than we do to call that
original sin which we derived from Adam; or the Law given to him, the natural
Covenant; or the union of the Divine and Humane Nature in the person of Christ,
the Hypostatical Union; or the three Persons in the Godhead, the Trinity; or
the Lords Supper, a Sacrament, etc. which are words no where to be found in
Scriprure? Yet since the things themselves which ar^ signified by them, may be
found there, it is thought sufficient to justify the use of them.

I have the rather insisted upon this Argument, because the confounding of
these two Covenants, this I mean of Redemption with that of the Gospel, and
making them but one, which, as will afterward be made more fully to appear,
are vastly different, and consequently to be distinguished, has been the
fundamental cause of those several Controversies and Mistakes, that have been
concerning the Gospel Covenant.

PROPOS. IV. Of Christ's actual Satisfaction by his Obedience and Sufferings.
JEsus Christ, according to the tenor of this Eternal Covenant, did in time
assume the Humane Nature, and therein, as Man's Surety, actually do and perform
all that the Law of Righteousness required at the hands of the guil^y Creature,
and consequently all that was any way requisite, either to the repairing of his
Fathers Honor, or effecting the Creatures Redemption and Happiness. Psalm.
40.6, 7, 8. God had for some while taken his Sons word, and saved souls upon
his single promise of making satisfaction in their behalf, and in the interim
accepted of typical Sacrifices and O^lations, the blood of Bulls and Goats, as
daily memorials of what he expect^d from the hands of h^s own Son, though not
as things pleasing and acc^pt^ble in themselves: Yea, but now God will no
longer admit of these Shadows, or be satisfied with Bonds or Promises, but
requires the actual payment of the Debt, and therefore now Christ comes,
according to his engagement, to discharge it: Then said I (that is Christ) Lo I
come, in the Volume of thy Book it is written of me, I delight to do thy will,
O my God! And for the full accomplishment of this great Undertaking, he clothes
his Divinity with the Humane Nature; A body have thou prepared me, (for so the
Author to the Hebrews, chap. 10.5. renders those words of the Psalmist ( ver.
6.) Mine ears have thou dug) as was before observed, or as the Apostle
expresses it, Gal. 4.4. He was made of a Woman, made under the Law: Yea, and
being found in fashion as a Man, and in the form of a Servant; subject to the
Law of a Creature, he also humbled himself, and became obedient, says the same
Apostle, Phil. 2.8. and that not only in some more signal and momentous
instances of Obedience, but even to the least tittle and Iota commanded by the
Law, Math. 5.17, 18. He fulfilled all Righteousness, and he tells you it
behov^d him so to do, Mat. 3.5.

Nor yet did he only thus render himself subject to the Commands of the Law,
and pay a perfect active obedience to them, but he also undertook and suffered
the most rigorous penalties, that were therein threatened against sinners. He
was a man of sorrows, and acquainted with our griefs: He was wounded for our
transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities, and the chastisement of our
peace was upon him, Esa. 53.3, 4, 5. He was in all things tempted, or
afflicted, even as we are tempted, sin only excepted, Heb. 4.15. He loved us,
and gave himself for us an Offering and a Sacrifice to God, for a sweet
smelling savor, Ephesians. 5.2. He humbled himself, and became obedient unto
death, even the death of the Cross, Phil. 2.8. He was made sin for us, who knew
no sin, etc. 2 Cor. 4.18, 19. Yea a Curse, that we might be blessed, Gal. 3.13.
And all this that he might ransom our souls, Math. 20.28. and propitiate God to
sinners, 1 John 2.2. and vindicate his Fathers Authority, Law, and Justice, his
Truth and Holiness, that he might, consistent with his honor, pardon the
guilty Creature, and reaccept him into favor, Romans 3.25, 26. And thus Jesus
Christ by his active and passive Obedience (which here are not to be separate,
or distinguished, since both were paid solely upon the sinners account)
finished the whole work which his Father gave him to do, in order to Man's
recovery, Joh. 17.4. and so being made perfect through sufferings, he became
the Author of eternal salvation to all them that obey him, Heb. 5.9.

PROPOS. V. Of the application of Christ's Merits to sinners.
THE saving fruits and benefits intended to sinners by the Obedience and
Sufferings of Jesus Christ, they do not actually and of necessity become
theirs, immediately upon the Satisfaction thereby given, and the Purchase made
in their behalf: But before they can be admitted to any actual interest in, or
reap any comfortable advantage from either, there is yet somewhat further on
their part to be done and performed by them. The Merits of Christ, in dying for
sinners, do not necessarily save any, but only as God the Father, Son and
Spirit shall think meet to communicate, and dispense with the issues of them to
the Vessels of Mercy. For all that properly results from the satisfaction of
Christ is only this, that the grand obstacle which stood in the way of Mercy,
and obstructed its communications to the guilty Offender, that this being
removed, God might now be at liberty to pardon and reaccept him unto favor in
what way, and upon what terms he pleased, such as he in wisdom should judge
most for the honor of his own Being and Perfections. Yea, but not that
therefore God must of necessity pardon the sinner what ever come on it, as one
well expresses it. That is, whether he repented or believed or not, or still
continued in his Rebellion and Impenitency.

Christ's Sufferings they were not in a strict sense the Idem, i. e. the very
thing which the first Covenant required at the hands of Man, but the tantundem,
or an equivalent compensation: Not properly solutio debiti, the payment of the
debt, but an equitable satisfaction for a criminal offense. And accordingly God
in this whole transaction is to be considered, not so much as a Creditor, as an
offended Magistrate or Governor of the World, that admits (as Seleucus did the
putting out of one of his own eyes, for the redemption of his Sons) the
suffering of one for another (though of somewhat a different kind and manner)
for the maintaining of the honor of his Laws and Government. And therefore God
could not be obliged thereby immediately to acquit and discharge the Offender,
(since the satisfaction given in his behalf was refusable) but may in Justice,
and for the vindicating of his own Holiness, and retaining the Creature in his
due subjection, bring him to terms and conditions, before he remit the offense,
and become actually reconciled to him: Much less was God obliged to this by his
own essential goodness: for though the issues and outgoings of his love be most
natural and agreeable to his Being: upon which account he is styled in
Scripture a Sun and Fountain; yet are they not like the ebullitions of water
from their Fountain, or emanations of light from the Sun, absolutely necessary
and involuntary. No, they are still free, though most natural. Else how comes
it to pass, that Apostate Angels were not redeemed from their Chains and
Darkness? and the Spirits now in Prison set at liberty, and freed from
torments? And the Inhabitants of the Earth that still sit in darkness and under
the shadows of death, have not the Sun of Righteousness arising upon them with
healing in his Wings, as well as we in these Northern Islands? What ever acts
by constraint and necessary impulse of Nature, it is incapable of setting any
bounds or limits to its own actions, but imparts it self and influences
universally, at all times and alike to all. The same Sun shines not to some
parts only of the Earth, but equally to both the Hemispheres. And the same Sea
and Fountains scatter their streams, not only to some few Passengers, but
indifferently to all that pass by without exception. And if such were the
egress and communications of Divine Love and Goodness, then tell me whence it
is, that there is any difference betwixt fallen Angels and degenerate man?
Betwixt Jew and Gentile? the Christian and Pagan World? Why is not the whole
Earth, India and America, as well as Europe, turned into a Goshen, a Land of
light, and made as Eden the Garden of the Lord? Why is so great a part of it
yet left to be as a darksom Egypt or barren Wilderness? Does not all this
sufficiently argue, that the bequeathments, and application of Christ's
satisfaction and purchase, with all the rich Fruits that spring from both, are
made not by necessity, but ad placitum, according to the mere good will and
pleasure of God to sinners? as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 1.5. and 9.

PROPOS. VI. Of Gods freedom to prescribe the terms upon which sinners shall be
saved.
SInce all the communications of Grace and Mercy to the Creature, even to those
that Christ has redeemed with his blood, are absolutely free, and issue forth
only according to the Prerogative of the Divine Will and Pleasure, God may
therefore give out, and apply the merits of his Sons obedience and sufferings
to whom, and in what way and method, and upon what terms he in wisdom shall
think meet. He that cast the skirts of his love over the lost Sons of Adam,
when he saw them polluted in their own blood, might also, if he had pleased,
have made it a time of love to the Apostate Angels, and have put them with Man
(since Christ's Merits were intrinsickly sufficient for both) into the same Act
of Grace and Indemnity. And he that has chosen only some few to be Heirs of
Glory, out of the common Mass of Mankind, might likewise have extended the same
mercy and favor to all the rest. Judas as well as Paul might have been an
Elect Vessel to the Lord. Yea but one is taken and the other is left, to show
that God has mercy upon whom he will have mercy, and that whom he will he
hardneth, Romans 9.18.

And as God freely makes choice of the persons whom he will effectually pardon
and save by his Son Jesus Christ, so also of the mediums and ways in and by
which this salvation shall be dispensed to them, First only in a dark and
mysterious Promise, so to Adam, Genesis 3.15. Then more explicitly by actual
Covenant, so to Abraham, Genesis 17. After this by Types and Shadows, so to the
Jews: And last of all by open and manifest Revelation, through the ministration
of Christ and his Apostles, so to all under the Gospel Dispensation, Heb. 1.1,
2. Thus Jesus Christ, and in him salvation, is first promised, then typified,
and then exhibited; and that first to the Jews only, but afterward to the
Gentiles also: And he surely that makes choice of whom he will, to be the
Objects of Mercy, and freely determines in what way and order they shall have
salvation dispensed to them; he cannot but be alike free to appoint the terms
and conditions upon which they actually may be saved. He that has power to
appoint the End, must also have power to appoint the Means by which it may be
obtained. God in this whole transaction is to be considered, not only as Lord
and Governor, but as the offended party and our great Benefactor, and upon all
these accounts the Right of prescribing the terms upon which the guilty and
condemned Creature shall be admitted to pardon and happiness, properly and
solely belongs to God. As he is absolute Lord of all, so he may do whatsoever
he pleases with the Works of his own hands. And as he is rightful Governor
over the World, so he may prescribe what Laws he thinks meet for the due
government of his Creature. And as pars laesa, the party wronged and offended
by Man, he may say upon what terms he will be reconciled to him: And as our
great Benefactor, that designed and contrived the way of Man's pardon and
salvation, by the death and sufferings of his only begotten Son, he must
dispense these benefits according to the pleasure of his own Will, Math. 20.15.
To save a sinner upon any terms is an act of Grace; but Grace is not Grace
unless it be free. He that pardons an Offender, a Traitor, a Rebel, he may
bring him to terms, before he pardon him; and he that dispenses Crowns and
Scepters to unworthy Persons, Beggars, and Miscreants, he may require homage
and observance from them, without fear of rendering it no act of Grace.

The truth is, all that Jesus Christ obtained, or can in reason be supposed to
design by his undertaking to obtain, at the hands of his Father in the behalf
of sinners, was only this, that pardon and salvation might be dispensed to
them, upon such terms and in such a way, as might be consistent with the Honor
of God, and most for the good and interest of the lapsed, yet reasonable
Creatures, whose perfection and happiness lay in his likeness and conformity to
his Maker.

That therefore which we are to consider, is not so much what is the intrinsic
worth and price of Christ's blood, or how far it might have been available to
the saving sinners, but rather to what ends and purposes God has accepted it,
and in what way, and upon what Conditions it is made over to us, that it may
become ours. God might by virtue of his Omnipotency have made many Worlds, and
yet he has made only one: and according to the judgment of some, he might by
virtue of his absolute Prerogative have pardoned the sinner, without the death
of his Son, and yet he would not do it without it. And possibly he might upon
the account of his Sons undertaking, have saved sinners by other means, and
upon other terms than those he has now declared in the Gospel, and yet these
he has only made choice of, as they by which they shall be saved. And
therefore the actual determinations of his Will in this particular (which he
has fully made known to us by his Word) are the things which we are concerned
to observe and attend to, if ever we expect to have any lot or portion in the
Grace and Glory that Jesus Christ has purchased.

PROPOS. VII. Of God's transacting with Man by Covenant.
THE particular way, and medium, that Divine Wisdom has been pleased to make
choice of, in, and by which to interest sinners in the saving benefits of his
Son's undertaking, it is per modum Foederis, by way of Covenant, or mutual
Compact betwixt himself and the Creature. What this Covenant is, and whether a
Covenant in a proper sense, that is afterward to be enquired into; that which
now I have to make good, is to show in general, that it is by Covenant that the
Fruits of Christ's death are made over to us. And here it is to be observed,
That this is the way in which God has ever treated Man, both before, and since
his fall. For though God, by virtue of his absolute Sovereignty and Dominion
over the Creature, might have imposed what Laws he thought meet upon Man, and
have exacted perfect and perpetual Obedience at his hands, without ever giving,
much more without obliging himself to give, any thing by way of reward for his
obedience: And though Man, by virtue of his necessary and essential dependence
upon God, from whom he received his all, was thereupon indispensably obliged to
obey, and serve him so long as he had a Being; yet such has been the
particular good will and bounty of God to Man, that he never yet dealt with him
stricto jure, or in a way of absolute Right and Dominion, but rather has
chosen to encourage him to obedience by the promises of reward. That God indeed
should give Man a Law, that, supposing him a reasonable Creature fit for
Government, seems no less than necessary; yea, but that God should turn his
Laws into a Covenant, and thereby make himself a Debtor to his Creature, as
Augustine speaks; that is, become engaged to Man, to reward him for that
service, which was antecedently due to him, this is to be deemed an act of mere
Grace and infinite condescension. But thus was God pleased from the first to
treat Adam, whilst yet he was in his primitive state of integrity. This
generally is conceived to be the meaning of those words, Genesis 2.16, 17. And the
Lord God commanded the Man, saying, Of every Tree of the Garden thou may
freely eat, but of the Tree of the knowledge of good and evil thou shall not
eat of it, for in the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely dye.

In these words, we have first an express command given to Adam, that he should
not eat of the Tree of knowledge of good and evil, together with a free and
gracious concession to eat of the Fruit of every Tree of the Garden, excepting
that; as also a severe commination annexed to this Grant and Command, assuring
him that if he should dare to eat of the forbidden Fruit he should certainly
dye; and in this threatening there is a promise also necessarily employed (since
all Negatives are judged to include their contrary Affirmatives) that if he
continued in his obedience to the Law of God, he should not dye but live, and
so we find the Apostle commenting upon the words, Romans 10.5. and Gal. 3.12. And
a Positive Law requiring obedience of the Creature, to which there is annexed a
promise of some good, provided he continue to pay and perform the homage and
duties required of him, together with a threatening of evil and punishment in
case of default, this according to the proper meaning and import of the word,
is no other than a Covenant, supposing only that both parties do mutually
agree, and yield their consent to the terms, which in the case in hand is
sufficiently evident: First on Gods part, since he made and propounded this
Law, with its respective immunities and conditions to Man. And on Man's part
also it is necessary to be supposed, since he being but a Creature essentially
depending upon his Maker, is thereby essentially obliged, to give his consent
to whatever he shall please to propose to him. But however we shall please to
call this, whether a Law or Covenant, no sooner was this primitive institution
made void by Man's transgression in eating of the forbidden fruit, but God is
pleased to erect a Covenant of Grace for life and salvation with fallen Man;
the first foundations of which we have laid in that first Evangelical promise,
Genesis 3.15. The Seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents head. The Promise
indeed is absolute, and nothing therein is mentioned, more than that God would
raise up a Savior unto Man, from the Seed of the Woman, by whom he fell. But
who knows, how far God might or did further discover himself to Adam, and the
Primitive Ages of the World, either as to this or other concerns of his and
their duty and reward; since it is abundantly evident, that in the Revelations
made to Moses, God's design was not to make known all the transactions that had
before past betwixt himself and the Creature, but only such as were most
requisite for the People of Israel, and the succeeding Generations to be
acquainted with? Besides it is impossible, that the particularities of all
transactions for so many hundreds of years, should all be recounted and summed
up in so short an History, as that of Genesis. Yet this we find, that the Sons
of Adam, immediately upon the giving out of this gracious promise, offer
Sacrifice to the Lord, which is a sufficient testimony, (1.) Of their own
guilt, that they had sinned, and deserved to dye, acknowledged in the death of
the Sacrifice. (2.) Of their Faith in a Messiah, and expectation of salvation
by his death and sufferings, typified in those of the Beasts they offered. For
as the Apostle argues in his Epistle to the Hebrews, chap. 10.4. It Is
impossible that the Blood of Bulls and Goats should take away sin: And yet
without shedding of blood he also tells us there is no remission, chap. 9.22.
and therefore by necessary consequence, only by the blood of Jesus Christ,
which he also infers, chap. 9. v. 10.14. (3.) Of their obedience, and entire
resignation of themselves to the Divine Will. And in these three you have the
substance of all that the Covenant requires on the Creatures part to be
performed.

But what ever were the methods (not particularly made known to us) in which
God treated the first Ages of the World, yet so soon as ever he began to frame
a peculiar People to himself, and to make any enclosures, wherein to plant an
holy Seed, he then more expressly engages them to himself, and makes them his
by way of Covenant. Thus he treats with Abraham, Genesis 15.18. And afterward
with the Israelites, the multiplied Seed of Abraham, Exodus 24. And because
there were certain Shadows, and temporal Appendices annexed to this Covenant,
which were only suited to the infancy of the Church, the present State of the
Jews, and therefore to be abolished, at the appearance of the promised Messiah;
he further declares by his Prophets, that when this should be done away, he
would yet make another Covenant with them, and all his Saints, comprehended
under the name of Israel, Jer. 31, 32, 33, etc. Ezekiel. 34.25. and 37.26. which
the Author to the Hebrews applies expressly to the Gospel times, Heb. 10.16.8.9,
10, 11, 12, 13. As all our Mercies are purchased for us by the blood of Christ,
so they are given and conveyed to us only by the Covenant founded in his
blood. From first to last all is by Covenant. Does he give Adam an earthly
Paradise? Abraham a blessed Seed? Israel the Land of Canaan? and the Saints in
all ages a Crown and Kingdom of Life and Glory? it is still by Covenant. Yea,
our very temporal Blessings become ours, not by virtue of any absolute grant
and donation, but by a federal right, 1 Timothy 4.8. And therefore it is no good
plea to argue thus, Jesus Christ has given full satisfaction to the Father,
and fulfilled all righteousness, and purchased eternal life and glory, and
therefore there is no doubt but our sins will be pardoned, and our Souls saved.
No, Whatever Jesus Christ has done and suffered, or purchased by either, we
for our parts can expect no more advantage by it, than what the new Covenant
makes over to us, nor upon any other terms than what are therein propounded,
nor yet, without presumption, lay claim to any right or propriety in any of the
benefits resulting from it, unless we can first prove our selves to be within
the Bond of the Covenant. For though the satisfaction that Jesus Christ has
made be the foundation of our general hopes in God, and encouragement in our
addresses to him for mercy, yet it is the Covenant only that gives us interest
and propriety.

PROPOS. VIII. Of the Nature of the New Covenant.
THIS New Covenant, or Gospel Conveyance, by which pardon of sin and eternal
life, the fruits of Christ's Purchase are dispensed to sinners; it is not a mere
Will and Testament, as some have imagined, but, in the true and proper sense of
the word, a formal Covenant.

By Covenant, I mean a mutual agreement and stipulation betwixt God and the
Creature, whereby as he freely engages himself to us, to be our God, i. e. to
do us good, and bless us, and give us an everlasting happiness; so we also on
the other hand oblige our selves to God to be his People, i. e. his Subjects,
to pay him, as far as in us lies, that homage and observance which he requires
of us, that we may be partakers of the mercies promised. This is properly a
Covenant, which will yet further appear, when we come to speak of the terms of
it.

But a Will or Testament is the act or instrument of some one single person,
whereby he gives, according to the pleasure of his own will, certain Boons and
Legacies to some particular persons, to be enjoyed after his decease, without
any stipulation made or required on their part, in order to their having a
right to, or their receiving of them.

By this you see there is a vast difference betwixt a Covenant and a Testament,
both in regard of the subject, and terms, and formal notion of both: That Is the
joint act of two or more: This only of some one single person. That stands upon
certain terms and conditions to be performed; This is, at least may be,
absolute, without any terms at all. That is by mutual consent and stipulation;
This requires neither, at least they are not necessary and essential to its
Being. No, Goods or Lands we know are given at will (and therefore called, a
Will) without the consent of the Legatee thereto required, nay many times
without his knowledge. And the Donations of the Testator however makes them
his, and gives him an undoubted right to them, nay though he should despise
them, and ever after hate and revile the name of him that gave them. But who
will say, that the great blessings of the Gospel, pardon of sin, and the favor
of God, and eternal happiness, are thus dispensed to sinners? That the Grant
which God has made of them is so wholly absolute, as that it admits of no
terms, but that they may become ours without our knowledge, or consent, or
professed willingness to accept them; nay though we should hate and blaspheme
that God that bequeathed them to us?

It Is true, the Covenant it self was first framed by Divine Wisdom and
Goodness, before we had any intimations of it. God did not ask the Creature
whether he were willing that he should make a Covenant with him, or how it
should be made, or what the terms should be. No, but being thus made, and
propounded to us, we are now bound to give our own personal consents to the
terms of it, or else the blessings of this Covenant can never actually become
ours: I know no such Grant in Scripture made to any, that whether they are
willing or not to accept it, and to promise obedience to their Maker, he will
yet remit their sins, and save their Souls. Only he here declares, that upon
his Son's account he will do this for us, provided we will take them upon his
terms, and entirely yield our selves up in subjection to him, that has
purchased them for us.

But is it not frequently in Scripture called a Testament, and the New
Testament; and does not the Author to the Hebrews argue it to be so, from the
death of Christ, whom he there expressly terms a Testator? Heb. 9.16, 17. It Is
true, it is here called a Testament, and Christ a Testator. But who knows not,
that the same thing may have different denominations, according as it relates
to different objects? Thus Jesus Christ himself he is called a Prophet, a
Priest, a King, a Surety, an Advocate, etc. But will it therefore follow, that
he is no Advocate because a Surety, or no King because a Priest and Prophet?

And so again, the same Gospel Dispensation it is expressed by several names; it is
called a Gift, a Promise, a Royal Law, a Testament, a Covenant: but we cannot
thence infer, that it is no proper Covenant, because termed a Testament, any
more than that it is no Law, because a Gift and Promise. All therefore that can
rationally be deduced from hence, is only this, That there is some analogy or
resemblance betwixt this Evangelical Conveyance, and those Things the names of
which it bears. Thus, as the Good Things therein dispensed are freely given to
us, so it is a Gift: As God therein becomes engaged to give them, so it is a
Promise: As we thereby are commanded and directed to obedience, so it is a Royal
Law: As it is founded in the blood of Christ, and became of force to our
advantage upon his Death, so it is a Testament* But still so, as that our actual
consent to the terms therein propounded are required, in order to enjoying the
Blessings promised, and therefore still a Covenant.

And if we cast but our eye back upon the place before mentioned, Heb. 9. we
shall there find, that the Mosaical Dispensation, under which the People of
Israel were, is there also, as well as that of the Gospel, called a Testament,
which yet was, and must by any that reads Exodus 24. be acknowledged to be a
Covenant in a proper sense, i. e* as before expressed, a mutual stipulation
betwixt God and the Creature.

I, but it is not only called a Testament, but the original word, says a
Reverend Divine, in the Hebrew and Greek Language, which we translate Covenant,
signifies no more in the judgment of some learned Critics, than a Will or
Testament.

Who these Critics are is not mentioned, nor shall I here stand to enquire.
The original word, which we commonly translate Covenant, in the Hebrew is
(...), in the Greek (...); that it is well known comes from (...) which
signifies either to choose, or to kill and eat, which is the more usual
signification of the word. In the former it denotes a thing, which two make
choice of, and mutually agree about. In the latter it evidently relates to the
usual manner of making Covenant in those days, which was by Sacrifice, the
Parties passing through the midst of it, being divided, and thereby declaring
their consent, and confirming the Agreement. Thus we read, Jer. 34.19. And long
before this, the like observance we find in God's first covenanting with
Abraham, Genesis 15.10. which was also (as appears from the Testimony of their own
Prophets, and possibly by derivation from the Jews) in use amongst the ancient
Heathen. So that take the word in what sense we please, either as it signifies
to choose, or to kill and divide, it is so far from being appropriate to a
Testament, as that it is most properly applicable to a Covenant. And therefore
commonly rendered by those best skilled in the Hebrew Language, by Foedus and
Pactum.

And as for the Greek word, which we translate Covenant, though according to
its etymology, it may signify to dispose, or order any thing in general,
whether it be by Free Gift, or Promise, or Testament, or Covenant, or any other
way; yet it also signifies to bargain or agree, or Covenant with another, as is
well known to such as are skilled in that Language.

But suppose after all, that the original words should import no more than a
Will or Testament, yet 'twill not therefore follow, that they are not to be
taken in any other sense. Since words, we know, receive their principal stamp
and authority from common use, which not rarely gives them a various, yea
sometimes a far different sense from that which they received at their first
birth and primitive institution.

The great thing therefore to be considered, is not what these words may, or
according to their original notations ought to signify; but rather what is the
true and most proper Scriptural use of them: for from thence especially we must
take the signification of all such words as are expressive of revealed Truths.
But, besides what has been already said upon this Argument, take these
following Considerations, which will more abundantly evidence, that the Gospel
Dispensation is properly Foederal, and not merely Testamental; and that both
the Hebrew and Greek words import as much.

1. This is the most frequent use of these words in Scripture. As for the
Hebrew word (...) it is almost every where in the Old Testament made use of to
signify a Covenant, but rarely, if at all, to signify a mere Will and
Testament. For the proof of this it were easy to produce a cloud of Witnesses,
but these few following may be sufficient to show us the true use and meaning
of it. Deuteronomy. 4.13. and 18. ver. Levit. 26.9.14, 15, and 16. verses. Josh.
24.25. And for the Greek word (...), though it sometimes be rendered a
Testament, yet to any one that shall but peruse these following Texts, instead
of many more, which might be alleged, 'twill be sufficiently evident, that
it is also used to express a formal Covenant, Acts 7.8. Romans 9.4. 2 Corinthians.
3.15. Gal. 3.15. and 17. ver. Ephesians. 2.12. Besides, it is here to be noted, that
this Greek word, which the Writers of the New Testament so frequently make use
of, is borrowed from the Septuagint, who constantly render the Hebrew word
(...) by (...). So that if that, according both to its notation and use,
signifies a Covenant, so must this also, being always put for it in the most
authentic translation of the Old Testament, whence it is taken.

2. The account which Scripture gives us of the way and method, in which God
has been pleased to treat with Man, concerning eternal life and happiness,
does necessarily infer, that it is by Covenant in a proper sense, that these
Blessings are made over to us: Consult but those two famous places, before
mentioned, Genesis 17. where God treats with Abraham, and Exodus 24. where God
again treats with Israel, (both, for the main, upon the same account) and you
will there find, that there is somewhat more than a mere granting or bequeathing
of Blessings and Mercies only by way of Legacy, or absolute Donation. Does God
first promise to Abraham, to give him a Numerous Issue, a Blessed Seed, a Land
flowing with Milk and Honey; and under these Shaddows, blessings of an higher
nature, Grace and Glory? Yea. But what must Abraham now do nothing in order to
his fruition of them? Yes. He must walk before the Lord, and be upright, Genesis
17.1. He must keep the Covenant, v. 9, 10. and he must circumcise every Male
Child in his Family, v. 11, 12, etc. and he must command his Children, and his
Household after him, to keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and judgment,
Genesis 18.19. and the reason is there also given, that the Lord may bring upon
Abraham, that which he had spoken of him, which is again more expressly
declared, Genesis 26.3, 4, 5. Whence it is evidently manifest, first that there
were Commandments, Statutes, and Laws annexed to this Covenant made with
Abraham; and then in the next place, that he must keep and observe them, that
the blessings promised might come upon him.

Again, Does God engage to Israel to put them in possession of the Promised
Land? and to bless them there? Yea, but then they must come before the Lord,
and publicly declare their consent to the Covenant, and engage to be obedient
to it, Exodus 24.3.7, 8. Deuteronomy. 28.1, 2.15.

3. The several acts that are expressly either required of, or ascribed to Man,
with reference to this Covenant, speak it to be somewhat more than a Testament.
As for instance, we are said to enter into Covenant with God, Deuteronomy. 29.12. And
to make, or (as the original there signifies) to cut a Covenant with him. Psalm.
50.5. And to join our selves to the Lord by Covenant, Jer. 50.4, 5. And to be
brought into the Bond of the Covenant, Ezekiel. 20.37. and to keep or observe his
Covenant, Psalm. 25.10. and to obey the words of the Covenant, Jer. 11.2, 3, 4,
5. and to perform and stand to the Covenant, 2 Kings 23.2, 3. As also to
transgress it, ( Josh. 7.11.) and to break, ( Esa. 24.5.) and not to continue
in ( Heb. 8, 9.) or be steadfast in the Covenant, Psalm. 78.37. But are these
expressions any way applicable to a Will and Testament? or what tolerable sense
can we possibly make of them, if so applied? To make or enter into Covenant
with another, is proper language, which every one understands: But to join our
selves to another by Testament, or to enter into, and make and cut a Will with
him, or to be steadfast in it, is a mode of speaking no where to be found. No,
all this necessarily implies somewhat of engagement, and duty on our part to
God, and not only his bequeathment of Mercy to us, by way of absolute Grant and
Donation.

4. But suppose we should after all admit, that it is a Testament? Will it
therefore follow, that its Donations are so absolute, as to be without all
Conditions? not so much as requiring our actual consent to them, that they may
be ours? May not a Father by Will give and bequeath his Lands or Moneys to his
Children, or Friends, with these or the like Priviso's, That they discharge the
Debts he owes, and pay the several Legacies he has given, and allow such
Pensions and Annuities for charitable uses, as he has therein appointed, and
set apart for that purpose? And are not the parties hereupon obliged (in case
they expect any benefit by his Will) to assent to, and perform the Conditions
thereto annexed? And if not performed according to appointment, do they not
thereby forfeit their claim to the whole? or rather they never had any legal
plea, or title to it, since they accepted not of the terms, upon which it was
given to them. Why, all for the main that I am arguing for, is no more but
this, viz. That the great Blessings of the Gospel are by the Father, through
Christ, made over to sinners, not by any mere absolute Grant or Bequeathment,
but upon certain Terms and Considerations, which on their part are to be
consented to, and accordingly to be performed, that they may be actually
interessed in them. And that whoever refuses to accept of these Terms, and
shall not sincerely endeavor the performance of them, they can neither be
instated in, or have any lawful claim to any part of that eternal Salvation,
which is the fruit of Christ's Satisfaction and Purchase.

In this sense if any one will call the Gospel Grant a Testament, there is
little to be said against it, since though the name be different, yet in
reality it is but the same: Which formally comprehends in it all the
essentials of a Covenant. It Is therefore, if you will, a Testament in a
Covenant form; or, a Testamental Covenant. It partakes of the nature of both,
but principally of the former. But all this will yet be more amply made to
appear by that which follows in the next Proposition.

PROPOS. IX. Of the Parties with whom the New Covenant is made.
THIS Evangelical Covenant, by which repenting and believing sinners are
readmitted to the favor of God, and the fruition of eternal life, it is made,
not immediately with Christ, for and in the behalf of Believers, but with
Believers themselves, in their own persons, through the mediation of Jesus
Christ with the Father. That there is indeed an eternal Covenant established
betwixt God the Father, and God the Son, in order to Man's Redemption, has
already been asserted: but besides this Covenant of Redemption (as it is now
fitly called by our Divines) there is also another Covenant; that I mean which
the Author to the Hebrews calls the New, and Second Covenant, which being of a
far different nature from the former, ought accordingly to be distinguished
from it; and this is that which I say is made betwixt God and Believers. In
short, The Covenant of Redemption was made with Christ: The Covenant of Grace
with Believers in Christ. To make this more evident, it is to be considered,
that in every Covenant there must of necessity be two or more persons mutually
stipulating and engaging to each other. One promising to give or grant somewhat
that may accrue to the benefit of the other; and another also, that may not
only accept of what is so granted, but further engage to return somewhat by way
of homage or acknowledgment. Thus in the Legal Covenant the Persons engaging
were God and Adam: In the Covenant of Redemption God and Christ: In the
Covenant of Grace, God and Believers.

Not that our consent was required, or is any way necessary to the framing and
drawing up this Covenant, as before was hinted: No, that was made without us:
Only to the Conditions therein propounded it is necessary. Betwixt Man and Man
indeed, supposing them to be equals, and each to be sui juris, there no
Covenant can be drawn up, or made, at least so, as to be obliging, unless it be
by mutual consent and agreement, thereto demanded and obtained, since betwixt
equals there can be no Dominion or Sovereignty, and consequently no right to
impose terms upon each other. But betwixt Superiors, and such as are in a state
of subjection and dependence, the case is far different. The Supreme
Magistrate, if he intend to confer Honors or Preferments upon any of his
Subjects, or to pardon such as have been disloyal, and have rebelled against
him, he may draw up, and propound to them what Conditions or Articles of
Agreement he thinks meet; provided they be not unjust and unreasonable, and not
to their prejudice: He may require them to make public acknowledgment of their
fault, and to promise homage and subjection to all his Laws and Government,
without asking their leave to do it, and they notwithstanding are thereupon
obliged to yield their consent thereunto, at least i^ they expect any benefit
by his Act of Grace and Pardon. Now this is the case betwixt God and the
Creature. Man he is not only as a Creature, necessarily subject to, and
dependent upon God, but, as a degenerate Creature, he is fallen under his
displeasure, and become liable to his anger and vindictive justice. And God on
the other hand, he is our Sovereign Lord and Governor, that has an absolute
Dominion over us; yet being withal infinitely gracious and compassionate, he
has been pleased to draw up conditions of Peace betwixt himself and fallen Man
(which is that we call the New Covenant) wherein he promises to pardon our
sins, and give us eternal life, provided we repent, and believe, etc. This he
has caused to be printed, and published by his Ambassadors to all the World,
and besides, that this is a sufficient declaration of his own consent to it, he
has also confirmed it to us by his Oath; and now requires, that we also, each
man for himself, should come and seal to these Conditions, (which we all do in
Baptism) and solemnly profess our consent to them; upon which (but not before)
we are actually instated in all the Privileges and Blessings belonging to this
Covenant. But withal let me add, that even they who withhold or deny their
consent to it, and resolve never to perform the conditions of it, are
notwithstanding necessarily obliged thereunto, not only as it is an act of
Grace, in the benefits of which they hope to be partakers, but also as it is the
Royal Law (as the Apostle calls it) of that God who is the Supreme Governor of
the World, from obedience to whose Authority it is impossible the Creature
should be exempted.

But before I proceed to make this good by further proof, it will be necessary
to make some short digression, for the clearing the sense of one place of
Scripture, that seems at first view to bear open testimony against what I am
now pleading for. The place we have Gal. 3.16. Now to Abraham and his Seed were
the Promises made. He says not, And to Seeds, as of many, but as of one, And
to thy Seed, which is Christ.

Hence some infer, and they suppose with no less than unquestionable evidence,
since it is in terms expressed, That the New Covenant is made with Jesus Christ,
and not with Believers personally considered, and consequently, that he is the
only party that stands engaged to the Father, and not they, for the performance
of all such terms as this Covenant does require. A strange and dangerous
Position, which raseth the very foundations of Christianity, the great design
of this being to teach us to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to
live godly, righteously and soberly in this present world, Tit. 2.12.

To this it might be sufficient, by way of answer, to reply, That since this
Text is of doubtful interpretation, it cannot in reason be thought sufficient
to warrant an opinion of so great importance, especially since it not only
stands alone without a second to confirm it, but that there is abundant
evidence, both from Scripture and Reason against it, as is afterward to be
shown. And it is a known and safe rule in interpreting Scripture, that doubtful
and obscure places are (and not on the contrary) to be tried and judged by the
light and testimony of such as are more clear and evident.

1. But further, for the better understanding the true sense of this place, it
is here to be noted, that such is the resemblance that Believers have of
Christ, and that intimate union they have with him, as that they are sometimes
called by his name, as for the same reason Magistrates are called Gods, Psalm.
6.7. and the Children of Jacob are called Jacob, Psalm. 44.4. and Israel, Romans
11.2, 7. and Jerusalem the Lord our Righteousness, Jer. 33.16. and every man by
the name of Adam, Psalm. 144.3. and so upon the like account Believers they are
called Christ, because of that near alliance there is betwixt them. Thus we
find this word used by the Apostle, 1 Corinthians. 12.12. Ephesians. 4.13. Col. 1.24.
Heb. 11.25, 26. compared, Acts 9.4. So that by Christ here we may understand
not Christ personal, but Christ mystical, that is, the whole body of Believers,
whether Jew or Gentile as jointly united and made one in Christ their head, as
the Apostle expresses it, Ephesians. 1.22, 23. and chap. 2.13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18,
19, 20, 21. And this I take to be that one Seed to whom the promise is here
said to be made.

2. But secondly, As the word may be thus taken, without imposing any new sense
upon it, since it is elsewhere so used by the Apostle, and Scripture delights to
transfer the name of any common Head to those that are either derived from, or
representative of it; so it ought also to be taken in this, and no other sense
in this place, and that for these following Reasons, which to me render it
abundantly evident. For,

1. This sense of the word here does best suit with the Apostles design and
main intendment in this, and the following Chapter; which is first to prove
that we are justified by Faith in Christ* and secondly, that this privilege,
with the rest annexed to the Covenant of Grace, belonged not only to the Jews,
but to the believing Gentiles also. It Is well known, that it was the common
opinion of the Jewish Doctors, that if a man lived in a due observance of the
Law of Moses, and if, upon any moral miscarriage, he were but punctual in
offering Sacrifices and Oblations in that case appointed, his sins were thereby
expiated, and he assured of eternal life, and consequently that they were saved
by their own righteousness and works of the Law. And because they were
originally descended from Abraham, and had the Law and Oracles of God, and the
holy Temple, etc. amongst them; therefore they rested in the Law, and made
their boast of God, as appropriate to themselves, being, as they falsely
apprehended, the only Seed of Abraham, to whom all the promises of the Covenant
did belong, and consequently that the rest of the Nations (whom they termed
Gentiles) could have no lot or portion in this matter, but were eternally
excluded from all hopes of acceptance with God, otherwise than by becoming
Proselytes to the Religion of the Jews.

These were the two great things in debate betwixt the Apostle and the Jewish
Rabbis, viz. upon what account a sinner might be justified and saved; and who
were the persons, whether Jews or Gentiles, or both, to whom the Promises of
the New Covenant did belong.

To the first, the Apostle makes this reply, Gal. 2.16. that a man is not
justified by the works of the Lw, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ; which he
makes good to them by several Arguments (which I must not now insist upon) and
particularly from the example of Abraham, in whom they so much boasted, He
himself was justified by faith and not by works, Gal. 3.6.

And as to the second, he proves to them, First, That they were not therefore
to repute themselves the blessed Seed of Abraham, and Heirs of the Promise,
because they were naturally descended from him, and so had Abraham to their
Father, Romans 9.7. The Seed of Abraham it was multiplex, not one, but diverse,
one by Ishmael, and another by Sarah* Now if they were the Children of the
Promise, qua filii, as they were the natural Sons of Abraham, then Ishmael as
well as Isaac, and Esau as well as Jacob, should have inherited the Blessing.
Yea, but the Promise was not made to Seeds, as of many, but to one Seed only,
which he in this second place proves to be only such, whether Jew or Gentile,
that should, as Abraham did, believe in Jesus Christ, and do the works of
Abraham. Such, as elsewhere it is expressed, that were Jews inwardly, and whose
circumcision was that of the heart, and in the Spirit, and not in the letter,
Rom 2.28, 29. Such as were born of the Spirit and not of the Flesh, Gal. 4.29.
Such as are not only of Israel, but Israelites indeed, Romans 9.6. Such as walked
in the steps of the Faith of Abraham, Romans 4.12. These he tells them were
truly, and only to be reputed the Children of Abraham, Gal. 3.7. and Heirs of
the Promise, Gal. 3.29. and the Seed of Abraham; in the beginning of the same
Verse, and the Seed to whom the promise was made, ver. 19. of the same Chapter:
and therefore Children of the promise, Gal. 4.28. Yea though they were
Gentiles, and of the most vile and despicable amongst the Gentiles, Scythians
and Barbarians, yet upon believing they were to be owned for the Children, and
of the blessed Seed of Abraham, Gal. 3.26. for there is no difference says the
Apostle to the Romans, chap. 2.22. and 10.12. And if no difference, no
distinction, and so still but (...), one Seed. And consequently all the
Blessings and Privileges of the Covenant made with Abraham did equally belong
to them with the Jews. And it is observable how much the Apostle, both here and
elsewhere, labors in this argument, v. 8. of this Chapter. The Scripture
foreseeing that God would justify the Heathen through Faith, preached before
the Gospel to Abraham, saying, In thee shall all Nations be blessed. And ver.
9. So then they which be of Faith, are blessed with faithful Abraham. And ver.
13, 14. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, etc. That the
blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ. And Romans
3.29, 30. Is he the God of the Jews only? Is he not also of the Gentiles? yes
of the Gentiles also, seeing it is one God, which shall justify the
circumcision by faith, and the uncircumcision through Faith: which he
prosecutes more at large, chap. 4. ver. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.16, 17.

Thus you see, how much the Apostle labors, as his great design, to
demonstrate to the Jews, that the Gentiles were included in the Promise made to
Abraham, and were to be blessed in and with him: Yea but upon what account? Why
because they also were Children of the promise, Gal. 4.28. and that Seed to
whom the Promise was made, Romans 4.13.16. But how come they to be of his Seed,
being not of the stock of Israel? Why, by being of the Faith of Abraham, Romans
4.12.16. that is by believing in Jesus Christ, Gal. 3.26.

And from hence it is clearly to be inferred, that the Jews had no cause either
to boast of their being the Children and Seed of Abraham, unless with him they
did believe: or to exclude the Gentiles from being so, if they did believe;
since 'twas not Birth or Nation, but Faith that entitled them to be his Seed.
Thus the Argument runs clear, and is convictive: But if by Seed here we
understand Christ personal, and not Christ mystical, that is Believers in
Christ, his argument is neither proper, nor conclusive, at least not so
evident, and suitable to the Apostles main intendment in the words.

2. This sense of the word is most agreeable to that account, which we have
here and elsewhere given of this Covenant made with Abraham. The great thing
promised in this Covenant was the giving of a Messiah, in whom all the Nations
of the World should be blessed, Luke 1*68, 69, etc. And that by Faith in him,
their iniquities should be forgiven, Romans 4.7, 8. and they justified, Gal. 3.8.
and freed from the curse, ver. 13. and receive the Spirit, ver. 14. and be
admitted to the inheritance, ver. 18. and have righteousness and life, ver. 21.
All which is said to be confirmed of God in Christ, ver. 17. of the same
Chapter. Now all these privileges, which are but so many branches of the
Covenant, they are here made expressly not to Christ but to Believers, as the
Seed of Abraham. Nor can they any way possibly be applicable to Christ himself.
For he is the person here promised, and therefore not the person to whom the
promise is made. The Father did not Covenant with Christ to give him Christ,
(that is a Position so absurd, that the Reason of man can never give
entertainment to it) but to give him to Believers, they are without doubt the
parties to whom God engages to give the Messiah. And it is as evident also that
the several Blessings of the Covenant before mentioned were promised to them,
and not to him. For had he any sins to be forgiven? or was he to be freed from
the Curse of the Law, who therefore came into the World, that he might bear the
Curse for us? or did he stand in need of an inheritance, righteousness, and
life? Since therefore the several particulars of this Covenant with Abraham,
are made over to him, and to his Seed, and since by his Seed in this place
cannot be meant Christ (the blessing therein promised, being not compatible to
him, but to Believers) it necessarily follows, that by Christ in the Text we
are to understand not Christ personal, but Christ mystical; that is, the whole
Body of Believers, both Jew and Gentile, united in one by Faith in Jesus Christ.

3. But thirdly, to name no more, the Apostle himself does thus interpret his
own meaning in the close of this Chapter, ver. 26, 27, 28, There is neither Jew
nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female,
for ye are all one in Christ Jesus: and ver. 29. it follows, If ye be Christ's,
then are ye Abraham's Seed, and Heirs according to the Promise. And what can be
spoken more expressly to instruct us, that by the one Seed, he meant both Jew
and Gentile, as believing in Jesus Christ? They are all, he tells you, baptized
into Christ, they have all put on Christ, they are all one in Christ: They are
Christ's, They are all the Seed of Abraham, and they are all joint-heirs of the
Promise: Which we have yet in more direct terms expressed by the same Apostle in
his Epistle to the Romans, where he treats of the self same argument, chap. 9.
ver. 7, 8. Neither because they are the Seed of Abraham, are they all children,
but in Isaac shall thy seed be called: that is, (as he expounds himself in the
following verse) They which are the children of the Flesh, these are not the
children of God; but the children of the promise (and who are they but
Believers?) are counted for the Seed.

And thus having cleared the Apostles sense and meaning in this place, and
showed how little it speaks in favor of that opinion, that the Covenant was
made with Christ; I shall now proceed to make it good by further Argument, that
Believers, and not Jesus Christ, are the parties with whom God stipulates in
the New Covenant.

And first, From those Names and Titles that are given to Jesus Christ with
reference to this Covenant. He Is called the Angel, or Messenger, that brought
the glad tidings of it to the World, Mal. 3.1. The Prince, that is the Lord and
Founder of it, Dan. 11.22. The Mediator, by whom it was procured for and
conveyed to us, Heb. 12.24. The Surety, that stands bound for the performance
of it, Heb. 2.22. And by his death he is said to ratify and confirm it, Dan.
9.27. Upon which account it is by the Evangelist called the New Testament in
his blood, Luke 22.20. Now that all these are spoken of Jesus Christ with
relation to the Covenant of Grace, is so abundantly evident, that there shall
need no other proof of it, than merely to view the several places, whence they
are cited. But are these consistent with his being a party in this Covenant?
What? Did he as Prince frame and found this Covenant for himself? Or was he
Messenger, and Mediator, and Surety to himself? Or did he dye to confirm it to
himself? And if not to himself, to whom then, but to Believers? Was it not for
them that he founded this New Covenant? And to them that he brought the glad
tidings of it? And for them that he mediates? And for them that he dyed, that
they might be confirmed, and assured in the truth of it? It Is they then, and
not Jesus Christ, with whom this Covenant is made.

Yea, but is not he expressly by the Prophet called our Covenant? Isaiah 42.6.
It Is true, and so is Circumcision, Acts 7.8. Genesis 17.13. And so are the Saints
themselves, Dan. 11.28.30.32. But who sees not, that these must of necessity be
taken in a figurative and not a proper sense; An usual way of speaking to give
the name of the adjunct to its proper subject, and of the thing signified to
its sign, and of the Effect to its Cause and Author. And thus it is here, the
Saints they are called the Covenant, as they are the proper Subjects of it,
Isa. 55.3. And Circumcision as it is the Sign and Seal of it, Romans 4.11. And
Jesus Christ, as he is the Mediator and Founder of it, Heb. 8.9. But,

2. Where ever we read of the Sanction and promulgation of this Covenant, there
we shall find, that Believers themselves (and not Christ) are still mentioned,
as the Parties with whom God stipulates and agrees. When God covenanted with
Abraham, who are the Parties there engaged? God and Christ, or God and Abraham?
See Genesis 17. ver. 2. I will make my Covenant between me and thee: and ver. 4.
Behold my Covenant is with thee: and ver. 7. I will establish my Covenant
between me and thee, and thy seed after thee: and again, ver. 10. This is my
Covenant which ye shall keep between me and you, and thy seed after thee. And
as God here promises to bless Abraham; so Abraham also he declares his
acceptance of the terms upon which it is propounded, and seals to the Agreement
on his part: ver. 23. of the same Chapter, And Abraham took Ishmael his Son,
and all that were born in his House, etc. and circumcised the flesh of their
foreskin, in the self same day, as God had said unto him. And this afterward
God himself gives as a reason, why he would bless his Seed, as he had promised.
Genesis 26.5. Sojourn in this Land (says God to Isaac there) and I will be with
thee, and bless thee, for unto thee and thy Seed, I will give all these
Countries, and I will perform the Oath which I swear unto Abraham thy Father,
etc. Why? Because that Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept my charge, my
Commandments, my Statutes, and my Laws. But what was that charge? etc. Why; not
only that he should circumcise Ishmael, with the rest of the Males in his
Family, but that he should walk before the Lord and be upright, Genesis 17.1.

From all which we learn, (1.) That this transaction betwixt God and Abraham,
it was not merely a Testament but a Covenant: (2.) That this Covenant is mutual
betwixt God on the one part, and Abraham and his Seed on the other: (3.) That
as God promises to bless Abraham, so he also accepts of the terms, and
engages to keep his Statutes and his Laws, and sets to his Seal for
performance. For so the Apostle calls Circumcision, Romans 4.11.

Again, When this Covenant, with some further additions to it, is renewed with
the Israelites, the Seed of Abraham, who are there mentioned as the Parties
covenanting with God; Is it not the Israelites, each man for himself in his own
person? It Is true, the Apostle tells us, that it was ordained by Angels in the
hand of a Mediator, Gal. 3.19. that is, by the intervention of Moses, who was
herein a Type of Jesus Christ, the Mediator of the New Covenant, as the Apostle
styles him, Heb. 8.6. Yea, but the Covenant for all that, it was made, though
by the hands of Moses, yet with the Israelites themselves, and not with him, as
Mediator in their behalf. But let us consult the place it self, since there we
shall find the fullest account, I meet with, of the most solemn manner of
entering into Covenant with God. First, Moses he goes up into the Mount, and
there receives the Covenant from the mouth of God himself, Exodus 19.3, 4, 5, 6.
The sum of which, as you there read, was this, viz. That if they would obey the
voice of God indeed, and keep his Commandments, that they should then be a
peculiar treasure above all people, etc. This Moses upon his return propounds
to the People from God, for their consent: ver. 7. And Moses came, and called
for the Elders of the People, and laid before their faces all these words,
which the Lord commanded him. And the people hereupon declare their consent to
these proposals, ver. 8. And all the people answered together, and said, All
that the Lord has spoken we will do: which Moses again reports back to God, in
the close of that verse; And Moses returned the words of the People unto the
Lord.

And then, having made a more particular rehearsal of the Laws and Statutes,
which God had commanded them to observe: in the four following Chapters he
again propounds them to the people, and they again declare their acceptance of
them: Chap. 24. ver. 3. And Moses came and told the People all the words of the
Lord, and all the Judgments. And all the People answered with one voice, and
said, All the words which the Lord has said will we do. And thus the Covenant
being mutually both on God's part and on the Israelites assented to, he
immediately causes an Altar and twelve Pillars to be erected: An Altar to the
Lord, and twelve Pillars, as representative of the twelve Tribes of Israel (
ver. 4.) who having offered Sacrifice thereon, ( ver. 5.) he takes one half of
the blood thereof, and sprinkleth it upon the Altar, to signify the Peoples
sealing their part to God, ver. 6. and the other half he sprinkleth upon the
People, to signify Gods sealing on his part to them, ver. 8. which is
therefore called in the close of that verse, the Blood of the Covenant, which
God had made with them; that is, the Blood by which the Covenant was mutually
ratified and sealed betwixt God and Israel: Upon which account Moses tells
them, that they had avouched the Lord to be their God, and to walk in his ways,
and keep his Statutes, etc. And that the Lord had avouched them to be his
peculiar People as he had promised, etc. Deuteronomy. 26.16, 17, 18, 19. And thus you
see in these two famous instances of God's covenanting first with Abraham, and
then with Israel, that not Jesus Christ, but Abraham and Israel were the
Confederates, that became engaged to God for the performance of the terms
therein required. And were not they, for the main, under the same Covenant with
Believers in the Gospel? As to Abraham the case is evident, read Gal. 3. and
Romans 4. and then tell me whether he were not under a Covenant of Grace? And as
to Israel, though there were several Appendices, Types, and Shadows superadded
by Moses, which are now done away, yet is there any other difference betwixt
that, and the Evangelical Dispensation? Are they not essentially, and for
substance the same? Had not they the same Christ exhibited in Types and
Sacrifices, which we have explicitly revealed in the Gospel? And were not the
same spiritual Blessings in him, as pardon of sin, justification, and eternal
life, etc. promised to them? And were not the same substantial Duties, as
Repentance, and Faith, and Obedience required of them? And was it not therefore
the great business of Christ and his Apostles, in their frequent contests with
the Jews, to demonstrate the conformity of their Doctrine with the Law of
Moses, and that they taught nothing but what Moses and the Prophets had before
revealed to them? For proof of this, let these following places be consulted.
Joh. 5.45, 46, 47. Joh. 6.45. Joh. 10.34. Luke 4.17, 18, 19, 20, 21. Luke
16.29. Luke 24.27. and 44. Luke 18.31. and Luke 1.70. Acts 3.18, 19.21, 22, 23.
Act. 10*43. Acts 26.22. Acts 24.14, 15. Acts 28.23. 1 Cor. 10.2. Romans 1.2. and
3.21. Ephesians. 2*20.

And if Abraham and Israel were for the main under the same Covenant of Grace
with us, it is evident that therein Believers themselves were the parties that
stood engaged to God, and consequently that the Covenant of Grace is made with
them, and not with their Mediator in their behalf. This Argument is so clear
and convictive, as that it is impossible to avoid the power of it, otherwise
than by saying that they were not saved, as we, by a Covenant of Grace, which,
as it openly affronts the testimony of Christ and his Apostles, as may be seen
in the places before mentioned, and more particularly from what the Apostle
Paul has delivered upon this Argument in his Epistles to the Romans and
Galatians; so it necessarily infers this monstrous conclusion, that Old
Testament Believers were saved, as never any man yet was, and as it is
impossible that any since the fall of Adam should be; that is, by a Covenant of
Works. For there is no medium betwixt these two: If it be not of Works, it must
be by Grace, as the Apostle argues Romans 11.6.

However, they covenanted with God, each man for himself, and what reason can
be given that Jesus Christ should undertake or stand engaged more for us than
them? or that we (if saved as they, Acts 15.11.) should not lie under the same
actual engagements to Faith and Obedience, especially since our duty is more
plain, and our knowledge more clear, and our reward more express, and our
assistance by the Spirit more influential, and our advantages and obligation to
God every way greater and more persuasive?

But to be short, does not Scripture affirm the self same thing of Gospel
Believers? Are not they still expressed as Parties, wherever we find, either in
the Old or New Testament, any mention made of the New Covenant? Jer. 31.31.
Ezekiel. 34.11.25, etc. Ezekiel. 37.24, 25, 26, 27. Isa. 55.3. Isa. 61.8, 9. Heb.
8.10, 11, etc. Heb. 10.16. That these Texts speak of the Gospel Covenant is
unquestionable, or else we have no such thing revealed in Scripture. But with
whom is it there said to be made? with David the Prince, and Shepherd, as
Christ is there styled by Ezekiel? No, But with the Sheep and Flock, with the
House of David, and the House of Israel, that is, with Believers, who are
expressed under those Old Testament Names, of Israel and Jacob, and Seed of
Abraham, etc. And whereas some object, that it is constantly called in Scripture
God's Covenant, and not ours, the reason is obvious, from what has been
already said, viz. That God as absolute Lord and Sovereign, he contrives and
frames, and propounds this Covenant to us, and all that we have to do, is only
to subscribe and seal to it. And therefore not properly our Covenant, but
God's, because he made it, and not we: Though this also is to be here observed,
that Believers are said not only to enter into Covenant, but also to make
Covenant with God, which is given as a constitutive Character of a Saint: Psalm.
50.5. Gather my Saints together unto me (says God there) But who are they?
Why, those that have made a Covenant with me by Sacrifice: Upon which account
it is also by the Prophet called their Covenant, Ezekiel. 16.61. Then shall thou
remember thy ways and be ashamed, when thou shall receive thy Sisters, thine
elder, and thine younger, and I will give them unto thee for Daughters, but not
by thy Covenant.

3. As the Covenant is expressly said to be made with Believers, so it is
frequently spoken of in Scripture, as their proper act to stipulate with God
therein, and by their own consent to engage themselves to him. Hence they are
said to make Covenant with God, 2 Kings 23.3. and to enter into Covenant, Deuteronomy.
29.10, 11, 12. and join themselves to the Lord by Covenant, Jer. 50.5. and
subscribe with the hand to the Lord, Isa. 44.5. And give themselves to the
Lord, 2 Cor. 8.5. and to avouch the Lord to be their God, and to walk in his
ways, Deuteronomy. 26.16, 17. And what can all this signify less than their actual
consent and agreement to the Covenant? But there are yet two expressions more
in Scripture, that deserve more particularly to be taken notice of, as speaking
more fully to this purpose. The first you have Psalm. 50.5. the place before
mentioned, Gather my Saints together unto me, that have made a Covenant with me
by Sacrifice. That have made] so we render it, but according to the original it
is, that have cut a Covenant with me: which phrase, upon the like account, is
also used by the Prophets. A mode of speech taken (as before was observed) from
the usual manner of making and confirming Covenant, which was by cutting and
dividing the Beast then offered in Sacrifice, and passing mutually betwixt the
parts of it, whereby they did in effect say, Let it be done to me, as to this
Sacrifice, if I shall presume to violate this Covenant: to which Christ seems
to allude, Mat. 24.51. The Lord of that Servant shall come in a day, when he
looks not for him, and in ^n hour that he is not aware of, and shall cut him
in sunder, and appoint him his portion with the Hypocrite, etc. Thus are God
and Believers mutually engaged to each other. They make a Covenant by
Sacrifice, and there^n they interchangeably set to their Seals: as God seals to
them, Ephesians. 1.13. so they also ^eal to God, Joh. 3.33.

The other place we have Ezekiel. 20.37. And I will cause you to pass under the
rod, and ^ will bring you into the Bond of the Covenant* See here is a Covenant
with a Bond and Obligation annexed to it, and into this Bond every Soul must
enter, that covenants with God, and their entrance it must be by passing under
the Rod; which is a manifest allusion to what we find commanded in the
Levitical Law, as to the manner of tything their Flocks and Herds: Levit.
27.32. And concerning the tithe of the Herd or of the Flock, even of whatsoever
passes under the Rod, the tenth shall be holy unto the Lord, etc. The Jews
were a carnal and selfish People, that were ready to put off God with the
worst, the hal^, the blind, and lame, and to keep the best to themselves, as
God complains of them by his Prophet, Mal. 1.13, 14. and therefore God would
not leave it to their choice, what should be his, but appoints, that every
tenth, as it came in order out of the Fold, and so passed under the Shepherds
Rod or Staff, by which he numbered them, as they came out, should be set apart
for himself. This whether it were good or bad, God would have it, it must not
be changed, ver. 33. And thus must every Soul, that becomes holy and
consecrated to the Lord, pass into the Bond of the Covenant: They must all come
under the Rod, that is, they must come one by one, and every one for himself,
engage to be the Lords. And that which renders this place, with that also of
the Psalmist, the more considerable, is this, that they are both spoken with
reference to Gospel Times, as might, were it needful, be sufficiently evidenced
from the context of both those Scriptures. But besides the Testimony of
Scripture, even that of Reason it self might be sufficient to evince the
necessity of our stipulating with God in the New Covenant, as they did in the
Old. For who can possibly imagine, that God should oblige himself to the
Creature, and in the interim leave the Creature at liberty, without being
engaged to himself? What? God bound by Covenant to pardon our sins, and heal
our backslidings, and take us into the relation of Friends, and Children, and
make daily Provisions for us? To spread our Table, and fill our Cup, and take
the care of and protect us, and after all receive us unto Glory? And yet we not
bound to repent of our sins? And believe in him, and love him, and live in
obedience to his Laws and Government? Who can entertain such unworthy thoughts
of God, that believes him to be infinitely wise and holy? One that has made
all things for himself? Prove. 16.4. and has also sworn, that every knee shall
bow, and every tongue shall confess to the Lord? Isa. 45.23.

4. The Nature and Design of those two great Gospel Ordinances, Baptism and the
Lords Supper, which Jesus Christ has instituted in his Church, do necessarily
suppose this. That these are Seals, and Seals of the New Covenant, and mutual
Seals, appointed not only as Badges of our profession, but Bonds and
Obligations by which we formally engage our selves to God, as he to us, are
things avowed by all. But who now are the persons here sealing? Christ or
Believers? It Is they that are baptized, and they that eat the Flesh and drink
the Blood of Christ; and consequently they, and not Christ, that are the
Parties engaged in this Covenant? For what has any man to do to seal to any
Covenant, wherein he is not a person concerned?

First for Baptism, Do we not therein personally every one for himself, promise
to forsake our sins, and deny our selves, and quit our carnal and worldly
interests, and renounce the works of the Flesh and of the Devil? Do we not
solemnly dedicate, and give up our selves to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in
whose Names we are baptized? Do we not there professedly own God as our Creator
and Father, to love him, and to live in a dutiful and obediential observance of
him? And to accept of Jesus Christ as our Mediator and Redeemer, in all his
Offices, to submit to his Doctrine, Laws, and Discipline? And to receive the
sacred Spirit as our Guide, to be led and governed by him in all the actions of
our lives? This Profession grown persons were ever required to make, upon their
first admission into Church^Society. And though for Children this be done by
their Sureties, yet it is no less obliging, than if it had been done in their
own persons: For since Parents have an undoubted Sovereignty over their
Children in their minority, they are thereby invested with a right to dispose
of them at pleasure, provided it be not to their prejudice. If Hannah begs, and
obtains a Son from God, she may give him back again to God, and devote him to
his use and service. And if a Father settles an Estate upon his Child, he may
oblige him to pay such lawful Debts and Annuities as he has thought meet to
charge upon it, and hereby the Child is no less engaged to performance, than if
it had been his own act and deed. However, in the first and most pure Ages of
the Church, such as were admitted to Baptism in their infancy, when they came
to years, and were instructed, by Catechists particularly appointed for that
purpose, in the Principles of Christianity, they then were brought into the
Public Congregation, and there in their own persons did own, and ratify, and
take upon themselves what their Sureties had promised in their behalf. Upon
which account Baptism is called by the Apostle the answer of a good Conscience
toward God, 1 Pet. 3.21. In which words the Apostle has respect to the
questions, that were then by the Minister propounded to the party to be
baptized, and the answer he gave to them. Do thou believe the Articles of the
Christian Faith? Do thou renounce the World? etc. Do thou give up thy self
entirely to Jesus Christ, and promise to be faithful to him? These were the
Questions usually propounded to the Christian Converts at their Baptism, to all
which they were to answer, I do believe, I do renounce, I do promise. And this
is that (supposing it to be spoken sincerely, and from the heart) which the
Apostle here calls, the answer of a good conscience. The true Baptism indeed,
that saves us, as he there speaks, and not the putting away the filth of the
flesh, by being either immerst in Water, or having that poured upon our Faces.

Again, When we approach to the Table of the Lord, and are there admitted to
the sacred Communion of the Body and of the Blood of Jesus Christ, as the
Apostle expresses it, 1 Cor. 10.16. Do we not then renew our Covenant with
God, and solemnly declare that we take him to be our God, and give up our
selves also to him to be his People? Do we not engage to love him, and believe
in him, and to walk in all ways of holiness and obedience well pleasing in his
sight? Do we not then say with David, Psalm. 119.94. Lord I am thine? His indeed
we ever were, as made and redeemed by him, but now we become his by our own
actual choice, and solemn dedication of our selves unto him.

How therefore any that are baptized, and admitted to the Lords Supper, should
imagine, that they are not parties that stand engaged to God in the New
Covenant, I understand not, since thereby they do no less solemnly avouch the
Lord to be their God, and to walk in his ways, and to keep his Statutes and
Commandments, than Israel did at Mount Horeb: To me it is an argument that these
men were yet never duly instructed in the nature and use of these Gospel
Institutions. As Christ told the Woman of Samaria, they worshipped they knew
not what; so we may say to them, they know not what it is to be baptized, and
to partake of the Table of the Lord.

5. Lastly, If Believers are not the parties, but Christ, that stand engaged to
God by the New Covenant; how then comes it to pass that they are charged with
the commission of any sin? or in any sense punished for it? That Believers, as
well as others, may and do become guilty of sin, is evident from express
Scripture. For in many things, says the Apostle James, we offend all, Jam.
3.2. And he that says he has no sin, he lies, says John, and the truth is
not in him, 1 John 1.8. And why else did Jesus Christ instruct his Disciples to
pray daily for the remission of their sins, ( Math. 6.12.) if they had no sins
to be forgiven? Sin then they do, that is unquestionable, yea and upon their
sinning they also become liable to temporal punishments, though exempted from
those that are eternal. Was not Jacob punished for his lying to get the
Blessing? And Aaron and Moses punished for their passion and disbelief, Numb.
20.12. And David punished for his Murder and Adultery? And the believing
Corinthians punished for their undue celebration of the Lords Supper? 1 Cor.
11.30. But how come they to be guilty of sin, or punishable for it? For where
there is no sin, there no punishment can be due (and consequently it would be
injustice in that case to punish) And where there is no Law, there can be no
sin, as the Apostle argues; for all sin it is (...), the transgression of some
Law, as he defines it, 1 John 3.4. But what Law is that by which Believers
become obliged to Obedience? The Old Covenant, or Law of Works? No. That Is long
since abrogated, and laid aside by the mediation of Jesus Christ, and therefore
no more obliging or convictive to such as are in Christ, Romans 6.13. For ye are
not under the Law, but under Grace. By Grace there the Apostle means the
Covenant of Grace, as by Law, the Covenant of Works. And such is the opposition
betwixt these two, that he who is under one, cannot be under the other, any
more than she that is married can be under the power of another Husband, till
the first be dead. As he further argues in the following Chapter, ver. 1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6. The conclusion from all which is this, that being married to Christ,
we are freed from the Law. But how then become Believers obliged to duty, or
convict of sin? By what Law, since not by the Law of Works? What? By the Law of
Grace, the New Covenant? Neither, according to the sentiments of such as say
that the Covenant was made with Christ, and not with Believers. For if they be
not the parties that stand engaged for service and obedience to it, neither can
they be charged with guilt in not obeying it. Suppose that any one should
covenant and agree with a third person in my behalf, that if I be put into the
possession of such an Office, or Estate, I shall pay such a Rent, or homage, by
way of acknowledgment, my consent and stipulation thereto being not required.
Who now stands bound, he or I, for the performance of these Conditions? or who
shall be charged with breach of Covenant, in case of nonperformance? Gratitude
indeed and Ingenuity may persuade me to use all possible endeavors to perform
what my friend in kindness has promised for me. Yea, but in Law I am not bound
thereto, but he only that entered into Bonds for me; and consequently, if I
neglect or refuse to pay such Rents, and Acknowledgments, the default shall be
charged not upon me but him. He Is the only Offender in Law, not I: for where
there is no obligation to obedience by Law, there can be no sin or offense
against it.

And thus by affirming the New Covenant to be made with Jesus Christ, and not
with Believers, they do not only acquit themselves from all sin, and
possibility of sinning, which is flatly contrary to the express testimony of
Scripture, but they also in effect charge Jesus Christ with their sins, and
make him legally guilty of all the violations of the Covenant, which are
Consequences of so foul and black a nature, as that no sober mind can entertain
a thought of them, or of the Principles whence they spring without abhorrence.

I have been the more large upon this argument, since this opinion, of the
Covenants being made with Christ and not with Believers, as it is of dangerous
consequence, and evidently destructive to the power of Godliness, so it has
gained much upon the minds of men, partly from the corruption of Man's nature,
that readily entertains what ever makes for liberty, and promises indulgence
to the flesh, and gives a dispensation from the more strict observances in
Religion: And partly from the Nature of the Doctrine, that tends to take Men
off from the trouble of duty, and obedience, and to gratify them in their
desires of ease and pleasure: And partly from the worth and credit of some
Seers in Israel, that have unwarily preached and pub^isht this to the World,
either by inadvertency, taking it up as a traditional Doctrine without due
examination, or by mistake, not rightly distinguishing betwixt the Covenant of
Redemption (which it is evident was made with Christ) and the Covenant of Grace,
which is made with Believers.

But if Jesus Christ be the Author, Mediator and Confirmer of this New
Covenant, by his death and intercession in the behalf of sinners: And if
Believers themselves and not Christ are still mentioned in Scripture, as the
party with whom God Covenants, as from the instances of Abraham, and Israel,
and Gospel Saints it is evident: And if it be made their act to stipulate with
God therein, they enter into Covenant with the Lord, and they join themselves
to him by Covenant, and they cut a Covenant with him, and they avouch the Lord
to be their God, and they subscribe with the hand to the Lord, and they pass
under the Rod, and come into the Bond of the Covenant, and give themselves to
the Lord: And if they be the persons only that seal with God in this Covenant,
and that this be the proper use, and design of those two great Gospel
Institutions, Baptism and the Lords Supper: And lastly, if they become guilty
of sin in their non performance of the terms of it, and are punish^ble for
their defaults: Then it is no more to be doubted, but that Believers, and not
Christ, are the sole parties with whom God transacts in the New Covenant, which
was the thing to be demonstrated.

PROPOS. X. Of the terms of the New Covenant.
THIS New Covenant made with Believers in Jesus Christ for life and glory, it
is not only consistent with, but does necessarily, as such, imply certain terms
and conditions annexed to it, which we are indispensably obliged to accept and
perform. The Covenant is made up of Promises and Commands, Privileges and
Conditions; the former contain our happiness, the latter our duty, and these
two they must not be separated.

What a Condition is, every one, I suppose, understands, that has but seen any
ordinary Lease or Indenture. By that we know there ^s somewhat demised and
granted, as the ^ree and peaceable enjoyment of the Premi^es, with all
Emoluments and Appurtenan^es belonging to it: And there is also somewhat
therein required and enjoined, as the payment of the Rent reserved, and keeping
the Premises in repair, etc. which if done and performed accordingly, the
Tenant is continued in possession. But if it so happen, that the said Rent be
unpaid, or the Premises suffered to go to decay, then the Lease is forfeited,
and the party may by Law be ejected. So that a Condition you see is that, which
on our part is required, upon the performance of which some good, or emolument,
is to be received, and enjoyed by us, but in case of nonperformance the whole
is lost, either by forfeiting our right, or by having at first no rightful
claim to it. And thus we say that Faith and Repentance, etc. are Conditions of
the New Covenant. God therein indeed gives and grants pardon of sin, and
eternal life to sinners, but with this proviso, that they repent of their sins,
and believe in Jesus Christ, etc. which if they do accordingly, the Blessings
promised become theirs, and they are continued in the possession of them, but
if they fail in the sincere performance of these duties, their sins shall not
be pardoned, no^ their souls eternally saved, as is afterward to be shown.

This is that which I call the condition o^ the Covenant. Nor can I see any
just reason why any should be offended with the word. For do we not in all
contracts call that a condition to the performance of which we ar^ by Covenant
obliged upon penalty of forfeiture in case of non^performance? As if you shall
pay such a Fee, or Homage to the Court, you shall enjoy such an estate,
otherwise you shall lose the possession of it? And in all Agreements those are
the conditions, which are the terms upon which the disagreeing parties mutually
accord: As Luke 14.32. it is said of the King that was not able to war with him
that came against him, that he sent his Ambassadors, an desired conditions of
Peace: And those in Logic conditional propositions upon which the consequent
has an evident dependence upon its antecedent? As if you forgive men their
trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you, but if ye forgive not
men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive you your trespasses,
Math. 6.14, 15. If we would judge our selves, we should not be judged of the
Lord, 1 Corinthians. 11.31. If ye keep my Commandments, ye shall abide in my love,
Joh. 15.10. If thou seek for wisdom, as silver, and searchest for her, as
for hid treasures, then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord and find the
knowledge of God, Prove. 2.4, 5. If ye live after the flesh ye shall die, but if
ye through the spirit do mortify the deeds of the flesh, ye shall live, Romans
8.13. If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? Genesis 2.7. If we confess
our sins, he is faithful to forgive, 1 John 1.9. Are not all these conditional
propositions? Does not reason, and common language teach us to speak thus? And
who ever yet called them by any other name? I have therefore the rather
instanced in these Scriptures, that you might see how confessing our sins, and
forgiving others are made conditions of Gods forgiving us: And judging our
selves is made the condition of our not being condemned of the Lord: and a
diligent seeking after wisdom a condition to our finding of it. And doing well
a condition of our acceptance with God; and keeping the Commandments of Christ
a condition of our abiding in his love. And mortifying the deeds of the flesh a
condition of eternal life.

Again, do not all men distinguish the promises (which are but so many several
branches of the New Covenant) into absolute, and conditional? And are not all
acknowledged to be conditional, excepting such, as promise the first grace? As
for instance, that the meek shall inherit the Earth, Math. 5.5. That if we
humble our selves under the mighty hand of God, he will exalt us, 1 Pet. 5.6.
That they that take the yoke, and submit to the burden of Christ, shall find
rest and ease to their souls, Math. 11.28, 29. That they that hunger and thirst
after righteousness shall be satisfied, Math. 5.6. etc. These and many more of
the like nature, are commonly said to be conditional promises. And if meekness
be acknowledged the condition of inheriting the Earth, and humiliaton of being
exalted, and taking the yoke of finding rest, and hungring and thirsting of
being satisfied, why may not being pure in heart be also termed the condition
of seeing God, and obedience the condition of eternal life, when they are all
promised in the same way, and upon the like terms?

Besides is it not commonly said that one Grace may be the condition to an
other? As sincerity to confidence, 1 John 3.21. Humility to spiritual growth
and strength, Jam. 4.6. Faith and Hope to rejoicing in God, etc. 1 Pet. 1.

And may one Grace be the condition of another, and yet may they not be the
conditions of pardon of sin, and eternal life for fear of eclipsing the Glory
of free Grace? Why, Is not second grace, notwithstanding its conditionality, as
free as the first? And no more of debt than eternal recompenses? Why then may
not conditions be allowed of with respect to the latter, as well as granted in
the former, since both grace and glory are alike ^he fruit of Christ purchase
and donation? And why then should any one be offended at ^he use of the word,
since it is proper you see ^o all compacts and agreements, since all
propositions, that have any dependence upon their antecedent, are so termed:
since the promises of the Covenant are generally acknow^edged to be
conditional, and one grace to be the condition of another? But this I have only
promised to remove that scandal, which some have taken at the word condition; I
shall now endeavor to make it good by several demonstrative arguments, that
the Covenant of Grace does necessarily suppose conditions, or which is all one,
that the great blessings of the Covenat are promised and propounded to us upon
certain terms and conditions in order to our being admitted into the possession
of them.

1. And first from the very nature and definition of a Covenant. That Believers
in the Gospel are under a Covenant-dispensation, according to the true intent
and meaning of that word, has already been demonstrated, and therefore I shall
now take that for granted. But what is that then we call a Covenant in a proper
sense? Is it not a mutual Compact, and Agreement betwixt two or more Parties,
whereby they do, upon certain terms and conditions therein specified,
respectively oblige themselves to each other?

It Is an Agreement, and that supposes more Parties than one. For though a Man
may be said to purpose with himself, yet not properly to Covenant, but to and
with another* And therefore when Job is said to make a Covenant with his eyes;
His eyes there ar^ spoken of as a different party distinct from his Soul, that
Covenants with them. And as there must be more parties than one in every
Covenant, one giving and granting* and another to receive and make returns o^
what is granted; so the agreement, and stipulation betwixt them, it must be
mutual: for no one properly can be obliged, but by his ow^ consent. And
therefore though the creatur^ be indispensably obliged to consent to whatever
his Maker shall propound to him, yet h^ will have our free, and personal
consent and stipulation to the Covenant, that we may be bound by our own act
and choice. Bu^ besides this that there must be more partie^ than one, and they
mutually engaged to eac^ other, there must also be some terms, and conditions
specified concerning which the^ agree and stipulate: somewhat that is demised,
and granted, and somewhat that is t^ be rendered by way of homage, or
acknowledgment: somewhat that is to be received, and somewhat that is to be
returned. An^ this is necessarily implied in the very wor^ agreement and
stipulation: For if two agree together, it must be upon some terms, and certain
considerations mutually to be performed. E. g. One promises the quiet
possession of such an estate upon the payment of such rent; and the other
promises the payment of such a rent upon his quiet possession of it. And in
this mainly lies the difference betwixt a Gift, a Promise, and a Covenant. A
deed of gift is when I do freely bestow somewhat upon another without
preengaging so to do. A promise is when I engage my self by word to do any act
of kindness for another, without requiring any thing by way of engagement on
his part. For if there be any condition affixed to my promise, it cease
properly to be a promise, and becomes a Covenant, for every conditional promise
is implicitly so: But a Covenant is a mutual engagement betwixt both parties,
wherein as I promise to do somewhat for him, so he also promises to do
somewhat that I require of him. So that in every Covenant there is ratio dati
and accepti, somewhat promised and somewhat required. Somewhat given, and
somewhat to be received. Somewhat by way of privilege to be enjoyed, and
somewhat by way of duty to be performed. And who ever consults his own
thoughts, shall find that this is the most natural and express notion of a
Covenant, that constantly represents it self to his mind, when ever he
entertains any apprehensions of it. For when you say such a one has Covenanted
and agreed with another, what do you mean by that expression? What? Only that
he has bequeathed him such legacies? or settled upon him such an inheritance?
or made him Heir to such an estate: hundreds and thousands by the year? And
under his own hand and seal has confirmed all this to him? This I suppose you
would call a donation, or deed of gift, but would you, were there nothing more,
call it a Covenant? No, your own thoughts upon the very mention of that word,
would immediately suggest this to you, that there was some mutual compact
betwixt them, and certain articles and conditions of agreement drawn up, to the
performance of which they respectively obliged themselves. And therefore to
suppose a Covenant without conditions, is all one, as to suppose a Sun without
light, or a Man without reason, which are no better than implicit
contradictions. I may as well call that a gift, which is not given, or that a
promise where my word is not engaged; as that a Covenant where there is no
mutual stipulation, or conditions of agreement. They are things that eye has
not seen, nor ear heard of, nor can it enter into the heart of man to conceive
what they are. No, I cannot possibly frame the idea of a Sun in my mind,
without light: Nor entertain any formal conceit of a man, without including
reason in that conception. No more can I conceive of a Covenant, without
conditions; since these are essential to the nature, definition, and common
notion of a Covenant.

2. The Gospel, which is little more but a comment upon the New Covenant, does
not only in general declare to us, that there are conditions affixed to it, but
in particular acquaints us what they are. And here I shall only instance in
these three, faith, repentance, and sincere obedience, as inclusive of all the
rest: First for faith, does not the Gospel expressly tell us, that we must
believe, and that this is the great command of God? 1 John 3.16. I but what if
we do believe in the name of Christ, according to his command? What has God
thereupon promised to us? What? Why? that then we shall not perish but have
eternal life, Joh. 3.16. I, but what if we be defective in this particular, and
do not believe? May we not yet hope to be saved by Jesus Christ? No: He that
believes not, is condemned already, Joh. 3.18. and the wrath of God abides
upon him, ver. 36. and he shall be damned, Mark 16.16. Here Is one condition you
see plain and evident in the New Covenant: I but is not faith then the only
condition? And may not that alone serve the turn without any thing else, to
invest us in all the privileges of the Kingdom? No, there must be also
repentance toward God, as well as faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, Act.
20.21. This is no less expressly commanded than the former, Acts 17.30. Now God
commands all men every where to repent: And the very first doctrine that
Jesus Christ himself preached, after his most solemn consecration to his
Prophetic Office was this of Repentance, Matthew. 3.13, 14, 15, 16, 17. compared
with Matthew. 4.17. From that time began Jesus to preach and to say; Repent, for
the kingdom of heaven is at hand. And as it is in terms no less than faith,
commanded in the Gospel, so you have the same benefits of pardon of sin, and
eternal life annexed to it. Repent, says Peter to the Jews ( Acts 3.19.) and
be converted; but to what purpose? Why? that your sins may be blotted out, when
the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord.

And God is not willing, says the same Apostle, that any should perish. I but
how may they then escape it? How? By repenting and turning to God, and
therefore he there adds, but that they should come to repentance, 2 Pet. 3.9.
And for this reason it is called repentance unto life, Acts 11.18. And
repentance unto Salvation, 2 Cor. 7.10. Yea, but what though we fail in the
performance of this duty? May not our sins be pardoned, and our Souls saved
upon the account of Christ for all that? No, except we repent we must perish,
Luke 13.3, 5. Faith in this case will not save us. Well then, faith and
repentance are conditions, that is manifest from what I have now said. I but is
there any thing more yet required by the New Covenant, as necessary to eternal
life? Yea, we must not only enter in at the strait gate, but we must also walk
in the narrow way, if we would enter into life. Nor only be implanted into the
true vine, but abide in it, and bring forth fruit to God, Joh. 15. Nor only
receive Christ Jesus the Lord, but walk in him as we have received him. Col.
2.6. By the former, faith and repentance, we enter in at the strait gate, and
by holiness and obedience we hold on in the narrow way. By those we are
ingraffed into the true vine, and by this we abide in the vine and become
fruitful. By an humble faith we receive Christ Jesus the Lord, Christ in all
his offices, and by a sincere obedience we walk in him according to the terms
upon which we at first received him. And therefore though our actual obedience
and holiness, which are the work of time, be not required to our justification,
and initial instatement into life, only our turning to God and hearty
acceptance of Christ as Lord and Savior, to be taught, and governed, and saved
by him in his own way; yet is our obedience vertually therein included, as all
practical conclusions are in their first principles, and in order to our actual
and complete fruition of eternal life, our actual holiness and obedience is
required in the Gospel. The former gives us an initial right, and this jus
aptitudinale a legal fitness. That puts us into possession, as the delivery of
the Key to the Tenant upon sealing the Indentures, gives him a legal possession
of the House; and this continues us in it, as paying the rent does the Tenant
afterward: And therefore in order to eternal happiness I know nothing, that is
said of faith, or repentance in Scripture, but the same is also said of
holiness, and obedience. Are they positively commanded in the Gospel? So is
this, we must deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and live godly,
righteously, and soberly in this present world, Tit. 2.12, 13. we must be holy
in all manner of conversation; even as he that has called us is holy, 1 Pet.
1.15. we must walk after his Commandments, 2 John 6. we must perfect holiness
in his fear, 2 Cor. 7.1. etc. It Is commanded. Again is the promise of eternal
life made to them? So to this also: The obedient and holy, and pure in heart,
they shall be blessed, Mat. 24.46. They shall be happy, Joh. 13.17. They shall
see God, Matthew. 5.8. They shall have right to the Tree of life, Rev. 22.14.
They shall have eternal life, Rom* 2.7, 8, 9, 10. And eternal Salvations, Heb.
5.9. But what if we be wanting in point of holiness, and obedience? May not the
righteousness of Jesus Christ here make supply and be accepted in the room of
it, and so Heaven had without it? No, no more than without faith and
repentance. For are the unbelieving, and impenitent expressly excluded from
having any interest in the eternal blessings of the Covenant, and laid under an
immutable sentence of eternal death? So also are the impure, and disobedient.
They shall die, Romans 8.13. They shall in no case enter into the kingdom of
heaven, Matthew. 5.20. They shall not see God, Heb. 12.14. They shall be cast
into outer darkness, Matthew. 25.30. They shall have indignation and wrath,
tribulation and anguish, Romans 2.8, 9. They shall be punished with everlasting
destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power, 2
These. 1.7, 8, 9.

Now what can possibly be more plain, than that the great blessings of the New
Covenant are made over to us upon the conditions of faith and repentance and
sincere obedience? It tells us indeed that God will pardon our sins, and own us
for his children, and admit us to be heirs of his Kingdom, and be our God. I,
but still it is with this proviso, if we do repent: if we do believe, if we do
obey the Gospel, and by patient continuance in well doing seek for glory, and
honor and immortality: I but except we eat the flesh and drink the blood of
Jesus Christ, i.e. believe in him, Joh. 6.53. And except we repent, Luke 13.3.
And except we be converted and become as little children, Math. 18.3. And
except we be born again of water, and of the Spirit, Joh. 3.5. And except our
righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, Matthew.
5.20. And except we abide in the vine, Joh. 15.4. And except we strive
lawfully, 2 Timothy 2.5. we shall not enter into life. And if these be not plain
conditions, I would gladly know what then are to be accounted such: or how
otherwise they may be expressed. But thirdly,

3. All this is necessarily employed in that short Epitome of the New Covenant
so often repeated in Scripture, I will be your God, and ye shall be my people.
The first part I will be your God, contains all the privileges, and the
second, ( ye shall be my people) all the duties of the Covenant. First, God
here promises to be our God: What Is that? Why? That he will do all that for
us, that a God can do, and be all that to us that a God can be to a Creature.
He will pardon our sins, and adopt us into his family, and put his holy spirit
into us, and dwell with us, and take care of us, so that we shall not need to
take any thought, what we should eat, or what we should drink or wherewithal we
should be clothed. He will provide for us, and give his Angels charge over,
and protect us in all our ways, and turn all things to our good and never
leave us nor forsake us. He will hear our prayers, and supply our wants, and
deliver us from our temptations, and subdue our corruptions, and lead, and
assist and comfort us by his spirit, and make us heirs of his eternal Kingdom.
In a word, he will give us Grace, and Glory, and no good thing will he withhold
from us* and after all, he will be more than all this to us, for he himself
will be our reward and portion. Thus God promises to be our God, yea, but then
we must engage to become his people. For those words, And ye shall be my
people, are not only promissory, but preceptive, and do as well declare what
God requires of us, as what he will effect in us, or do for us. Thus have we
God himself often commenting upon and expounding this phrase: If you will walk
in my statutes, says God to Israel, and keep my Commandments and do them, Lev.
26.3. Then I will walk among you, and will be your God, and ye shall be my
people, v. 12. And this thing commanded I them, saying, obey my voice, and I
will be your God, and ye shall be my people, Jer. 7.23. And chap. 11.4. Obey my
voice, and do according to all which I command you: So shall ye be my people,
and I will be your God. And thou have avouched the Lord this day to be thy God,
and to walk in his ways, and keep his statutes, etc. And the Lord has
avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people, and that thou should keep
all his commandments: That thou may be an holy people to the Lord thy God, as
he has spoken, Deuteronomy. 26.17, 18, 19. And come out from among them, and be ye
separate, says the Lord, and touch no unclean thing, and then I will receive
you, and will be a father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters,
says the Almighty. 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. All which is Emphatically expressed by the
Prophet Isaiah by subscribing to the Lord, Isa. 44.5. One shall say, I am the
Lord: and another shall call himself by the name of Jacob: and another shall
subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, and surname himself by the name of
Israel.

And therefore it is, that God first promises to put his Law, and Fear, and
Spirit into his chosen, and to cause them to walk in his ways, and observe his
Statutes, that so they may become his people, Je. 24.7. Ezekiel. 11.20. and 36.26,
27, 28. and 37.23, 27. Jer. 32.38. etc. That Is the method in which God makes
them his.

Now whoever is taken into Covenant with God, he seals to both these parts,
that is, to take God to be his God, his portion and happiness, and also to list
himself in the number of his people: but what is that, you will say? Why? It Is
as you have heard, to cleave to him, to obey his voice, to walk in his ways,
to keep his judgments, to observe his statutes, to serve him with a pure heart,
to touch no unclean thing. In a word, to carry and demean themselves in all
things as those that are in a state of subjection unto God, and have subscribed
with the hand to him, and avouched him to be their God, to love and serve him
with all their hearts, and with all their strength, and with all their
thoughts. This is indeed to be the people of God, according to the true intent
and meaning of the Covenant, as before explained.

Nor is it possible for any whose notions of God are not monstrously degenerate
and enormous, so much as to imagine, that an infinitely wise, and righteous
God, should ever engage himself to any people to be their God, unless they also
were made willing to be his people, to love him, and live in a due
acknowledgment, and observance of him: Nor is it to be supposed, that any
reasonable, and ingenuous Creature, that understands himself, and the reason of
his own actings should ever intend otherwise in his Covenanting with God. What?
take God only to serve our selves of him, and yet not to serve him? What? That
we may be pardoned, and protected, and delivered from eternal miseries, and yet
not give up our selves to him, to be ruled and governed by him? What? only to
shroud our selves under his wings, and be fed at his table, and enjoy all the
privileges of his adopted ones, his paternal love and care, and blessing, and
yet continue prodigal Sons of Belial, and children of disobedience, and pay
nothing of that love and reverence and obedience that is due to him as a
Father? Is this your language or meaning when you take hold of his Covenant,
and say, Lord be my God? Will not common ingenuity then teach you to take up
the Psalmists words, and say: And Lord I am thine, I am thy servant. All
relations we say are mutual, and so are also the respective duties appropriate
to them. And therefore whoever puts himself into any relation, he does by that
very act, at least implicitly, bind himself to the performance of all the
duties of that relation: He that sincerely owns any man to be his Father, or
Master, does thereby oblige himself to all the duties of a Son, and Servant.

4. I might add, that since the pirviledges and immunities of this Covenant are
not equally, and alike imparted unto all, it is necessary, that some conditions
should be affixed to it, as marks, and evidences, whereby those to whom they do
belong, might be assured of their legal interest in, and title to them, and all
others excluded, that wilfully reject the tender of them, and unworthily prefer
their carnal delights, and pleasures, and worldly interests before them. If the
question be asked, why have not all an equal share in, or rightful claim to
pardon and life? The only answer must be, the one sincerely perform the
conditions upon which they are promised, i. e. they repent and believe, etc.
but the others continue in their impenitence and unbelief; But of this I shall
have an occasion to speak more fully in the following proposition.

5. The everlasting benefits of the New Covenant are either promised
conditionally, or else absolutely and without conditions. If absolute, then may
all equally lay claim to the promises of pardon, and life, and alike partake of
all the blessings of the Covenant. Then Esau as well as Jacob, and Judas as
well as Peter, and Pilate that condemned Christ, as well as those that became
his Disciples and suffered for him, might hope to be justified and made Heirs
of the Kingdom. For what should hinder, or exclude them? What? you will say
their impenitency, and unbelief. I but if the Covenant be absolute, and there
be no such condition, or proviso added to it; how can their not repenting, and
believing in Jesus Christ be legally pleaded against them? or become any bar to
their Salvation? It Is absolutely promised without reserve that they shall be
saved, and God is obliged by his own faithfulness to make good his promise to
them. And if so, what becomes of his threatenings and comminations against the
impenitent, and unbelieving world? And where is the truth of Christ's doctrine,
that strait is the gate, and narrow the way that leads to life? The entrance
into Heaven is then wider, than the gates of Hell, and many there be that enter
in thereat. Publicans and Harlots, Scribes and Pharisees, and Hypocrites and
Infidels, as well as Saints and Believers: None are excluded.

Suppose a King to set forth a Proclamation, wherein he positively declares
that all such as have rebelled against him, or such a number of them, as he
therein mentions by name, shall be pardoned, and accepted to favor, and
accordingly that he does hereby fully pardon, and accept them; can any thing
possibly in this case debar them from reaping the full benefit of this
Proclamation? No, but if the proposals of his Grace and Favor be conditional,
and therefore only to such, as shall lay down their Arms, and come in and
humble themselves, and engage to own him as their Sovereign, and to submit to
his Laws, and Government, otherwise to be proceeded against as Rebels and
Traitors against his person and Sovereignty; Here as whilst the door is held
open to all that shall submit themselves, and return to their Al^egiance, so
it is by the other hand, shut against ^ll obstinate, and resolved offenders.
They ^ave no plea, or claim to any benefit by his ^roclamation of grace, and
acceptance. Why? Because they submitted not to the ^erms upon which it was
propounded. But will any one say that God has made any ^uch Declaration of
Grace to Sinners as that ^ll, or any particular number of them shall ^e
pardoned and admitted into his favor, and received into eternal Glory, though
they ^ever repent, or believe in Christ, but ob^tinately continue in their
infidelity, and acts ^f hostility against him? If so, to what pur^ose has God
appointed an Hell or day of ^udgment?

For if the impenitent and unbelieving and ^isobedient, have an absolute
promise to be ^^ved, there is none then can be damned. Ba^am might then have
spared his prayer, Numb. 23.10. Let me die the death of the righteous, and let
my latter end be like his, ^^nce as dies the righteous, so dies the wicked, i^
sure and certain hopes of a resurrection unto eternal life. The Covenant then
you see it is not absolute: it is not to all alike without exception: it is not to
the obstinate, and resolved sinner, that continues in his impenit^ncy and
unbelief. And if it be not absolute, i^ necessarily follows that it is
conditional: for the opposition betwixt these two terms, is contradictory, and
so cannot admit of any medium. That which has no conditions, is absolute, that
therefore which is not absolute must have conditions.

PROPOS. XI. Of our necessary obligation to perform the conditions of the
Covenant.
AS the Covenant of Grace is made with conditions, so these conditions, they
must actually be accepted and performed by us, before we can be admitted to any
actual interest in, or have any lawful claim to the blessings of it. The
Covenant, as before was said, is made up of privileges and duties. Those are
promised, and these commanded. Now the duties commanded, must first be
performed, before the privileges promised can be enjoyed, since the promise is
only made to the performance of them. Plainly thus, We are not, first pardoned,
and then repent; first justified, and then believe; first glorified and then
made holy: But we must first repent and believe before we can be pardoned, and
make good the sincerity of our resolutions in both (so far as we have
opportunity) by obedience, before we enter into life. Which is no more, than
what is commonly said by Divines, viz. That faith goes before justification;
and holiness before happiness. This is the unvariable order in which the
benefits of this Covenant are to be dispensed, and in which they are only to be
expected by us.

I do not say, that these duties, or conditions are to be performed by us in
our own natural strength, but yet they must be performed by us, in our own
persons. The work is properly ours, but the strength to do it, is from the
Lord. He by his spirit inables us to repent, and believe and obey the Gospel. I
but still so, that it is our act: we are the persons that must actually repent,
and believe, and obey, or else we cannot receive the remission of our sins, and
an inheritance amongst them that are sanctified.

And shall I need to say much for the proof of this which is so manifest,
partly from what I have already said, and partly from the evidence of reason it
self? For first,

1. Has not God positively, and in plain terms commanded us to repent, and
believe and be holy? And that in order to our being happy* And has he not
finally excluded from life and happiness, all such that are impenitent,
unbelieving and impure? Can there be any doubt concerning this, to him that
reads the Gospel, and believes it to be of Divine authority? And is he not, do
you think, serious in all this? What, shall the unchangeable God, that cannot
lie, be deemed like degenerate Man, to speak one thing, and mean another? Or is
he serious only in his promises, and not so also in his commands, and
threatenings? Why? Are not both equally founded upon the same immutable nature,
and veracity of God? And if you can persuade your selves to hope, that God will
revoke his threatenings, and commands; Why should you not also doubt, whether he
will make good his promises? We have no other foundation, whereon to build our
faith, and hopes, but the declared will of God, and if that be changeable, our
faith's no better than opinion, and our hopes, presumption. We can then neither
be sure, that the wicked shall be turned into Hell, nor yet that the righteous
shall be saved. If this then be the fixed and unchangeable order, and method of
Salvation by the Covenant of Grace, that either we must repent, or perish,
return, or die, believe, or be damned, be holy, or not see God, be obedient, or
suffer the vengeance of eternal fire, as has been shown; how can we hope to be
saved otherways than in repenting, and turning, and believing, and obeying of
the Gospel? Otherways than in the actual performance of these duties?

2. Have we not more than once by our own voluntary act solemnly engaged our
selves to the actual performance of all these conditions? When we were
baptized; when we after this approached to the Lords Table, when we have at any
time professedly humbled our Souls before the Lord, in any solemn ordinance;
yea when we first entertained the tenders of Grace and Salvation, did we not
then promise and engage to amend our evil ways, and doings, and turn to God,
and believe in Jesus Christ, and receive him in all his offices, and keep his
Commands, and walk in all holiness, and obedience well pleasing in his sight?
Now either we were serious, and in good earnest, or not, when we thus engaged.
If serious, it is morally impossible, that we should indulge our selves in the
wilful neglect of these duties, since an intentional, and approved violation
of our promise is inconsistent with sincerity: And therefore the conscience of
our own obligation will necessarily put us upon all possible endeavors to act
conformable to our own engagements. And since the thing, to which we obliged
our selves, was not merely the profession, and acknowledgment, but actual
performance of these duties, we shall accordingly study to perform them.

But if we say, we were not serious in these solemn engagements, we then
plainly confess, that our design therein was only to play the Hypocrites with
God, and to impose upon his omnisciency. But is it possible, that any
reasonable creature should ever become so prodigious a Monster? Or that ever it
should enter into the heart of Man to imagine, that the all wise, and holy God:
He that requires truth in the inward parts, Psalm. 51.6. He that has cursed the
deceiver, Mal. 1.14. He that has denounced so many woes against the Hypocrite,
Matthew. 23. and has sentenced them to the lowest place in Hell, Matthew. 24.51.
That he I say should bind himself by Covenant to such Miscreants, to pardon
them and bless them, and admit them to the best and choicest privileges of his
Kingdom? What? such as design to mock God, and play the Hypocrite with him, and
to be treacherous and unfaithful to him? Be not deceived, says the Apostle,
God is not mocked, Gal. 6.7.

Besides, if our stipulating with God in the Covenant, or as the Prophet
expresses it, our subscribing with the hand to the Lord, be necessary (as has
been demonstrated) in order to our rec^iving the blessings of it, then our
actual performance of what we stipulated, and subscribed to, must needs be much
more necessary, since our solemn engagement to the Covenant is r^quired not
merely for it self but only as a means to this end, that is, to bind us to a
more punctual performance of the conditions of it.

3. How else shall we distinguish betwixt the righteous, and the wicked; the
Heirs of Glory, and the Sons of perdition? They may all be baptized. They may
all subscribe with the hand to the Lord. They may all eat, and drink at his
table. They may all be professors in Religion, and make a fair show in the
flesh, as the Apostle speaks, Gal. 6.12. These things are common to both, and
therefore can be no mark of distinction betwixt them. No, but herein lies the
difference. The one break off their sins by repentance, and turn to God: the
other not. The one come to the foot of Christ, take his yoke, and bear his
burden, and sincerely believe in him: the others not. The one keep his
Commandments, and obey from the heart his Laws, and Doctrine: the others not.
The one love the Lord with all their Souls and thoughts and strength: the
others have not the same love of the Father in them; but love the world and the
things of the world, as John speaks, 1 John 2.15. In a word, the one perform
the Oath of the Lord, and act conformably to their Covenant engagements, but
the other they draw back and are unfaithful. Like the Pharisees, they say, and
do not: But the others they say and do. And thus they are mutually described
and distinguished by the Apostle, 1 John 3* 7, 10. Little children, let no man
deceive you; he that does righteousness, is righteous, even as he is
righteous: ver. 7. But whosoever does not righteousness, is not of God, ver.
10. And herein he tells us, the Children of God are manifest, and the Children
of the Devil. Herein they are differenced, and hereby they manifestly may be
distinguished. And the same Character and mark of distinction we have from
Jesus Christ himself, Job. 8.31. and 15.8.

But if the actual performance of these conditions be not unchangeably
necessary, all distinction betwixt good and bad, Holy and Profane is taken
away, and we cannot say of any, ^owever visibly different in their lives and
conversations, this Man is wicked, or that Man is righteous, since one is not
this in observing, nor the other that in neglecting the observance of them, if
not nece^sary to be observed; and so we have no Standard left whereby to judge
of either. The obedient and disobedient are alike, if obedience and
disobedience be the same.

For whatever elective love God may have for any particular person, more than
for others amongst the degenerate Sons of Men, yet since that is only an
immanent act in God, and that, which had an existence from all eternity, before
we had any thing, and wholly lies hid in the secret counsel of Gods will, and
so absolutely unknown to us, that cannot possibly either make any change of our
state, or become any foundation for any real and forensick distinction betwixt
Man and Man. It Is not that, which makes this Man a Judas, and that Man a Paul.
The one actually wicked, and the other personally righteous. And therefore
whoever God predestinates, says the Apostle, them also he calls, before they
are either justified or glorified, Romans 8.30. He makes them to pass under the
rod, and brings them into the bond of the Covenant, and pours clean water upon
them, and puts his Spirit into them, and writes his Laws in their hearts, and
causes them to walk in his ways, and keep his Judgments, before he will own
them to be his people, and dignify them with the name of Saints, and Children,
and righteous ones, Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 27, 28. Jer. 31.33. 1 Cor. 1.2. Take Paul
for an instance. He was you know a chosen vessel to the Lord, Acts 9.15.
Separated (in Gods predeterminate counsel) from his Mothers womb, Gal. 1.15.
Yea, but was he therefore immediately justified, and sanctified, and adopted,
and owned for a Saint, a Child of God from his Mothers womb? No, for all that,
he will tell you, that he was for some years a Pharisee, an injurious person, a
Persecutor, a Blasphemer, 1 Timothy 1.13. And as he speaks of the Ephesians, that
he was dead in sins and trespasses, a Child of disobedience and of wrath,
without Christ, having no hope, and without God in the World. Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3*
and 12. To this effect he speaks expressly of himself, Tit. 3.3. And may we not
now truly say of Paul (however elected) that he was a wicked Man, during his
continuance in this state? And consequently, that he was not righteous; since
it is impossible for the same person to be righteous and wicked, dead and alive
at the same time. But how then came Paul to be amongst Gods Jewels, his holy
ones? How? God humbles him at the foot of Christ, Acts 9.5, 6, etc. and calls
him by his Grace, Gal. 1.15. and makes him obedient to his call, Acts 26.19.
and regenerates him by his Spirit, Tit. 3.3, 4, 5. and causes him to believe,
and obey the Gospel, Acts 24.14, 15, 16. and to live entirely to Jesus Christ,
Philip. 1.21. Thus Paul obtains Mercy as he tells you, 1 Timothy 1.16. and is
listed into the number of the Saints, his name now is changed, Acts 13.9. It Is
no more Saul, but Paul, no more a Persecutor, but an Apostle of Jesus Christ:
and now he is justified, Gal. 2.16. and now he receives a Crown of
righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.8. And thus you see what it is, that denominates a man
righteous, or wicked, and what is the only note of distinction betwixt an Heir
of wrath, and a Child of God, not baptism or profession, or being in the
visible Church, or the elective love of God, but doing righteousness, as John
speaks, which is nothing else, but the actual performance of the Conditions of
the New Covenant, of which I am treating.

4. Why else has God sent his holy Spirit into the World? Is it not plainly
for this end, that he may help our infirmities, Romans 8.26. and that he may
assist us in the actual performance of those duties, which are by the New
Covenant required of us? That we may look upon him whom we have pierced by our
sins, and mourn, Zech. 12.10. that we may believe in Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4.13.
that we may mortify the deeds of the flesh, Romans 8.13. that our hearts may be
purified in obeying the truth, 1 Pet. 1.22. And that we may walk in the ways
and keep the Judgments of God, Ezekiel. 36.27. All this is said to be by the
assistance of the Divine Spirit. And therefore it is, that the ministration of
the Spirit is still necessary in order to our Salvation, notwithstanding that
Jesus Christ has fully discharged the office and perf^cted the work of a
Redeemer and Mediator for us: Joh. 16.7. Nevertheless, I tell you the truth; It
is expedient for you, that I go away: for If I go not away, the comforter will
not come unto you* but if I depart, I will send him unto you.

The Spirit here is expressly promised to be sent in the room of Christ to
supply his place and office, when he should leave the World, as that which
should be of more advantage to them than still to enjoy Christ's personal
presence here on Earth: Nevertheless I tell you the truth, it is expedient for
you that I go away. But why expedient? For then the Spirit shall come. But when
he is come, what shall he do? Why? He shall convince the world of sin, of
righteousness and of judgment, ver. 8. I, but if Jesus Christ has so done all,
as that we have nothing at all to do, and that his imputed righteousness alone
be sufficient to save us, without our personal, and obediential righteousness,
to what purpose is the administration of the Spirit? His work, and office is
wholly superseded. For what needs a Spirit of mourning to be poured down upon
us, if so be the Covenant of Grace require us not personally to repent? Or a
Spirit of Faith (as the Apostle calls it, 2 Cor. 4.13.) if we are not bound to
believe? Or a Spirit of holiness, if it oblige us not to be actually holy? Or a
spirit of obedience, if we may be saved without obeying? If then our having of
the Spirit, and being led, or acted by him, be indispensably necessary in order
to our Salvation, so also is our repenting, and believing in Christ, and loving
God, and doing of his will, and cleansing our selves from all filthiness of
flesh and spirit, and perfecting holiness in the fear of God, and purifying our
selves, as he is pure; since the effecting this in us, is the great errand for
which he came into the World, and the main office he has undertaken, during
the time of Christ Mediatory Kingdom.

The truth is, we can no more be saved without the ministration of the spirit,
than we can without the Mediation of Jesus Christ. This argument runs clear in
Scripture, He that has not Christ, has not life, 1 John 5.12. But he that
has not the spirit, has not Christ, Romans 8.9. And he that is not holy and
obedient, has not the spirit, Jude ver. 19. For where ever the Spirit is, he
regenerates and sanctifies the whole lump, Body, Soul and Spirit as the Apostle
speaks, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. and so becomes in that Soul a Spirit of Faith, Holiness,
and obedience.

5. How otherwise shall Believers attain to any evidence, or assurance of their
Salvation? Or come to know that they more than oaths are in a state of
friendship with God, and made Heirs of the promise, and vessels of mercy, when
so great a part of the World are Heirs of wrath, and Sons of perdition? That
they may be thus assured, since some undoubtedly have been so, and that they
all ought to labor for this assurance, since God in Scripture has expressly
commanded it, I here take for granted. But how is it possible, that this
assurance should be raised in them, any other way than by their certain
knowledge, that they have through Grace, been enabled to discharge those duties
of the Covenant to which these blessings and privileges are therein promised?
As how shall any man know that he is secured in the quiet possession of the
Lands he holds by lease, but by knowing that he has truly performed Covenants,
and discharged the Conditions of his Indentures, by which his title to, and
possession of them were made over, and secured to him? This I am sure is the
only foundation that Scripture lays whereon to build our evidence, 1 John 2.3,
and 5.1 Joh. 3.18, 19, 20, and 24. and 1 John 5.18, 19. Hereby, says the
Apostle, we know, and hereby we assur^ our selves, Of what? That we are in God,
and that he loves us: But how? Why? (...) we love him, and keep his
Commandments. And if we do these things, says Peter, we shall never fall, 2
Pet. 1.10.

And does not the very nature of the thing it self no less demonstrate this?
For what is assurance? Is it not a reflect act of the Soul upon it self, and
actions, whereby it comes to k^ow that its state and actions are, and have been
such, as God by the Law of the New Creature does require and will accept? I^
knows (by the assistance of the Divine Spirit) that it has sincerely repented,
and that it does believe, and is regenerate, and born of God, and made obedient
to the heavenly call, etc. And that consequently all the blessings promised to
such a state, as pardon of sin, and acceptance with God, and eternal life, do
now undoubtedly belong to him, as his reward, and portion. This is properly
assurance, and not an unwarrantable persuasion, that we are elected, or that
Jesus Christ died for us and rose again for our justification in particular, or
that God loves us, we know not why, etc. For then the strongest presumption
would be the best assurance.

It Is therefore impossible, that any Soul should be truly, and with safety
assured of its being saved, unless it first be assured of its own sincerity in
having acted according to the tenor of the Covenant: Man may presume indeed,
and please themselves with pleasant dreams, and delusions, and fondly persuade
themselves like drunken, or distracted men, that they are Kings, and Priests to
God, and Heirs to a Crown of Glory, and shall sit upon Thrones in Heaven with
the Lamb, and reign with him for ever: They may thus fancy indeed, but whatever
they pretend, they can never be thus assured, till the truth of their
repentance, and faith, and holiness be first assured to them.

The great business therefore of the Spirit in sealing, and witnessing, is to
evidence and confirm the truth, and reality of these Graces to the Soul, and to
raise it to a comfortable persuasion of its own sincerity. For this is that,
which modest and humble souls do usually most question, and concerning which
they are not easily satisfied, partly by reason of temptation, and partly from
a sense of their own daily failings, and infirmities, and partly also from the
great importance of the thing it self, their eternal woe, or happiness depends
upon it. That they who sincerely repent, and believe, and are sanctified, shall
infallibly be saved, that is not the thing they doubt of. No, this they will
acknowledge they do believe: I but their great doubt lies here, whether their
repentance, and faith, etc. be true and sincere. It Is their own sincerity, and
not Gods faithfulness, that they commonly call in question. And here now
properly comes in the witness of the Spirit. They are Saints, and Sons, but
they cannot discern their Fathers image upon their Souls: they have Faith, and
Repentance, etc. they have Grace, but they do not see it. As a man that may
have good Evidences for his Lands, yet by reason of some weakness, or distemper
in his eyes, he may not at present be able to read them. The spirit therefore
he comes, and blows off the dust, if I may so express it, and draws the lines
more clear, he enables them more powerfully to mortify those sins, that
weakened their evidences, and stirs up those languishing sparks, that are in
them, and makes them more quick and burning, and so more visible, or as the
expression is in the Canticles, he blows upon the Garden, and makes the Spices
thereof to flow out, and their sweet Odors to be more fragrant and diffusive:
He invigorates their Graces, and causes them to act with more sensible life,
and strength, and after all he shines upon his own Graces, and strengthens
their visive and discerning faculties, and so enables them to see the truth,
and reality of those Graces, which before they doubted of. And thus by
witnessing together with our spirits ( Romans 8.16.) He raises the Soul to a
comfortable assurance of its being in a safe, and happy state. As when a Man is
under any apprehensions, that his Estate is forfeited for breach of Covenants,
and that thereupon he may be liable to arrests, and actions if upon reading his
indentures, and viewing his acquit^ances he conceives that the rent has been
paid, and the rest of the conditions have been kept, his fears are in a great
measure allaid, but if the owner himself now come, and ^oint him to that
particular acquittance, which was before over laid, and acknowledge that it is
his own handwriting and that he has faithfully discharged the several
conditions of his Lease, the Man is now fully satisfied, and sufficiently
assured, that he may still have, and hold his Lands without any let, or
molestation. This is, as I apprehend, the true Scriptural notion of the spirits
sealing, which you plainly see, presupposes our repenting, and believing, etc.
according to the tenor of the Gospel Covenant. For can you imagine that the
Spirit seals to a blank? Or witnesses to a lie? What, teach us to cry Abba
Father, before we are born of God? Or persuade us we are justified, when we are
in a state of unbelief, and the wrath of God abides upon us? Or assure us, we
are Heirs of the promise* when we are strangers to the Covenant* Or that our
estate is safe, when a curse, and death, and hell, are denounced against us? Is
this the Spirits witness do you think, or way of sealing? No, he first works
Grace upon the heart, and then gives testimony to his own work. He sanctifies
first and then he seals to the day of Redemption Ephesians. 1.13.

6. The personal performance of the Conditions of the New Covenant is therefore
necessary, because the promise of pardon, and acceptance, and eternal life is
only made to our personal performance of them. This I have often hinted before,
and presupposed as a foundation to several of the preceding arguments, but now
it may be necessary to enlarge a litte farther upon it, to make it more clear
and evident. This is certain, that whoever receives an estate by grant, or
Covenant from another, he can have right to nothing more, than what is therein
by name expressed, nor upon any other terms, than those therein specified. Nor
any longer maintain his claim to it, than those Conditions are done, and
performed by him. So that if either he did not consent to, and accept of the
terms, or not duly perform them, when accepted, he is no more de jure to be
deemed the lawful possessor of it. The case is thus here betwixt God, and Man:
God makes a grant of pardon, and acceptance, and eternal life to sinners. This
grant is by Covenant. This Covenant is with certain terms, and conditions, and
these conditions, they must be accepted, and performed, or else no right to any
of the privileges of this Covenant is conferred upon us. For since we have
here no right (as was said) but what is given us, and since that right is
expressly affixed to the personal performance of the conditions of the Covenant,
therein mentioned, where there is no such performance, there can be no right.
That this right is thus affixed to the personal performance of the Conditions
of the Covenant is evident, for we have no right, but by promise, 1 John 2.25.
This is the promise that he has promised us, even eternal life. And therefore
Believers are by the Author to the Hebrews called the heirs of promise, Heb.
6.17.11.9. The promise then only gives us right to life, yea but the promise is
only made to the personal performance of these duties, Acts 3.19. Repent ye,
and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the days of
refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord. Prove. 28.13. Who so
confesses, and forsakes his sin shall find mercy. Romans 10.9, 10. If thou
shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe with thine
heart, that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. For with
the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is
made unto salvation. Romans 8.13. If ye through the spirit mortify the deeds of
the flesh ye shall live. Joh. 13.17. If ye know these things, happy are ye, if
ye do them. And Matthew. 7.21. not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord shall
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which
is in heaven.

From all these Scriptures it evidently appears that the promise of mercy, and
pardon and life and blessedness (the great benefits of the Covenant) they are
expressly made to the actual, and personal performance of repentance, and faith,
and sincere obedience, which are the main duties and conditions of the same
Covenant. It Is our personal performance therefore of the conditions of the
Covenant, that gives us a formal, and personal right to the blessings of it,
and our nonperformance only by which our right is forfeited. *It Is that which
gives us right, Rev. 22.14. Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that
they may have right to the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates
into the City. Blessed are they; who? They that have eat, and drunk in his
presence, and wrought miracles in his name? No, but they that do his will: but
why blessed? Because, they have right, (not only the favor, and privilege)
but right to the tree of life: But what gave them this right? Their
subscribing, and sealing, and promising obedience to Jesus Christ? No, but
their performing Covenants; their keeping of his Commandments. Therefore
blessed are they, that they may have right. And this right since it is founded
in Grace, and not in merit, it may be humbly pleaded by Believers, when their
right to the promise is called in question, or any accusations from the old Law
brought in against them. Through Grace they have been enabled to believe, and
repent, etc. And therefore they are freed from the curse and from condemnation.
And therefore the promise of pardon, and life is theirs. But because few are so
well satisfied concerning their own sincerity as to be thereby enabled to make
this Plea, therefore the promises that are more absolute, in this case are to
be pleaded by them. For as some promises are made to Grace, the conditions of
which, being performed, are the foundation of our assurance: So there are other
promises of Grace, which are the immediate foundation of our encouragement to
Faith and Prayer. However, the doubting Souls cannot always plead their right,
because they question their own performances; yet the sincere performance of
the condition, for all that, gives an undoubted right, and lays a good
foundation for a legal plea, and by such as are satisfied concerning their own
sincerity may be pleaded against accusations from the Law and Justice, without
either asserting merit, or retrenching the free Grace of God. Since this right
(as was said) arises from the gracious will and favor of God, and not from
our own desert, or the intrinsic value of the duties we perform. As suppose
one to found a School, or Hospital, and to endow it with rich revenews, and
privileges, but with this condition, that they upon whom it is settled, shall
once, or twice every year pay by way of acknowledgment, some few pence or half
pence to one of his own name, that the memory of his name might be preserved,
and they constantly be made to acknowledge from whom they received so liberal a
donation. In this case, as his making this the condition upon which they hold
it, shall not render it to be no act of Charity, or blot out his name from
amongst their Benefactors: So neither shall their pleading, that this
acknowledgment, if called in question, has accordingly been made, and the
conditions of the grant been constantly performed; the pleading this I say,
shall not be deemed either any detraction from the freeness of the gift, or a
pleading of your own desert, only an humble asserting of their own right which
was by grant conferred upon them.

But as our actual performance of the conditions of the Covenant gives us an
undoubted right (because founded upon the faithfulness of God) to all the
privileges of the Covenant, so consequently, on the contrary the
nonperformance of them must needs null our right, and cast us out of
possession, and actually expose us, and make us liable to all that wrath, and
vengeance, to all those woes, and penalties that either this, or the Old
Covenant has denounced. For since it is attended with double guilt, it shall
also be rewarded with double punishment, Heb. 10.29. Nor will it be sufficient
in this case to plead, that we have subscribed, and sealed, and promised
performance to the Gospel Covenant; no, all this, if it be not actually kept,
will serve for no other purpose, but to witness our own unfaithfulness, and to
condemn us for being false to our own engagements. You know what answer Christ
returned to such as made the like plea, Matthew. 7.23. Depart from me ye workers
of iniquity, I know you not.

But lastly to sum up all. One of these three things must here be affirmed.
Either that God will dispense with his Laws, and stated order of saving
sinners, and save them in some other way, than what he has declared; or else
that these duties, and conditions are discharged, and performed by some other
person as surety for us and in our behalf; or else that they are actually to be
performed by us in our own persons.

But, first what reason have we to imagine, that God will change his laws, and
alter ^he fixed methods of his Grace, and rescind his Covenant, which is the
contrivance of his infinite wisdom, and goodness; founded in the blood of his
own Son, and confirmed by his death, and that every way so well secures the
honor of God, and the allegiance and comfort of the creature? What? Do you
think he will thus offer violence to himself, his wisdom are holiness, which he
so much delights to honor? Or that he will contradict the great design of his
Sons undertaking, which was to reduce the creature to his duty, and obedience
to God? Or that he will affront his own truth, and faithfulness, and impeach
himself guilty of a lie? What? The holy and wise God do thus, and only for this
end, that he may gratify sinners in their wilful neglects of him, and of the
duties they indispensably owe to him? And open a door to licentiousness, and
all sorts of abominations, which his Soul hates? And all this to save the
impenitent, and unbelieving, and impure, and disobedient, (for all Men are so
that do not actually repent, and believe and obey) and make them Coheirs with
Christ, and set them upon his throne, and put Crowns of Glory upon their heads?
What? those that are his enemies, whom he hates, and has sworn in his holiness
that they shall never enter into his rest, or see his face, or taste of his
joys, but be thrown into outer darkness, and suffer the vengeance of eternal
fire, and be tormented day and night, and everlastingly drink of the wine of
his wrath poured out without mixture, and lie for ever in an Hell of misery,
weeping, and wailing, and blaspheming because of their plagues, and torm^nts,
where his eye shall not pity, nor spare, nor have mercy on them? What? Can any
Man, that has not wholly lost his reason, persuade himself to believe thus, or
to hope for Salvation in this way? Or if you suppose it possible for any thus
to believe, will his faith, this faith, do you think, save them? For whom then
is Tophet prepared? Or for wh^m is the blackness of darkness reserved, if none
be vessels of wrath, and Sons of perditions? And none are such, if not the
impenitent, unbelieving, disobedient and impure. If these expect Salvation from
God, they must then show us another Gospel, another Covenant, for by this I am
sure it is impossible that any should be saved that does not personally perform
the conditions of it. Nor have we secondly any greater reason to believe, or
hope that these conditions should be discharged for us by any other person in
our stead and behalf. For are not the commands, that require duty, expressly
spoke to us? Ye shall repent and turn to God: ye shall believe in Je^us Christ:
ye shall be pure in heart, and holy in all manner of conversation, and ye shall
love God and keep his Commandments, etc. And are not the promises of pardon,
and life, etc. particularly made to us and to our personal performance of the
conditions upon which they are made, as has been shown? And are not the
comminations of death, and wrath, and eternal torments denounced against us in
case of personal disobedience? He that believes not shall be damned, Mark
16.16. He that loves not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be an anathema,
maran-atha, 1 Cor. 16.22. And except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish,
Luke 13.3. Now what foundation is here to imagine, that these can concern any
one, but our selves? Or if any of them be acknowledged to be appropriate to our
selves, why not the rest? If the promises, why not the commands and
threatenings, since we are alike spoke to in all? Why should we charge these
upon another, and take the promises only to our selves? May we not with as good
reason say, that another may be saved for us, or damned for us, as that he
shall repent, and believe for us? And so Heaven should be ours only by a
proxy, and Justification ours by a subtitute, etc. That is, in plain English,
it is not we that are justified, nor we that are adopted, nor we that are
admitted into eternal Glory; but some one else for us.

But who is this, that we suppose should perform these Conditions for us? Jesus
Christ our Mediator?

It Is true he has fully satisfied the demands of the first Covenant, and taken
Believers off from all obligation of duty to it. And he has also by his
Mediation obtained another, and better Covenant founded in his own blood, and
attended with better promises, wherein pardon and eternal life are again
offered, and assured to sinners upon the equitable, and honorable terms of
repentance and faith, and sincere, though not perf^ct obedience. Yea, but yet
we must not say, that Jesus Christ repents, and Jesus Christ believes for us,
etc. No, this must still be our own Act, and it is impossible it should be the
act of Christ. For consider but what is the proper object of these duties: The
object of repentance is sin: and the object of faith and obedience is Jesus
Christ: we are to believe in him, and to be obedient to him, Heb. 5.9. and be
conformable to him, Romans 8.29. and to keep his commands, Joh. 15.10. and to
walk after his example, 1 Pet. 2.21. But can these any way be applied to Jesus
Christ? What? shall we say, that Christ believes in Christ? Or that Christ is
obedient to Christ? Or that Christ is conformable to Christ? Or that Christ
walks in the steps of Christ? What sense shall we then make of Scripture? Or if
any shall be so forsaken of their reason, as to cant thus, yet will any one
say, that Jesus Christ repents of Sin? Or breaks off his sins by repentance,
and amends his evil ways and doings, as we are commanded? If then it be not
possible, that either God should violate his own Covenant, and contradict
himself, or that Jesus Christ should perform the conditions of it for us, it
necessarily follows that we our selves are personally obliged to the actual
performance of them, in order to our obtaining eternal life. That is, as I have
often said, we our selves are the persons, that stand bound, ^^ch Man for
himself to repent, and believe, and obey and be holy; or else Salvation it self
cannot save us.

PROPOS. XII. Of the consistence of a conditional Covenant with the sufficiency
of Christ's righteousness, and the doctrine of free Grace.
THis method of Gods saving sinners by way of Covenant, as is before explained,
is very well consistent with, and no way derogatory to, either the sufficiency
of Christ's satisfaction and righteousness, or to the doctrine of free Grace in
Christ.

I add this, because it is the common fortress to which Men of more loose, and
debauched lives and principles in Religion are wont to retire, when by the
evidence of Scripture and reason they are driven from all their other holds.
Tell them, that they must repent, and turn to God, and amend their evil ways,
and doings, and bring forth fruits meet for repentance. Tell them, that they
must come to Christ, and believe in him, and take his yoke, and bear his
burden, and deny themselves, and be obedient to his Laws, and love him in
sincerity. Tell them, that they must mortify the deeds of the flesh, and deny
all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and live godly, and righteously and soberly
in this present world, and be pure in heart, and holy in all manner of
conversation, as he that has called them is holy: Tell them, that there is an
indispensable necessity of all this, or else their sins cannot be pardoned, or
their persons accepted, or their Souls saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. And
give them undeniable reason, and plain and express Scripture for the proof of
all these commands, and promises, and threatenings, all speaking the same
language. And what is their answer to all this? Why? The righteousness of
Christ is sufficient, and the Grace of God in Christ is free, and therefore
they hope in his mercy, and doubt not of their Salvation, though they still
indulge themselves in sin, and continue in a manifest neglect of God, and the
great duties of Christianity. And all that is said to the contrary, that might
take them off from sin and vanity, and persuade them to any greater diligence,
and exactness in Religion, that is immediately condemned, and decried for legal
doctrine, that disthrones Christ, and takes the Crown from his head, and
destroys the free Grace of God, and tends to bring us again in bondage to the
Law.

And that which makes it the more difficult to take Men off from these mistaken
notions they have entertained concerning the righteousness of Christ, and free
Grace, is this, that they are the only foundation and hold that these Men have
for their hopes of pardon and Salvation. So that if you beat them off from
these, you take away all their hopes, and confidence, yea their Heaven, and
happiness from them. They have nothing then left whereby to stop the mouths of
their own awakened consciences, or warrant their expectations of Heaven, or to
keep their Souls from sinking immediately into despair. Their hearts, they
condemn them for their daily neglect of duty, and indulgencies to the flesh,
and disobedience to the Gospel, and alas! they have nothing within, or from the
word to witness for them. No broken, and contrite spirit: no mournings in
secret for their sins: no acts of self-denial: no change of heart, or life: no
spirit of faith, or fear, or love, or adoption to entitle them to the promise,
and blessings of the Covenant. No, neither Sun, nor Star appears, that might
encourage them in their way, but as it was with Paul in his voyage to Rome, all
hopes that they should be saved, is taken away, and therefore it is, that they
do with so much constancy and resolution adhere to, and contend for these
mistaken notions, as their only refuge and security.

And thus, though they are not able to conquer, or encounter those thundering
Legions, that are brought against them, yet whilst they have this strong hold
and fortress to retire to, they are little moved by the terrors of the Lord,
but still apprehend themselves safe, and well secured against all that thunder,
and lightning, that is from Heaven poured out against them: All is but like the
shooting of pointed Arrows against the walls of a Castle, which are presently
beat back again, without making any great impression upon the walls.

And therefore there is little hopes of ever prevaling with these Men, to
surrender themselves to the powers, either of Scripture, or reason, though on
every hand besieged by them, unless this Fortress of theirs be demolished, and
its Towers broken down, and consequently their refuge and defense taken away.
That is, in more plain English, unless it be discovered, that their notions
about the sufficiency of Christ's righteousness, and the doctrine of Free
Grace, are false, and vain, and that neither the conditionality of the New
Covenant, nor the necessity of our personal performance of the conditions of it
in order to eternal life, are any way inconsistent with, or prejudicial unto
either. Grace notwithstanding is still free: And the satisfaction, and
righteousness of Jesus Christ is nevertheless s^fficient. These are the two
things, that I am now particularly to speak to, and to demonstrate.

The sufficiency of Christ's satisfaction and ^ighteousness is no way either
contradicted, or prejudiced by asserting the Covenant of Grace to be made, not
with Jesus Christ, but with ^elievers themselves, upon certain terms and
conditions: to the actual performance of which, they are personally obliged in
order to their receiving, and enjoying the benefits ^f it. That Jesus Christ
has fully satisfied the demands of the first Covenant, and ful^^lled all
righteousness, and finished his work, ^s Mediator, and perfected our Redemption
^y his death, and suffering: And that his sa^^sfaction and merit is of infinite
value, and ^^erefore abundantly sufficient for the ends ^r which it was
intended, has been ac^nowledged, and proved in the foregoing ^^opositions:
Propos. 2. and 4. And therefor I shall need to say nothing here, for the
^^claring my assent to, or for the vindicati^^ of these particulars; That which
I have ^ow to do is only to show in what sense ^^operly it may be said to be
sufficient, and (...) remove those mistaken apprehensions, that ^^e concerning
it. For which purpose it is, (...) the first place, to be observed, that by
suf^iciency here we are not to understand the ^^^rinsick worth, and value of
Christ's sa^^^faction, and righteousness; upon which account, it may not untruly
be said, if rightly construed, that it is sufficient for the Salvation of many
worlds. And in this very particular mainly lies the mistake. The satisfaction
o^ Christ, say they, is infinite, and his righteousness infinite, and therefore
sufficient for the redemption of this, and many worlds, if they had been made;
which as to its absolute valu^ and dignity is acknowledged. But what^ then?
Why? Therefore they hope, and believe that they shall be saved by it. And (...)
they build their faith, and hopes, immediately upon the absolute worth and
merit (...) Christ's satisfaction. But will this foundation stand? or this
argument hold good, when it comes to trial? In this sense it is sufficien^ to
save the Infidels, Jews, and Turks: T^ save the spirits now in prison; to save
a^ Apostate Lucifer, and his Angels. Yea a Be^^zebub, the Prince of Devils: But
will yo^ yet say, that the unbelieving Jews, an^ Turks, and damned spirits, and
Aposta^^ Angels, shall or can be saved? Or that the^ have any sufficient reason
hence to believe it* This is much what as if when a poor man (...) arrested for
a debt, he should say, the King Exchequer is full, and abundantly su^ficient to
pay what I owe, and therefore go to him, and my debt shall be pai^* But will
the Creditor, do you think, acce^^ of this as sufficient? If the sufficiency of
Chris^^ satisfaction and merit, as to its intrinsic value, were a sufficient
warrant for our Faith, and hopes of Salvation, then I see no reason but why the
Devils might as before was hinted, not only, as James speaks, believe and
tremble, but also believe and hope. For they may also argue thus, Christ's merit
is infinite, it is sufficient, and therefore we believe, and expect to be freed
from these chains of darkness, and to be readmitted into eternal mansions, and
enjoy those pleasures that are at Gods right hand for evermore. And thus men
miserably delude themselves, first by their misunderstanding, and then by
misapplying the sufficiency of Christ's satisfaction, and all by their not
rightly distinguishing betwixt its intrinsic value, and its stated, and
intentional sufficiency: That indeed is ^he foundation of the New Covenant, but
^his only of our Faith, and hopes.

But secondly by the sufficiency of Christ's satisfaction, and righteousness, we
are here, ^o far as it is of concernment to us, to un^erstand its fitness and
efficacy with respect ^o its designed and intended end. For what^ver is taken
up only as a means, or medium ^o any end, its sufficiency is no otherwise to ^e
judged and determined, but by its fit^ess and ability, or its unfitness and
ina^ility to the production of that end, for which it is made choice of, and
unto which it is appointed. This is the only rule, and standard by which the
sufficiency of all means is to be measured and decided. That therefore which is
not fit, and able to effect its end, we properly say it is insufficient: But
that which is every way suited to, and does ^ffectually in all points obtain
its end, that is truly to be de^med sufficient. As suppose (to make it yet more
plain to every capacity) that one, who is poss^ssed of a great, and liberal
estate, mortgage some part of his lands to another for his security, upon
consideration ^ith^r of moneys borrowed, or some Annuities to be paid, etc.
What Is that which a w^se Man would here look after for his security? What? the
intrinsic value of this Man's whole Estate, and incomes? No, that is not engaged
to him, nor intended as a means for his satisfaction, and therefore he has no
sufficient ground from this to exp^ct to be satisfied, only the mortgage, and
what of his lands are therein mentioned, being intended, as a means for his
security, the value of that he considers, and whether there be enough thence
arising to pay the moneys owing, and to discharge such annuities; if so, it is
judged a s^fficient estate, and sufficient security, and he ^ests satisfied
with it. Now to apply all this. The satisfaction of Christ, it is designed by
God as a means for the accomplishment of certain divine ends, which have
already been declared in the precedent discourse, as the vindicating of his
wisdom, holiness, justice, faithfulness, etc. and maintaining his authority and
laws and government in the world. And laying a sure foundation for the
readmission of fallen Man to the favor of God, and eternal life upon his
returning to God, and accepting of the redemption offered, and living in a due
acknowledgment of, and subjection to his Maker, and Redeemer, etc. These are
the great ends (as has been shown more at large in several propositions) for
which God intended his Sons satisfaction. And to these, it is every way
sufficient, though not to all those ends that wicked men may fancy, and imagine
to themselves, for their greater encouragement to vanity, and presumption. It Is
sufficient to evidence the holiness and purity of Gods nature, and his
irreconcilable hatred against sin: sufficient to declare his righteousness,
that he might be just, and the justifier of them that believe in Jesus:
sufficient to vindicate the authority of his Laws, and Government to the world:
sufficient to obtain a New Covenant from God with his Creature, for the
pardoning of his Rebellion, and taking him again into friendship, and bestowing
eter^al life, and Glory upon him, provided he will but humble himself and
submit to God, and live in obedience to his righteous Laws and Government: To
these wise, and holy ends, for which God has designed it, it is sufficient.
Yea but yet not sufficient for the redemption of fallen Angels: or for the
Salvation of the damned now in Hell, because not designed and intended for
their Salvation and Redemption. And for the same reason we may also say,
without detracting any thing from its sufficiency, that it is not sufficient to
save the impenitent, and unbelieving, and unholy here on earth: Why? Because it
was never intended for this end. As I may without offense say, that the Kings
treasury is not sufficient (though in it self more than sufficient) to
discharge my debt, or satisfy my creditor, because it was never appointed for
that purpose, but for higher, and more worthy ends: and therefore the as^^rting
the Covenant to be conditional, requiring our personal repentance, and faith,
and obedience, without which we cannot expect to be pardoned, or saved by it,
can be no diminution, or prejudice to the sufficiency of Christ's satisfaction,
and righteousness, unless it be shown, that God did purposely design it for the
Salvation of such as would neither repent, nor believe, nor obey, that is, such
as lived and died in open rebellion and defiance against him. Such as rend
their pardon, and throw away the Physic that should cure them, and spit in the
face of their Phisician. Such in a word, as blaspheme God, and do despite to
the Spirit of Grace, and trample under-foot the blood of Christ, and put him
again to open shame. If it can be shown indeed, that God ever intended the
satisfaction of his Son, for this end, to save such Monsters of iniquity whom
he has by an unchangable degree sentenced to eternal torments, then it is true,
to say that Men cannot be saved by Jesus Christ, without repenting, and
believing, and being holy, is to argue it of weakness and insufficiency, since
it falls short of obtaining the end for which it was appointed. I but if it be
evidently manifest, that the satisfaction of Jesus Christ was never intended
for this end (only to save such as humbly believe, and obey,) then it is no
derogation to the sufficiency of his righteousness to say, it is not sufficient
for their Salvation, since otherwise acknowledged sufficient to the ends for
which it is intended. For since it has only the place of a means, as was said,
if you give it all that sufficiency, and honor, that is of right due, and
belonging to it, when I assert it sufficient to its designed end, though I deny
it to be sufficent to many other purposes, for which it never was appointed. As
he that says ^he mortgage given for his security, is well able to discharge
the debt for which it is engaged, acknowledges all that is proper to be said of
it* Nor would it be thought any disparagement, this being granted, neither to
the owner, or to the security given, to say that it is not sufficient to pay
such other debts, and bonds, for the payment of which it never was, nor ever
was intended, that it should be obliged. And so much by way of answer, to the
first objection. But secondly,

2. As the method of Gods saving sinners by Covenant, in the sense before
expressed, it no diminution, or prejudice to the all sufficiency of Christ's
satisfaction and righteousness duly explained, and understood; so neither is
it (as pretended) any way destructive, or opposite to the doctrine of free
Grace, rightly stated according to the rules of the Gospel. There is indeed a
Free Grace, which some Men vainly fancy to themselves, to which I confess this
doctrine is diametrically opposite, but not to that, which we have recommended
to us in and warranted by the Scriptures.

But that this may be the more clearly evidenced, and made good, these five
things must here be done.

1. We must in the first place rightly state the notion of Free Grace.

2. We must duly distinguish betwixt causes and conditions.

3. We must take notice of that order in which the blessings of the Covenant
are dispensed, and in what order the Conditions of it are to be applied for the
obtaining of them.

4. We must inquire into, and inform our selves aright concerning the nature of
Salvation, and happiness, and see how the duties of Christianity stand related
to it.

5. And lastly we must not forget by whose strength, and assistance all our
duties are performed.

1. We must here rightly state the notion, and limits of Free Grace. For herein
lies the great error of the World, and that from which also arise those many
dangerous mistakes, that are concerning it. They have wild, and strange and
unbounded conceptions, and ideas of Gods Free Grace in their minds, and
therefore no wonder, that they give us so bad a Comment of it in their lives
and conversations. For God to accept of their good wishes, and desires, as they
call them, though their lives are still wicked, and unreformed. And to pardon
Sinners that have worn out all their days in carnal delights and pleasures,
and manifest rebellion against God, only upon their crying out in the last
moment of their lives, Lord have mercy on them, and receive their Souls. And to
be so pitiful, and compassionate to his Creatures, as not to damn, or destroy
them because he has made them. And to give them Heaven, and Happiness for the
sake of Christ, though they never truly believed in him, or seriously minded
Heaven all their days, or regarded to please God, and live in obedience to his
Law. And bestow eternal recompenses upon them, Kingdoms, and Crowns of Glory,
though they have sat still all their time, and never worked in the vineyard,
or fought in the battle, or run in the race that was set before them. This is
that, which generally Men call by the name of the Free Grace of God, and by
which they hope to be saved, as well as others, as well as the best, as they
commonly speak. But is this indeed the Grace of God? That which he assumes to
himself, as his Glory; and which he has revealed to us in the Gospel, as the
foundation of our Faith? To pardon and save such, I confess, even the most
impenitent, and unbelieving, and impure Sinners in the world, the very Heirs of
wrath and Sons of perdition, this I grant, would be Grace, and free Grace too.
Yea but where have we any warrant or encouragement from the word to believe,
that there is any such Grace in God, or Jesus Christ, whereby such sinners
shall be saved? And yet might those be owned for the legitimate, and true born
notions of free Grace, which the wild imaginations of Men may at ^leasure
create to themselves, it were easy to give a more large, and extensive
description of it. To proclaim liberty to the captives now in Hell that are
weeping, and wailing, and blaspheming God because of their torments: And the
opening of the prison to the Devil and his Angels that are bound in chains
reserved for the blackness of darkness for ever: And to proclaim the acceptable
year of the Lord, to all the inhabitants of the earth, that they all might be
saved; Jews, and Turks, and Pagans, that none might perish: tell me, would not
this be Grace, and free too with an emphasis? Yea but all Grace you see that we
may f^ncy, is not saving Grace. Nor all that neither, the Grace of God, which
we fondly imagine to be in God.

I have said all this to show, how much the generality of the world are
mistaken in their conceptions of free Grace, and what necessity there is to
come to some stated, and limited notions concerning it, which must undoubtedly
be such, as may be worthy of God, and suitable to the nature of a reasonable
Creature.

Such as may be consistent with the infinite wisdom of God, and holiness of his
nature, and truth, and veracity of his word. Such as may uphold the credit of
his Laws, and Government in the world, and retain the Creature in his due
subjection to, and d^pendance upon his Maker. Such also as may be agreeable to
his Sons great design in dying, and suffering for M^n, which was to mend, and
reform the world, and to make Men holy and righteous and conformable to God,
and not to encourage them to sin and wickedness by their hopes of mercy and
impunity. These boundaries and limitations must necessarily be supposed to all
the dispensations of Gods free Grace to the Creature, since for God to act
otherwise, which is not to be imagined, would be both dishonorable to himself,
and contradictory to the undertaking of his Son in redeeming the world. Where,
by the way we see, how greatly they are mistaken, who ascribe this free Grace
to God, under a pretense of giving the more honor to him, when in truth
nothing can be said more unworthy of him. Suppose the Magistrate should set
forth a Proclamation, wherein he declares it to be his Royal pleasure that all
that have been guilty of any crime whatsoever, Murderers, and Traitors, and
Rebels, the worst, and vilest of malefactors should without distinction be
pardoned, and set at liberty, though they never humbled themselves to him, or
reformed their lives, or promised allegiance to his person, and Government, but
still persisted in their wickedness, and kept their weapons in their hands to
fight against him. This you will grant would undoubtedly be an act of free
Grace, and favor in the Magistrate, yea but would it do you think, be to his
honor? Some few profligate persons possibly, who hoped for impunity by it,
might cry him up, as wonderfully gracious and indulgent, but would any wise and
sober Man commend him for it? Surely if he had had any love to justice, and
righteousness, or any regard to his own credit, or any due care and respect for
his Laws, and Government, he would never have been guilty of so imprudent, and
unadvised an action. He would never thus have countenanced such impieties, and
encouraged Men to rebel against him, would not this be the plain sense, and
interpretation of such an act of Grace? Just thus do these Men honor God, and
Christ, that make his Grace to be so free, as to save impenitent and
unbelieving sinners.

But if it be certain, that there is no such free Grace in God, nor no such
righteousness in Christ, as may be sufficient to save such sinners as these,
then it is also as certain that the conditionality of the Covenan^ requiring our
personal repentance, and faith and holiness in order to our Salvation, is no
way inconsistent with or derogatory to that stated notion we have of both in
the Gospel, though it be to those wild notions of them that wicked Men vainly
fancy to themselves, which I shall yet more plainly demonstrate by showing
first what Grace properly is, secondly what is absolutely necessary to make it
free.

1. Grace properly signifies no more, than love and kindness, favor, and
friendly acceptance, or bounty and ben^ficence, Luke 1.30. Fear not, says the
Angel there to Ma^y, for thou have found (...)* f^vour with God; and ver. 28.
thou art greatly, or highly favored, (...), which we render in the margin,
graciously accepted, or much graced: So Luke 2.52. it is said of Jesus Christ,
that he increased in wisdom, and stature, and favor ((...)) with God, and Man.
Acts 2.46. They eat their meat with gladness, and singleness of heart, says
Luke there of those primitive converts, praising God, (...) and having favor
with all the people. And Joh. 1.17. The Law came by Moses, but Grace, and truth
by Jesus Christ, (...): which is elsewhere rendered love and kindness.

And to name no more, 1 Cor. 16.3. Whomsoever you shall approve by your
letters, them will I s^nd to bring your liberality: ((...)) that is, your
charity as we speak, or kindn^ss, in your liberal contributions for the relief
of the poor Saints at Jerusalem. In which sense you have the same word taken,
2. Cor. 8.4.

And therefore when the fruits of the Spirit, as Faith, and Love, and Hope,
etc. are called Graces, as we say the Grace of Faith, and the Grace of
Repentance, etc. this is not to be understood in a proper sense, for so they
are not Grace, but metonymically, and by way of derivation only; either because
they come from the special love and favor of God, and so are the effects of
it, or because they render us acceptable to God, and so become the obj^cts of
his love, upon which account it is called by the Schoolmen, Gratia gratum
faciens: In the first sense they are (...) quia (...), in the second, quia --

By the Grace of God then we are here properly to understand his love and
favor and kindness, and good will, and beneficence to the Sons of Men.

2. But secondly that all this may be truly said to be free, free love, and
free kindness, and free beneficence, there is nothing more required, but that
it be not deserved. For, if I cannot possibly by any thing that lies within the
compass of my power to do, merit or deserve the least favor or kindness from
the hands of another, then whatever I receive from him, must be acknowledged
due to his free love and bounty. This therefore I shall take for an undoubted
axiom, that as what I deserve, is my due, so that also is undoubtedly free,
that is undeserved. And therefore notwithstanding all that has been said
concerning the conditionality of the Covenant, and the necessity of our
personal performance of the Conditions of it, that of the Apostle will still
stand firm, Ephesians. 2.8. By Grace ye are saved, through faith; and not of your
selves, it is the gift of God. Because it is not possible for any Creature to
merit, or deserve any thing at the hands of God, much l^ss such transcendent
favors, as to be made the Sons of God, and H^irs of Glory. For who ever merits
any thing of another by any thing he gives, or does, that gift, or action of
his, that it may become meritorious, or deserving, it must of necessity have
these four qualifications, or properties annexed to it.

1. It must be de pr^prio. Somewhat that is his own. Otherwise he properly
gives nothing, but he rather from whom he received it. As he that takes an
hundred pound from one Man, and gives it to another, deserves nothing for such
a gift, since properly he gives nothing that is his own.

2. It must be ex indebito, somewhat that is not antecedently due to the party
to whom it is given. And therefore no man is judged worthy of a reward, that
pays no more than the debt he owes.

3. It must cedere in lucrum alteri, be some way or other beneficial, and for
the advantage of another, and not only to my self, or else wherein do I oblige
him?

4. There must be a due proportion betwixt the datum and acceptum, that which
is done or given, and that which is received by way of reward for it. For which
reason, we say he that gives a penny, cannot deserve a pound, much less he that
gives a farthing deserve millions. Now upon all these accounts it is absolutely
impossible, that any creature should merit or deserve pardon, or grace, or
glory, or any thing from God, and therefore all still must needs be (...):
freely of his grace, as the Apostles phrase is, Rom* 3.24. For first,

1. It Is not properly our own but the Lords, whatever we render to him: What
have thou, that thou have not received, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.7. It Is not
only his corn, and his wine and his wool and his flax by which we are fed and
clothed, as the Prophet ^peaks, Hos. 2.9. but his strength, and his assistance
^y which we are enabled to perform all our works, 2 Cor. 3.5. It Is he that
breaths upon these dry bones, and causes the spirit of ^ife to enter into
them, Ephesians. 2.1. It Is he that strengthens us with might in the in^er man, Ephesians.
3.16. And it is he that work^th in us both to will, and to do, of his good
^leasure, Phil. 2.13. And therefore Paul ^hen he had told the Corinthians that
he had ^aboured more abudantly than all the Apo^les, 1 Cor. 15.10* (A more
particular account of which he gives them, 2 Cor. 11.23, 24. etc.) Immediately
he corrects himself, as having ascribed too much to his own endeavors, and in
the n^x^ words adds, Yet not I, but the Grace of God, which was with me, by
which grace, says he in the foregoing words, I am that I am. Thus Paul, from
first to last, both as to what he was, and what he did, he acknowledges all to
be o^ Grace: So that upon this account we are you see so far from meriting any
thing by our best endeavors, as that the more we do the more we are indebted
to divine grace, for enabling us so to do. And therefore after all must take up
David's words, and make the like humble acknowledgment as (...) did, after he
had made so munificent pr^parations for the building of the Templ^ 1 Chronicles.
29.11, 12, etc. Thine, O Lord, is t^^ greatness and the power, and the glory
and (...) victory, and the Majesty: for all that is in (...) Heaven, and in the
earth is thine: thine is (...) Kingdom, O Lord, and thou art exalted, ^ head
above all, both riches and honor come (...) thee, and thou reignest over all,
and in thi^ hand is power, and might, and in thine hand is to make great, and
to give strength unto (...) Now therefore our God, we thank thee, (...) praise
thy glorious name; but who am I, (...) what is this people that we should be
able (...) offer so willingly after this sort? For all thi^ come of thee: and
of thine own have we given thee. And as it follows, all this store that we have
prepared comes of thee, and is all thine own.

2. It Is no more than what we all owe to God, if not antecedent to his command,
yet to any promise he has made either to accept, or reward us for our
obedience. For since we all by our first creation received our beings and
faculties by derivation from him, and still live in an essential dependence
upon him, we are thereby indispensably obliged to render to him all possible
homage, and service, and to improve both our faculties and beings entirely for
his Glory. If we any way offend God by sinning against him, we are bound to
humble our selves, and return to him, and cease from offending of him: And if
he lay any command upon us, we are bound to yield obedience to it, and to
subject our selves to all his righteous Laws. And if he in kindness make any
promise to us, we are bound to believe him, and rely upon him.

These are all natural duties, that immediately result from the creatures
necessary dependence upon, and subjection to God, as he is the Lord our Maker.
And though it be true that we are now fallen from God, and much disinabled by
our fall from the due performance of these duties, yet this is to be considered
that our inability cannot null Gods right. The debt is still owing, and may be
demanded, though the debtor has by his own default rendered himself unable to
pay it. How then should Man, by any act of his, merit pardon, or life, when
before these blessings were promised in the New Covenant for our encouragement,
he was necessarily obliged to do and perform all that which is therein at
present required of him? Can the payment of an old arrear, deserve a new grant
of the inheritance it self? Put the case that the Father of a prodigal child,
that had riotously misspent his portion should for his greater encouragement to
repentance, tell him that he would freely forgive his rebellion, and settle the
whole inheritance upon him, of which he had been justly disinherited; provided
only, that he would, as becomes a child, humble himself, and return to his
duty, and be obedient to him. Would any one now say, that this was no free act
of Grace, or kindness in the Father, because propounded with these conditions?
Or that the Son in accepting, and performing of them did therefore merit the
inheritance? No, for all this the Father, you will say, freely pardon^d his
Son, and freely settled the inheritance upon him: Why? Because his Son was
bound by the law of nature, thus to humble himself to his Father, and to return
to his duty and obedience, though his Father should not have given him one
farthing more of his estate. The Son it is true did his duty, in doing thus; yea
but since he did no more he deserved nothing, Luke 17.10.

3. There is no real gain or benefit accrues to God, but to our selves, by any
of our performances, Job 35.6, 7, 8. If thou sinnest, says Elihu there to Job,
What do thou against him? Or if thy transgressions be multiplied, what do
thou unto him? If thou be righteous, what give thou him? Or what receives be
at thine hand? Thy wickedness may hurt a man, as thou art, and thy
righteousness may profit the Son of man: God is too great to be obliged by any
creature, and too powerful to be really prejudiced by them. He knows how to get
the full revenues of his Glory out of the most rebellious, and impenitent, by
throwing them into chains of eternal darkness. And therefore Christ teaches
his disciples to say, after they had done all that was commanded them, that
they were unprofitable servants: yea, but he does not say (observe that by the
way) sit still, and fold your hands together with the Sluggard, and take your
own ease, and pleasure, and be not over solicitous, and diligent in obedience
to the commands of God, lest by that means you should be thought to derogate
from the sufficiency of his sons righteousness, or eclipse the glory of his
free Grace. No, he does not say, do nothing, that you may be said to deserve
nothing, but he supposes that to the uttermost of their abilities they were
diligent, and industrious, in the business of religion, and did all that it was
possible for creatures to do, in the keeping of the commands of God, and after
all this it is, that they are to acknowledge their unprofitableness: When ye
shall have done all those things which are commanded you, say, we are
unprofitable servants. Here Is doing and doing the commands of God, and doing
all things commanded, but unprofitableness joined to all.

4. There is no proportion at all betwixt the duties required, and the reward
promised, betwixt our work, and our wages. Romans 8.18. I reckon, says the
Apostle there, that the sufferings (and we may also add the services) of this
present time, are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be
revealed in us. And where there is no proportionable worth, there can be no
desert. The payment therefore of a small fee cannot deserve a Kingdom, nor the
giving of a single mite deserve millions by way of retribution, much less for
the same reason, can any of our performances deserve eternal life, since here
the disproportion is much greater: B^twixt a mite, and millions, a small fee,
and a Kingdom, though the difference be very large and wide, yet there is still
some proportion betwixt them, they are both finite, and so agree in the same
common notion, and predicament of beings, but here the different terms are so
far distant, as not to admit of any comparison: There the difference lies only
betwixt finite and finite, but here betwixt finite and infinite. O^r obedience,
that is only finite, but our reward infinite; that is temporal, but this
eternal. We serve God only for a moment, but we are made happy for ever. Now
betwixt finite and infinite, temporal and eternal there can be no proportion.
And where there is no proportion betwixt the work and the reward, there can be
no desert. For whatever we receive, either it must be an act of Justice, or an
act of bounty that gave it to us. If an act of Justice, there the only rule and
standard is proportion: That every Man may have, as we say in our English
Proverb, a peny-worth for a penny: wages agreeable to his work. This is the true
and proper notion of Justice. But in acts of bounty there the rule and measure
of acting is only the good will and pleasure of the Agent, and not the worth or
merit of the person that receives. Since therefore the giving of eternal life
to sinners upon terms of Faith and Obedience, cannot possibly, for the reasons
already given, be deemed a mere act of Justice, it necessarily follows that
it is still an act of free Grace and bounty. To make this yet more plain, take
this familiar instance.

He that sets a poor Man to work, and at night pays him his ordinary wages, he
is just you will say, but not bountiful, and therefore upon this account, there
is no great thanks owing to him, since the poor Man's sweat and labor was
judged by common estimation to deserve it. But he that imploies an indigent
person for some few moments in his service, and then gives him a thousand pound
for his reward, this man is to be accounted not merely just, but liberal, and
therefore notwithstanding some moments, or hours service were required of him,
yet you would call it an act of free Grace, and bounty, and not of justice,
since so small a s^rvice could never deserve so rich a reward, there being so
little proportion betwixt them. And surely then if we do but duly consider how
much the disproportion is yet greater betwixt our obedience for a moment, and
infinite happiness to all eternity, we cannot but acknowledge that
notwithstanding all, that it is possible for any creature to do, yet it can be
no less than an act of free Grace and bounty in God to give us these eternal
recomp^nces.

Upon all these accounts then you see it is evident, that if the notions of free
Grace and sufficiency of Christ's satisfaction be rightly stated according to
the Gospel, there is nothing affirmed in any of the foregoing propositions,
that is either inconsistent with, or really prejudicial unto either. Not to the
sufficiency of Christ's satisfaction, since notwithstanding all that has been
said it remains sufficent and effectual to all those ends for which it was by
infinite wisdom designed and intended. Nor to the free Grace of God in Christ,
since notwithstanding all our performances it is undoubtedly free because
undeserved. But secondly,

2. That we may further evidence the truth of this proposition, we must here
distinguish betwixt causes and conditions, which if duly weighed will be found
to be of very different considerations: A cause is that, by whose proper virtue
and influence the thing is produced; but a condition that without whose
presence, or concurrence the principal cause cannot well obtain its end or
produce its effect as to some determinate actions. Thus (to make it plain by
some familiar instances) the Sun it is the original cause, and fountain of
light; but the opening of the windows, that is the condition, or medium by
which the Sun transmits its light into the house: And fire is the proper cause
of heat, but the air notwithstanding a necessary requisite without which it
cannot burn. Or to instance in moral concerns, which are more direct to the
thing in hand. He that sells, and makes over his estate to another upon the
tender and receipt of a considerable sum of moneys, here the money, or valuable
consideration given is the true and proper cause why this man parts with his
estate, and setles it upon another person: But he now that makes over an
estate, suppose of some thousands by the year, to some poor Man, with this
proviso only that he pay quarterly some small fee, a Rose perhaps, or a
pepper-corn, by way of acknowledgment of his bounty, or else that he have no
right to the revenues and profits of it: Here the payment of this
acknowledgment (being consequent upon the grant, and no way answerable to its
just value) is not the cause, but the condition only of this gift. The
condition it is true must be accepted and performed by this poor Man, that he
may be admitted to, and continued in the quiet possession of this estate, but
still for all this, the Donors free love and bounty is to be acknowledged the
sole cause, why this rich revenue and inheritance was settled upon him. And can
it then be any derogation to the free Grace of God, or merits of Jesus Christ
in bestowing eternal life upon heirs of wrath, to allow faith and obedience to
have the place of a medium or condition, in that Covenant by which this life is
made over to them? Notwithstanding this, Jesus Christ may be, and is the only
cause of our Salvation, Heb. 5.9. It Is by virtue of his satisfaction and
merits, that we are acquit from the condemnations of the old Law, and admi^ted
to be heirs of Glory: Th^se were the valuable consideration, and pur^hase money
(if I may so term them, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.) upon which the Father makes a new
grant, and conveighance of an inheritance incorrup^^ble and undefiled and that
fades not away, to the degenerate Sons of Adam. Y^a but so still, as that
repentance and faith, etc. are to be acknowledged the conditions, the small fee
and homage, upon the rendering of which, the possession of this inheritance is
put into their hands, and secured to them, and this we may do, without fear of
offering the least injury or prejudice either to the perfection of Christ's
righteousness, or the freeness of divine Grace. It Is true indeed to admit of
these or any thing else but Jesus Christ, to be the meritorious, and procuring
cause of Man's Salvation, that is not only a little to eclipse, but totally to
extinguish the Glory of free Grace, and plainly to deny the sufficiency of
Christ's satisfaction. But to make them only mediums, and conditions, without
which they will not be effectual to save us, this may be very well consistent
with both, the freeness of the one and sufficiency of the other. For is it
thought any diminution of the Suns radiency, and universal influence, that it
does not enlighten the house unless the windows be opened? Or of the fires
efficacy to warm, because it cannot burn without air? Or of the Benefactors
kindness and bounty in settling a rich estate, millions by the year, upon a poor
Man, because required to pay a rose, or pepper-corn by way of acknowledgment,
without which he cannot enjoy it? Much less can it be any diminution to divine
goodness, to make our repenting and believing etc. the conditions of the New
Covenant, since the disproportion betwixt the good promised, and the duties to
be performed, is infinitely greater, as has already been demonstrated.

I grant it is possible for conditions to be of that nature, as to render what
is tendered or granted upon them to be no act of kindness, and bounty. Such as
those that Nahash the Ammonite propounded to the men of Jabesh Gilead, 1 Samuel
11.2. And such as are usual in the ordinary contracts betwixt man and man* But
this is not merely because conditions, but because they are either reproachful,
and unreasonable, like those of Nahash to the Israelites, or at least
equivalent in their value to the benefit promised, as those of common
contracts. Neither of which can without manifest falsity be affirmed of the
Conditions of the New Covenant. For first, the things therein required of us
are highly rational, and most becoming both the nature of God and the Creature.
For a guilty, and undone sinner to humble himself to his Maker whom he has
offended, and throw down his weapons, and quit his ways of rebellion, and be
reconciled to him. For him also to accept of Jesus Christ the eternal Son of
God, to be his teacher to instruct him in the things that belong unto his
peace, and his Priest to satisfy, and interceed for him, and his King to rule
and govern him, and in this way to rely upon him for his Salvation which he
has not only purchased, but sealed, and confirmed to us by his blood. And for
him again to purify himself as God is pure, and be holy in all manner of
conversation, as he that has called him is holy, and to live in a due
observance of all his good and righteous Laws, and to approve himself to God in
all things. What more reasonable or more becoming of a guilty and dependent
creature? Especially if it be in the second place considered, that the
conditions here required, as they are not unreasonable, so neither in worth and
value equivalent to the good promised to us upon the due performance of them,
there being, as has been once and again demonstrated, an infinite
disproportion betwixt them. And wh^re conditions are of this nature, though in
a less degree of reasonableness and disproportion, there they may be admitted
without nulling, or detracting from the free Grace and bounty of the proposer,
as might besides the instances already given be made good by many more of the
like nature. As should a King, suppose, promise to a poor indigent Beggar, that
he would cloth him with Scarlet, if he will but cast off his old and dirty
rags: or adorn his fingers with Rubies and Diamonds, if he will but throw away
the dirt he has in his hands, and wash them: or load him home with bags of
Gold, and Silver, if he will but come to his Palace, and fetch it: or pardon
him the treason he has committed, if he will but down upon his knees and
humbly confess his fault, and promise for the future to be more Loyal. Here are
manifest conditions you see affixed to each of these tenders, supposed to be
made to this poor Man, and yet will any one say they are therefore no acts of
Grace and favor? Or thereupon make this reply, No Sir, I will none of your
offers upon these terms. I was told, that I had a friend at Court that had
obtained all this for me, and that upon his account they should be freely
bestowed upon me; but now it seems I must down upon my knees and beg pardon or
I cannot be forgiven, and throw away my rags and dirt, or I shall not be
adorned with Scarlet, and Jewels; and attend at the Princes Gate, or I must not
have the Gold and Silver that was promised. This is not the free Grace, and
kindness, that I expected, and should I take it upon these conditions, I should
be guilty of dishonouring my Sovereign, by detracting from the freeness of his
favors, and mistrust the efficacy of my friends mediation with him. Should the
poor Beggar to whom these tenders were made, argue thus, would not the whole
world gaze upon him, as they do upon blazing Stars and Comets, with admiration?
and record him as the greatest prodigy of folly and impudence, that has been
yet seen on Earth? For what would the Man have? Here is Gold and Silver, and
Robes of Majesty, and orient Pearls, and Jewels, together with the pardon of
his rebellion and his Princes favor. And are not these desirable and inviting
objects? And can it rationally be expected that ever they should be dispensed
upon more easy, and honorable terms? What* be pardoned, and yet not ask
forgiveness? What! Be loaded with bags of Gold, and yet not so much as reach
out the hand to receive them? What! Be adorned with Diamonds, and Rubies, and
all the glory of both the Indies, and yet not part with that dirt with which
his hands are filled, that he may be adorned? and be clothed with Scarlet, and
Robes of Majesty, and yet not put off, and lay aside his old and filthy rags?
Surely he that expects to find any such free Grace as this in God, to be saved
without parting with his dirt and rags, I mean his sins, I much question the
possibility of that Man's Salvation: But thirdly,

3. We must upon the service of this design observe the order in which the
several privileges of the Covenant are dispensed, and in which the conditions
of it accordingly are to be applied to each of them, that they may become ours.
For as the former are not all actually given in the same moment, but
successively, so neither are the other required to be all at once in act, and
exercise, but gradually according to the successive administrations of the
privileges to which they are appropriate. It Is true there is a necessary
connection betwixt the several benefits of the Covenant, so that he who has any
one link of this golden chain put into his hands, he is thereby assured, that
all the rest will follow in their order, as the Apostle argues, Romans 8.30. For
whom he did foreknow he also did pridestinate, and whom he did predestinate,
them he also called: and whom he called, them he also justified: and whom he
justified them he also glorified. But though they are all thus mutually united
both in their particular subjects, and Gods eternal preordination, yet they are
still truly distinguishable in themselves as to their formal notions (vocation
being one thing and justification another) and also in the order in which they
are given out to sinners. For first they are effectually called, then
justified, then adopted, and last of all glorified. Betwixt the three former
there is at least a priority of nature, as the Sun we say is before its light,
and the fire before its heat: But betwixt them, and glorification there is a
priority of time. Thus Enoch we know walked some years with God in a justified
state, before he was translated: And Paul fought long after he was called
before he received his Crown. This is the unvariable order, that God has
fixed, wherein to dispense the great blessings of the Covenant to such who are
the objects of his elective love. He justifies none but the called, and adopts
none but the justified, and glorifies none but the adopted, Romans 8.

In the next place (the order in which the privileges of the Covenant are
dispensed, being stated) we must consider in what order the several conditions
of the Covenant (since ^ot to all alike nor at the same time to all) are to be
applied, for our being actually in^eressed in them. And first in order to our
^ffectual calling no more is required of us, ^han an humble, and diligent
attendance upon all such means, as God has appointed for that end. Our waiting
by the pool for the Angels moving upon the waters. Isa. 55.6. Prove. 2.4, 5.
Heb. 2.1. Luke 11.9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Joh. 5.25. Act. 10.33. Acts 13.44, 48.

Our actual faith, and repentance, and holiness cannot here be supposed as a
prerequisite to our effectual calling (only our attendance upon the means)
since these are the very things to which we are called. Act. 26.18. Rom 10.14.
Romans 1.7. Gal. 1.6. And he that is called to believe and be holy is upon that
very account supposed before to be both unbelieving and unholy. But then in
order to our being justified and adopted there both faith and repentance (as
has already been proved) are antecedently necessary. Or which is all one, our
humble and penitential acceptance, or receiving of Jesus Christ in all his
offices, as Prophet, Priest, and King, and consequent upon this our reliance
upon him for pardon and Salvation, Gal. 2.16. Joh. 1.12. and lastly in order to
our being actually glorified, and made eternally happy in the immediate
fruition of God, it is further requisite that we be not only penitent, and
believing, but also actually holy and obedient as has been said, Math. 5.20.
Rev. 22.14* First, God in the use of means calls sinners to repent and believe,
and then upon their repenting and believing in answer to his call, he justifies
and adopts them: And then upon their being further purified in obeying the
truth, as it is expressed, 1 Pet. 1.22. and so made meet to be partakers with the
Saints in the inheritance of light, they are as the consummation of all their
happiness eternally glorified. So that you see our repenting and believing
necessarily presupposes our effectual calling, and our justification and
adoption our repenting and believing, and our glorification not only our being
justified and adopted, but also our being personally holy and conformable to
Jesus Christ. When therefore it is said, that obedience, as well as faith and
repentance is a necessary condition in the Covenant of Grace, if we understand
it as we ought according to the order before explained the great doctrine of
justification by faith in Christ which the Apostle so much contends for with
the Jews, especially in his Epistle to the Romans, and Galatians, this doctrine
I say is hereby secured and preserved inviolable, since our obedience is made a
condition only with reference to eternal life and not to our justification,
being in order not ^ntecedent to, but consequent upon that. We are still
justified by faith in Christ without works as the Apostle speaks, but yet not
sa^ed by faith alone without works* There is more required to make a Soul fit
for Heaven, than merely the pardoning of his sins, and justifying of his person.

But is it not often affirmed in Scripture that we are saved as well as
justified by faith, Joh. 3.16. Ephesians. 2.8. Mar. 16.16.? It Is true, and so also we
are said to be saved by hope, Romans 8.24. And by calling upon the name of the
Lord, Romans 10.13. And to be blessed, and have a right to the tree of life by
keeping of the commands of Christ, Rev. 22.14. If then the argument will hold
good, that we are saved by faith alone without holiness and obedience, because
it is said, he that believes shall be saved; we might also by the same rule
argue, that we are saved by hope without faith, or by calling upon God, without
hope, or by our obedience without all the rest, since Salvation and blessedness
is ascribed to each of these, to hoping and calling upon the Lord, and obeying,
as well as believing. All therefore that can justly be inferred from hence is
only this, that faith, as well as hope and obedience is necessary to our
Salvation: And because there is an inseparable connection betwixt them, and a
joint subserviency of both to the same end, therefore it is that eternal life
is sometimes ascribed to one, sometimes to the other. Sometimes it is said,
blessed are they that believe, Joh. 20.29. Sometimes, blessed are the pure in
heart, Matthew. 5.8. Sometimes, blessed is he that fears the Lord, Psalm. 112.1.
Sometimes again, blessed are they that keep his testimonies, and are undefiled
in the way, Psalm. 119.1, 2. All which it is evident must be taken inclusive of
each other, faith of fear, and fear of purity, and all as joined with actual
obedience. That is, he that believes and acts sutably to his faith, in
purifying his heart, and keeping the commands of Christ, he shall be saved. And
so again, on the other hand, he that obeys, supposing also that he repents, and
believes in Jesus Christ, he shall be blessed. But we cannot possibly without
making Scripture to contradict it self, appropriate happiness to any one of
these conditions, (not to faith any more than to obedience) either by way of
opposition to or separation from the rest. The plain English of that would be
this, that a disobedient faith, or an unbelieving obedience might be sufficient
to qualify us for eternal life. Even in justification it self, though our
actual obedience be not there required, yet it is vertually included in the very
nature of that faith by which we are justified. But as to our being eternally
glorified, there our actual obedience* together with faith and repentance are
alike necessary to give us a perfect and complete right to it: faith and
repentance alone as to this are not sufficient. A complete right I say; for
there is, I grant, a certain right to life, that does immediately result from
faith it self. But then we must here distinguish of a double right.

There is first a primary and initial, secondly a perfect and consummate right:
or as the Civilians speak, there is jus haereditarium, and jus aptitudinale.
Both which are in their respective order alike necessary, fully and completely
to enstate us in one and the same possession. Thus for instance. He that is
lawfully elected to any office of trust and dignity, his mere election gives
him an initial right to that office; yea but for all that, before he can
receive the several insignia proper to it, or exercise any act of authority in
it, or actually receive the profits, and emoluments belonging to it, he must
solemnly be installed, and take the Corporation Oaths, and perform such other
ceremonies, as are usual in the case, and this gives him a consummate right to
his place and dignity. Again, he that seals to an Indenture, he thereby has an
incipient right, and title to the estate therein conveyed; But yet to
complete this, there must be seisin and delivery, and performance of Covenants,
payment of rent and repairing the premises, and this gives him an actual right
to it, and continues him in the quiet possession of it. Take one instance more.
A Child in his infancy may have right to a Kingdom, as some have been Crowned
in their Cradles. But yet notwithstanding he afterward remains, as the Apostle
speaks, under Tutors and Governors, and little differs the Lord of all from a
Servant until he come of age, and then his Kingdom and Government is put into
his hand. Before he had an hereditary, and now an aptitudinal right to, or
legal fitness for government. I have brought all these instances to show, that
there may be a different right to the same thing arising from different
qualifications and conditions, and yet both subservient to the same end. And so
here faith gives right, and obedience also gives right to eternal life, but in
a different manner; that begins it, but this continues, and compleats it.
Plainly thus; Whosoever does sincerely accept of Jesus Christ upon Gospel
terms, which is truly faith, he is thereupon not only quit from all the demands
of the first Covenant, which is properly justification, but he also has, by
virtue of the Gospel-grant, an initial right to the eternal Kingdom purchased
by Christ: But yet before he can enter into the actual possession of it, and
enjoy all the glories and bliss and joy that belongs to it, he must be pure and
holy, cleansed from all filthiness of flesh and spirit; and this gives him an
aptitudinal and complete right to it. Faith is as our sealing to the Indenture,
that first founds our right: and obedience is as the performance of Covenants,
that perfects and continues it. That by making us Sons, Joh. 1.12. makes us
also heirs of the Kingdom, Romans 8.17. and so gives us an hereditary right to
it: But this being the means to make us holy, and like to God, and as Scripture
speaks, perfect Men in Christ, that is men of ripe age, it thereby gives us a
fitness or aptitudinal right to the eternal possession of it.

And thus I have shown in what order the several conditions of the Covenant are
to be applied for the obtaining the great blessings of it, according to the
method in which they are dispensed, which being attended to will further
evidence the consistence of free Grace with their being given out to sinners
upon such terms. But before I conclude this particular, it will be requisite
(especially since it may add some further light to the thing in hand) to
inquire into and evince the difference (which I have all along in this
discourse supposed) betwixt faith and obedience; for I cannot wholly be of
their opinion, that make them one and the same without distinction, nor yet
apprehend them so vastly different as some imagine.

That they are not the same to me is evident, since I find them frequently
distinguished both by different names, and effects in Scripture, Acts 15.9.
Purifying their hearts by faith, Heb. 11.8. Acts 26.18. By faith Abraham
obeyed. Tit. 3.8. These things I will, that thou affirm constantly, that they
which have believed in God might be careful to maintain good works. Therefore
also called the obedience of faith, Romans 16.26. Here you see they are
distinguished, and elsewhere they are opposed, Ephesians. 2.8, 9. By grace ye are
saved through faith, and not of works. Phil. 3.9. That I may be found in
Christ, not having my own righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is
through the faith of Christ. And more than once in the Epistles to the Romans
and Galatians, where the Apostle treats designedly concerning justification,
which he there once and again affirms to be by faith, and not by the works of
the law. And can they possibly be the same that are not only distinguish but
opposed?

I know it is said, that the opposition the Apostle there makes betwixt faith,
and works, is only to be understood with respect to Jewish works, and that
opinion of perfection, and merit that they had of them. But were the works of
Paul, and the Ephesians, and Abraham of this nature? were they Jewish and
Levitical? or have we any reason to think that they had any such opinion of
their obedience as being perfect, and meritorious? And yet in all these
instances we find that faith is opposed to works. And though Paul it is true
does in the third Chapter to the Philippians first instance in his legal
privileges and righteousness, yet afterward he adds his Gospel services and
sufferings for Jesus Christ, and whatever else you can imagine to make up his
obedience, and righteousness perfect. Phil. 3.8. Yea doubtless and I count all
things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ my Lord:
for whom I have suffered the loss of all things. And yet after all he tells us,
that he desired to be found not in the righteousness of works, but of faith,
ver. 9.

Again they are not only distinguished, and opposed, but also delivered to us
under different notions in the Gospel: As faith is expressed by receiving of
Christ, Joh. 1.12. Obedience by walking in him as we have received him, Col.
2.6. That by coming to Christ, this by taking his yoke, and bearing his burden,
Matthew. 11.28, 29. That by looking unto Jesus, this by running with patience the
race that is set before us, Heb. 12.1, 2. That by eating his flesh, and
drinking his blood, Joh. 6.54, 56. this by growing up in him, Ephesians. 2.21. that
as the principle of our filiation, Gal. 3.26. and this as our imitation of God,
as dear Children, Ephesians. 6.2. And is there no difference betwixt receiving, and
walking? coming, and taking? seeing and running? eating and drinking and
growing? Betwixt our being children, and performing the duties of Children?
Even common language, as well as Divinity teaches us to distinguish betwixt
the Creed and Ten Commandments, the credenda and agenda in Religion. Betwixt
believing and doing. Believing we ordinarily say, is one thing, and doing
another.

But is not faith in God, and Jesus Christ expressly commanded in Scripture? And
is not that properly to be called obedience which falls under an express
command no less than any other duty in Christianity? And if faith be obedience,
is not obedience then and faith all one? This is that invincible argument, that
is brought to prove faith and obedience to be one, which Scripture you see
before makes two. By this way of reasoning, repentance, and love to our
neighbor, and sobriety, and godliness, etc. are all the same, and not to be
distinguished. All duties but one duty, and all graces but one grace. All is
faith, all believing, because all commanded. Nay our very engaging, and
Covenanting to obey God in all things is also enjoined, and yet shall there be
no difference betwixt obedience, and promising to obey? betwixt a bond and
present payment? betwixt entering into Covenant, and performing Covenants?

It Is one thing for a Wife to promise, as usually they do when married, to
love, and honor and obey her Husband, and another thing actually to love, and
honor and obey him. One thing for a rebellious Subject to submit himself to
the mercy of his Prince, and engage himself by oath to be Loyal, and another
thing for him to live in all due subjection to his Laws and Government. And in
this mainly lies the difference betwixt faith and obedience. That is our
entering into Covenant with God, and this our performance of Covenant. That our
taking Christ for our Husband, and this our loving and honoring and obeying of
him, as we then engaged. That our submitting our selves to the clemency and
goodness of God, and this our living in a due observance of all the righteous
Laws and Statutes of his Kingdom. And thus indeed, faith it is the first
entrance upon, or beginning of obedience, as a point is the beginning of a
line, or unity of number, which yet no one takes to be the same but different
things, and accordingly calls them by different names. And indeed who knows not
(if they may be allowed to know any thing that differ from these men's
sentiments) that things which agree in their general notions, may yet be vastly
different, as to their particular and specific natures. Diamonds, and flints
agree in this, that they are both stones? And Stars, and clods of earth, in
this, that they are both natural bodies; And men, and beasts in this, that they
are both animals, both living creatures. And yet who will say that a Diamond is
a Flint, or a Star a clod of Earth, or Man a Beast? Are these therefore the
same because they agree as faith and obedience in their common notions? and is
there no difference betwixt them? Nay since that wherein they differ is more
considerable than that wherein they agree, therefore in naming things we take
little or no notice of their general agreement, but denominate them according
to their specific differences. We do not call Men animals, but reasonable
creatures. Nor Diamonds stones, but Dianonds. Nor Stars bodies, but Stars. And
for the same reason we do not call believing, obedience, but faith. And as
things are most properly denominated from their particular not general natures,
so also are all effects, and operations belonging to them, ever ascribed to
them under the same notion. Thus discourse and reason is appropriate to Man,
not as he is an animal, but as he is a reasonable creature. And splendour and
value to Diamonds, not as they are stones, but Diamonds; and influence to the
Stars, not as they are natural bodies, but as they are Stars. And therefore we
properly say that the Star shines, and not the body, and the Diamond sparkles
and not the stone, and Man discourses, not the living creature. And why may we
not (without canting,) by the same rules of undoubted reason, ascribe
justification to faith, not as it is obedience, which is its general nature
wherein it agrees with repentance, and justice, and love to our neighbor, etc.
but as it is properly a believing in, or acceptance of Jesus Christ which is
its specific difference wherein it is distinguished from all other duties? And
why may we not say, that fides qua fides, faith as faith, that is, as it is an
act receiving Christ, and not as it is an act of obedience, justifies? As well
as say, that homo qua homo, man as man speaks, and reasons, and not as he is an
animal? Where Is any thing of jargon, or nonsense, or mystical divinity in all
this, unless all that must now be called so that speaks not in plain English
the language of Crellius and Socinus? A Father, suppose, commands his Son to
receive a sum of money for the payment of his debt, that he may be discharged
from the suits and arrests that are against him. What is that now that properly
pays the debt, and discharges the Son? Is it his act of receiving the money
though commanded? or the money that is received? His receiving it indeed, is
necessary, as a means, and his duty, as commanded, but it is the money only, and
not his receiving for which he is discharged. So here our faith it is necessary,
and it is commanded, but yet it is not that, but the satisfaction of Jesus
Christ, for, and upon the account of which we are justified. That Is the money
by which our debt is paid, and we are discharged, but faith is our actual
receiving of it, without which it could not have been ours. In a word that is
the cause, and this the condition of a sinners justification before God. But
though faith, and obedience are not as has been shown so much the same, but
that they may be distinguished, and differently considered in the business of
justification, neither are they so strangely different, as some Men have
imagined. Since all our obedience is nothing else, but the actual making good
of our engagement, and resolution in our first believing. By faith we take
Christ, as offered in all his offices, as Prophet, Priest and King, and by
obedience we demean our selves toward him, as those that have so taken him. We
hear him in all things whatsoever he says unto us, and make his word the rule
and standard of our belief and practice, as he is our Prophet. And we go to God
by him and seek for pardon, and acceptance with God upon his account as he is
our Priest. And we fear and reverence him, and live in a due submission to his
Laws and discipline, as hei^ our King. By that we marry our selves to Christ,
and by this we love and honor and obey him as our Husband. By that as was said
before, we receive him, and by this we walk in him as we have received him. So
that all our obedience it is vertually though not actually included in our first
solemn act of believing, as all conclusions are in their principles, and all
our performances of Covenant in our voluntary subscribing and sealing to it,
and therefore it is impossible that these two however distinguished, should ever
really be separated. Faith without works, says James, is dead, Jam. 2.26: That
is in truth it is no faith, as a dead Man properly is not a Man, but a mere
carcass, and an apparent resemblance only of a Man: It Is little better than an
implicit contradiction, at the best, but an ens rationis, a mere figment, and
Chimera that is no where to be found, existing but in the wild imaginations of
some such whom the Apostle calls absurd, and unreasonable men: An impenitent
faith, and disobedient faith, an unholy and unjust faith. What a strange
conjunction would this be? Can any Man think this to be a justifying, a saving
faith? It Is true, if we do humbly and sincerely receive and give up our selves
to Jesus Christ upon Gospel terms, God does not suspend our pardon and
acceptance till our holiness be complete, and our obedience grown to its full
stature, but upon that very act acquit us from our obligation to the Old
Covenant, and admit us to an incipient right to all the privileges of the New.
As he that has before witness sealed to Indentures is thereupon immediately,
though the things therein required are not yet discharged, admitted to the
possession of the premises. And he that humbly submits himself to his Prince
upon his Proclamation of grace and pardon, is at the same time pardoned, and
taken under the protection of his government, though he have not yet
demonstrated his loyalty by any signal acts of service to him. But then as
sinners are thus justified, upon their first solemn and serious believing in
Jesus Christ, (or else it will be hard to say when it is done) so they must, and
if sincere in the first act, they will (otherwise in truth they never did
believe, and consequently never were justified) they must I say, and will
continue in all due obedience to him, according a they then promised, and
resolved, or else their first act stands only for a cipher, and signifies
nothing in Gods account, nor in man's neither, could he as God understand our
hearts. There is no pardon sealed, nor right to life conferred, nor the least
spiritual advantage to be expected from the Covenant of Grace, unless our faith
be such, as is justified by obedience. As he that seals to any Covenant, must
also pay his rent, or he cannot expect ^o be continued in possession and ^reap
the profits of it. And he that is pardoned upon submission, must also live in a
dutiful subjection to his Prince, or otherwise h^ cannot hope to enjoy the
benefit of his pardon. By the former, I mean our believing, and submission to
Jesus Christ, we are, as I have already said, justified and obtain an initial
right to eternal life: And by the latter, i. e. our holiness and obedience, our
right is continued and completed. But fourthly,

4. It may contribute somewhat to our better understanding the consistence of
free Grace with the conditionality of the Covenant, and the necessity of our
personal performance of the conditions of it, in order to our eternal
Salvation, a little to consider the nature of Salvation and happiness, and how
nearly holiness and obedience are allied to it. Happiness! Salvation! they are
pleasing words. As light to the eye; music to the ear. Every one is delighted
with the sound of them. How beautiful are the feet of them that bring these
glad tidings? But alas! how few are there of those that desire it, that rightly
understand what it is? Ask them what they mean by being happy, and they will
tell you* Oh! to be freed from sin, they mean no the sinfulness, but the
punishment of sin, the curse of the Law, and the wrath that is t^ come. And to
have all tears wiped from their eyes, and burdens taken from their shoulders,
and to rest for ever from their labors. To be delivered from Hell, and ete^nal
burnings, and to live in the midst of joy and delights in another world. In a
word, not to be everlastingly miserable, but to be at ease for ever without
care, and trouble, and anxiety. But what is there in all this more than in
Mahomet's Paradise, or the Poets Elyzium? If freedom from misery were properly
happiness, then non-entities might be happy, and the readiest way to make us
so, would be ^o annihilate us, and turn us into our first nothing. For that
which is not, is at ease, and cannot be miserable. And if mere sensitive
pleasures and delights were sufficient to create beatitudes, then the brute
creatures might be numbered amongst the blessed, and the most effectual means to
make Man so, were to change his nature, and turn him into a beast, since they
are observed to have the quickest sense, and so most capable of enjoying the
pleasures of it. And yet this is all, that the generality of the world
understand by happiness, and indeed all that they desire. And according to
these false conceptions of happiness are also their notions of free Grace
framed, and modelled. To be created over again in Christ unto good works, and
be pure in heart, and holy in all manner of conversation: To live the life of
God, and be righteous, as he is righteous, and be followers of him as dear
children, etc. These things are seldom instanced in, or taken notice of, either
as any, much less as the most essential parts of our happiness, or any fruit
and evidence of free Grace. But when they would set forth this arraied in her
richest robes of glory, and greatest Majesty, they instance in God pardoning
sinners, and blotting out their iniquities, and justifying the ungodly, and
casting their sins into the bottom of the Sea, and scattering them as a thick
cloud, and redeeming them from the curse, and freeing them from Hell and
condemnation, etc. This, they cry, is Grace, and wonderful Grace to sinners.
And so indeed it is, and wonderful beyond what it is possible for any finite
creature to express, or comprehend. And therefore my design is not to shadow,
or eclipse any part of that unspeakable glory, that arises hence to the free
Grace of God. But yet, let me add, is there no free Grace but pardoning and
justifying Grace to be admired? And may not men without offense be minded of
it, and be desired to consider it? Tell me what greater favor and kindness
(and that is properly Grace as has been shown) can God possibly manifest to
any creature, than to make it eternally happy? And what greater happiness can
he possibly bestow upon him, than to make him like and conformable to himself?
The true, and formal notion of happiness lies not in negatives, but positive
fruitions. Not in being freed from misery* but in the enjoyment of all possible
perfection of which a created nature is capable. And all the perfection
competible to a creature, consists formally in his conformity and assimilation
to God, the original fountain of being and perfection.

That creature that has all excellencies, and perfections, proper and
competible to its own nature, that creature is truly and formally happy. He is
so well, that he can be no better, and therefore capable of no greater
felicity. But then, since man's being and perfections are not originally from
himself, but borrowed and derived from God, as rays of light from the Sun, and
streams from the Ocean, it thence necessarily follows, that God, as Original,
is the only rule and standard by which all perfection is to be measured, and
consequently the more or less any creature is approximate, and conformed to
God, the more or less perfect. As the excellency of a Picture lying in its
exact resemblance to the face by which it is drawn, the more like thereto, still
the more excellent. And this is that which gives Man the pre-eminence above the
rest of the creatures in this visible world. They are at a far more remote
distance from him, and partake less of him; but Man is more nearly allied to
him, and admitted to a more full participation of the divine nature. The rest,
as it is commonly expressed, have only some tracks and footsteps of God, but Man
his Image. And by this resemblance of Man to God, is his greatest happiness,
both as innocent and glorified, described in Scripture, Genesis 1.26, 27. So God
created Man in his own Image, and after his own likeness. There is the
happiness of Man in his primitive state of innocence. And 1 John 3.2. It does
not yet appear what we shall be, but we know that when he shall appear we shall
be like him, for we shall see him as he is. There is the chief happiness of the
Saints now in glory. And indeed nothing less than this can be the happiness of
a reasonable creature. And to this all the duties of Christianity are so nearly
related, as that that they really become an essential part of it. For either
they are such wherein our likeness to God does formally consist; as the more
patient, and just, and merciful, and holy, and righteous we are, still the more
like to God, since he is so. Or else such wherein we express our conformity to
God, as humility, and reverence, and faith, and watchfulness, etc. which hold a
suitable correspondence to his greatness, Majesty, faithfulness, omniscience,
etc. In the former we resemble God, as the picture does the face it represents:
And by the latter, as the impression in the wax does the stamp upon the seal
that made it; as a late Author has well expressed it, in his most ingenious and
learned treatise concerning the blessedness of the righteous.

Did men therefore, as they ought, consider either what happiness is, or how
great a correspondence and affinity their present duties have to it, they would
be so far from thinking the performance of them any diminution of Gods free
Grace, as that they would rather esteem it as one of the most signal acts of
his Grace and favor, that he has provided such effectual means, and afforded
them so powerful aids and assistances, in order to the making them holy and
obedient. It Is doubtless an act of kindness and bounty to heal the wounded, and
restore eyes to the blind, and strength and beauty to the maimed and deformed,
no less than to forgive a poor Man his debt. In justification our debt's
forgiven; but in sanctification the ruins of degenerate nature are repaired,
and the Image of God restored. And which of these two, do you think, is the
greater kindness? That frees us from prison, and arrests from misery, but this
makes us truly and formally happy. But lastly,

5. Though our personal performance of the conditions of the Covenant be
asserted, as indispensably necessary to our eternal Salvation, yet not by
virtue of our own natural strength and power without the assistance of Divine
Grace. That is no where affirmed, but the contrary. What remainders of natural
strength and ability there may be left in Man, and how far they may be improved
by him with reference to his own Salvation, is not my business now to enquire
or determine. He is now it is acknowledged in a state of degeneracy, and by his
fall the several powers, and faculties of his Soul were impaired, and weakened,
though not wholly lost. But yet his obligation to duty is not thereby
rescinded, but remains entire, and therefore he is still bound as much as ever
to render love and service to his Maker. For man's inability to obey cannot
take away Gods right to command, nor his Apostasy destroy the law of his
creation. Man is still Gods creature though degenerate, and lives daily in a
necessary dependence upon him, and therefore it is impossible he should ever be
absolved from his engagement to love, and honor, and obey him, since it is
impossible for a creature to become independent. The great design therefore of
Gospel Grace is not, as some foolishly imagine, to exempt us from duty, and to
dispense with our love to God, or obedience to his Laws, but to repair our
strength, and assist our faculties, and every way to enable us to the
performance of our duty: That we may repent, and return to God, and live in all
due subjection and obedience to him as becomes creatures, Tit. 2.11, 12. For
the Grace of God that brings Salvation, has appeared to all men, teaching us
that denying all ungodliness, and worldly lusts, we should live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present world. The same Grace here that is said
to bring Salvation, the same also teaches us to deny all ungodliness, and
worldly lusts, etc. And both are alike called by the name of Grace. Grace
teaches us this lesson, and Grace also assists us both in the learning and
practice of it. For God is no hard Master, he does not gather, where he has
not strewed, nor reap, where he has not sown. Though he gives not succors to
all alike, but to some more, to others less, according to the good pleasure of
his will, yet he is wanting to none, but such as are wanting to themselves. His
promises are no less extensive, than his commands. No duty is required of us,
but God himself is engaged for our assistance in the performance of it. Must we
repent and turn to God? Acts 17.3. He then will give us repentance unto life,
Act. 5.31. Must we come to Christ, and believe in him that we may have life,
Matthew. 11.28, 29? He then will draw us, ( Joh* 6.44.) and make us willing in
the day of his power, Psalm. 110.3. Must we cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of flesh, and spirit, and perfect holiness in his fear, 2 Cor. 7.1?
He then will pour clean water upon us, and cleanse us from our iniquities,
Ezekiel. 36.25. and sanctify us throughout in Body, Soul, and Spirit, 1 These.
5.21. Must we run with patience the race that is set before us, Heb. 12.1? He
then will increase our strength, that we may run and not be weary, and walk and
not faint, Isa. 40.29, and 31. Must we work about our Salvation with fear and
trembling, Phil. 2.12? He then will work in us both to will and to do of his
good pleasure, ver. 13. Must we be steadfast and unmovable always abounding in
the work of the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58. holding fast our confidence firm to the
end, Heb. 3.6. being faithful unto death, Rev. 2.10. and not drawing back lest
his soul should have no pleasure in us, Heb. 10.38? He therefore has promised,
that he will establish us, 2 These. 3.3. and make us fruitful, Joh. 15.2. and
perfect his own good work in us until the day of the Lord Jesus, Phil. 1.6.
and keep us by his power, 1 Pet. 1. that we may not perish but have everlasting
life, Joh. 10.28. From first to last you see we are indebted to Divine Grace
for what we do. All our works if good, are begun and carried on, and perf^cted
by the assistance of the Sacred Spirit. And therefore when we have done all, we
cannot plead desert, or merit from any of our actions, but still are bound to
make Paul's humble acknowledgment, 1 Cor. 15.10. By the grace of God, I am that
I am: And not I (that labored so abundantly) but the grace of God that was
with me. Not I that repented, and believed, and became obedient, and holy, and
fruitful in every good word and work, continuing steadfast and unmovable to the
end. Not I, that did this, by virtue of my own natural abilities; no, but by
the aid and assistance of Divine Grace: not by might, nor by power from nature
and reason, but by the spirit of the Lord. And in this sense, I suppose, we are
to understand that saying of some Divines, that God stands engaged for both
parts of the Covenant. Engaged first by promise to justify, and save sinners
if they repent, and believe, etc. and next also to give repentance and faith by
assisting them thereunto, that they may be justified, and have eternal life.
And so it may be no contradiction to say, that the same thing may be both a
benefit, and a condition of the same Covenant. As he that in the same
Indentures, wherein he binds his Tenant to repairs, may also promise to furnish
him with Brick, and Mortar, and other materials for the work. Thus faith, and
repentance are here commanded in the Covenant of Grace, and so they become
conditions on our own part to be performed. But withal strength and assistance
is promised enabling us to repent, and believe, and so they become benefits on
Gods part to be given, and on ours to be received. But still it is to be
remembered, that Gods promise does not null our duty, nor his assistance
supersede our endeavors, but necessarily suppose and more strongly enforce
them. For as we can do nothing without God, so he will do nothing for us
without our selves. It Is he, says the Apostle, that works in us both to
will, and to do, of his good pleasure, in the place before mentioned, Phil.
2.13. What then? Must we therefore sit still, and do nothing? Only take our
ease and stretch our selves upon beds of Ivory, and dream our selves into
Abraham's Bosom? No, we must therefore (so the Apostle in the same place argues)
work about our own Salvation with fear and trembling. As it is still the Tenants
duty to repair the ruins of his house, though his Landlord has (and indeed
therefore the rather because he has) been so kind, as to promise sufficient
supplies for the building.

Thus much I thought necessary to add upon this argument, that I might
vindicate the conditionality of the Covenant from such exceptions, as have been
made against it, and evidence the amicable agreement there is betwixt this
doctrine and that of free Grace, and sufficiency of Christ's righteousness and
satisfaction: And would Men but be persuaded to lay aside their prejudices, and
to weigh things in an even balance: Would they as now instructed rightly state
their notions of Christ's righteousness, and free Grace according to the rules
and measures of the Gospel, and not by the imaginary, and unwarrantable
sentiments of the carnal and uncatechised world: Would they duly distinguish
betwixt the causes, and conditions of their Salvation, which are vastly
different, and ought not therefore to be confounded, that Jesus Christ may
still be owned, as the sole cause and Author of it, and faith and repentance,
etc. only as the necessary means without which it cannot be had: Would they
observe the order in which the several conditions of the Covenant are to be
applied, first faith and repentance for the obtaining of pardon, and then
holiness and obedience for the completing and continuing our right to eternal
life, according to the order in which they are dispensed to sinners: Would they
also duly inform themselves in the nature of true happiness, and what a near
alliance holiness and obedience have to it, that formally consisting in our
likeness and conformity to God, and these being that whereby we become actually
like and conformable to him: Would they in the last place to all add the
assistance that God by his holy Spirit affords us, for the performance of all
these duties he requires of us, Nothing being done in our own, but all by his
strength, and agency: Would Men I say thus distinctly weigh, and consider
things before they pass sentence upon the Doctrine herein delivered, their
objections against it would I am confident soon be answered, and their scruples
removed, and their judgments convinced, that there is nothing said, that does
in the least, either contradict, or prejudice the Doctrine of Gospel free
Grace, or derogate from the sufficiency of Christ's righteousness. Nothing that
does (as some have said) speak the language of Bellarmine, or Socinus, or any
way favor the opinions of any other who are justly censured as enemies to the
Grace of God in Christ Jesus.

It is true, the Church of Rome pretends much to good works, and cries them up,
as the Ephesians sometimes did their great Goddess Diana, and muchwhat upon the
same design. But alas! what are those works they so zealously contend for? A
little bodily exercise, and superstitious will worship. Masses, and Dirges, and
Pilgrimages, and Ave-Marys, and abstinences, and whippings, and the like. But
for that which the Apostle calls the power of godliness, and life of God, that
is little preached, and less practiced by them. And yet these works as
inconsiderable as they are, they call by the name of satisfactions, and make
them both the matter of their justification before God, and the meritorious
cause of their own Salvation.

For according to their Doctors, we are justified by works, confession,
charity, giving of alms, etc. as well as by faith in Jesus Christ, and may be
saved, yea and by I know not what redundancy of desert in our good works, help
to save others too, by our own merits. The improvement, say they, of our own
natural abilities deserves Grace ex congru^, and the improvement of Grace so
gained, merits glory ex condigno. This in short is the Doctrine of Rome in this
particular.

And as to same others who also plead for the necessity of holiness and
righteousness, though they in great measure reject the Popish works, and wholly
disclaim any merit by them, and possibly acknowledge Christ's satisfaction,
though since they speak (some of them) so darkly, and undervaluingly of it,
that may be questioned: Yet the efficacious influences of the Sacred Spirit,
for their assistance in the performance of those acts of righteousness they
plead for, are not so much acknowledged by them, the creature being thought
sufficiently instructed with power from nature and reason to repent, and
believe and obey, etc. according to the pleasure of his own will. And though
they seem much to advance the Sovereignty of God over the creature, whilst they
ascribe to God nine hundred ninety and nine degrees of power, and but one of an
hundred only to Man, yet in conclusion the matter comes to this, that this one
single degree of power in the creature may, and does at pleasure baffle and
defeat, and put to flight, and triumph over those 999. which are in God* i. e.
The creatures weakness is stronger than Gods power. In short, if the question
be asked them, who made thee to differ? The answer will be, Ego meipsum.

But is there any thing said in this whole discourse that lays any foundation
for these opinions, or that does so much as add one stone to the building?

Are our own works any where affirmed to be either the matter of our
justification, or the meritorious cause of eternal life? Or that our duties are
performed by our own natural strength without the effectual assistance of the
Spirit of God? Where is nature and reason advanced above Grace, or our own
righteousness set up to justle Christ from his Throne, and rob him of his
Crown? Is it not more than once affirmed and proved that holiness and obedience
are not the causes, but conditions only of our Salvation? And that it is
impossible for any creature, much less one that is degenerate, to merit any
thing at the hands of God? And that we are justified, not by works, not by our
holiness and obedience, which follow justification, as the payment of the rent
does sealing to the Indentures) but by faith in Jesus Christ; receiving him in
all his offices? And that the several duties of the Covenant are performed not
by the sole power of nature, but by strength received from the Spirit of God,
and by the daily supplies of his Grace? So that we are doubly indebted to God,
first to his command, to obey that, and then to his Grace for enabling us to
obey. And will any one that is not profoundly ignorant call ^his by the name of
Popery, and Pelagianism? or have so much confidence, as to ^ensure, and condemn
it as a Doctrine in^onsistent with the Grace of the Gospel, and that
righteousness that is by Christ? Is not ^his, in Judes language, to speak evil
of those things, which they know not? And ^o proclaim themselves unskilled in
the words ^f righteousness, and that Doctrine which is according to Godliness?

But suppose the agreement betwixt faith and works, Christ's righteousness and
our ^wn, free Grace and the necessity of obedi^nce, in the business of
Salvation, could not ^fficiently be evidenced to our present reason, must they
therefore be exploded, as ab^^rdities, and untruths, and things absolute^^
irreconcilable? We must then throw a^ay not only some of the greatest
mysteries (...) our Religion, but many of the most evi^^nt phenomena, and
appearances in Philosophy. The influences of the Lodestone* the ebbing and
flowing of the Sea, etc. mus^ be rejected as fables, and our senses no more be
credited in what they see, since the manner how these things are done is not
yet sufficiently understood, and explained. Things themselves, we know, are
evident, but the modes and manners of things are almost every where latent and
unaccountable. Tha^ therefore which we have to do in all matter^ of Divine
faith and practice is only this duly to inform, and satisfy our selves, wha^
God has certainly revealed and made know^ to us, as his mind and will
concerning (...) which being done, and our minds being satisfied, that God has
said it* and that (...) is the plain meaning of his words, we ar^ then without
any further debate to believe and do, according to his word, though possibly at
present we cannot so well discove^ that mutual accord and agreement which there
is betwixt those several truths reveale^ by him. The positive and plain
conclusion of Scripture are humbly to be believed, thoug^ they cannot be
reconciled by us. For this suppose will easily be granted by all, as
unquestionable. That the will of God, if w^ certainly know it to be his will,
is the u^doubted rule, and standard both of faith an^ practice. We must believe
what it is certai^ he has revealed. And we must do, wha^ it is certain he has
commanded. For the will of God is not to be disputed but obeyed. And does not
the Apostle expressly tell us that this is the will of God, even our
sanctification? 2 These. 4.3.

He that has said, he will blot out our transgressions for his own sake, and
remember ^ur sins no more, Isa. 43.25. he has also ^^id, that we must repent,
and be converted, that our sins may be blotted out, when the days of ^efreshing
shall come from the presence of the lord, Acts 3.19. He that has said, that ^e
are justified freely by his grace, through the ^edemption that is in Christ,
Romans 3.24. he ^ath also said, we are justified by faith, ver. ^8. and that we
must believe, that we may ^e justified, Gal. 2.16. He that says, we ^^e made
the righteousness of God in Christ, ^ho was made sin for us, 2 Cor. 5.21. he
also ^^ith, that except our righteousness (speaking ^ere expressly of moral, and
personal righte^usness) exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees,
we shall in no case enter into the ^ingdom of God, Matthew. 5.20. And he that
^ith, we are saved by grace, and not of our ^^^ves, Ephesians. 2.8. and according to
his mercy, ^^d not by works of righteousness, which we ^^ve done, Tit. 3.5. he
also says, that we ^ust work out our own salvation with fear, and ^^mbling,
Phil. 2.12. and that without ho^^ess, we shall not be saved, Heb. 12.14. Is not
all this plain, and easy to him that will but understand? God has said it.
It Is his will, expressed in terms that we must repent, and believe, and be
righteous, and work about our own Salvation, and follow after holiness, that we
may not perish but have everlasting life. Who then shall shall dare to argue
and dispute against it? At least here is no ground, you see, for any humble and
sober mind that is but sincerely willing to be governed by the Divine will, so
to do, but rather seriously to apply himself to the performance of these
duties, that God has so expressly injoined, and made necessary to our Salvation.

The great reason therefore why men profess themselves so much offended with
this Doctrine it is not because it is, or because they in truth believe it to be
an enemy to the Cross and Grace of Christ, but rather because it is an enemy to
their lusts, and passions and presumptuous neglects of God. An enemy to their
present ease and pleasure and worldly satisfactions, the lusts of the flesh,
the lusts of the eye and the pride of life: An enemy to their false and carnal
hopes, and empty professions of Christianity. Therefore it is, that they thus
condemn this Doctrine, because otherwise they cannot justify their own faith
and practice that are so manifestly condemned by it. They must have a cheap
Religion: Faith without works, pardon without the trouble of repentance, an
Heaven without holiness, and a free Grace to save them without obedience, or
else they are miserable and undone to eternity.

But be not deceived, says the Apostle, God is not mocked: for whatsoever a
man sows, that shall be also reap. For he that sows to his flesh, shall of
the flesh reap corruption; but he that sows to the spirit, shall of the
spirit reap life everlasting, Gal. 6.7, 8. For if ye live after the flesh ye
shall die, but if ye through the spirit, do mortify the deeds of the body ye
shall live, Romans 8.13. For God will render to every man according to his deeds:
To them, who by patient continuance in well doing, seek for glory, and honor,
and immortality, eternal life: But unto them that are contentious, and do not
obey the truth; but obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath, tribulation
and anguish, upon every soul of man that does evil, of the Jew first, and also
of the Gentile, But glory, honor and peace to every man that works good, to
the Jew first and also to the Gentile; for there is no respect of persons with
God, Romans 2.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Be ye therefore steadfast and unmovable,
always abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much as ye know that your
labor shall not be in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58.

FINIS.

