Certain LETTERS Written to several PERSONS.

Anno Dom. 1654.

SIR,
THe sad and desperate condition his Majestyes sacred person is in, has filled
me with much greater anxiety and disquietness, then has been usual to me
since these unhappy times: And it is not often that I think of any thing else,
but what may or ought to be done in order to the preservation of it, as a
Christian, as a Subject: For I believe both duties are inseparably conjoined in
this occasion. The inquisition after this led me into the consideration of Gods
dispensation of times and seasons: and that as those are not to be neglected,
wherein there is freedom for our active-duty; so neither these, wherein there
is appearance of little else remaining, save only for others to be encouraged
and revived by the passive. (And truly I doubt not but the divine goodness will
act for our good ends, by our Christian readiness for sufferings.) And as it is
thus with times, so also it is with persons: some are rather, or more decently
qualifyed for this then that, at least to give example and authority to it.

These cogitations drew from me the considerations herein enclosed; which I
have addressed to -- because I assure my self much of your gentleness. I have
already communicated them to a very learned, reverend and pious -- but I will
not adventure much further in it, until I have also your sense of the
expediency of the thing. For neither to the reputation of the matter, until it
be maturely considered of, nor to any person, would I be cause of
inconvenience. And indeed, if it be so well encouraged by your self, and such
others of like reputation, as it is by Him, it will become me afterward to be
silent (as I conceive,) for I have a better Heart then a Head for this
business. I profess I have a jealous eye upon the Scots and Presbyterians;
who, I doubt not, would make malicious advantages upon any colorable defect of
our Clergy. I shall add this, that those of my profession are not idle, but
are confident and vigilant. And truly it were a vile shame for us of all
qualifications, if this excellent Prince should be lost, and we not able to
excuse our selves, that no means was left unattempted for his preservation;
Whom I beseech God to comfort and defend. To whose protection I also leave you,
etc.

Feb. 11. 1647.
POSTSCRIPT.
I Think it gives weight and encouragement to this proceeding, both his
Majesty's late excellent Declaration to his Subjects; as also the Resolution of
the Houses to exhibit theirs to the people. I heartily wish this were timely
fitted for this conjuncture.

The Considerations enclosed.
THe straight durance his Majestyes sacred person is held under, the late
Declaration of the Army, (with which the Commons have concurred,) to act
without and against the King, puts it past all scruple, that the flagitious and
execrable resolution of these men has engaged them past retiring; and (which
is yet worse) that they cannot but proceed to the deepest and utmost villanyes
and impietyes.

There is not less question of this, then of what ought to succeed it; which
is, that their impudence must be encountered with a Christian courage, zeal, and
resolution superior to it: otherwise it is a doubt not to be slighted, that
these men, and too many others seduced by them, will have a seeming cause to
believe themselves, that Theological truths are more controversiall, then
those Astronomicall or Astrologicall, wherein lines and Images are only
fictioned, to make Schemes for Sciences and Discourse. I am not altogether free
of this scruple, though it looks so stupendiously irreligious.

Will not the whole frame of Christian verity be shaken (if not subverted,) in
this Nation, when this so great a truth in it shall not be vigorously averred;
That an established Magistracy is Gods immediate Minister; and ought not,
cannot, with Christian profession, be deposed by those that owe obedience and
allegiance to it? I am fully persuaded that it is so necessary a truth, that
were it tied to the stake, and the flames about it, even there ought we to
offer our selves to vindicate it, and contend for it; or else adieu
Christian-Protestant profession.

The seed of the Church was Suffering: And shall it be lost for want of
suffering, after it is grown to such a perfection? The ancient Patterns must be
imitated, if we expect the same benediction should preserve to us, what was so
piously and gloriously planted by them. I think I mistake not my measure, this
error amongst men lies not in the brain but in the heart: therefore
Instructions want not, but strenuous Examples of Christian zeal; which (I
persuade my self) will most daunt them. For those believe, what they want of us
in truth, they supply in pertinacity.

All this considered, is it not now seasonable (I believe it was not so till
now; but because the reasons are so obvious I will not trouble you with them)
for a considerable number of our learned, gravest, and most pious Divines
(though they exceed not the number of 20 they will be enough) in a grave and
sober manner (for those tart reprehensions, of which every day there wants not
store, suite not the weight of this business, being rather movings of spleen
then sanctity) to present unto the Houses, That a Government established is
Gods immediate Minister, and That an attempt to depose it is an high impiety
against God, and his known truth plainly and expressly taught us in the holy
Scriptures; That his Majesty is indubitably Gods Vicegerent over us, and that
this allegiance we owe unto Him we have attested by the oaths of Supremacy and
Allegiance; That not any of his Subjects can stretch forth their hands against
Him and be guiltless; That they demand (according to the practice of the
holiest Christians in all ages) a time and place to prove this great truth they
now assert, by evidence out of the Scripture; and if this be not allowed them,
then to declare, they refuse not to seal it by Martyrdom?

I do very readily acknowledge that the qualifications for so great an
engagement ought to be weighty and serious; and that to rush into Martyrdom,
(as long as God has left us any justifiable humane means) may want as much of
true Christian piety, as it may seem of prudence. God has engaged our nature
to many and several duties and functions; and each has its several laws and
rules proper, whereby they are so set on work, that each may attain their due
and proper ends: nor is the greatest means always best, when there are others,
though less, yet fitter. But if I mistake not, ventum est usque ad Triarios:
we must bring up the Reserve. God has in his just judgments (upon our Estates
and Persons) permitted all our temporal endeavors to be dissipated and
frustrated; we may say, Our Van and our Battle are routed: but if the courage
of this our reserve fails us not, I hope we shall rally our selves again about
it, and by the divine goodness have a fair day of it. This will awaken all,
encourage the half-spirited, corroborate all honest and sincere minds. Me
thinks I have reason too on my side, when I believe it will easily fall into
this sequence. All the Clergy of England (with very little exception) will
second so Christian an example. Besides most entire familyes will be engaged;
and scarce will there be one but will have a share in it. For to this point the
Presbyterians will frankly concur: diverse reputed Independents (of whom I
know some much valued by themselves) will be joined unto you: and even in the
Army the Impression of it will be notable. Nor can their present power prevent
the expression of so universal a sense, so piously incited, and so well
warranted.

Whereby will appear their paucity. Upon good advertisement I am assured, that
they believe they have the Hearts of the greater number of the people, so much
has their prosperity dazzled them: But of nothing am I more certain, then that
they have not the fourtieth man. And an expedient like this, to let both the
people and them into a view one of another, I know not. And yet also would this
be further prosecuted: This attestation would be sent into Scotland, and all
the Protestant Churches and States of Europe (for with the others we
communicate not.) And for it I know an expedient proper and of reputation.

If this progress of it should fail, though improbably, which has such a
politic seemingness in it; yet in my opinion, it does not at all vitiate the
pious part of it: the means and end being throughout truly Christian. I say, if
it should fail, yet I see not that any thing we can do or suffer, can more then
answer the importunity of the occasion, and the necessity that lies upon us as
Christians to do the utmost of our duty. How long, and with how many arts and
subtletyes have these men abused and deluded the people with the pretensions of
their candid intentions, only to preserve the Laws of the Nation and the
Protestant Profession? But now that they are possessed of so great power, with
what impudence do they confound those, and with what impiety do they subvert
this? But since in this case both those do so well accord, were it not best to
set this last-named in the front, and to draw up the Civil affair to it; and
though we contend for both, yet to fight under the banner of this, in some such
manner as I have stated it, and by your wisdom will be disposed into the best
Order?

I shall add such a consideration more, that if it stood singly, yet in my
opinion would justify and quit the cost of any endeavor, or indurance. That
is, the unparalleled sufferings of this great Prince; to which I know nothing
superior, but his incomparable virtues. Believe me, multitudes of men are
mistaken, if in the point of his temporal affairs, he had not been in a much
better condition, (though I confess not in a good one,) had he timely relaxed
much of his constancy and sincerity toward the Rights, preeminencies and
patrimony of the Church. Neither is our obligation but very great to Him; his
sufferings being for our Laws; so unquestionably is our prosperity mixed with
his dignity. Now shall this great Personage suffer imprisonment, deprivation of
Majesty, absence of all worldly comforts, and minutely hazards of life, for his
magnanimous stedfastness to your and our advantages; and we not struggle for
Him with our utmost endeavors? Life were inseparable from much infamy with
such ingratitude. And truly in humane reason (the utmost employment whereof God
(I doubt not) expects at our hands) I know no guard for his life, but by some
means or other to make it manifest how dear he is to his people, and their
readiness to testify how inseparably united Gods truth is with the cause of his
Majesty. This only next under God must awe them, preserve Him.

I cannot refuse to believe that this cause, as to the Crown, will rise again:
because I see not a bottom or foundation in humane reason for this
surreptitious power to establish it self in the order it seems now to point at.
Though I do also very fully confess, that great mischiefs are easily under
their power. But if these only were prevented, amongst which the safety of this
sacred Person is of highest importance, we had no cause to repent of such pious
endeavors. And should the cause of the Crown (with which Gods truth is so
firmly combined) resuscitate without such Christian aides, little were it to
the honor of the present clergy and those that now serve at the Altar: and if
redemption come singly some other way, their share could be little looked after
(of which truly none is more passionately tender then my self) nor were the
Protestant Profession well vindicated: which (I doubt not to say) has received
a deep wound (but I hope not mortal) by the unchristian proceedings of these
vile and detestable men amongst us.

This I have offered to your candor, prudence and piety, which truly I hold in
great reverence; otherwise I would not thus have exposed my self to the censure
of it. The weakness of the advice, at least the unskilful digest of it, I
shall readily acknowledge; but the sincerity and zeal of my heart for the cause
to which it is directed, I shall never be ashamed of.

But after all this I shall make this conclusion; and I pray believe I am
serious and sincere in it. Let me not be mistaken, that I should seem to
reprove a slackness in those whom I think proper to take up this matter of
themselves. Indeed I am not at all guilty of it. I doubt not but great numbers
have been long since ready for this encounter; and perhaps disposing themselves
to it, in a much better manner, then I have proposed. I have only offered my
opinion. Receive it I pray, as it is, I may affirm, in the weakest part of it
not wanting some measure of a pious jealousy (as a Son of this Church) for this
great verity taught and professed in it, and as a transport of that duty and
care I have for the safety of this Gracious Prince, my Master. To which I shall
add, that I have had too much experience in this world to be ignorant of this
frequent truth in affairs; That in good men there is always a modesty
accompanying them, that oftentimes they begin overlate; And it is almost proper
to them neither to machinate, nor to be overhasty to encounter wicked designs.
But, if I err not, this is that point and article of time, wherein your Order
are to manifest their full persuasion of this verity in Christian Religion;
vindicate it as it is professed by the Church of England; answer the kindness and
stedfastness of the King to the Clergy; protect that Life which was our
Protection, and is in such imminent hazard for it: By all which (through Gods
blessing) you may lay a foundation of reviving both in Church and State, that
which now looks so cadaverously.

MY LORD,
IT joy's me not a little, that in the late refusal of the Lords concurrence
with the Commons House concerning the trial of his Majesty, you were there,
and had an eminent share in it. The blood of our Familyes being mixed, it is a
grief to me, I could not bear a part with you in so virtuous and commendable an
action; yet a large part of contentment in it cannot be denied me.

You are (unquestionably) on firm ground. If you stir an inch from it, you
fall. If you keep your station confidently, magnanimously, you are safe,
undoubtedly safest; if coldly and with trepidation, you are ruined, lost. Are
the dangers great? the occasion is much greater: and the whole affair is
therefore great, because greatned by hazards of the highest nature to the
public, to your particular. I have bought experience at a dear rate: but into
the bargain I have no very imperfect knowledge of these men. Let them but meet
a well-grounded and justifyable zeal, greater then their misguided fury, you
shall render them recollected: and you have begun a conquest upon them, when
they perceive an engaged resolution. Let them but see there is a generosity and
incredible courage prepared to stem the torrent of their fury, they must,
they will yield way to it.

The case of the whole Kingdom has long been a sad and a heavy one; but now
at length it is a plain one too. Though your Lordships seem at present to
appear most upon the stage, the Eclipse of the King has very sensibly obscured
the luster and brightness of the Gentry also: And therefore it may be the
easylier believed, that although the King at present has very little
attendance, and solemnity about his Person, his Interrment must be accompanied
with the considerablest part of the Nobility and Gentry, and with the
demolition of Kingship; and the mutation of Monarchy in this Commonweal,
together with that of Nobility and Gentility, will be attended with that of the
civil and sober distinction of all degrees.

It is not uneasy to be discerned (as elated as these men are with their
Victoryes) that yet there is a kind of hesitation, and stop in their carriere.
For now the time being come that they are to consider how they shall retain and
rule what they seem to have gained, they begin to perceive that there is a wide
difference between making a conquest over their fellow-citizens (of which their
own unhappy differences will lay claim to the greatest share) and governing
them contrary to their own appetites by so small a part of themselves: And that
means are easilyer found and readyer at hand to discompose and disorder a
State, then such as shall compose and rule it, especially when so differing to
long-ingraffed customs and the inclinations of the people. Attack them then in
this musing mood, though they do use an artificial confidence that they act
the sense of the people. It Is true, they are in some present awe of their
power, or rather in a kind of present amazement at their boldness: An expedient
must be used for the people to resume courage, and to declare their
inclinations. I need scarce name who are the fittest to contrive the way, and
give the onset. It can be none but your Lordships; none will begin before you,
and there is none but will follow you. Make then a Declaration (by a competent
number of you that are readyest at hand (for some have must be used considering
the Kings danger) the rest will speedily follow you) of your horror and
detestation to such a proceeding against your anointed King and lawful
Sovereign, (your Lordships will best order it:) Invite all the Clergy, all the
Professors of the Law to make their several subscriptions under their
several qualifications. Those in London are ready at hand, and will speedily
follow you. Then the Countyes and Cities will undoubtedly hasten their
testimonies. This occasion is so large, it incloses, comprehends all opinions:
whatsoever ownes humanity, will be joined to you. The paucity of these
prodigious Regicides, Parricides, will quickly appear as Monsters not contained
within the terms and limits of humane nature. Nor can the power and vigilance
of the Army hinder the progress of this: or if they attempt it, they do
half-work, it destroys their pretensions and will irritate the people to a
revenge. Send such a Declaration to the General and the Council of War. Let
them see there is a noble Confidence and resolution that will back it and not
be refused. Demand a stop of the proceedings, until the people have delivered
their suffrages by their subscriptions. They will own you as regardfull of them
for preserving them from the imputation of so high a guilt of so unspeakable a
crime, as these would impose upon them.

This proceeding (I acknowledge) is not ordinary, not exampled: but the
occasion is altogether new, and so unimaginable, That (all the circumstances
weighed) all historyes are silent, that the like thing ever entered into the
heart of man, as this intended enterprise of these men of the Army: That a King
and a free Monarch, the Protector of our municipall Laws, should, contrary to
all Laws, to our own Laws, but yet with the impudent semblance of a packed
Jury, be submitted unto a trial for his Life. To encounter this horrid novelty
a way altogether new must be excogitated, and seconded with a courage and
confidence above ordinary. Why may not your Lordships find it convenient to
remonstrate to all Kings, Princes, States, Potentates and Nobility your
disclaimure of so foul a matter; and desire their assistance, if it may be
timely had, for the preservation of his sacred Majesty's Life? For if that were
but in a reasonable security, you need not doubt but that the Kingdom has
more then means enough to strugle for it self and recover its ancient Laws and
Government from such a vertiginous and giddy generation; who have the impudence
to derive a title and authority for their proceedings from visions and
revelations. Give but the people an honorable example they will follow you,
and vindicate both you and themselves from being considered as such a silly
generation, that they should suffer themselves, to be couzend out of their
good, known, and established Laws; and in the place of them, to be imposed
upon by imaginations and Dreams.

I despair not of Gods wonderful providence over his sacred Majesty's Person
and Life: but that suspends not our endeavors. He expects we should work with
Him by those humane means he has left us. It grieves me, I can do nothing else
but rub my fingers upon paper: an employment that fits not my Genius. Per
force I must do it, or nothing. And because I would not be guilty of leaving
any thing undone that I can do, I have applied my self to it, and directed it
to your Lordship. To whom I wish that all the advantages that ever happened to
any noble endeavor may succeed, and rest.

Yours, etc.
Tower. Jan. 9. 1648.
SIR,
THe conjectures of men are strangely various (yea of the same persons)
concerning the safety or danger of the King, my Master: Some times their hopes,
other times their fears prevail most. I should be much ashamed if I were the
lest guilty of so universal an inquietude, in so justifiable an occasion, and
arising from so good a ground, as a kindness and reverence they owe to their
lawful Prince. I frankely give you leave to think (nor do I value the
inconvenience it could draw a long with it,) that there is not that honest
expedient in the world to serve Him by, that I would not hazard my self in, to
employ for Him: nor do I know what earthly felicity it is, could be so welcome
to me, as to advance a step, beyond any other, in my duty toward Him. But my
present condition refuses me the ability of any thing else, but that of
invocating the favor of God for Him; and making my addresses to you, whom I
take to be the figure that gives the denomination to the sequence of a great
many ciphers that follow you: And therefore I do the rather believe that a
person, that signifyes so much, will the better apprehend what weight and
signification Reason and Religion have in all humane and Christian actions; and
that these at last will make a Conquest upon all those, that act without their
Commission.

I can hardly persuade my self into (I think) the too common opinion, that the
extraordinary success and felicity that has constantly followed your attempts
(who as the saying is, seem to have hired fortune to serve you at day-wages)
has dazzled that light of understanding that formerly was usual to you. You
cannot forget the advantages on the House's part, and the Infirmityes and wants
on the Kings part at the beginning of the war; and that the complication of
many favorable accidents on the part of your affairs will challenge a share in
the success; yet is there a large room too left for your merit in Martial
conduct; and you have cause enough to value your self upon a better foundation
then the event of Battles, and successes in war. Proverbiall wisdom is not
the worse, because easilyest learnt; It seldom happens that the same man is
Happy and Wise together. And if that lesson also be good, That Affliction makes
men understand, it is the Academy in which I have been strictly disciplined for
7 years; so that I must either be an egregious Dunce, or no ill Counselor for
you; there being a Person scarce to be found, that lies under so dangerous a
temptation, of seeming prosperity, and therefore fittest to be advised and
councelled to sobriety and wisdom. Of this I do assure you I do so little
repine at your prosperity, and easy opportunityes of fixing your self securely
in it, that if you do as much justify your love to the tranquillity of the
Nation by a discreet uniting the King and his people, as you have been
isntrumental in their long separation. I shall prize your prudence, courage,
industry, and sobriety, at as high an estimate, as the sufficientest wit can
deliver it in language.

I doubt not, but both of us are easily agreed in this point, That success
legitimats not a quarrel, nor the power which supports it; neither are the
Instruments of the calamity of a Nation thereby justified. We cannot but
remember and observe, that it is no more then the filthyest and imperfectest
creatures have heretofore effected; which have driven people out of their
countries; made desert, Islands extremely fertile. Have not frogs and Locusts
desolated Empyres? and other vermin ruined great Cittyes, and large
Territoryes? By these means God magnifyes his own power and Justice: the
Instruments remain but what they were, their nature and quality not changed.
But in the acts of Gods Grace and favor to those who have been isntrumental
in destructive practices, there is a mutation of qualityes; an ejection of
those vicious, and an infusion of contrary graces; and those affects and
appetites, which are necessary and connaturall, but misguided, are by his
goodness guided to good ends. And thus was Saul from a furious persecutor
transformed to a zealous Professor; from a destroyer of the Church to a
Master-builder-up of it. No doubt but God in both had his ends by and upon S.
Paul: and from my soul I wish it, that your case may have a similitude with
his; that of him in the Spiritual affair, (which was the function to which he
was separated) you may be a resemblance in the temporal; and from a destroyer
(by Gods goodness) rendered a restorer. This in passage to those other
considerations I intended to you.

That which weighs most, and lies heaviest upon men's hearts is, the fear of
the Kings Person; that the whole Kingdom may lie under the imputation of the
guilt of violence offered to it; and that a mutation of the form of Government
shall succeed it. If this be the end aimed at, then my present endeavor is to
demonstrate to you, how humanely impossible it is to attain unto it. First
there is no example (the necessary circumstances observed) that encourages
such an endeavor. For examine all the Stories of all States, and you will not
find so much as one instance (I pray observe how I propose it) that ever any
people within the fifth degree (I might double the proportion) as we of England
are, or in the same degree so spacious a territory, were ever transformed from
a Monarchy, to an Aristocracy, or Democracy. Some Cittyes and petty
Principalityes have sometimes suffered a change to those Forms; and from thence
have arrived (yet not without desperate, intestine seditions and vexations) to
a great Puissance: The people growing up and increasing with the widening of
the State, the Governing by multitudinous Councels through constant habit and
practice has not always ill succeeded. But to attempt to introduce such a
form (which is so vitrious and brittle, and so easily carried into distemper,
tumult and multitude being scarce separable) upon such a huge mass of people,
as we of this Nation are, and altogether unexpect and undesirous of it, the
matter it self in reason will be found manifestly repugnant to, and not
susceptible of, such forms; nor is there a pattern to be found, to give any
light of direction for the managing of such a design. Reasons may be seduced
from the accidents happening this Parliament, which well weighed and pondered
will afford matter more then enough to clear this question. Som-thing like an
example may be produced (though rarely too) that large Monarchies have been
cantonized. But that (I think) few have any sealousy is intended.

The next considerable is, That the change from the ancient and
long-established rule of Governing will demolish all the received rules of
property. And if that inconvenience be, with difficulty provided for; yet the
people will not expect other, but that with new Lords they must have new Laws:
And more then probable it is that the people will be shaken into such an
apprehension of it, that they may fall upon the Heads of the enterprisers. We
frequently see that people are hardly reclaimed from customs barbarous and
unreasonable; how much less can our Nation (the best civilized the world has
known) be withdrawn from the love of Laws, so prudently constituted, and under
which they have so long continued, that the very desires of the people are
assimilated into the nature of their Laws. The people and the Laws will
always be alike. Are their Laws Monarchical, so will be the affections of
the people? Custom is a second nature, and in many things goes beyond it.

Upon what principle, upon what authority must such a proceeding be founded? It
can be no other but, that the people have the right and power to depose an
established Government, erect a new form arraigne the supreme Magistrate, and
execute Him. Herein is all History silent; and it will not only be disclaimed
by all those you call Cavaliers and Presbyterians, but also by a considerable
number of Independents: the remainder then will amount to a slender body of
people. So that whereas the pretense is, that the sense of the people is acted,
nothing will prove to be a grosser mistake. But this embroilment in the State,
especially upon this principle, will make all Kings parties to the quarrel:
Yea all States that administer Aristocratically, will be thoroughly engaged to
defend their right of ruling. So that there is little question but that the
greatest calamity that can befall a Nation will inevitably be drawn upon us,
that is, a foreign invasion. And Trade (which nature seems to have designed our
Nation most properly for) will be embarred by all Kings and those States. Nor
can it be expected that permission will be given to those of our Nation to
Trafick, who derive themselves from a State, from whence they shall bring the
contagion of so destructive a maxim to those rules of governing, where they
expect commerce. Yea even popular States will abhor so prodigious a principle
and proceeding; they having been urged by necessity to use a supreme
Magistrate, though for time limited, yet exempt from question and trial:
whereof the ancient State of Rome gives us frequent Examples. No man sure is so
mad as to search our Chronicles for a president of this nature.

The consideration of Scotland will have a large share in this affair: for the
Regal Rule can receive no diminution, much less alteration here, but that it
must make a notable impression on that State; and can have no other event but a
disunion of the Nations; the union of which has ever been so much considered
and vehemently desired by all our prudentest Princes, and by the most fortunate
Martialists of them, (with so much fruitless loss of blood) often attempted,
yet afterward by Gods providence so happily effected, and in a most peaceable
manner, to the universal contentment of all sorts in both Nations. It Is not
possible there can be an union of Nations, where there is a dissimilitude in
the nature and form of Government; for they will perpetually strive one with
another. Nor can a violence upon the person of the King but prepare a way to
let Scotland into a quarrel undeniably just, and unavoidably necessary, for
the loss of their Liege Lord and lawful Sovereign, and unconsulted with. To
this consideration of Scotland I Will join that of Ireland. It Is apparent that
the Army will have more then their hands full (if Scotland slept) with the
vexations and difficultyes that will arise here at home. For of the Commons
house (which you call) the representative of the people, an eighth part remains
not, with any countenance for the Army; nor those neither does the awe of the
Army retain united to one sense: Take also into the reckoning those who have
been expelled the House for adhering to the King in this war, which at least
will be four or five parts more: the remaining part of the Lords have
disclaimed to have any share in such proceeding. So that by this Index of the
Nation you may see the Spirit of the whole body of it, the Nobility, Gentry,
all persons of distinction, and all of any competent subsistence: and I am
persuaded, (besides the unsuccessfull trial that has been made of some
persons practiced and learned in the Laws,) even those of your late selected
Jury or Judges for the Kings trial, will fail the promoters of it. Indeed all
things refuse them; and doubtless so will you too: when calmly and
recollectedly you shall cast your eye upon so horrible a spectacle, you cannot
let it long rest there. We then thus turmoil'd and disquieted, Ireland will be
left to it self; or rather worse, a prey to a foreign Nation: a large Kingdom,
the fertilest soil of the Northern parts of Europe, happy beyond England for
number and convenience of Ports and Havens: so that inevitably with it the
destruction of the Empire of this Nation over the Seas, and the cessation of
trade must ensue; and after it, unspeakable misery and poverty to our Nation,
and eternal infamy to the causers of it.

Very considerable also is the fashion and shape of the proceeding, which (they
say) is intended against his Majesty; so ugly, monstrous, and deformed, that
when it appears upon the stage to act, the horror of it will irritate the
whole Nation to revenge. What? (for it is not otherwise apprehended) that a
Council of War of that Army, that profess to act under and by the authority
of the two Houses, should impose Rules to judge by, and Judges for those rules
too, upon those whom they have professed to be their Legislators; and that for
the trial (by their own acknowledgement) of the dignifyedst Person of the
Kingdom; therefore not more then any other submittable to an arbitrary power
and extra-judiciall proceeding. Who is it that after this can expect security
of life, or quiet possession of any thing he has? It is said (but who almost
can believe it?) that a title is derived from Revelation and inspiration: If it
were but talk, it were but ridiculous, and would be thought so simple, that it
would not be condemned as guilty of malice; but to act under such a notion,
were a plain confession that all other titles are insufficient. Nay if it be
but mingled with any other pretensions, the pestilent quality of it would
poison all the rest: and, believe it, the dropping of such expressions, by the
unsoberest of those that call themselves of your party, has incredibly
discredited those who are indeed well-advised. Away with it then, as that which
will bring the certainest and suddenest destruction; as that which will enrage
the whole Nation to a furious vindication of themselves, from being considered
as such a silly generation of people, that should be cousened out of their
good, known, and established Laws; and in the place of them suffer themselves
to be imposed upon by imaginations and Dreams, which every morning must be
declared to be the foregoing nights legislative power. The people do already
take themselves to be scornfully mocked, that they must be stigmatized with the
defamation of so impious an act, as a violence offered to the life of their
sacred and anointed King; and that the act of so slight a part of their
Trustees must redound to their shame; who shunning the light of established
Rules, which would have guided them, (the paths they expected they should have
walked in) do in this so palpably wander from their trust, and the sense of
those who trusted them; and that so inconsiderable a part of them should set up
a figment of fancy to be idolized. Consider the Commons House (if yet it may be
so called) allow (which cannot be refused) the Knights to be the
Representatives of the Shires, which truly is the main of the people, you shall
not find Knights for the tenth County in England, I am persuaded, not a far
smaller proportion: Is it then possible that men shall believe against sense
and evident demonstration, that the people incline to you; nay that they are
not diametrically opposite and bent against you? We read that God, as an
expression of his gracious favor to his Church, has promised, that Kings and
Queens shall be nursing Fathers and Mothers of his Church; But that his Church
should set up new forms, or any forms of trial, to execute their own Kings and
Queens, is monstrous and unknown to Religion, is less then an idle dream, it is
the fiction of a dream, and so it will be esteemed not deducible out of the
sacred Scriptures; defamatory to the Christian profession, and the nearest way
to introduce Paganism or Mahumetanisme, their Prophet practicing such
delusions. So that hereby as Christians is all Europe engaged, as Protestants
all of our belief either in this or other Nations.

The last consideration that impedes the mutation of the Government is the
person of the King: which we find does unavoidably mix it self with all the
former considerations; so that the discourse of the one, will not be without
the aid of the other. Yet this following has somewhat more in it. It Is This
King, such a King, so conspicuously virtuous and sufficient; therefore (it must
be acknowledged) that has a right apprehension and clear vision of the true
Interest of Kingship, which is the peace and prosperity of his people; A Prince
of undaunted resolution and clear courage, therefore not vindicative, and far
above base revenges. Example me, in any one person, of any vindication, or
disrepect, or injury, that the King can be charged with.

I Will give you many instances of his placability and readiness to be reconciled
(let me in a short parenthesis give you this advertisement; Revenge is to be
doubted from the people, not from the King; He alone must be, can be, your
security; upon such a Prince you may rely:) A Prince of exemplary devotion and
sobriety, therefore dear to all persons so qualifyed. It Is This King, during
whose happy days, (no less then 17. years,) in which he quietly possessed and
ruled the Scepter, such an inward tranquillity was joined to such a security
from without, and both accompanied with such an opulency, that no period of
like time, with the like felicity, have the former ages delivered over to us.
And it is no impertinent question to ask; whether ever any other Nation ever
enjoyed the like. I am persuaded (and that upon no ill grounds of conjecture,)
were it in the power of the Nation to elect out of the Catalogue of all their
Kings, the Spirit of which of them they would have rest upon this; if they
wished Him the fortune of Henry the V. yet they would not refuse his own
virtues, for the most signal of any of the former. So notable an impression
does the memory of the peaceable part of his Reign make upon the affections of
his people: And such an horror and aversion has the disquiet thereof wrought
in them to any other form of rule, that they look upon their tormentours as
Salamanders, that only live and are cherished by the flames, that have scorched
them. Is it not now high time then to stop and make a halt? Is there not enough
done to satiate the vanity and quench the thirst after military renown, when
you have vanquished your Compatriots and fellow Citizens, and under such a
Prince?

Look upon the brink of what a dreadful precipice you are; and let this last,
and those other considerations be seriously revolved by you: to which being
added those weights which your own judgment can cast into the scales,
undoubtedly you will see that there is a wide distance between making a
conquest over a people, (of which their own differences will lay claim to the
greatest share,) and governing them contrary to their own appetites by so small
a part of themselves; and that means are easilyer found and readyer at hand to
desolate and disorder States, then such as shall compose and rule them, various
to long ingrafted customs, and their own inclinations. Invisa Imperia nunquam
retinentur diu. Hated rule is never long-lived. Me thinks you cannot well avoid
the observation that the most perspicacious and sagacious persons of your
party, who with a wonderful stedfastness and undismayedness have kept company
with you in your counsels and affairs, and in the greatest hazards (for you
have not always been without such,) do herein, and in this action, and in this
highest time of your power and prosperity, not only make a stop, but avowedly
withdraw themselves, and declare against it; no doubt but very evidently
foreseeing the fatality of such an enormous and unparalleled attempt. But the
imagination that some have, that this design will be carried on by dispatching
the King out of the way, excluding the Prince and Duke of York (both now out of
the realm) and setting up the Duke of Gloucester, until the people are better
seasoned by this new fashion of Government, is such a mockery, that it cannot
be believed but the most purblind understanding will see all the shapes of the
design, when it stands but behind so slender a thread. This will not do the
feat; nor will the people of this age be so deluded: wherein there are but too
many (for the public peace,) that understand Arts and policyes of State, or,
at least, would have it so thought.

Upon the prospect of these foregoing considerations, (and there want not
others important) draw a short state of the whole affair; and it will be thus,
or little otherwise. At the present, you of the Army stand high; but naked,
unloved; the bulk of the people that assists you, small; they are, to speak of,
all in one cluster, the Army; and that not all ripe for such designs: through
the Kingdom they are so thinly disseminated, that the appearance of them by
the eye is scarcely discernable; and lastly, to deal frankly with you, (because
their temper in your affair will make a notable impression,) for the greater
number a vertiginous and giddy generation, that will never suffer quiet to
themselves, you, nor others. The opposites to these are the most
prudent-constituted form of Rules the World has known; a vast number of people
wedded to it; the matter therefore irreconcilable; no example friendly to you;
all Potentates made parties against you; the certain disunion of Scotland with
England; the damage and infamy for the loss of Ireland; the defamation of
Christian Religion, more especially of the Protestant Professors; and lastly
the person of a most Excellent Prince, loved, reverenced, and desired by the
generality of his people. Besides all these, and others that are obvious to the
commonest understandings; trust me, no mortal man can have a prevision of the
future vexations which such a Regicide, such a Parricide will bring to the
persons, affairs and designments of the Army; if a prognostic may be made by
the rules of Reason, by the constant course of humane actions, by the
conjunction of the present affairs of this Kingdom. It is the certain
expectation of all sober men, that Jacob followed not Esau closer by the heel,
then the Armies destruction will that of such an inhumane act of violence upon
the sacred Person of this King. What then, in the name of God, is it that
hinders you, answerable to reason, suitable to duty, and agreeable to piety,
from making have to join your self to the Law, and to agnize that Prince, whom
the laws and ordinance of God have set over you? Obey then the municipall Law
under which you were born, that has nourished and cherished you; restore it,
promote it all you can; reverence that Prince, into whose custody God has
committed both the Laws and your self; who, I doubt not, will find it most
convenience to employ your self, and the soberest of your party, in the
eminentest administrations under Him: And verily I wish it. Nor do I think it
in any degree reprehensible for you, or any other to observe the Physicians
rule, Accipe dum dolet; take this opportunity of the present anguish of the
King and Kingdom; restore it to its former habit of quiet and peace. There is
none that will grudge you such sober commodity, as may arrive to you by it. But
with such manner of discourses I will not detain you, least I should thereby
mis-leade you into a false opinion of me. My principles, according to the
temper of these times, are very remote from self-safety; or to employ
ungenerous flatteryes for it. Know this assuredly, that I firmly believe, that
an established Magistracy is Gods immediate Minister, nor can it be deposed by
those that owe obedience and subjection to it, without the highest guilt of
impiety; And that this is a verity so plainly held forth to us by the sacred
Scriptures, (as an ordinance employed by God, for the manifestation of his
power and goodness in the conservation of humane communion and society,) that
the conscientious sufferers for it may expect a Crown of Martyrdom by it. That
this Government is a Monarchy, and his Majesty the right and lawful King, has
not a colorable objection to gainsay it. Read the Act of recognition 1 Iacobi
calmly done by the whole Parliament, and unanimously pursued by the whole
Nation, at a season and opportunity that might have encouraged pretenses, if
any could have been found. How happens it that the lawfullness of Regal rule
is questioned? Search the Scriptures: God it is that owns their Charter; He it
is that gave it them: Per me Reges regnant, (Prove. 8.15.) not per nos: it is no
plurality they hold by. Where Solomon speaks in the person of the eternal
Wisdom, thereby to advertise us of (no doubt) greater reverence and
circumspection. God himself appoints Moses the first Prince of the politic
State of the Jews; after him Joshua, etc. Is it the title and hereditary
succession of Kings you look for? See then, God himself chooses Saul;
afterward guides the lot; lastly, follows the publication and acknowledgement
of the people. Afterward God rejects that Dynasty, and by especial command
fixes David; whom, by like appointment, Solomon succeeds: and from him
continued that family in the rule, in the eldest son of that Family. Yet is the
person so sacred, so delicate, that no violent hand must come near to approach
it. Wherein are the Scriptures more plain and express then in this particular,
Touch not mine Anointed? David, before he was a King, and persecuted by a King,
who can (says he) stretch forth his hand against the Lords Anointed, and be
guiltless? 1. Sam. 24.5.6. Multitude of texts there are that both justify the
dignity, and enjoin reverence to the person. And conformably it has been the
avowed doctrine and practice of the Church in all ages, even under Heathen
Princes. It Is an argument too copious for a paper to contain the reasons and
instances for it; rather indeed it is too manifest to be disputed. Has not God
coupled the fear due to Himself, with the duty of reverence toward the King?
Prove. 24.21, 22. My Son, Fear thou the Lord and the King (in conjunction:)
meddle not with them that are given to change. Mix not with such machinators:
for a like end shall be to the offenders against both, Destruction.

Sir, my conclusion shall be very plain, because you may thereby be the better
assured of my sincerity in all the rest. The ancient constitutions and present
Laws of this Kingdom are my inheritance and Birthright: if any shall think
to impose upon me that which is worse then death, which is the profane and
dastardly parting from these Laws, I will choose the less evil, which is
Death. I have also a right in Kingship, the Protector of those Laws; This is
also, by a necessity and conjunction with that other, dearer to me then life.
And lastly, in This King is my present right; and also obligations of
inestimable favors received from him. I would to God my life could be a
sacrifice to preserve his. Could you make it an expedient to serve that end,
truly I would pay you more thanks for it, then you will allow your self for all
your other merits, from those you have most obliged, and dye

Your most affectionate Friend.

POSTSCRIPT.
SIR,
I Add this Postscript. When with the most unheard of and highest violation
of all Laws humane and divine, of Morality and Sanctity, both upon the person
of the King and municipall Laws of the Kingdom so execrable an Act is
perpetrated, let the profit of it to the Actours be summed up, it amounts to
nothing more then this, That a King is escaped out of their present possession;
but the succeeding King obliged by all the ties of Religion, Nature, Duty, and
Honor; encouraged with all the irritations of this Nation, Scotland, and
Ireland; fortifyed by the Interests of all Christian Princes and States to
animate and aid him, for his revenge upon the Actours. I am not guilty of so
implacable and inveterate malice, as to wish that the contrivers of this
villainy might pursue a counsel that shall draw such sharp revenges and
infallible destruction upon themselves: But truly I think that those who have
been, or are their veryest Friends, and who have any light of understanding or
motions of conscience, will never forgive them so outrageous a folly, madness,
and wickedness. I must confess the present proceedings torment me with
terrible apprehensions: but truly I cannot make my self believe, that God will
permit the Devil to draw Christian Protestant Professors unto the consummation
of so detestable and impious a Fact. God of his infinite mercy prevent it.

Enclosed in a Letter, thus.
Sir,
THis short Letter has no other errand, but to excuse that longer which is
enclosed. I pray read it over, though it comes from a person that is not proper
to apply himself to you; and using an instrument (a pen) not suitable to my
Genius. But believe it, it is the extremity of this present occasion extorts it
from me. God guide you, and recall you, if you are engaged in this horrid
proceeding. I rest,

SIR, Your humble Servant
Tower, Jan. 15. 1648.
A Letter written to his LADY the day before his suffering.
My dearest Life,
MY greatest care in relation to the World is for thy dear self: But I beseech
thee that as thou have never refused my advice hitherto, do thou now consummate
all in this one. And indeed it is so important both for Thee, Me, and all our
Children, that I presume passion shall not overrule thy reason, nor my request.
I beseech Thee again and again, moderate thy apprehension and sorrows for me;
and preserve thy self to the benefit of our dear Children, whom God, out of his
love to us in Christ Jesus, has given us: And our dear Mall (in the case she
is in,) and our comforts in that Family depend entirely upon thy preservation.
I pray remember that the occasion of my Death will give Thee more cause to
celebrate my memory with praise, rather then to consider it with sadness. God
has commanded my obedience to the fifth commandment; and for acting that duty
I am condemned. God multiply all comforts to thee. I shall leave Thee my dear
Children: In them I live with Thee; and leave Thee to the protection of a most
gracious God. And I rest

Thy, etc.

Another written the same day He suffered.
My dearest Life,
MY eternal life is in Christ Jesus. My worldly considerations in the highest
degree Thou have deserved. Let me live long here in thy dear memory, to the
comfort of my Family, our dear Children, whom God out of mercy in Christ has
bestowed upon us. I beseech Thee, take care of thy health. Sorrow not
unsoberly, unusefully. God be unto Thee better then an Husband; and to my
Children better then a Father. I am sure, He is able to be so; I am confident
He is graciously pleased to be so. God be with Thee, my most virtuous Wife; God
multiply many comforts to Thee and my Children, is the fervent prayer of

Thy, etc.

A Letter to Mr. E.S. from a reverend and grave Divine.
SIR,
I Hope this paper will find you upon your recovery. You have my daily and
hearty prayers for it; not so much for your own sake (for I doubt not but it
would be much better for you, in regard of your self, to be dissolved and be
with Christ) but in the behalf of the Church, your friends, and poor Family: to
which notwithstanding be assured, God will be merciful, howsoever he disposes
of you, either for this life, or for a better. But if you live (as I pray and
hope you will) you shall do very well to write the life and death of that Noble
Lord and Blessed Martyr, who professed at his death, that he dyed for the fifth
Commandment: and to dye in the defense, and for the testimony of any Divine
truth, is truly and properly to be a Martyr.

That which I can contribute toward this work is, to communicate some few
observations I made of him and from him, before and after his Condemnation. I
was several times with him, and always found him in a very cheerful and
well-composed temper of mind; proceeding from true Christian grounds, and not
from a Roman resolution only, (as his enemies are pleased to speak of him.) He
told me often, It was the good God he served, and the good Cause he had served
for, that made him not to fear death: adding, he had never had the temptation
of so much as a thought, to check him for his engagement in this quarrel: for
he took it for his Crown and Glory; and wished he had a greater ability, and
better fortune to engage in it.

After his Condemnation, and the afternoon before his suffering, we were a
great while in private together: when, bewailing with that sense which became a
true (and not despairing) penitent, the sins of his life past; the greatest he
could remember was his voting my Lord of Straffords death: which though (as he
said) he did without any malice at all, yet he confessed it to be a very great
Sin; and that he had done it out of a base fear (they were his own words) of a
prevailing party: adding, that he had very often and very heartily repented of
it, and was confident of Gods Pardon for it. Then he told me, he had a great
desire to receive the Blessed Sacrament (so he called it) before he dyed the
next morning: asking what Divine of the Kings party I would recommend to him. I
replied, that (though many were more worthy, yet) none would be more willing to
do him that service then my self. Which he accepting very kindly, told me he
durst not desire it, for fear it might be some danger to me. After this, and
some conference in order to his preparation, both for his viaticum and his
voyage, the Sacrament and his death; he desired me to pray with him. Which
after I had performed, and promised to be with him by seven the next morning, I
left him for that time to his own devotions.

The next day I was there at the time assigned: and after some short conference
in order to the present occasion, he desired me to hear him pray: which he did
for half an hour in an excellent method, very apt expressions, and most strong,
hearty, and passionate affections: First confessing and bewailing his sins with
strong Cries and Tears; then humbly and most earnestly desiring Gods Mercy
through the merits of Christ only. Secondly, for his dear Wife and Children,
with some passion; but for her especially, with most ardent affections:
recommending them to the Divine providence with great confidence and assurance;
and desiring for them rather the blessings of a better life, then of this.
Thirdly, for the King, Church, and State; and lastly, for his enemies, with
almost the same ardour and affection. After this sending for my Lord of Norwich
and Sr. John Owen, I read the whole Office of the Church for good Friday: and
then, after a short Homily I used for the present occasion, we received the
Sacrament. In which action he behaved himself with great humility, zeal, and
devotion. And being demanded after we had done, how he found himself; he
replied, very much better, stronger, and chearfuller for that heavenly repast;
and that he doubted not to walk like a Christian through the vale of death, in
the strength of it. But he was to have an agony before his passion, and that
was the parting with his Wife, eldest Son, Son in Law, two of his Uncles, and
Sr. T: C: especially the parting with his most dear Lady; which indeed was the
saddest Spectacle that ever I beheld. In which occasion he could not choose but
confess a little of humane frailty; yet even then he did not forget both to
Comfort and Counsel her, and the rest of his friends. Particularly, in
blessing the Young Lord, he commanded him never to revenge his death, though it
should be in his power: the like he said unto his Lady. He told his Son he
would leave him a Legacy out of David's Psalms, and that was this, Lord, lead
me in a plain path. For, Boy, (said he) I would have you a plain honest man,
and hate dissimulation.

After this, with much ado I persuaded his Wife, and the rest to be gone; and
then being all alone with me, he said, Doctor, the hardest part of my work in
this world is now past, meaning the parting with his Wife. Then he desired me
to pray preparatively to his death, that in the last action he might so behave
himself, as might be most for Gods Glory, for the endearing of his Dead Masters
memory, his present Masters service; and that he might avoid the doing or
saying of any thing which might savor either of vanity, or sullenness. This
being done, they were all carried to Sir Robert Cottons House; where I was with
him, till he was called unto the Scaffold, and would have gone up with him, but
the Guard of Soldiers would not suffer me.

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints. Psalm 116.15.

The righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance: He shall not be afraid of
any evil tidings; His heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord. Psalm 112.6.7.

Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy; for behold your reward is great in
Heaven, for in the like manner did their Fathers to the Prophets. Luke 6.23.

I saw under the Altar the souls of them that were slain for the word of God,
and for the Testimony which they held. And they cried with a loud voice,
saying, How long O Lord, Holy and True, do thou not avenge our blood on them
that dwell on the earth? And white robes were given unto every one of them and
it was said unto them, that they should rest yet for a little season, until
their Fellow Servants also, and their Brethren, that should be killed as they
were, should be fulfilled. Revel. 6.9, 10, 11.

They overcame Him by the blood of the Lamb and by the word of their Testimony,
and they loved not their lives unto the death. Revel. 12.11.

I heard a voice from Heaven, saying unto me, write; blessed are the dead which
dye in the Lord, from henceforth, yea, says the Spirit, that they may rest
from their labors; and their works do follow them. Revel. 14.13.

FINIS.

