Conversations WRITTEN IN FRENCH By Monsieur Clerombault, And put into ENGLISH

By a Person of Honor.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman at the Sign of the Blew Anchor in the
Lower Walk of the New Exchange.

M DC LXXII,

THE PREFACE.
I Was a long time known to the Marshal of C. without having any familiarity
with him, till (being withdrawn from Court, by reason of some indisposition of
health) he was about six months at Poictiers, where he endeavored to perfect
his recovery, and divert himself. I was in that Country when he came thither,
and sought only to pass my time as pleasantly as I could. The Mareshal had so
agreeable a Wit, that every one was pleased with hearing him, which made me see
him often, and it was my happiness to have some share in his friendship. He
understood that his Friends at Court had designed to get an Employment for him,
which was the more honorable, because Merit was the principal thing that was
looked upon in the bestowing of it. And because one could not be too careful in
acquitting ones self worthily in an affair of that consequence, he often
thought upon it, and considered of it, and sometimes spoke to me concerning it,
under other colorable pretenses. Not but that he had confidence enough in me
to have discovered to me his most secret thoughts: But being yet uncertain of
the issue, he was not willing that any should imagine that he was in
expectation of it, lest the thing should not succeed. I partly knew his design,
and he himself perceived it. Nevertheless he was willing to disguise it (for
the least veil is a great help to modest persons) he made some reflection upon
those that had been Conquerors, and asked me what I thought of them, and by
what ways they were become such great men, whether it were their Birth or
Education, or both, nay whether Fortune might not pretend to have contributed.
He loved Alexander, but admired Caesar; and of two Persons who had governed in
our times, well known to him, he did value the height of the one, and the Art
of the other, being well pleased to discourse of eminent Persons, he freely
spoke his Judgment of them, and I observed by all his discourse, that the King
held the first place in his opinion. He was so charmed with this Prince, that
he was almost transported when he spoke of him, and the remembrance of his Air
and good Mien gave him admiration; he told me that whoever saw him must love
him; that he was the happiest birth, had the best heart in the World; that as
young as he was, his knowledge in things exceeded his; and that by a natural
discernment he had an aversion to seigned honesty, and could not endure base
Compliance or unhandsom Railleries. This methinks should be sufficient to make
a Court of worthy honest men, and to produce a happy Age. The Mareshal was a
very good Judge of all this, and I knew by his countenance and manner of
speaking, that he was very well persuaded of what he had said; besides, was it
likely that he should disguise his thoughts to me, on design to be better
received at the Court, or make any advantage by discerning of a person that
goes not thither? Discoursing of these Conquerors and Heroes, and considering
what it was, went to the making up of great men, or rather what might complete
an honest man (for that was what he designed) it happened that we spoke almost
of every thing: and as perfect honesty is made appear by our actions as well as
words, we judged of both, this Converse lasted till his departure. After a
certain tenderness which friendship inspires at parting, when one has spent so
many days pleasantly together (at least on my part) he conjured me to consider
on our Discourse, and told me, that he had a great desire to write something of
them; and that if I on my part would also do something, it would divert us at
our meeting again. I writ five or six Conversations, and as I was about to
proceed, I understood that his illness increased, and suddenly after I heard
what besel him.

To conclude, there are some persons in the World who endeavor to inform and
perfect themselves by reading, but the most part of them seek only after the
pleasure of it; and I blame them not, for I am partly of that number; I should
desire only that Justice might be done to every thing, and that as much may be
discovered as is possible, and what we may reasonably expect on each Subject;
for it cannot be imagined (be ones Art never so great) that we can extremely
please when we write on those Themes which tend to instruction. In effect, to
discourse a long time of Truths and of Falsities, of Good and Evil, is a kind
of Entertainment which agitates the mind without moving the heart; and that
which commonly pleases proceeds from the contrary; for the heart should be
moved, and the mind undisturbed. Besides, although people are not willing to be
deceived, they love much less to be undeceived; and that (perhaps) is one of
the chief reasons why the World as yet knows so little, as to the benefit that
may be made by reading these Entertainments. There are but few people who will
believe that they stand in need of them, to render them either more knowing or
able; but this is true, that the more Wit any one has, the more he will like
them, and it requires only a good sense to understand them; Learning will help
very little. It is likewise true, that the most worthy man by reflecting on
them, will yet become more worthy; and that the most accomplished Lady, by
employing never so little time in them, will become more agreeable, and
consequently the more desirable. It is so easy to be satisfied of this, that
it would be great imprudence to affirm it without being certain of it. I
sometimes raise my Subject, and sometimes let it fall, the better to show in
every thing the good and the ill; for I design no praise to my self.

To conclude, I should not have thought of writing these Conversations, if I
had not believed that I should do a pleasure to that person, of whom I have
been speaking. For besides that, I apply my self to nothing, and not aim to
appear public, I understand well enough the different opinions of the World
not to deceive my self in them: the smallest number, which commonly is the
best, i^ seldom found the strongest; and if I had followed my own humor, and
undertaken to write, it should have been upon other Subjects.

THE FIRST CONVERSATION.
THE Mareshal of C. is a Person justly deserving the Character of a gallant
Man, who understands the World perfectly well. He has spent his time for the
most part either at the Court or in the Army; and there are but very few who
have had a greater share than he of those natural parts, which renders a man
both able and agreeable. Notwithstanding his little impediment, he expresses
himself gracefully; he loves rather to speak than to hear others, whether it be
that others seldom answer his expectation, or rather (as it is thought) that he
takes delight to make himself admired. It is above two years since he began to
be ill; all the Physicians who have been with him, and the Waters of Bourbon
have not cured him: it is a distemper which has not at all seized on his
Spirits, for he never had them more lively nor pure, nay nor more pleasant. He
was for some time with Madam Mareschale to breathe (as they say) his native
Air; but it seldom happens that a Courtier, who is sick at the Court, can think
himself better at his Country House. Madam Mareschale was upon her return to
Paris, and the Mareshal came to Poictiers, where he was six or seven months;
wherever he is, he endeavors to divert himself, and delights to please
others: and as there is nothing so inconsiderable, which a great man when he
undertakes it, cannot set a value upon; the Mareshal, knew so well how to
improve the least occasions of pleasure, that wherever he was, Divertisement
was never wanting. One day finding himself better than he used to be, he
desired the company of some Ladies at Dinner with him, which was not of those
kind of Feasts, where many times there is nothing pleases but such a delicate
and so well chosen an Entertainment, that there was nothing more to be desired.
Ladies Meals commonly are not very long, whether it be that they love not that
kind of excess, or that they distrust themselves, and think they should abate
of that modesty which gains them a respect. As soon as they rose from Table,
every one began to divide Companies, some to play, others to look on. The
Mareshal, who was only a Spectator, spoke according to his custom many pleasant
things; but Play being employment enough of it self, and because the Losers
commonly are not in humor to be delighted with Wit, he thought it best to say
little, and to avoid the occasion which tempts the most reserved. He drew the
Chevalier aside, and going into another Room, You may easily believe (said he)
that I am very glad to see you, but I must assure you further, that I find my
self something better for seeing you: and to say truth, after having tried so
many remedies to recover me of an illness, which Melancholy would not at all
lessen, I have now nothing to seek after but Mirth.

The Chevalier who studied how to divert him, asked him what he had most mind
to do. I was more willing to entertain him, answered the Mareshal than play
with the Ladies, we will discourse of certain things which are not commonly
learned in the Commerce of the World. I never wished any thing so much as that
I were a little less ignorant, and when I converse with you in particular,
methinks I rid my self of it without any study or instructions. The least thing
that you relate to me of Socrates sinks very deep into my mind, and I hope one
day I shall be heard to cite divine Plato as the Lady does who has a good Wit,
and delights very much to discourse upon every thing. Wit (said the Chevalier)
is always acceptable, and Women also in my opinion cannot have too much of it;
but most people approve not of their being so knowing, or at least that they
should show it; and may not this Lady you speak of, be the same who had given
you the Idea of those whom you represented so pleasantly the other day. I never
saw any thing better imitated nor more to my liking; without doubt it is not
enough to have Wit, but he must be an extreme well-bred man that can know how
to be pleasant after such a manner. I agree with you, said the Mareshal that
among persons that know how to judge, one cannot be too well accomplished to be
as pleasant as one would desire, because that most people have not a delicate
taste, nor are able to discern that which is best; it often happens that they
are taken, nay even charmed with certain ridiculous parts they play to them:
but well bred persons do not use such kind of Buffonnery. You know very well
that there are some persons who are pleasant Company, and who notwithstanding
are not beloved, and for whom few are concerned. I do not think that any one
has reason to envy such kind of persons: but those who are pleasant indeed
after the best manner, never fail of gaining the heart, and it is in that way
that I should be glad to please. One cannot show too much Wit in a pleasant
Conversation, yet one must have a care not to be too forward, as if you would
appear always ready to make Jests, and speak fine things: there is something of
a free easy way which cannot be expressed, that has a better effect. Neither is
it good to be too reserved, nor affect singularity too much: when one is
arrived to such a degree of Merit, an open and complaisant Carriage has very
great Charms to attract Love; what advantages soever any one has, they must be
pleased with others, if they would have others pleased with them. I observe
that there are some Fooleries which are current amongst some people, which do
not much credit those that use them, they are rather the subject of scorn than
laughter to those that rightly understand.

They are laughed at, added the Chevalier as that Queen of Egypt laughed at the
fine words and pretty conceits of Anthony. How, replied the Mareshal that
Anthony who was one of Caesar's Generals, who disputed the Empire with Augustus?
Oh that pretty Egyptian! and what could she find in him to except against. The
Chevalier then giving him to understand, that it might be something of
bluntness, he being in Armor, and always dressed Souldier-like, I see by that,
answered the Mareshal that there was in those days your Virtuoso's and nice
conceited Ladies, which I thought had been an Invention of our times. You
approve not then, said the Chevalier, that the Princess should be so difficult
of access, or that so much Wit should be necessary to be employed in gaining
her favor; but for all that, I fancy that you have least reason of any person
in the World to dislike it: for I believe it would be to your advantage, if
there were such nice Genius in all Courts where you come: methinks for that
only reason you should love them; for when things are spoken or done with an
ill grace, do you not think that a little disdain or aversion showed, becomes a
Lady very well, so as it be but just enough to give one cause to guess that it
is so?

I am of your Judgment, said the Mareshal, but there is a kind of an affected
delicacy, which cannot allow of any thing which one is not accustomed to see,
and despises rigorously every thing that is not greater or no longer in the
Mode, which seems to me to proceed from a dark understanding or want of wit.

But to return to our nice Queen, was it not unreasonable in her to expect,
that a man who is bred to Arms, should show nothing of his Profession, but when
he faces the Enemy? How is it possible that any one can spend his life in the
Wars, and not smell a little of the Soldier? The Wars, said the Chevalier, we
must grant to be the finest employment in the World; but to take it right, a
well bred man has no Profession at all: For though he understands a thing
perfectly well, and is in a manner obliged to pass his life in it, it seems to
me, that neither his Actions nor his Converse should show any signs of it, he
takes too deep a tincture of nothing, and his Wit and good Sense teaches him
how to behave himself on all occasions. What a fine Idaea you give me, cried
the Mareshal, I am much pleased with fancying to my self our young Prince to be
of this kind of Wit: we cannot take a more noble Subject to entertain our
selves withal, and you know that very few days pass wherein I speak not
something of him. I remember very well where we left when we were interrupted.
I was asking, whether you were not of that opinion, that it would do well for
him to learn the Language of the ancient Romans, which is spoken by so many
good men and such a number of Emperors. It is not only to be valued as good in
it self (answered the Chevalier) but there is very much advantage to be made by
understanding it; we find in it so many excellent things, and that in their
Original: for you must needs confess, that when any one speaks, there is
something so clear and natural, which proceeds from the Wit and Understanding
of the person expressed in apt and significant words, which cannot by all the
Art imaginable be rendered into another Language, as to be altogether the same.
I find also that the Art which is used to teach that Tongue, gives a great
light into all the other Languages, and that we may by knowing it, speak our
own the better and with more assurance. Besides, being at this day the most
known and universal, the Prince would be glad (especially if he should one day
become the Arbiter of the World) to understand what so many Nations should say
to him, and to express himself without an Interpreter.

Is it an easy matter (said the Mareshal) to learn it in a little time? The
more necessary part of any Language (answered the Chevalier) will ask but
little time; and yet it is of great benefit when one knows it. But the Niceties
which depend much on the skill of the Teacher, and on the persons we hear
speak, are more difficult. You know, in all other things, what it is to give
the last touch. I should be of opinion (continued the Chevalier) that now in
his Youth it would be best to divide and set apart his hours, for fear of
oppressing him too much, and giving him a disgust of what he should learn: and
make him begin to practice such little Exercises for the activity of his body,
as his age and strength permits, he would be the better shaped and more
healthful: that it will be good likewise to divertize his Studies and his
Recreations too, as should be thought most convenient: and I believe his hours
should not be too regular; for even pleasure it self, if it be offered always
in so orderly a way, and at set times, becomes tiresom and looks like
constraint.

I fancy now in his tender age (in which they may make what impressions they
please, but not so easily blot out again hereafter) they should order it so,
that those who come about him, should be of those persons who are lucky in all
things, and whose demeanor and presence may not accustom him to any thing
which is fit for him to forget. I would have the like regard had in choosing
those Masters who come to teach him the smallest things. I know there will not
want those who will say, that this is but a fancy; but I am very certain, that
as for all sorts of Exercises, as well those of the body as of the mind, it
were to be wished, that such as are most skilful and able to perform them best,
might form in him that unexpressible gracefulness, which most Masters want
themselves: and also that after some time, Monsieur de D. T. and likewise
Monsieur le P. might discourse to him of the Wars, and show what ways
Conquerours took to be great. For I am persuaded, that of what Birth soever any
one is, he may think himself much honored to have contributed any thing to a
work of so great consequence, and that all those things which a young Prince
ought to learn, cannot come from a person of two good a Family.

It is said, that Caesar by combating and running through all parts, from
Europe into Asia, and thence into Africa, lost most part of his old Soldiers;
and that he himself instructed new-raised men to hold the Buckler, and use the
Sword, or the Javelin; Do you not think that by learning of such a Master, the
instruction took much deeper impression, and spread it self further, even
without being aware of it?

What is said of handsome persons (answered the Mareshal) that every thing
becomes them, may be said with more reason of dexterous and judicious persons.
I should have been glad to have seen that Masters of the World play the
Fencing-master. Whatsoever I had observed from so great a man, would have
taught me something that I should have been glad to remember. And that which
you said just now is very true, That there are some persons whose Company we
cannot too much frequent. It Is certain, that by seeing them often, on
whatsoever occasion it may be, besides the improvement that we have by being
with them, we gain a good esteem to our selves; as we perfume our selves,
unawares by walking amongst the Jasmins and Orange Trees.

There cannot any thing be imagined more gallant, and truly, said the
Chevalier, you have a great exactness in speaking. I know very well, said the
Mareshal, when I am minded to be pleasant: and I thought it would surprise you.
If you did surprise me, said the Chevalier, 'twas the better to please me. A
thing that is well conceived, ought likewise to be well expressed, and I think
there is nothing more pleasant.

For all that, answered the Mareshal, I am the man in the World that least
studies those kind of florid expressions. Neither do I much affect exactness in
speaking. To be punctual and just, as to the sense I love always; but to be so
in words, appears commonly too much affected: and if I did desire to be
eloquent, I should wish to be so with my heart and understanding. No man wants
words when he has any thing to say to the purpose.

People talk as long as they please (said the Chevalier) of what relates to the
Commerce of the World: we find but too many that are skilled in that way of
discourse: but for some other things which are less clear, and not easy to be
conceived, one is many times puzzled to express them, as one has a mind to do.
It Is true, that a person may be said to be eloquent, who first had the
conception of them, in what manner soever he makes others understand them.
Those who think well are never too long nor tedious, for they seek words only
to express their thoughts; whereas others study more how to speak finely, than
how to express themselves.

As to exactness in speaking, I find two sorts which have always good effects:
the one consists in discerning things as they are, and without confounding
them: for if we fail never so little, either in speaking or acting, it is
presently perceived and taken notice of: this depends upon the Wit and
Understanding.

The other, justness or exactness of speaking appears in being able to judge of
the decency of our expressions, and in having true measures how far we ought to
go, and when to stop. This which proceeds chiefly from the relish and judgment
we have of things, seems to me more doubtful and difficult.

The exactness of words pleases when it is without affectation, and words are
not played and gingled withal. But I can assure you, that one cannot have too
much of that kind of justness of Speech, which consists in the knowing how to
make use of the aptest and most proper words and the best forms of speaking, to
infuse our thoughts into the minds of others in the same manner we desire;
neither more nor less.

These exactnesses are always approved of, provided we be not too severe and
rigorous in expecting them from others; and that we remember that Roman Lady,
before whom one might not so much as trip; for as she was one day pressing and
playing upon an excellent man, who was something entangled and out of order, he
told her; she was in the right, but that she was a little to blame to take away
the pleasure of freedom and negligence.

We are much more civil to Ladies now adays, said the Mareshal, than they were
in those times: and whatever they say now does not discompose any body that
understands the World. They may venture at any thing, especially when they are
handsome. But an accomplished person, though of never so much merit, ought not to
be too confident of himself: yea, the more he excels others, the more care he
ought to take not to prescribe to the Company, but to be complying. For
naturally every one is afraid of a Master-wit.

I love those persons who always show some Wit without offending any one, and I
perfectly hate those who make use of it only to the displeasing of others. It
is good to avoid the converse of such, as much as one can: for this humor
proceeds from the pride and maliciousness of their nature, which mingles it
self in all their actions, There are others of them, who are more rash than
malicious, who, to vent a Jest, will make sport with, and play upon every body,
without considering the consequences. What advantage is it to have Wit, if one
cannot make use of it for the gaining of the good opinion and love of the
World? One may withdraw and absent ones self, if things go not to ones mind:
but when we come into Company, we should carry our selves so, that we may be
acceptable to those persons with whom we are, although we have no great
kindness for them. For those who think to revenge themselves by a cross
Carriage, do to themselves more injury than they do to others.

I know some also who are froward and disagreeable, out of a principle of envy.
This is a fault which disgusts me most of all, which discovers a mean Spirit
and a narrow Wit. For if one well understood what Life and Fortune is, it would
incline one rather to pity, than envy those whom the World thinks happy. I have
seen some obscure persons and of very ordinary capacities, who would equal
themselves with the chief men of the World, and who by no means would consent
to, nor allow of their reputations.

There are others who would gladly please and gain love: but neither honor,
truth, nor the benefit of those who hear them, can make them say any thing,
unless it tends directly to their own proper advantage. It Is an ill way they
take; for the World thinks not well of those who are only for themselves, but
it always approves of those who endeavor to advance the reputations of those
that deserve it. Sir (said the Chevalier) your Art is mavelous: For the thing
that was in question, was only concerning the exactness of Language, or
something like it, yet by degrees, and almost insensibly, you are fallen upon
the discourse of the Commerce of the World, and you have described those
persons who make ill use of their Wit; and who only speak for their own
interest: which shows that you have observed the Court, and that you are not
well pleased with the Principles and Manners of it.

I shall only add to that which you said just now, That when any one speaks,
whatsoever design he may have, that of pleasing should always be one: but that
ought not to be the sole or principal end. Nature tends only to things
necessary. There is nothing in the fairest body of the World which is not
necessary for life or motion. Good cheer is founded upon the necessity of
eating and drinking. Lodging must be had, and that is the cause we love fine
houses; for at first we only seek those things we cannot want: and afterward
we proceed, and desire the pleasure into the bargain (if we may be allowed to
speak so) as an accidental thing which rejoices us, though we did not expect it.

I allow (said the Mareshal) that a man take the liberty to express himself,
let it be in what way he pleases: and I understand you very well. I believe the
best way to improve ones self and become knowing, is not to study overmuch,
but to entertain our selves often, and discourse of those things that open the
Understanding. And it would be good (if I mistake not) to accustom our young
Prince to this, and to place people about him who might instruct him in that
manner. As for such Ladies as are placed about him, I do not see that there
need be such care in the choice of them. I confess, I should only have a regard
to those of the pleasantest humor, to keep him always cheerful. For excepting
a very few, (the wisest of them appear to me to have little sense) though
otherwise they may please. You judge well, that from some certain agreeableness
in the face or shape, we can conclude nothing concerning the Understanding. And
those who are able to discern one from the other, are seldom deceived.

The World will not allow Women to be wise, said the Chevalier, but I know not
why, unless it be perhaps, because they are commended enough for other
qualities, and that they are handsome. For the World delights to lessen on one
side what it is forced to allow on the other. And if it cannot deny a man to be
very brave, it will never agree that he is other ways well bred, although in
reality he excels most in the latter. In my opinion it is not so rare a thing
to meet with Ladies of good Understanding. I find in them a delicacy of Wit
which is not so common to men; and I have likewise observed in many places and
amongst all sorts of Qualities, that commonly men's actions are not attended
with so much gracefulness as Women's are; and that Ladies are more skilful than
they in what they do: whether it be that the advantage of pleasing be more
natural to them, or that they finding their greatest strength to lie there,
they make it more their study from their Childhood. Two or three of them, (if I
am not mistaken) have begun to undeceive the Court concerning your false
Gallantry, and if we thought there were no glory nor pleasure in gaining their
favors, we should not study so many ways to render our selves agreeable to
them. Besides, no person is ever well bred, or at least a perfect gallant man,
in whose making the Ladies have not had a hand.

How much am I obliged to you (said the Mareshal) for making a difference
between the well bred man and the gallant man? We are apt to mistake and
confound one with the other. It seems to me (said the Chevalier) that the
excellence of a Gallant consists in the common way of living; and we find in
him a certain plausibleness of Carriage, which a well bred man always has not.
But a well bred man has more solid virtues, though he be less busy and
forward to show himself in the World.

There Is a great deal of difference betwixt the one and the other (said the
Mareshal) This quality of a Gallant, which pleases in young people, passes away
like a flower or a dream; and I have seen some of these gallant men become the
neglect and scorn even of those who once admired them. But if we love a man for
his good breeding and honesty, we always love him, and it is not in the power of
time to make it otherwise.

I imagine, said the Chevalier, that when those gallant men were so much
esteemed of, yet all the World was not so dazzled with them: and that there were
always some who seigned that it was but a false Gallantry, and a glittering
Varnish, which might perhaps surprise. But true Gallantry amongst persons who
understand it, is always well received. It depends but very little upon the
advantages of the body: nay, it happens many times, that a deformed man has a
better grace than another, who seems made on purpose to be made for a Picture.
It is not enough to have a fine outside to make one agreeable; that which is of
greatest importance is the well regulating of our Intellectuals, and the taking
are that our head and heart be in good order: for one can never be a gallant
man without having a good heart and much wit.

This true Gallantry appears principally in the knowing how to set a pleasing
gloss upon things that are in themselves displeasing. For many times that which
disgusts us most, we should the better endure, if a good color were put upon
it; and if we considered it so as to make the best of it. I remember there were
two friends that went to visit a Lady, and he that was the worst received by
her, imagined, that to gain her favor, there was nothing wanting but to ruin
his friend in her opinion. The other, who perceived it, instead of complaining
or being enraged at it; I knew very well (said he to him) that you had a love
for me, but I did not believe that you thought me deserving enough to be in the
favor of a Lady of such merit, and who is so good a Judge of men: these
thoughts of yours are so advantageous to me, that they cannot any ways be an
occasion of the breach of our friendship.

This (said the Mareshal) seems to me perfectly gallant, I know not whether
something that has been told me of a great Princess, proceeded not from a Wit
of the same nature. She was informed, that a very worthy well bred man (but a
little fantastical) found some fault with her Carriage: we have (said she) but
two many Flatterers; that which you tell me of this Gentleman, is rather an
advice than a reproach; it is none of his fault that I am not better; and I am
much obliged to him for it.

There could not any thing have been found out more just (said the Chevalier)
and it makes me my self better understand my own thoughts. This Princess must,
without doubt, have been more than an ordinary person. Oh! how happy should we
be, if all things that pass in the World were construed after this manner. I
fancy (continued the Chevalier) that a gallant man is no other than a well bred
honest man, only a little more brisk and sparkling than ordinary, and who has
the Art to make every thing become him; however there is a great advantage to
be made by knowing how to be both the one and the other, as we see occasion.
And I have seen some worthy good men, who have been much to seek amongst
Ladies, how to insinuate themselves into their Conversations, though they have
had very rational things to say to them.

Rational? (cried the Mareshal) who could ever have it in their heads to use
their reason so unseasonably? The Ladies are neither so coy nor so severe as to
stand upon reason on such occasions; but they would be accosted gallantly and
boldly, as you know they would have neat addresses, an airy and frolic
Conversation, an agreeable complisance, with a little flattery, and that je ne
scay quoy of smartness and wit to stir and warn them without perplexing them:
that way which is now used in the most refined and civilized parts of the World
which takes with every body. A confident yet a modest Carriage, which is
neither mean nor sullen, having nothing which savours not of goodness and
honesty.

He that knows how to perform his Courtship after this manner, may in my
opinion become of great consideration amongst the Ladies; and that is the
surest way to please them: but it is also the most hazardous, unless it be
carried very skillfully, and with a good grace. For we must remember, that the
more such kind of things are agreeable when they are well done, the more they
displease when they are ill performed.

It may besides be added, said the Chevalier, that few people are born with
these perfections, nor skilled in the managing of so glorious a course of life,
and if it should be ones fortune to succeed in perfection, the most part of
Women are not much delighted with it: at least it is certain, that so much
smartness and frowardness will at length tire them.

I find that those Women who have the most wit, like much better a little more
reservedness: and commonly those people are unfortunately disappointed of their
aims, that do not know that they are gained by the same ways that we are
gained; and likewise lost after the same manner. They throw as it were their
hearts at their heads, and at first dash tell them more of their Love than can
in any probability be true, and many times more than they desire to hear. They
give them not time so much as to wish that they were loved, and to taste of a
certain sweetness which is only found in the progress of Love. That pleasure
must be long enjoyed to make Love last for ever: there is but little pleasure
in obtaining that which we have not very much desired; and when we have it so
easily, we accustom our selves to neglect it, and commonly come there no more.
But troubel not your self about Ladies for our young Prince, there will enough
offer themselves when the time comes.

As they were speaking, one came to tell them, that there was something in
dispute amongst the Ladies, who were, as I told you, at play in another Room,
and they desired them to come and give their opinion. It could not have
happened more opportunely, said the Mareshal, just when we were so seasonably
upon the Theme of Ladies. For if we would not displease any of them, we had
need to summon all our wits to judge between them. Let us do the House right,
and we will conclude for this day. To morrow I will expect you, and give order
that we may not be disturbed.

THE SECOND CONVERSATION.
THose who are at the Court make more Friends and Acquaintance, than those who
live retired. But of that number of Friends, few of them are really so, and for
the most part they are as little understood by any of the Court, as they
themselves perfectly understand the Court. Not that it is so, as it is generally
said, That Courtiers love nothing, and that they study their own interest more
than how to discern and esteem true merit. For peoples hearts and minds are
much the same there as in other places, and Interest sways through all the
World. But in that place we are divided amongst so many people, that every one
has but a little of us, and that superficially, according as every one desires;
and commonly we fix not upon any one, either to love, or perfectly to
understand.

The Chevalier who had seen the Mareshal so much abroad in the World, and who
knew well enough that he was a very gallant man, yet had not so great an
opinion of him then when he seldom saw him, as now, and having frequented him
seven or eight days in retirement, he knew not how to be absent from him.

He therefore failed not to come the next day, as they had appointed: and being
with him betimes, he engaged him to pass the morning at play, and before they
left off, he ordered it so, that they should be obliged to set to it again
after dinner; though it was a great delight to him to hear him discourse, yet
he always found some invention or other to hinder him from speaking much. For
the Mareshal, to whom any great agitation was hurtful, was easily moved (and
contrary to the custom of other persons that are much in the World, and who
dive but little into things) is excessively thoughtful, and speaks often with
much eagerness, and with as much action as if he were in perfect health. They
played only to pass the time as one ought always with true friends; for if high
play destroy not friendship, yet it may lessen it.

After they had played a long time, the Mareshal spoke of going into a Meadow
by the side of a little River which runs at the foot of the Town: but the
heat of the day being not yet past, he began to walk in the Chamber, and told
the Chevalier he was thinking of that Queen of Egypt. As I was rising this
morning, said he, I was laughing at that man that you represented to me, I
fancied that I saw him with her, entertaining her with such fine things, as
martial men use to say to Ladies.

That which pleased you, said the Chevalier, was, that you have no cause to
fear if you should meet with any persons that are so nice and delicate. Not too
much of that (said the Mareshal) for I should be apt enough to show something
of my Profession, if I had not a care. And some persons have done me the favor
to give me an Item of it; and to say the truth. I have but little Learning, and
you cannot imagine how I am vexed at it; but I hope my Children will be more
knowing than their Masters themselves.

Do not regret so much, said the Chevalier, that having studied so little, you
have only lost a little Latin by it, which they would have taught you. That is
very much (replied the Mareshal) if there were nothing else: but besides, would
they not have instructed me in those Sciences which my Friend X. esteems so
much.

As he was enlarging himself upon the discourse, which he had had with that
Friend; You speak not like a man without Learning (said the Chevalier) that
which I have now heard from you, would make you be admired: and in truth, you
know very much for a Soldier and a great Courtier.

The Mareshal began to laugh, and told him, that he knew nothing of the Science
but their names. The Masters themselves, replied the Chevalier, know but very
little more. They would have taught you all that which they ordinarily teach
others with much expense of time and great pains, and you should not have
understood the more, nor been more learned, unless perhaps by that means you
might have been undeceived as to the value you set upon them.

What you say (answered the Mareshal after a little consideration) in
probabilty may be true; and you make me call to mind how I have spent whole
days with this man to hear him discourse of the Sciences. I confess freely to
you, that it always happened that I could not apprehend him; the more he took
pains to explain himself, the less he made himself understood. For to judge of
Philosophy by the Idaea that he gave me of it, I represented it to my self like
the night, and I asked him, whether it were essential to it to be dark and
obscure.

This (said he) is a very fair beginning, I have known those who have been
longer at it, who could not have said so much. But to disguise nothing to you,
all this is never well understood but when it is learned in our Youth.

One understands it not the better (said the Chevalier) for being exercised in
it in our youth, but we are less surprised with the obscurity of it. These
people are accustomed from their youth to speak of all things without
discerning any thing distinctly. That which they say never seems obscure nor
confused to them, and the most part of them imagine, that they are very well
understood, although it be impossible to know their meanings.

How comes it to pass then (said the Marshal) that we profit not by those
Instructions which the Ancients have left us, and so many other great men since
that time? I would tell you what I think of it, answered the Chevalier, if I
were not afraid to tire you, for the Subject has but little of divertisement
in it. Besides, it seems to me, that people should do well to practice what
they already know, without endeavoring either to establish it, or teach it to
others: And I for my part who knows so little, have no reason to meddle in the
matter.

I rested well last night (said the Mareshal) and we have dined so well, that
for this day all Subjects will be acceptable to me, and I defy you to weary
me. Besides, there is nothing so dull, but may be made pleasant by the help of
a good Wit, and I find that you have to spare.

Sir (said the Chevalier) you love to be merry. I speak of you (replied the
Mareshal) as I should speak to you of my self. I endeavor to show neither
vanity nor flattery; and I find the best men have but little of either, yet a
little flattery may be used on some occasions, if it be done discreetly; but
vanity is always ill becoming: and I see besides, that commonly that which vain
persons have most commendable in them is despised. It is good to hide it, but
much better to quit ones self quite of it if one can. For if one takes never so
much care not to let it appear, there comes from it insensibly I know not what
which displeases. This defect, which I fear so much, hinders me not from
telling you, that though the Intrigues of the World and some kind of Ambition
have permitted me to be but little speculative; yet I love extremely to meet a
certain sprightliness and vivacity diffusing it self every way with a comeliness
and grace.

I have been thought to have had some sparks of it; however there is nothing of
all that which people love and admire, which affects me to that point. I must
open the bottom of my heart to you, I have but little reason to be fond of
life, and I know how I ought to consider the World; but how much soever we are
dis-engaged, those who have Children cannot out look often upon them with a
concern. I have some very hopeful, and I am persuaded, that which we now
discourse on, may one day be useful to them. And that is it which obliges me
to speak upon so many Subjects. But to return to that which I asked you; how
comes it to pass, that we draw so little advantage from the Learning which
those able Graecians have left us?

You have often spoken to me of Greece, and the smallest matters that you told
me of it, have much delighted me.

I should be glad that you would now again conduct me through these renowned
places, and that by the way you could make me observe that which you think most
considerable in them.

When he had said this, he took a seat, and caused the Chevalier to sit down,
who began in this manner.

Since you will have it so, I must tell you, that Greece was the most pleasant
abode that can be imagined. The Air of the Country is mild and serene, and so
temperate, that it seldom happens that either Winter or Summer is troublesome to
them. There was abundance of all things that can be desired to live happily.
The men there were born very dextrous at all sorts of Exercises, and Art easily
compleats that which Nature has so well begun. The Ladies of Athens were
naturally very courtly, and rather brown than fair. There was a kind of
sharpness in their Conversation which pleased. And as there often appears in a
dark and still night some flashes of light, so although their manner of
speaking was plain and reserved, there brake forth always a great deal of wit.
'Twas said also, that the sound of their voices was so harmonious and charming,
that the hearing that alone was sufficient to delight. But besides the pureness
and delicacy of this Language, how many fine things do you think was said in
it. For there were many who were not contented with the graces and address of
the body only, but sought after other accomplishments. No people in the World
were more apt to love, nor knew how to make love better.

This Country had the proper Genius to invent Arts, and to bring them to
perfection. Painting appeared there in its excellence, full of spirit and
passion. There was in it always some invention which surprised and pleased much
more. What has not been said of the Sacrifice of Iphigenia, which could not be
looked on without tears? And of that Tablet of Roxana and Alexander, where the
little Cupids put Chains of Mirtles and Roses about this great Conqueror, to
lead him to the feet of his Prisoner? So strange an adventure might at first
hold us in admiration; but this Captive appeared with so surprising a Beauty,
that when they considered her a little, they no longer wondered at her Conquest.

There are also at this day some of their Statues to be seen, which would make
one fancy there were something more than humane in them. This reason alone, if
nothing else, methinks might excuse the Nations of these times for having
adored them.

They were so skillful in Music, that by adding and varying certain Notes,
they knew how to affect the heart as they had a mind. Did you never hear how
Alexander in the midst of a Feast, when there was nothing thought of but Mirth
and Jolity, was so charmed and transported with those Sounds, that he ran to
his Arms, as if he had seen the Enemy? For it was a sort of violence and
enchantment, the secret of which is not come to us, or at least that in it,
which was most rare is lost.

Their Eloquence needs not to be spoke of, it speaks enough it self: and who
can so well express what it was as it self? And did not all those fine Verses,
which appeared of their making, make the World believe that it was the Language
of the Gods, and that they spoke it in Greece as it was spoken in Heaven? To
conclude all, those excellent Knowledges which have spread into all parts, have
come from that happy Country, and even the Romans, who since that have made so
much noise, have not excelled in so many things but by their imitating the
Grecians, who were the first Inventors.

As they were a people of great reason, so it was their nature to live
peaceably; but however they were very Martial. There were always of them
Soldiers and Generals, who knew both how to fight and command. This Alexander
who was instructed according to the Discipline of the Greeks, with a little
money and but a few men, had the Courage to go and attacque the richest and
greatest Monarch of the Earth, and to overcome him twice in ranged Battle in
the midst of five or six hundred thousand men.

This young Conqueror, who ran through all parts in search of Glory, had a
Preceptor who thought it no less in his way; and if the Scholar rendered himself
Master of the World, we may say also, that the Preceptor as well by his own
ingenuity as by the favor of this Prince, had the Empire in Sciences. He had
such a Wit as is requisite to make him able in that which concerned living in
the World; but as to certain knowledges more hidden, he went not so far as some
others who had preceded him.

Those made it their felicity to know, and said, that they knew almost nothing:
they were honest men, and of a sincere faith, and treated doubtfully of
doubtful things: and for such things as they could comprehend clearly, although
they were of the highest speculation, they discoursed of them nevertheless in
such a manner, as savoured neither of Art nor Study; but so clearly and
naturally, that there needed only a good Wit to understand them at the very
first.

This person who made it not so much his aim to be learned, as to gain the
reputation of being so, found very well they were above him, and that those who
were good Judges of Wit and Learning, would never put him in the first rank.
And being persuaded that a small number (that nothing could dazzle nor delude)
who understood to what degree things were valuable, would not be favorable to
him, he applied himself to gain those who were not so clear-sighted, and to
make himself admired by the multitude.

To effect this, knowing well what sort of people he had to deal with, and what
would best take with them, he resolved to be positive, and to decide like a
Legislator, and to insinuate to them, that they needed but only to understand
him to be learned. He borrowed the inventions of those who were little known,
which he used as his own, and turned all the rest into ridicule.

Some said, that the foundations of his Building are not very sure, and that he
established Principles, which are not only obscure and doubtful, but besides so
false and improbable, that a very ordinary capacity may discover the abuse.
However, I could wish that a man of such Eminency had a little more naturalized
the Art and the Rules; for it seems to me, that the smallest matters which the
meanest capacities comprehend when they are naturally and plainly spoken, will
puzzle the most able, when delivered in an intricate method, and a studied way,
which appears in all the Writings we see of his.

That which he said well, and was well understood, might perhaps be the cause
of bringing an esteem upon all the rest which was not understood. For he has
written many very good things; and that which seems strange to me is, that
people neglect them, because they understand them: they are of a belief, that
there is nothing good which is not obscure, so that they are so far from
following the light of Reason, and framing themselves according to the
Principles of this learned Greece, that they seek nothing but false Subtilties
and Chimerical distinctions. The Master teaches a Language which he himself
understands not, and which he had from another that understood it as little.
Hence it comes, that a young man after ten or twelve years study knows nothing;
and that those who have applied themselves all their life time to this
Doctrine, are but the more ignorant. They are so much out of the way, that
every one scorns to talk any more to them about it. For the but natural Wits
are apt to take an ill habit by it; and being once accustomed to consider
things in that manner, they never afterward consider them as they really are.
I have likewise observed, that when any of this order of men are spoke of as
truly learned, able men, it is commonly a mistake; there is a mixture in them of
Art and Fallacy together, which is very ditastful.

As for Euclide and Archimedes, of whom we have formerly discoursed, those who
endeavor to perfect themselves in their Science, always make some progress
therein: that which it teaches is indubitable, and would to God we could learn
with the same certainty all other things that we desire to know. It Is good to
season a man's mind with this Science, because it makes one accurate and
judicious; but it is not good to engage ones self too far therein, in regard it
withdraws people from the Converse of the World, and renders them too
speculative. And to meet with that which we look for in it, and likewise to
make others comprehend it, we must proceed by long reasonings and inductions,
from line to line, and from figure to figure; and when we have found it, we for
the most part find too, that we might as well have been without it. Besides,
that this method is not only tedious, and that it has never been the Language
of any Court in the World; it seems to me, that when we say any thing that is
handsome, high, or of consequence, it always carries its own light with it to
make it understood, in case it be well expressed.

The Chevalier making a pause, the Marshal who had hearkened to him very
attentively, asked him whether that regular Master who marched always in order
at the head of the Doctors, had taught those dark and dull Sciences to that
young airy Prince? There are Sciences which seem more curious than necessary
(answered the Chevalier) and I do not believe, that that person who understood
so well what it is that sets the excellent Princes above the ordinary ones, had
much burdened him with it; he had a mind to make a Hero of this young Prince,
which in truth he did, and formed him by Homers pattern. It is true, that when
he instructed him in those things that were of the most concernment, he was not
wanting to discover to him the greatest secrets of his knowledge. That which
makes me speak, it is because he published some Books of this nature, and
Alexander writ him a Letter, wherein he showed enough his dislike of it.

Is this Letter (said the Mareshal) come down to us? I should be glad to see
whether this Prince had the same Genius in these matters which made him so
admired in others; and whether great men show their greatness in their meanest
actions. You may judge of the Letter (said the Chevalier) for it being not
long, I remember it, and this is it word for word.

You ought not to have made public so many excellent things which I had from
you, how shall I for the future appear to have any advantage or knowledge above
other men, if they know the same things which you have taught me? You did not
consider, that I loved rather to surpass others in knowledge and wit, than in
all things which relate to Power and Grandeur.

This was the Letter, and are you not amazed, that Alexander should write it in
the middle of his Glory and in the strength of his Ambition? Must he not needs
have a very vast mind and a wit of great extent, to be concerned for such
things as these, which Conquerours commonly make little account of?

What a man was this! (said the Mareshal) he aimed to be the first in every
thing; and who, after all this, can think that it was Fortune alone that
rendered him so puissant, and that merit had the greatest part therein?

But to return to the Sciences; I apprehend very well, that this able Preceptor
applied himself to that which was most necessary. It seems to me, that in order
to become a great Prince, and to govern the World, a man cannot know too many
things.

I agree with you (said the Chevalier) but there is an extreme difference in
being instructed, as an Artist who would excel in his Trade; and in Learning
how to discourse and understand the reason of any Subject which is offered,
without any other design than to learn what it is, and not to be mistaken. This
last knowledge, though it be very ornamental and of great use; yet it costs but
little pains, when we meet with such persons as go directly to the point.

That which I would principally wish in a King is, that he should have wit and
be a just man, and every way accomplished: and in my judgment he cannot be too
perfect in either of these Qualities. Besides, it is true, how happy soever we
are, or whatsoever new advantages we may have either of body or mind, we should
strive to be able and skillful in affairs, and begin there, if we can; for
without that the rest succeeds not always well, and it oftentimes happens, that
for want of skill, that which is best in us turns to our ruin. But it is not
good to discover too much of this crast and foresight; for the generality of
the World affect not naturally those that have so much of caution and prudence,
but are rather most favorable to those who put themselves upon adventures, and
expose all to hazard. Hence it comes, that so many persons (especially the
Ladies) like not Caesar so well as Alexander. This Talent of being able
consists in a certain dexterity and particular Genius, and is conversant in
making a right use of that which is in our power and of that which we know; but
if we are ignorant, and have nothing in our power, such a kind of Genius will
but little avail us. Therefore to have wherewith to employ it, we must get our
selves a Repute, and be well informed of things how they may be of use to us.
Those who have this kind of wit love to make themselves valued, and to take
their advantages; but they take no great pains to complete themselves in any
thing. Besides, the affairs of the World hinder them from fixing on any
particular thing; nor do you find that the ablest excel in all things.

I should be of an opinion (said the Mareshal) that a Prince should addict
himself to History; for it discovers so many things, that one may by it render
himself able and knowing, at least it is a good guide as to what concerns life.
It Is true (said the Chevalier) History may be of great use, were it only to
persuade by Examples that which we have a mind to, when we have but weak
reasons to give for it, or that we cannot make good ones be hearkened to. But
the events being different (although the Conjunctures are alike) it is
difficult to establish any thing certainly upon it, and I believe that one may
be able and knowing without the help of History. When there was neither track
nor mark of it, did not our Forefathers understand the good and the evil?

Besides, all things possible that we can imagine to our selves are as so many
Histories, if not of the past or of the present, at least of the time to come:
for in this infinite space of time and of the World, all that which can happen
meets with its time and its place.

In the mean time, History being a kind of Experience, it is certain, that we
may profit much by it; besides, there are some of them which come from so good
hands, that though we know them, it is a pleasure to us to read them. Kings do
well to read them, and also to inform themselves of things which pass in their
own times, that they may have an eye to what may be done therein, and not lose
any opportunities or advantages. It Is principally necessary to bring the young
Prince to consider that those Kings and Emperors who have been worthy men,
besides the glory which remains to them, that they led also a most happy and
pleasant life.

But the best time for taking the Air is almost past, and methinks it were good
to go and take two or three turns by the River side: Let us go (said the
Mareshal) I had not thought of it, if you had not put me in mind.

THE THIRD CONVERSATION.
THE Chevalier came in good time to the Mareshals Lodgings, who had a mind to
go forth that morning, there being neither wind nor heat, but one of those
pleasant days which are not too light nor too gloomy. The Mareshal was alone in
his Chamber leaning against the Window which looks upon the Gardens, and seeing
the Chevalier come in, he told him with a cheerful countenance, that he took it
kindly that he forsook not his Friend at a time of need, and that he had
thoughts of taking the Air, it being such fine Weather; and that he should be
glad to have so good Company. The Chevalier answered, He was very sorry that it
was no better. I doubt it not (said the Mareshal smiling) you are the most
concerned in it. One ought to wish himself of an agreeable Conversation, if it
were only to entertain himself: For a man is sometimes alone, and when he is
tired with his own thoughts, he cannot be rid of them as he would. That happens
to me but too often (said the Chevalier) and even at this instant that I am
speaking to you, I am glad to be with you; for I find that if I were alone, I
should be but little satisfied with any thing that comes into my mind. That
which you tell me does not at all please me (replied the Mareshal) for as a man
always loves himself a little, so he is apt to flatter himself, and when he is
not contented with his own thoughts, what likelihood is there that others
should be pleased, who for the most part excuse nothing? But I will not be so
nice: and walking toward the Garden, Come let us not droop (said he) speaking
in a pleasant manner; for by stirring we animate our vigor and spirits.

There were in this Garden Orange Trees full of flowers, the sight and odor of
which rejoiced and pleased them. They fetched some turns in the Walks,
entertaining themselves on diverse Subjects, and after that, being set down
under the Orange Trees; Let us enjoy this retirement, said the Mareshal, and
taste the sweet repose which is offered us, and entertain our selves in
freedom. Methinks, said the Chevalier, that one lives more in two days of
pleasure, and are more sensible what life is, than in two years full of
business and trouble. I find also that we see greater things in retirement,
than abroad in the World, or at least we consider them better. For what do we
see of great in the World, unless it be perhaps an Army, the Siege of a Town,
or the Court of a Prince? We are quickly accustomed to them, and all this
appears great to us only at the first sight. But if we look upon the different
works of Nature, the Sun setting, a still night, and these Planets which so
majestically roll over our heads, we are continually admiring them. Those who
think only of their Fortune, are employed about a little artificial World which
they understand very well; but this great natural World is unknown to them.

But for all that, replied the Mareshal, it is this little World that makes men
great, or to speak more properly, which makes them be known. For those who are
not so, of whatsoever merit they are, dye without any notice taken that they
have ever lived. Besides, consider with your self, that there is such a Prince,
who notwithstanding he has been once seen, makes one desirous to see him
again, and whom the most agreeable solitude cannot make one forget. That kind
of life is like an Enchantment, I cannot but have an eye that way; and the
young Prince being always in my thoughts, I must needs ask you whether you
think he ought to be so tenderly bred, and withal what care is usually employed
for the bringing up such persons as are so dear to us?

My opinion, answered the Chevalier, as to that is, that there should be a
great regard had to his constitution; but I should like it better to have it
done in a manner a little more hardy, than so much of tenderness, provided that
it be without any danger. We are so careful (said the Mareshal) how to secure
the present, that we hazard the future. I have seen many people, who by too
great a choiceness have been lost; they have been bred so, as that they could
not endure any thing of inconvenience, nor the least disorder. They went to bed
and rose always at a constant hour, (and you know whether the World allows any
one to live after that manner) and when they had occasion to alter their course
of life, they had not been two months in the Army, but they were dead or dying:
Whereas others who had betimes accustomed themselves to any thing, were as well
there as elsewhere, and sometimes better.

I believe, said the Chevalier, one can never break ones self of it, when one
has been delicately bred, and even the spirit and the heart may be infected by
it. Also in my judgment, it were well if a Prince did know how sometimes to put
off all that which we call Pomp and Magnificence; for there is nothing which it
needless and superfluous, which becomes not at last necessary by accustoming
ones self to it. Not that those should be hearkened to, who grumble so much
against plenty and abundance, and who will not allow of gildings nor of rich
Furniture? Most part of such sort of people know not what they would have, and
the rest pretend to get themselves an esteem by contemning that which they have
not in their power. It is well enough known, that the Carvings and fret Works
so finely painted, and the Tapestries embossed with gold, can charm neither
grief nor melancholy; and that one is the less subject to fumes, when one sees
nothing but the greenness of the fields, and that those magnificent Beds hinder
us not from thinking the nights many times very tedious. It is well enough
known, that riches are of little value, and likewise that they may be hurtful:
Not that the evil is in the having them, but in the thinking our selves the
more worthy for them, or in being dejected when we have them not. Merit and
Honesty is far above them all; and if we should come to want every thing, and
be reduced to suffer much, we should not think our selves dishonored by it, no
more than if we were sick, or of a weak constitution.

You take it right, said the Mareshal, and I think that by degrees there might
be some little attempts made to give our Prince the knowledge, or at least the
apprehension of certain things which Children use not to entertain themselves
withal, and which surpasses their ordinary capacities. For although a Child
understands not at the first what is said to him in its proper and full
signification, it prepares him against another time; they are as little Essays
of Reason, which never comes all at once.

I would not exercise him in imaginary Subjects nor nice Notions. For that
which is said, if it be unseasonable, or too far fetched, affects but very
little, and leaves but confused impressions. The smallest occasion which is
offered suffices to say something that bears some weight and pleases. For I
find that it is of consequence, that they study to form his wit agreeably. The
pleasure he will take to hearken and to look upon him, will likewise make him
desirous to be instructed; and if the persons who are about him, have a grace
in their actions and their words, he will retain at least the manner how he
ought to behave and express himself. If you consider it well, this agreeable
way of communicating ones self to others is of no small consequence. It is very
material (said the Chevalier) and as you intimated before, the surest way to
acquire that so agreeable and taking a way, is to frequent the company of those
that have it and practice it. It consists most commonly in things so delicate,
that though we are sensible of them, we can scarce say what they are. You made
use of one expression that pleased me infinitely to form the mind: I remember
some that were good Masters, who taught the Exercises in so great exactness,
that there was nothing defective or superfluous: not the least time lost, nor
the smallest motion that was not necessary to action. Those Masters told me,
that if once our bodies were made and formed, the rest would not cost much
pains. So it seems to me, that those who have their understandings formed,
understand all that is said to them, and that they want after that only some
body to put them in mind. When we meet with such, and keep them company, we
take certain opinions and certain observations, which we should never have of
our selves, and I see nothing which can contribute so much as that to the
making of a great man.

You touch me very sensibly, cried the Mareshal, if they had in my youth
discovered to me that which I have since found out by my own experience and
reflections, how much time and pains had they saved me? one word from them to
the purpose had made me comprehend a world of things, that I am sure I know
not, nor shall never know whilst I live. I reflect on all those opportunities
which I have lost, upon all those things which I might have done, and which I
was not aware of till it was too late. You cannot imagine how I blame my self
for those many sl^ps, which I had not made, if any one had lent me his hand.
All the World commits faults, even the most able persons, but the greatest only
are perceived.

He spoke with so much earnestness, that the Chevalier said to him, Sir, we
must in all things comfort our selves with this, that this life is not worth so
much, that we should thus trouble our selves in what manner we pass it. We are
ready to leave the World when we begin to understand it well, or at least we
are very far on our Journey before we have learnt the best way. You have great
reason in what you say (answered the Mareshal) but let them not allege, that
it is necessary we must be of such an age to understand to such a degree, and
that good sense cannot come but by a long experience. A Child that has
ingenuity will comprehend all that is said to him when the right means is used,
and that they accommodate themselves to his Genius.

I agree to it, said the Chevalier, but I would not over-burden him with a long
chain of instruction, nor so methodical. I rather choose to speak to him but of
a few things, and let each Precept work its effect, and commend or blame him
according as he should give occasion for either, and still give him a reason
for all I told him, in such a manner that he might come of his own accord
insensibly to make the application of it to himself. It is much better to
enlighten his Understanding rather than charge his Memory. Besides, too many
regular Precepts are forgotten before one can make use of them. They refer you
to a time when (say they) you shall see rare things, but this time is a great
while a coming.

They should so order it, that all that they say and teach to the young Prince,
may render him more knowing and agreeable to day than he was yesterday, and so
that you your self may be sensible of the progress he makes. Besides, it were
good to accustom him to be free and affable, which are virtues that make people
love great Kings. Affection produces effects which are very peculiar to it
self.

How true is that (cried the Mareshal) and of what consequence it is for a
young Prince to have the Art of making himself to be beloved? I prize it above
all (answered the Chevalier) how much do you think this noble height and
elevation of the mind and understanding contributes to it? You hit upon that
which is of greatest importance (said the Mareshal) and for that reason so soon
as he had learned that which is usually taught in his first years, I would
begin to give him some new light of things, I would enlarge his knowledge, and
show him every thing. But for fear of carrying him out of the way, and of
straggling into some unknown Country, I would have a great care to choose good
Guides, and the best of them should not escape me.

Children, said the Chevalier, are not ordinarily speculative, the most part of
them are active, and carried away with pleasures; yet there are some that are
by nature serious enough, and are capable to retire into themselves. It were to
be wished that the young Prince be neither too serious nor too active. It is the
evenest and best temper to partake of both, and to be able to pass with ease
from the one to the other. For the mind and spirit by continual thinking, is
apt to sink within it self; and if it remain so any long time, it becomes
sullen and less proper for the World. Perpetual action without intermission
produces all outward, and those who continually practice it, make no
reflections, and never come to be eminent men.

Though we have but few moments of leisure, we ought to spend them in
considering what we intend to do; for by meditating we find out the ways to
arrive to perfection; but when we believe that we have found them, it is
necessary to put them in practice, that we may know whether they are right; for
we cannot be certain or assured of it but by our own experience. If that which
we fancy to our selves to be the way to succeed in a business, be but a mere
Idaea, or some invention too difficult to put in practice, we need only make a
trial, and we shall quickly undeceive our selves. By that means we improve
every day, and still add new perfections to that which we do best.

When I came first to the Court, said the Mareshal, every body thought that to
be an accomplished man. There was nothing requisite but Dancing well, running
the Ring, or something of this nature; every one chose that which he liked
best, and set himself to it, as if it had been his Trade.

These sort of things add a grace to a man when he well performs them, as well
as they do at all other times; I mean that the body is the freer, and not so
stiff, and their skill in those Exercises is perceived, although they stand
still. You know it is a great advantage to be a good Actor: Action, said the
Chevalier, is a kind of expression, and as words well chosen are agreeable when
they express things that please, so all which is expressed by the face or gesture
of the body, is well received when it is done with a good grace. But we must
not mistake, there are those that are sometimes Actors of nothing, as well as
Speakers of nothing. Action has its defects as well as the Language, and to
excel in both, we must observe in all subjects that which will best please.

This Talent of being a good Actor seems to me very necessary for persons that
live abroad in the World, and it is much like that which is called now adays
(to speak a la Mode) Having a good Air; but it is not only in that, that the
good Air appears, it has an influence and spreads it self upon every thing,
and to say in a word what it is, it consists in doing well that which we do.
People confound it many times with the word Agreement, although there is very
much difference between them. The good Air shows it self at the first; it is
more regular and more in order. Agreement is more flattering and insinuating; it
goes more directly to the heart, and by more secret ways: The good Air gives
more admiration, and the Agreement more of Love. Young people who are not as yet
perfect, commonly have not the good Air nor certain Agrements like those who
are masters of it.

Some people who take pleasure to discourse, said the Mareshal, (smiling) like
very well such Subjects as these, to show their Wit in, but it is not
altogether so pleasant to those that hear them; but when any one understands
well that which he aims at, he says nothing that is impertinent, and his Reason
and Learning are remarkable enough.

Now to return to our ancient Courtiers, as the most part of Exercises are only
proper for a certain Age; it happens, that those who had addicted themselves
only to them, when their Youth was past, they knew no longer how to employ
themselves. Therefore I would not wish any to depend principally on such
Exercises: I know very well that they are not to be neglected, but there is
something which is better. In effect, I have always believed that one should
not so much wish for any thing as for Wit, and many times people fail of it by
their own fault: And I am now more of that opinion than I was, that it is
impossible not to have it, if one be brought up in the Company of some people.

At least, added the Chevalier, a late eminent Philosopher holds, that all the
World naturally have very near the same capacity: and that the principal
difference proceeds only from the care that is taken to form it, or else from
the course and bent that people take of themselves.

I cannot altogether agree to that (said the Mareshal) the advantage is to be
ascribed to a happy birth in the first place, and Art afterward perfects it.
As to the learning by ones self, it seldom happens, that the mind without some
help takes the best courses to do it; and I wonder at some Princes who are
nevertheless excellent men, although in their Youth they have been taught but
very few things. The most part of those who are about them fancy, that it is
not good to proceed too hastily, and that it might prejudice their health;
which I should like well enough, provided that there be regard had to the
consequences, and that they consider how dangerous it may be, to accustom a
young Prince to be without Wit. Wherefore they must endeavor to instruct him
in a pleasant way, and be always teaching him something without tiring him.

But to return to those Princes who are the most admired, and who have formed
and instructed themselves, I do not see that we can establish any Maxims upon
so few Examples: Neither am I of the opinion (said the Chevalier) that any one
should rely upon it, and I believe that the surest way to accomplish ones
self, is to have recourse to well-bred persons; as the voice improves by
singing, and one learns how to order it with skill by practicing under a good
Master; so Wit insinuates and communicates it self insensibly amongst persons
who truly have it. There is no doubt but it may be acquired, if an able man set
about it.

It should therefore be my advice (continued the Chevalier) that those who have
Wit, and are well-bred men, be not only well received by this Prince, but
likewise that care be taken to find them out and draw them thither; for
commonly they are not Traders, nor forward to show themselves: they know how to
content themselves with their own Fortune; and besides that, they are so rarely
met with, that those who understand them well need not fear to be troubled with
too many of them. I do not remember that I ever in my life saw so great a
number of them at one time, but I could have wished them more.

This sort of people always say something that pleases, and never do any thing
which has not some mark of Worth and Breeding; and by conversing with, and
observing them, we not only inform our selves of such things as are necessary
to be known for the making of an accomplished man, but also we learn how to
apply them, and likewise so far as to know when it is proper and mannerly to be
silent. Yet we see such persons sometimes, without taking notice of this worth
in them; they put me in mind of the best Artists, who are less forward than the
others, and that proceed not so much from a laziness or negligence in them, as
from a certain aversion which the most part of well-bred persons have to set a
value upon themselves.

When I chance to meet with any such persons, I know how to distinguish them;
and though I hear very good things come from them, and they behave themselves
with as much becomingness as can be desired, I make no conclusion from thence;
for many times this is but a borrowed Language and the actings of a Part, I
always take notice whether there be a foundation, and whether there be nothing
that contradicts. In short, I regard not so much that which appears so polite
and regular, as I do certain other things which shows that the Understanding
goes further, and is of a larger extent.

Children seek not always the company of Children; those who are of a bold
ambitious nature love to be amongst men, especially if they be pleasant. In my
opinion they should accustom the young Prince to divert himself amongst such;
one cannot imagine a more sure and less painful way to render him the most
accomplished Prince of the World, than the having even in his youth such
Courtiers?

For as a Child without any study learneth the Tongue of those people whom he
hears speak, and afterward speaks it naturally; so he will not fail to learn
insensibly the manners and actions of those who are about him, and all that he
gains in that manner becomes natural to him. They should make use, as much as
is possible, (answered the Mareshal) of this way of instructing him; but that
alone is not sufficient to teach him to speak well; for to effect that, it is
necessary to mix a little of Art and Study. I acknowledge that (said the
Chevalier) and indeed one cannot have too much of either of them; but we must
make it our principal business to put into him such a kind of Wit, which I
cannot express, and which neither Books nor Learned men can hardly ever give
him. It seems to me, that those who have it want neither Art nor Learning: and
when one has it not, however complete one may be in any thing, there is almost
always some unhappy circumstance which spoils that which one does best. It
seems then, that to the completing of an honest worthy man, there is nothing
necessary but well speaking and well doing.

Speaking well is what we are discoursing of; when we have learned all the
secrets of a Tongue, with such other things as are taught in relation to well
speaking, all this is nothing, in truth, if we know nothing but this; for what
probability is there of persuading or pleasing knowing persons, or what
likelihood of getting an interest in them, unless we understand how to touch
them, and can hit upon the right way to gain them? The most part of the great
Masters (if you observe them) say not a word of this.

Without this knowledge (said the Mareshal) it would be difficult to succeed
well, especially in the Commerce of the World, where the least failings are
taken notice of. When this misfortune happens, we cannot recover our selves
when we would; and I see that it is of the greatest importance to have this
sort of Wit, and to understand the World very well. I believe nevertheless,
that it would be very difficult to speak well upon all sorts of Subjects
without either Art or Rules.

This Art (said the Chevalier) is easily learned, and is but a small matter (at
least in the manner it is usually taught) the most part of those who know it,
are but little the more able for it. Whether it be that the Precepts which have
been given them are not very good, or that they have not been taught to make
use of them as they ought. If instructions that were excellent were given, and
they made practice them well as they gave them, it would without doubt be a
great help to well speaking.

As for the Rules that are to be given, they must follow exactly those that are
in use; the most part of those Rules regard the purity of the Language, and I
find that many persons without having learned them, do notwithstanding put them
in practice. There are other Rules that extend themselves further, which Reason
and long Experience have made so. They are things which the Masters of that Art
have observed from that which has sometimes succeeded well, and for that reason
they thought that they might give them for Rules; but they are very often so
uncertain, that they are not to be made use of, but according as one finds or
judges them to the purpose; and if any one ties himself to them, he must have a
regard to time and circumstances. So that if any one by his industry or by
chance should discover something that is better and more than has hitherto
been seen, he ought to make use of his own discoveries and invention.

The best Art which makes us excel in speaking, shows it self only under a
natural dress and appearance, it likes plain and natural beauty; but (and
though it endeavors to make its beauty and perfections to appear in their
proper and best light) it contrives principally how to hide it self. Do you
remember those enchanted Gardens of the Palace of Armide?

E quel che'l bello, e'l caro accresce a l'opre, L'art^ che tutto fa nulla si
scopre. I find that those who are the most perfect, show themselves least, and
when things smell of Art and Study, we may conclude that those who say them
have but little of either, or else that they know not how to make use of them.
This is the fault of people who speak so, that they cannot be understood by any
(though they have never so much Wit) unless they be learned: But as for those
who understand not as they ought, by reason of their little knowledge, or that
they are not acquainted with the World, they must blame only themselves for it.

But this is a great deal for one sitting, if you have a mind to walk again, I
perceive amongst these Orange Trees an Alley where you will find it cool. I see
well (said the Mareshal rising up) that we shall discourse no more for to day,
let us fetch two or three turns, and then to Dinner; for believe me, my stomach
begins to call: And after Dinner we will go to M.L.G. where we will play all
day. I was so pleased with our Walk yesterday, that I must carry you thither
again to morrow, not to the same place, but on the other side of the River upon
that rising Hill, I will come to your Lodgings, and if you are within, we will
go to the Hermitage.

THE FOURTH CONVERSATION.
ACcording to his promise the Mareshal came to call the Chevalier about four or
five of the Clock in the Evening. It was fair Weather, but a little hot,
according to the season; they quickly came to the Hermitage, which is but half
a mile from the Town. There is a Cell and a Chapel with a Garden to it; they
could not get in, because that no Hermit lived there, and the two Religious
men which were used to be there were gone forth that day, the Mareshal and the
Chevalier went down a little further into the Wood, where the Trees a little
further were very thick and tufted. Under this thickness (which the Sun could
not penetrate) they walked upon the Turf, as in a Meadow where the grass begins
but just to peep forth.

After they had walked a while, they stayed and sat down under an old Oak
extremely thick, And what shall we say, cried the Mareshal, or rather what
shall we not say, I have spent the night at play where you left me, said the
Chevalier, and that has made me very dull. I did not perceive it, said the
Mareshal, though we discoursed by the way. The Coach kept me stirring, said the
Chevalier, now I am at quiet, the freshness of this Wood makes me drowsy: I am
sometimes as you are now, answered the Mareshal, and when I am in that
condition, methinks I feel a certain sweetness, which is found between sleeping
and waking, and I think of nothing, only I am sensibly much pleased; but
commonly I put it by, that I may be good Company, and besides one sleeps the
better for it at night.

You told me as you were coming along, continued the Mareshal, that those
persons who express themselves best, use repetitions oftener than others, and
yet it is thought a defect in them. Is there not something of contradiction in
that? I remember it, said the Chevalier, and I do not think my self mistaken in
it, that is, because people who speak well, make use at first of the best words
and Phrases to express their thoughts, and when there is occasion to touch
again upon the same things (as it often happens) although they know very well
that Variety pleases, yet it is troublesome to them to quit the best expression
to make use of a worse: whereas those who are not so curious, make use of the
first that presents it self; so that Chance gives a Variety to their Language.
And because we are quickly tired with one manner of speaking (although it be
the exactest) to make that which it signifies to be understood, we are apt to
think it some defect, and those who speak purely, are more subject to it than
the others; for there is a good and evil in all things, and so there is in
Language, which in some kind cannot be too pure, but diversity is less tiresom,
and the meanest word can find a fit place, our Tongue abounds not so much in
words, that we need to reject it.

Some Ladies who have an admirable Wit, and who ought to make use of it, to do
Justice to every thing, condemn some very good words, which it is almost
impossible to be without. Those persons are they who use them too often, and
commonly to little purpose, that have given them this aversion; but though we
must submit to the Judgment, and likewise to the aversion of those Ladies, yet
for all that, I think it were not amiss to appeal sometimes to so many
excellent men, who judge soundly and without caprice, and who have had meetings
so long to decide concerning Language. I think it so, said the Mareshal, and it
is not a business to be neglected; for the sweetest moments of our life pass in
entertaining one another, and very few things are done without speaking; and I
find by experience, that it is a great advantage to succeed in it: But that in
it which appears to me of the greatest importance is, that occasions are
offered, wherein we have need of skill and wit to gain people, and to make them
understand that one is in the right: people content themselves with the being
able to acquit themselves tolerably well in this, which I have been speaking
of; and the most part of them are persuaded, that if they can do a thing well,
it is no hard matter to do it a little better, whereas in truth therein
consists that which we call Perfection, and is the only difference between
excellent Workmen and ordinary.

You have quite awakened me, said the Chevalier, with this word, a little
better, which appears to me very difficult; but how happy is one that is able
to attain to it! And I am of your Judgment, that it cannot be too much
endeavored in Conversation, it is the surest means to make our selves to be
beloved; besides, I find that when we please other persons well, we are
likewise the better pleased with our selves, and thereon depends the greatest
happiness of our life.

As to those opportunities and occasions, of which you speak, wherein those who
are the skilfullest for the most part carry it, I am of opinion, that the best
words and ways we can invent to persuade are not good, but so far only as they
are decent and honest, and that we should not desire to overcome like barbarous
Princes on any terms, but like the Heroes in such a manner as may please even
the vanquished themselves.

I find nothing so commendable, as to have an upright and sincere heart; that
seems to be the foundation of Wisdom, or at least all wicked people are by me
suspepected of folly. It is impossible to have a noble and well framed mind,
but it must be somewhat across and contrary to the interest of the World; and
even in the transports of the most violent passions, such persons will through
them discern that which is most honest, and love it best.

Those who have an upright heart, their Judgment, how small soever, will be the
same; and observe always, that those people who have so many turnings and
doubles in their heart, never have a right Understanding: there is always some
counterfeit light which gives them false appearances, and then their artifices
and craft show that they have not parts enough to effect their designs by fair
and honest ways, the way that pleases worthy persons, is that of freedom and
plain dealing.

What a Gracefulness so clear a Source gives to all the actions of our lives!
how it beautifies our words and thoughts! and how aimable a thing it is to
speak well, when so much sincerity goes along with it! One may not perhaps be
happy in all things in following this Maxim (neither are those so who are
biassed to their own interest) at the least one is sure to gain the esteem and
affection of those who understand true merit, and what can one desire more?

As the Chevalier was speaking, he took notice that the Marshal wholly gave
himself up to hearken to him, and fearing lest so much attention might be
hurtful to him, he endeavored to divert him by some pleasant digression. The
Mareshal, who perceived it, I see very well, said he, that you are willing to
favor my health, but you take not the right way. Every one must be dealt with
according to that spirit that is in them: you must accommodate your self to
every palate; that which is a diversion to most people, is tedious to me, sense
and reason never tire me: those things more especially which may make me more
honest and accomplished, always please me. Well then, let us continue, said the
Chevalier, one would not have thought you so serious.

Amongst persons of rare merit, of whom I have some Idaea; I see some of them
who behave themselves so nobly in every thing, that they undertake they cannot
be thought on without admiration, and I take notice also of others who speak in
so sublime a manner, that it is very hard to attain to it; however one should
strive to equal them both in the one and the other, and if it be possible to
surpass them: for be it in acting or in speaking, there is nothing which is not
of this value, that deserves to be loved and admired. When the heart and brain
are full of these thoughts, and people accustomed to them from their infancy,
from thence we may justly expect something very rare and exquisite to be
produced.

We need not trouble our selves whether all necessary consequences are made
good. It imports not much whether one be at the first so equal or so regular,
provided that the manner be so fair and noble, that those who consider it,
cannot say how one may go; with a little care and time one arrives at
perfection, and it seems, that Fortune her self takes delight to complete any
thing which is well begun. I know some who speak well, and commit none of those
we call faults, but it is always in the same tone: we know what we are to
expect from them; and in my judgment there is nothing we should so much
endeavor to avoid as the not having something extraordinary in our discourse.
It may so happen, that it is for want of a good occasion that we say nothing
that is excellent, and the subject may not permit it. Yet for all this there is
no subject so untoward, which may not be turned to some pleasant sense by those
who know how to make good use of their Wit. For that which for the most part
seems difficult to me, and even impossible, is not so much in it self, as
because of our little skill and invention; for people might do many things that
would cause astonishment, if they had industry enough to discover the ways of
doing it; and it is certain, that there are such ways, though they are not
always found out.

While people are young, they cannot judge rightly of any thing, and if it
comes to pass, that either by experience, reflections, or the meeting with some
intelligent persons, they come to be of another mind, they despise that which
they once so much admired, and many times they laugh at themselves, when they
examine themselves without flattery. But if any one knew the just value of
every thing aright, do you not think that he would divert himself, and make
good sport with those people that are cried up, at least with those that
presume, and have a great opinion of themselves? As for the rest who satisfy
themselves with small matters, and have humble thoughts of themselves, one
cannot laugh at them, although they do amiss, because they know that all the
World is capable of committing the like errors, and they act upon that Maxim.

And so, though we have but a glimpse, or do but fancy something better than
that which we speak, yet we must have a little confidence to express it well
and with a good grace. But nothing is so great a hindrance to the attaining
perfection, as the belief that one has already found it.

It comes into my mind (said the Mareshal smiling) that the more perfect one
is, the more this that we say may be useful, and that our entertainments are
almost like (if the comparison offends you not) the Commentaries of Caesar, by
which no body could much profit, unless he were a great Soldier before. For we
touch by the by only on that which offers it self as necessary for the making
of a worthy honest man. What we say concerns those only who are animated with
such a kind of Spirit as we are; as for the rest, they will never go very far.
But do you think that this Spirit may be acquired? If you judge it may, how
would you begin to infuse it into Children? for one must not pretend to begin
with them so high at the first.

It were to be wished, that those who educate Children, said the Chevalier,
would endeavor to make them love or hate that which deserves the one or the
other, I mean as much as Childhood will permit, and to order it so, that they
may have a good taste or discernment. For to express my self well, I must make
use of this word, which so many people abuse, a good taste would make him
understand what he ought to desire to learn, and the means to be excellent in
it: For if he had aforehand a right apprehension of good and of evil, the very
course of things would instruct him without a Governor, and likewise the
aversion to that which is evil, whenever he saw it, would be a sufficient
Lesson to him to avoid it.

One cannot have too curious a taste to discern between true and false
pleasures, and not be deceived in what pleases or displeases. That which I mean
by it is, not to disrelish every thing, like a sick person, but to be able to
judge well of any thing that presents it self I know not by what a kind of
apprehension (which I cannot express) which works quicker, and is sometimes
more in the right, than reflections are; but for all that we must not reject
too severely that which is displeasing, or be too busy with our reproofs. The
most agreeable way of instructing and reforming others, is to endeavor to do
that well our selves, which we see them do ill, by which means we make our life
the more easy. Besides, I would have it so ordered, that a young man's wit and
heart be disposed as it ought to be. Wit finds out the means to attain to
perfection, and the heart is necessary to put in practice that which we judge
to be best; for honesty is not a mere speculation, it is fit it should be active
and govern.

We see many Children, said the Mareshal, who are not without some prudence and
a foresight of what may be either hurtful or beneficial to them; but that
which is called the having a good taste (for I dare use this word as well as
you all the elegant ways of speaking, when they are not affected, and are well
applied, are becoming enough) I say, that which I called the having a good
taste, must not be expected from young people, unless they are born with a much
more than an ordinary Genius, or that there has been a great care had in their
Education. I do not know whence that proceeds, unless it be, that by a natural
instinct, they take at first to that which appears to them the most necessary,
and that the rest affects them but very little.

This is an excellent reason which you give, said the Chevalier, and I look
upon it as a hard matter for one that is young not to be transported with that
which sparkles, and makes the best show, there should be as much care as could
be taken to undeceive Children, because that it is natural to them as well as
to the people in general to love Shows; and even these who are born Princes,
they are inclined naturally to delight in Stage Plays and public Spectacles.
But those that are perfect, and that have a good judgment, regard not things of
show, when they are but of little worth; those which are but of little luster
and great prize, please them. That is to be taken notice of in all things, even
in our thoughts and understandings; for if those sorts of things seem very
fine, they are so only in appearance, and presently disliked; those that are so
in reality, without appearance, the more they are considered, the better they
are liked: the reason is, because they are fair of themselves, without any
helps or ornaments, and that still we discover some new and secret graces in
them, which were not at the first perceived.

How comes it to pass, said the Mareshal, that some people who express
themselves well upon some certain Subjects, differ so much from themselves,
when they undertake to discourse of other things? and do not admire you that
that man (whom we have both known, and who had so much Wit) has left behind
him such ill Love Letters, he who writ such good ones on other Subjects? How
could that be? was it not still one and the same Genius? It is indeed the same
Genius, answered the Chevalier, but the most accomplished in the World is not
able alike in all things, and diversity of Subjects cause him to produce very
different effects.

Besides, to do a thing well, it is not enough to know the manner of doing it,
but we must take delight in it, and not be tired with it. We find that commonly
good Masters speak well of that which relates to their own Trade, and I fancy
to my self, that this man's Trade was not making of Love, or at least that he
never well understood what it was. It cannot be said to be want of Wit, if his
Letters concerning Love are not as his others so well esteemed, for there is in
some of them more than enough; but the Wit was ill employed, when his business
was to touch the heart, he was thinking how to refine things, and show his
witty conceits. He writ to a Lady, with whom he was passionately in Love, that
his Soul was so weak, that it had not strength enough to go quite out of his
body, that was the reason only which kept a little life in him: To another,
that the only thing that hindered him from dying was, that he should have some
pleasure in it, and that he resolve he would not receive any in her absence.

He took these inventions from the Spaniards, and I make no doubt but they are
good Models; but he made use of them unseasonably. For this gallant and frolic
manner of writing, which might be well received at the beginning of an Amor,
was not seasonable in the height of the fit, at which time people seldom use to
droll and jest. Besides, when he speaks seriously he makes it his business
chiefly to persuade her of his Love, and that the quickest and best way to
succeed is not to be so forward to declare ones Love. It were much more to the
purpose for him to find out a way how to render his affection agreeable and
acceptable to her. For a handsome Woman easily believes that she does not
displease, and I think she is in the right, so that to tell her she is handsome,
and that we love her, need be the least part of our care; she desires not
always to be loved, and the most important thing consists in the ordering of
it, so that if you did love her, she might be very glad of it; we ought at
least to begin there. I find he very punctually examines all that passed in his
heart, and to speak my judgment, he should remember that it is not the nature
of violent passions to reflect upon themselves. A man that is transported with
anger, does not think that he is in such a fury, and one that is confounded
with Love perceives not that he is so, or at least if he do take notice of it,
he considers himself no otherwise than in a natural estate, which he believes
can never alter. I take notice also, that he does so exaggerate his grief and
despair, that one may easily perceive that it is all false. It were much better
to say less of it, and leave them the more to think. Besides, Love should be
discerned a good while by the person beloved, without her being told of it, and
above all, care must be taken not to make any complaint that savours of
Artifice, or that may give any distrust of what we say. That Adventure of
Astraea and her Lover, who threw himself into the River Lignon, is easy and
natural: They used no such high strains one to the other; their affection
appeared not so much in their words, but all that was observed in them
discovered it, and there never was any thing seen more tender and more
affecting.

Besides it seems to me, that there is no Subject that can less allow of false
Ornaments; and that that person whom we mentioned, had sometimes (contrary to
his custom) made use of some when he writ his Love Letters; but that which was
most displeasing in him, was his too open and plain proceeding in that affair.
The fair Goddess (said an ancient Greek) does not think well nor approve of any
that speak so openly of her Mysteries; and any one without being told it, may
see that the veiling of them has a good effect, and the expressions thereof
cannot be too delicate and obscure: witness this Verse,

IN en connois de plus miserables? I find notwithstanding, said the Mareshal,
that this person has done something that is admirable in this kind, which
agrees but ill with what you believe of him, that he was not most knowing in
these matters. Can there be any thing more in perfection than that which is
spoken to his Heroine? The praise of that, said the Chevalier, is not wholly
due to him: A Lady who gave him the design and the invention, ought to have the
greatest share of it. It is the same Lady whom he has so well represented
under the name of Zelide. The work was for some time in her hands before any had
seen it; that which has so much charmed you comes from her, and you knowing
her cannot wonder at it. You tell me a great deal of News, said the Marshal,
and perhaps you think that you have fully satisfied me; but I have still one
question more to ask you.

What is it that they mean by that high Eloquence which does what it pleases,
as so many people say? I have asked some concerning it, who have bragged that
they understood what it was, but never any one as yet could make me comprehend
it. That which you ask me, said the Chevalier, is so little understood in the
World, that even the word Eloquence might be ill received: For it seems* to me,
that it is seldom used but to play upon those who are less pleased with good
sense than with a fine fantastical way of speaking.

It may be made use of in Raillery, said the Mareshal, but it would show too
much of niceness, and indeed of ignorance, to reject it altogether. Besides, at
the Court they seldom speak of other things than what they see there, and those
kind of things in which every one easily interests himself and understands,
makes that which is said seem agreeable. But in such retired places as these,
if we did not entertain our selves on certain Subjects, which the Court trouble
not themselves withal, we should spend our time but unpleasantly.

I agree to it, said the Chevalier, and that which you aim at deserves very
well to be examined; but the most part of those things which are considered
rather by apprehension than by reason, are always something doubtful, and this
same is of that number, and so are all those that concern the Graces, and
likewise the Beauty, although the cause of this latter is less hidden than that
of the Graces. If there were a dispute concerning two handsome Women which of
them was the most agreeable and fairest, it would be hard to decide it, or at
least to make it so cleary appear, that all people in the World should agree to
it. One might say on such an occasion, such a thing causes such an effect in
me; but I know not what others think of it. I take this to serve as an excuse
to my self, if I am singular in my opinion.

I do not think this high Eloquence to be so as it is imagined. People will
have that it ought to amaze, and that it must be always a high strain. And as
they are of opinion, that a plain and familiar style is low and mean; so they
believe that others cannot appear naturally. If it should be so too, it is
because they have more regard to the Ornament than to the Excellency of the
hing, and they do not consider that they should judge of it, as they do of
gold, which is esteemed according to its refinedness and purity.

I should be of a quite contrary Judgment to those who will have it always
storming and thundering; and I think that it naturally loves to show it self
without trouble and noise.

As it is the finest and most noble, it is also the most difficult and least
common, it proceeds from a just and subtle discernment, but so high and of so
large an extent, that there is nothing can be found above or beyond his. It is
a fire pure and quick, and there are discovered by chance some glances of it,
even in the most careless and ordinary Conversations. Although it addresses it
self principally to the mind, and seems to make the gaining of that its only
aim, yet it never fails to reach the heart. If any one indeed have a mind to
perplex and put the Soul in disorder, they must take another way more sensible,
and a more lively tone; but this high Eloquence is not found but in the
loftiness of high conceptions. Those who understand it only as that which is
called a fine Style, do not take notice (if I mistake not) of that which it
has most exquisite in it. Also in my judgment there must be a great stock of
Beauty to support great Ornaments, and it seldom happens, that people conceive
things that require such ^ magnificent way of expressing them. That which I
have said is a little intricate, and may not perhaps be well understood,
peradventure it may be better apprehended in a more familiar and known Subject.

When Ladies have a mind to appear, as it were to vie with others in a great
Assembly, you know they adorn themselves to please rather than to dazzle the
sight: to some the richest attire is most becoming, and to others the most
modest; and commonly they avoid extremities, they strive not to be too dull nor
too glittering; we scarce see two in the same dress, and this variety is that
which embellisheth the Scene.

Since I am fallen upon this, I find that the Eloquence which conceives well,
and expresses it self ill, is much like a handsome Woman ill dressed, or in a
careless habit; and that that which makes it self not much to be considered as
to Wit, but is very ready and dexterous as to the Language, may resemble a
Woman passably handsome, but very exactly dressed and set out, who for all her
great care charms no body. But if wit and a ready clear expression meddle, that
is Beauty it self, whereto nothing is wanting, and which pleases in perfection.

I am very much satisfied with the Idaea that you give me of it, said the
Mareshal, and I conclude thereupon, that to express ones self well, one must
endeavor to find out that in a Subject which is best and most agreeable; but
not strive so much to give a luster to the things that one says, as to place
them in such a manner which is most proper and best becomes them.

I would not be too florid in the beginning; it is a thing much to be wished,
that all that one says be good and fine, according as the Subject merits: but
we must proceed by degrees: Nature is in that as in all other things, a very
knowing Mistress. Consider how she proceeds insensibly, the fairest day when it
begins first to break and appear, has so little light, that it is hardly
discernable whether it be day or night. I discover all my thoughts to you, and
if I am deceived, or take one thing for another, I hope you will take notice of
it to me.

In my mind nothing is so great a sign, that the way of speaking is noble, as
when it leaves some certain things to be apprehended without speaking them: the
expression is clear enough, if one understands all that another says, although
we do not at the first understand all that he thinks, or that his sense extends
it self beyond his words.

People many times seek out so many subtilties, and refine so upon a Subject,
that that which was at first well said, becomes at last not so; when we have
hit the point right, it is good to know when to give over, and to proceed to
other matters: I would likewise give them another face and turn, because
diversity seems not tedious.

The person that speaks should accommodate himself to the Understanding of
those who hear him. The more Wit one has, the more he ought to be careful of
it. Many times by thinking and speaking things which few people have been used
to hear, though they are expressed very clearly, they may be carried so high,
that their heads may be giddy and turn round. Nevertheless this defect should
have its due, and I find it so seldom, that I meet with none that do complain
of it, nor who are not glad of it; and at the worst we may easily help it and
break our selves of it.

As to those they call Jests or Sayings, I should think that they depend not
less upon the subject, nay even upon chance, than upon the understanding and
wit; and that we must watch our time to bring them out. There is no great need
of them, I think, and it is enough, if one speaks like a wellbred honest man.
That which is just and proper upon every occasion that is offered, it is better
far than fine conceits; yet for all that they are much liked, and I should not
wonder at it, if in effect they be good conceits; but I admire that
Equivocations, which have only the appearance of them, have brought people of
very ordinary wits into credit.

They affect to speak Equivocations and Allusions now adays, as heretofore they
did to make Portraictures and Characters. For there is always, you know, some
false Agrements wherewith the World is abused.

I think, said the Chevalier, this to be a very ill invention; for to make ones
self be heard with pleasure, one must say such things as others will be glad to
hear, and say them pleasantly. I fancy that those makers of Characters and
Portraictures did neither of these. For the most part of those whom they
represented so curiously, there was so little likeness, that the persons could
not be known. And besides their manner and way of portraicting was not very
good; for to make people believe what they take notice of to be most rare or
singular in them (whether it be that they would commend or lessen them) there
is a more noble and sure way than to draw as they do, even to the smallest
Lines.

Excellent Painters never draw all; they always allow something for you to
exercise your imagination on, and still leave them more to find out than they
discover. That famous Greek so celebrated for his Wit and Inventing, did not
spend much of his time in describing Helena. He said not scarce any thing of
her Face, nor of her Stature, and yet for all that he has persuaded all the
World, that she was the beautifullest Woman that ever was seen.

Tasso, who on other Subjects touched like a Master, should have done well to
have imitated him, and when he speaks of the Arrival of Armide into the Camp of
the Christians, if he had contented himself with saying in two or three words,
that as soon as she appeared, and that they had heard her speak, they had a
mind to forsake all to follow her, and that even the General who ought to have
been more reserved, and less sensible, was tempted by her, we should then
without doubt, have thought her more amiable. All that he heaps together of the
Charms of Nature and of Art, gives us not so fair an Idaea, as that which one
might form to ones self, and one never fails in doing it.

The graces appear but very rarely, and even when they are seen they will not
be considered full-fac'd nor uncovered, it is hard to draw them well; and if
one should compass it, every one looking upon them with different eyes, the
Picture would never please every body.

But the Sun is setting, and is it not time think you to retire? Let us go,
said the Mareshal, and if you think it convenient we will walk a while for a
little more Exercise.

THE FIFTH CONVERSATION.
THE Mareshal received Letters often from Paris and from the Court, and writ
thither as often to keep up the Commerce, showed the Chevalier sometimes what
he had written. I cannot understand why people thought he was not an
extraordinary person in that way as he was in speaking. It seems to me, that
what he writes shows much of a worthy well-bred man, and there is always wit in
it.

It is true, that there is not so much order and placing of words required in
Conversation, which very few mind in speaking. I believe nevertheless, that if
people did observe it, so that it seemed neither strained nor affected, they
would speak much better. However, if the things that are said are good
severally, and that there be a grace in speaking them, they are well received.
But commonly that which is written must have a connection, and it must be so
ordered, that there may be no appearance that any pains was taken in observing
it. And if any one pretend to do something worth the being read; it is not
enough that each piece please in it self, but they must be made the one to fit
* and agree with the other, and they must be proportionate.

It is taken notice of the Mareshal, that he loves always to be sprightly and
full of fire, and though he chiefly studies to please those who understand and
judge best, yet he neglects not the esteem of others. In that he resembles
those Ladies, who cannot endure any one should escape them: Setting aside
certain History, some few Relations, and a small number of Books which he has
read, he is only well versed in the World, yet for all that he understands
every thing. It happens also very often, that he improves and carries things
further, which he has but newly learned. What would a young man of such parts
as his come to, if he were educated by good Masters?

The Chevalier came to his house the next day from a Conversation that he had
been at. The Mareshal was retired into his Chamber after he rose from the
Table, and seeing the Chevalier come in, I have very much wished for you, said
he to him, to assist me against five or six very Learned men, who would be good
company enough if they had but common sense. Before we sat down to Dinner, I
set them disputing, and I spoke in my turn; but when I thought I should triumph
most, there were two of them (if I am not mistaken) who whispered to each
other, that they could not apprehend what it was that was thought so rare in
me. They make me call to mind, said the Chevalier, a very able man, that I knew
that had read over all Tasso with very much attention, without finding in it
either Wit, or any thing to please him.

One never informs ones self by those sort of people, said the Mareshal, they
never apprehend aright those things that are said to them: where there is least
sense, there is enough for them, and any thing that is proposed, although never
so clear, seems obscure to them. Besides, they have a Language apart, which I
understand not, and which would be very ill received in the World. And it so
happens, that instead of coming to the knot of the business, they divide that
which you ask them into so many parts, that the one puts the other out of ones
mind; so that one remembers no longer what it was. It much delights me to see
how they range in such great order in things that are of so little consequence.
Any one that has a just Wit and a true Judgment, pursues closely that which
they hear spoken, or what they speak themselves, without varying it into so
many forms and figures. I am pleased that every one in Conversation should seek
an agreeable diversity and some little digressions, and that they by degrees
should sometimes raise themselves, if the occasion permits. Though one wanders
and soars a little too high, one may well enough recover ones self: and if my
Judgment may be allowed, one ought to go whithersoever ones Genius leads,
without any other division or distinction than that of good sense; at least
this manner is more conformable to our apprehensions and thoughts, than that so
regular Method of some people, who disguise every thing. There is nothing in
that which is natural, nor for the most part which is real; therefore when they
breed up Children, I know not why they should accustom them to such impertinent
constrained Rules, which afterward they cannot practice without rendering
themselves ridiculous?

Study may hinder, said the Chevalier, at least we must not pretend that it
will infallibly make Masterpieces. Nor the World neither, said the Mareshal,
does not do it always, especially of those people who are bred only in the
Army; who commonly are not of a very pleasing Conversation; but in recompense
of that they are said to have gained Reputation and Honor, as if that would
excuse their wants in every thing else: we may between our selves say, that
nothing is so great a dishonor as to be disagreeable and morose. It is
something like certain Women that pretend to Virtue, who value themselves much
upon their being coy and fierce; for, to prize so small a matter so much* makes
me think that all is but counterfeit and affected, and that they are easier won
upon, than those who observe good Manners and Breeding, and are as affable as
these are severe. The first seems to me to desire to be thought what she is not
by some people which she likes not, and with whom she does not desire to
engage; the other is satisfied that she knows her self honest.

When we judge sincerely, said the Chevalier, there is scarce any thing to be
found that is perfect: but the more exquisite discernment one has, the more it
is for ones honor to be indulgent, and we must not expect to meet with people
as one would have them; but we should endeavor to make them such, and
especially if we love them, and are obliged to pass our time with them. As for
others that one sees but by chance, they are not to be ordered as we will; they
can only be a l'ttle improved by telling them such things as are judged most
proper; and if they are capable of profiting by them, that will at the least
dispose them to complete themselves.

As soon as I begin to speak, said the Mareshal, you understand me better than
I understand my self, and whatsoever you tell me appears to me so easy to
comprehend, that I think many times I knew it before you told it. I am
continually thinking of my Children, who cannot as yet be without me, and I
love them the better for it; and though Wealth be something, yet I wish them
nothing so much as I do Parts. We discourse sometimes of that which we think
best for the educating of a young Prince, and by this Model, as near as it is
fit for us to come to it, in my judgment we might breed our Children. For I
imagine that is one and the same virtue that knows how to command, if Fortune
pleases, and how to obey, when ones duty obliges one to it. And being sat
down with the Chevalier: You said (continued he) that Study might hinder; I
would gladly inform my self in what manner it should be used, for I do not
believe that you are of the opinion to renounce it absolutely.

That would be (said the Chevalier) a very fantastical opinion, indeed the best
natural parts of the World would be but of little value, if there were not care
taken to improve and bring them to perfection. One can never take any thing
aright without having learned it; and who can believe, that either to do a
thing well that one does ill, or to do it better, if one does it well, that
Study can ever hinder? that is to say, to seek out the means, and that under
the best Masters; for so it is that one ought to study.

It is seen by all sorts of Exercises, how much Art and good Masters are
necessary, and it were very strange, that the body should be capable of
instruction, and that the mind should not be so to. For what likelihood is
there, that if Practice and good Masters are without peradventure effectual for
the making people skillful in riding the great Horse, that to the making of an
accomplished person, they should both of them be altogether needless and hurtful?

The body and the mind are seldom as one could wish; but the defects of the
body seem to me more difficult to be corrected: the mind is naturally souple,
and it may be redressed, provided a right course be taken. And who can doubt,
that if there be any one as exact in breeding Youth, as it is said, Pignatel
was good at Horsmanship, but that he might make an accomplished man, as well as
Pignatel made a good Horseman? How comes it about then, that it many times
falls out otherwise? The truth is, that when one learns to do a thing of an ill
Master, one learns to do it ill; and it is much more difficult to choose good
Masters for the framing of the mind, than for the body. For the advantages of
the body are much more remarkable and more known than those of the mind. And
besides, many people who are capable of instructing the mind, will not always
meddle in it; for in truth, as the World judges of it, there would be but very
little honor gained by undertaking the Trade, although they did acquit
themselves of it in perfection.

It is certain, that to be able, well bred, and agreeable to such a degree as
one would wish a great Prince, one cannot know too many things, so that he have
the skill to make a right use of them, and that he knows how to value them. But
to speak my Judgment, it is not to be knowing, to have read very much, nor to
have learned a great number of different opinions which discover nothing
certainly. We know nothing well but that which we see clearly, and that which
we can presently make others see and understand, if they are clear-sighted. We
should mistrust all that which we perceive but as through a Cloud, and which we
cannot make very plain to the sight of another.

Whilst people are young, they learn little more than certain words which make
a show of Learning, though they are knowing in nothing, and that is not
becoming to a man that is abroad in the World. I would have one know all
things, and that his manner of discoursing might not betray his having studied.

It is a very great advantage to have an inspection into things, said the
Mareshal, and to know the World, whether it be that we are to speak or write:
but that which savours too much of Study, is for the most part not liked. I
know not whether it be well to write as one speaks, and to speak as one writes.
Many people have been of opinion that it is, but it seems to me, that the use
is otherwise. 'Twere more likely, answered the Chevalier, if they had said,
that we should write as we desire to speak, and speak as we desire to write;
for one seldom does either of them as we wish we could. This question which is
not to be despised by persons of wit, may easily be cleared.

We write things which are never pronounced, and which are made only to be
read, as a History, or any such like thing. When any one undertakes that, and
would be successful in it, they must not write as if they were telling a story
in Company: History is more noble, and more severe; Conversation is more free,
and negligent. And as there are some things which are only fit to be read, so
there are others which are made principally to be heard spoken, as Harangues.
If we would judge of their worth, we must consider to what degree they are good
when they are pronounced, since that is what they aim at. And because that
Letters are not pronounced (for although they are many times read aloud) yet
that is not called pronouncing, we should not write them altogether as we
speak. As for Example, whosoever should see a person to whom he had just been
writing a Letter, although it were very excellent, he would not say the same
things to him that he had written, or at the least he would not say them in the
same manner: yet for all that it is good when we write, to imagine in some sort
that we are speaking, that we may not put in any thing that is not natural, or
which may not be spoken in Company: and likewise when we speak, to fancy that
we are writing, that we may not say any thing that is not noble, and which has
not something of exactness.

How comes it to pass, said the Mareshal, that many people are said to speak
well, who cannot write well? It is many times believed, answered the Chevalier,
that some certain persons speak well in effect, when in truth they only speak
well in appearance. That is because either their presence startles, or the
sound of their voice surpriseth. When any one excels in speaking, they may
do the same in writing: it is true, that this latter requires a little more
care. Also it seems to me, that one cannot write well, without knowing how to
speak well; but it happens, that those who make it their study to write well,
have commonly a languishing way of speaking, which is as it were almost spent.
Those people mind too much the sound and harmony. This softness of Language
which they affect, makes them many times lose by little and little the natural
use of it, which consists in giving to every thing that one speaks the motions
that we feel in our hearts. For we do not speak only to make our thoughts to be
understood, but to express our apprehensions, which are two very different
things.

He who finds himself not moved at any thing, is as unfit to speak as he that
thinks nothing. The heart has its Language, as the Wit has his, and this
expression of the heart works many times the greatest effects. When the heart
is not agitated, although one has very much wit, it touches not so sensibly;
and when one is stirred, if the wit fails, they only make a noise, and so
unseasonably, that they were better hold their peace. It is necessary then for
the heart to have apprehensions, and for the wit, not only to guide, but also
to make the choice of them. For as there are thoughts which are agreeable, and
others which are not, the very same diversity is found in the motions of the
heart, some of them are well received, and others rejected. You know much
better than I, that to inspire either joy or sadness, and many other passions
which govern the World (in truth to the prejudice of reason) it is not enough
to know them by experience, but we must be affected with them at the same
instant, at least so as we are with those things which are represented on the
Theaters.

Whether we design to speak well, or to write well, we must have many
considerations in the well doing of it: very few people have succeeded. The
most difficult thing, in my Judgment, is to be knowing in that which ought to
please, and to have a Genius to put it in practice. I say in that which ought
to please, because it is very difficult to be assured of it. For in matters of
agreements every one has his several relish, and if you take notice of that
which commonly pleases, it proceeds not so much from the perfection of it, as
from a certain temperature, which agrees with our natural sentiments. It is
this proportion which charms us, and it is not perceived from whence it comes;
but in my Judgment the true graces, those which affect most, and which are
always liked, are never to be without a delicateness, and that great things, as
Pomp and Magnificence, are made not so much to please, as to cause admiration.
Beauty it self, when it has so much luster, is above our strength, we cannot
support it. We praise the greatest Beauties, but we love the prettiest: The
reason is, because we are tired with long admiring, and whatsoever is made only
for that, displeases as soon as the admiration is over.

We must apply our selves to think well, the excellency of thoughts has so
many advantages over other certain Beauties, they hope to find in Arts and
Study, that he who thinks the best, is always above others. I find also, that
those who have a good discernment in things, have likewise the advantage in the
manner of expressing them, and that it is the exquisiteness of the apprehension
which makes the Language excellent. All this depends upon acquiring that king
of Wit, which we have been so much speaking of, and that Master who can teach
it, may be said to be an excellent Master.

Things of action and memory are very easily learned, and there are people
enough to be found, who know how to teach them. But it is not so with that
which they call to Know and to Judge: This is the Masterpiece of the mind,
especially as to that which regards skill and invention, the justness and
decency of things. There are but few Masters who do not make one take a
contrary course, which cannot afterward easily be altered. And because the
first motions and impressions which are made in the heart of a Child take
deepest root, and insensibly disposes and swayeth him to good or evil for his
whole life; I could wish that such Books only might be read to the young
Prince, as might give him the Idaea, or at least the apprehension of perfection
by some most remarkable passages written by a good hand. For sometimes we see
things so well hit, that it is impossible either to say or think them better.
One makes a great progress when one forms ones self after such models, and by
the accustoming ones self, whatsoever one says has a taste of it.

This Language which few persons know how to speak, proceeds from a justness of
wit, and from an extent of understanding, which discovers things as they are.
It is a natural discernment, which nevertheless we constantly improve, when we
think of it as we ought, and frequent the company of such persons who have it
by Nature. But I tell you again, Sir, that those who bemoan themselves for not
having studied as commonly people study, have lost but little by it.

It is no inconsiderable thing the being able to undeceive ones self in all
things, and to know how to set a value upon every thing according to its merit:
And if any one would discover to us, or but only make us sensible what we ought
to believe of things, we should have a great obligation to that person. Most
people account this nothing; but for all that, it is certain, that without this
knowledge we must be always either fooled by our selves, or unjust to all
others.

It seems to me, said the Mareshal, that to be instructed how to live, and to
insinuate such opinions as one ought to have, there is nothing more to be
feared than an ill Master. I do not wonder so much, that such as are first
offered, are taken for us, that is not of so much consequence: But for a great
Prince, upon whom the happiness of the Public must hereafter absolutely
depend, and by whose Example so many people will endeavor to fashion
themselves, as being the most noble Model, no care in the World should be
neglected. If there were a man in the farthest part of the Indies, who could
acquit himself therein better than the ablest amongst us, I would have him
fetched. The business is to make a great King, whom we may love and admire; to
make him happy, and likewise to order it so, that all those who live under him
may be happy too. For it is but reasonable that those should a little share in
his happiness, who are in duty obliged to sacrifice themselves for the
procuring of it.

There is nothing requisite, said the Chevalier, but the rendering of him an
honest and worthy man, at least that is the most important thing. I see, said
the Mareshal, that this word honest man almost comprehends every thing. But if
any one should ask me what it is, I should find my self much to seek. I do not
wonder at it, said the Chevalier, for a thing of so large an extent, looks too
many ways, and has too many appearances and shadows to be expressed in two or
three words. Those who say that honesty consists in living and dying well, only
vary the terms, without clearing the question. Besides, if one should not dye,
he might notwithstanding by living be an honest man, nay he might by that means
make a greater progress therein. To have a more distinct knowledge of it, we
may look upon it in it self separated from all other things that are not of it,
or foreign to it, and consider it by all sorts of lights.

Tell me what you believe of it, said the Mareshal, I should be glad to see
whether we have the same thoughts in a thing of this consequence. I know, said
the Chevalier, that you must needs understand it rightly, because you make use
of it always as your guide; and if that Idaea which I have of it be good, it
must without doubt be conformable to yours. For perfect honesty is always the
same in what subjects soever it is found, although the difference of Time and
Fortune makes it appear very differently. But under whatever form it shows it
self, it always pleases, and by that it may principally be known; for the true
Agreements come not from a simple superficial, or a slight appearance, but from
a great stock of Wit or Merit, which mingles and shows it self in all that one
says, and in all the actions of ones life.

It seems to me, that it affects not to make a mystery of any thing, that as it
avoids all extremes, it endeavors not to hide, nor to show it self. Its first
appearance has not so much luster, as either to dazzle or to surprise people;
but when we come to consider her, we find that it has so much Grace in every
thing that is offered of good or ill, of serious or pleasant, that one would
think that all things are alike to it and agreeable. And if there be any parts
so disadvantagious, that it would be impossible for the Graces themselves to
act them well, it knows well how to refuse them.

I find that it is not cruel, but willing to excuse and pardon, and it is so
far from raising it self upon the misery of another, that it is always ready to
help those that are so. It makes all those who depend upon it happy, so far as
Fortune permits; and if it be not in its power to do that, at least it makes no
body sad, it is careful to avoid that even in the smallest things. If it jests
sometimes, its mirth and gayety tends only to the delight even of those whom it
makes sport with. It is never so much satisfied with it self, but that it is
sensible that there is still something beyond what it can pretend to. it seeks
no false advantages, but on the contrary, if occasion offers not it self, we
must many times guess at that which is best in it.

Its own interest deludes it not, and if it so happens, that an honest man be
accused, although his life be aimed at, he makes not use of all sorts of
Arguments and Reasons to defend himself, but that little he says makes every
body regret that they offended him. Represent to your self Socrates, Scipio, or
some others of that rank; for I observe that those people are as it were above
Fortune, at least they are not transported with prosperity: and what misfortune
soever attacqueth them, although they are never heard to say that their virtue
does not forsake them, yet we may find that they have more than enough to
support them. I find that honesty always judges well, although it be very
cautious in deciding; it prefers Choice before Abundance, and has more care of
being neat and cleanly than richly dressed; and values those things that are
least in sight more than those that are soon discovered. Do you not take notice
likewise, that it has more regard to Merit than to Fortune? that it is not
subject to be prejudiced against any body; that which disorders narrow Souls
surpriseth it very little; and the opinion of the World hinders it not from
understanding the true value of things?

I believe it depends but little either upon time or place; and that he who can
attain so far as to be an honest worthy man in his Cottage, would be the same
in all the the Courts of the World. But there are many things necessary to the
being a worthy honest man. And although some may pass for such at the Courts of
great Princes, we must not therefore conclude, that there is nothing wanting in
them, unless they can be so every where, and amongst all sorts of people.

Many observations might be made, if any one would enlarge upon this Subject.
But to conclude, it is observed, that honesty has this in it, it leaves a kind
and tender remembrance always of it self in those who have once known it, and
carries it self so, that every body is very glad to have obliged it.

But now after all this, a Lady who was perfectly handsome, and of so pleasing a
wit and humor, that even the handsomest Ladies could not choose but love her,
asked me what an honest man was, and an honest Woman; for the expression is
proper to both: and when I told her my opinion of it, and that she her self had
discoursed very rationally of it, she confessed that she thought all that which
I told her was very necessary for the being that which she had asked. But yet
there was something more which was unexplainable, and was better known by
practice than by expression, which, as she imagined, consisted in I knew not
what of Nobleness, that heightens all the good Qualities, and which proceeds
only from the heart and from the mind, the rest is only the Train and Equipage
of it.

This Lady, said the Mareshal, was very hard to be pleased; for there was
enough before for the making an honest man, and I approve without exception of
all that you have observed concerning it, unless it be that which you said of
pleasing, and that it was an infallible proof of honesty. It seems to me, that
people very often succeed in that, as well by ill ways as by good, nay* and
with more choice and splendor. To that, said the Chevalier, one may answer in
two words, that there are some persons who understand true Merit, and that it
is a good sign when one pleases them: But there are many more who judge not
well, and for those we have no great cause to rejoice when we are so agreeable
to them.

Howsoever it be, said the Mareshal, to examine honesty well, whether we
consider it in it self, or in those things that it says and that it does, it
still appears to be above every thing else, and there is nothing so worthy of a
great Prince. It is true, said the Chevalier, that it is amiable, and that it
inspires respect, although it be forced to be silent and unactive; but you have
hit upon the two things which give luster, the speaking and the actions, all
depend upon that, and it was that (says Homer) which the Learned Chiron taught
to young Achilles.

That Master, said the Mareshal, without doubt had great skill, he made a
Scholar that the World has talked of: and if that we see so few of so high and
extraordinary a Worth, it must needs be the fault of the Governors. As he ended
these words, he saw Gamesters come in, who came to divert him, and that put an
end to the Conversation.

THE SIXTH CONVERSATION.
THE Chevalier came to the Mareshals house, who had passed the Afternoon at
play. He came just as the Game was ended, and the Gamesters were retiring. The
Mareshal, who had a mind to go abroad, was glad to see him come so opportunely
to have him with him. I will not ask you, said he, whether you are for walking;
for I know very well you love to look upon the different colors which are in
the Sky, when the Sun sets, and that it is a pleasure to you to breathe the
fresh Air in the Evening. I am only in doubt of which side we should go. That
Wood where we were the other day would please me much; but we must cross the
Town to go to it, and the way is very rough. I doubt besides, whether we shall
have time enough. I suppose, said the Chevalier, that it will be best to go the
lower way along by the Waterside: which advice was followed, and they went on
that side as far as to the end of the Meadow, where they stopped (because they
could not go further with the Coach) and alighted to walk by the River side.

The Mareshal loved not to be long silent, and it happened luckily for him, and
for those who frequent him, who were always glad to hear him. He had been so
employed at play, that he had scarce said any thing all the day. He began at
the first to speak of some things which he had most a mind to, and after some
discourse upon that Subject: We must not, said he, look upon Kings with the
same eyes as we do upon private persons, the most part whereof have little
other aim than to live contentedly and at ease, though a man of ability does
always study most how to purchase love and esteem.

I know very well what false glory is (a worthy honest man regards it not, and
the wisest despise it) but it seems to me, that the more Courage and Wit a man
has, the more he loves true Honor: and if there where any one who could not
acquire that, although he has all other things to be wished, he would
nevertheless be much to be pitied, at least if he were of a generous noble
Nature; and if you observe it, people are less willing to pardon those
injuries, which touch upon their Honor than any other. And when they find
themselves touched on that side, they think they cannot enough resent it. Also
to say the truth, that which makes* people so much desire great Employments and
high Commands, is not for the conveniences of life; for our lives are made by
them the more troublesome, but it is the hopes of having an opportunity to make
it appear, that they have Merit in them.

But this nevertheless for a private person cannot extend it self far, nor be
but of short continuance. But Kings are looked upon by all the Earth, and
Posterity which never flatters any body, will be Judge of their Merit. Glory is
their greatest and their chiefest Interest. All the Heroes and all the great
Men have devoted and given themselves up to it. One had need be able, faithful,
and zealous to give them good counsel, in this particular, and principally they
ought well to understand in what true Glory consists, and by what means it may
be acquired.

It is said, that Parmenio (that great Captain, whose only aim was to vanquish)
counseled his Master to surprise the Enemy, because of their great number, and
to assault them by the favor of the night. But this Prince (who made it not so
much his aim to gain the Battle, as to make his Valor be admired) would fight
them in the day time, being resolved to lose all, both his Life and Fortune,
rather than to run the hazard of having cause to blush at his Victory. The same
man counseled him also to divide Asia with the Persians, and to receive great
Treasures, which they proposed to him. This advice he received no better than
the other; he had a heart too Imperious to suffer any one to be equal with him,
and too high to love Gold and Riches. His desire tended only to glory, and if
he did not always know what was the best and most solid, it was because he was
yery young, and that he saw himself at the top of Fortune. Besides, he grasped
at so many things, that he could not well have a due regard to every thing that
he undertook, and he was also easily transported.

The smallest errors that Princes commit, are sometimes of great consequence
to their reputation; and I should advise them (if they would trust my Judgment)
to consider often in what manner the greatest Men would carry themselves, if
they had their parts to act.

It is no ill way to advise a Prince to do that which is most honest, and
likewise most heroic. We have seen already, that it is that which befits him
best; and if we look further into things concerning this World, we still find
in all manner of respects, that this at last is the best. Both Heaven and
Fortune seem to have a particular care of these great hearts who are negligent
and resign up themselves. The bravest for the most part prevail, and an high
resolution has been the saving of many more people than it has lost. The more
this Prince, whom I was speaking of, sought after death, the further it was
from him; and if he were wounded (as it is almost impossible for any one to
throw himself continually into danger, and never to be so) it was at least
without being ever killed or overcome.

However it is not to be wished, that a Prince should hazard himself so much,
or that he should only know that way to glory; for (besides that it would put
us in continual Alarms for so precious a life) it appears to me below a great
Prince, to expose himself on all occasions: and if you well consider it, it is
not that which most shows the greatness of ones Soul, and the contempt of
death. I think it much better to march toward death with a steady pace, like
Socrates, than to precipitate ones self upon it, like Alexander; for this is to
effect a very difficult thing very easily, which shows a heart to be more firm
and resolute.

There are some Sovereigns, who we can look on only but as wise Politicians,
and that in my mind is not the best form that they might appear in. Something
which I cannot express, of more noble, would give them a greater splendor, and
can you think any thing more worthy of a great Prince than Love and Arms? They
are the Subject of the finest Romances, answered the Chevalier, and when a
Reign is at an end without either Love or Arms, a History has but a few things
to say. But some Princes are not born to act both parts, and it is always
enough for a Sovereign to govern his States well, and to render his Subjects
happy.

I have known some Princes, said the Mareshal, who would have been very gallant
men, if there had been care taken at the first, to have put them into the right
way, and to have showed them what was to be done. This first point of Education
is of much greater importance to them than private persons; for when they are
no longer under the Conduct of a Governor, all that they do is approved on, or
at least it is so in appearance, and no body comes into their presence, but
with a design to please them, because although one loves them, yet one easily
inclines to love their favor more: And in truth it would be great imprudence
for any one to hazard the drawing the hatred of his Prince upon himself, and to
go about to advise him as he would one of his particular Friends, unless he had
first signified his pleasure to have it so. However those persons who are near
about him, if they are not too much swayed by Interest, may very securely tell
him in an agreeable manner, all that which may contribute to his Glory and to
his Happiness. It is an easy matter, said the Chevalier, to give them good
advice as to their glory. It is agreed what that is, and how it may be
acquired; all those who know how to judge will concur. But it is not so as to
ones happiness, which depends more upon the temper than upon those things which
people believe give it. And to say the truth, whosoever undertakes to ascertain
a Prince what will make him happy, must know him very perfectly. Many times we
our selves know not what would be best for our own happiness.

You speak reason, said the Mareshal, but when all things that can be wished
present themselves, and that there is nothing wanting but to choose well, it
seems to me, that with a very little help, it were no difficult thing to be
happy. And to say the truth, he is in a fair way to it, who sees himself one of
the first among the Masters of the World. Fortune has nothing greater to give.
Let us consider what pleasure it is to do good: There is nothing in my mind
more noble, and this delight seems to me to be made only for great Princes; the
more favor they bestow, the more they are in a condition to grant: For it is
certain, that their gifts, which are accompanied with choice and esteem,
support their Grandeur, and render them the more powerful. It is not riches
that are principally to be desired from Kings (for their Treasuries might be
exhausted by profuseness) but it is Employments and Trusts, these are the
opportunities, by which men make it appear what they are; and when those
persons who have Worth, are put into Employments suitable to themselves, they
make themselves known, and their Princes are well served.

That which commonly they want, and which we have abundantly, is the pleasures
which you know we have in conversing freely with those we love, and the being
in a condition to dispute of certain advantages, in which neither Fortune nor
Greatness have any part. The price of Merit, which touches so much many brave
hearts, at length becomes insensible to them, because people praise
indifferently all that they do alike, without regarding either measure or
decency. One must be complacent, as becomes a gallant man, to make his life
agreeable; and I cannot conceive that those Princes of the Levant, who live
only amongst Slaves, can be happy. They have all things, and perfectly enjoy
nothing; they have the fairest Women in the World, but they are Captives,
always in prison, without wit or love: they have nothing of that which is most
taking, nothing of freedom, nothing that is pleasant and delightful.

The Commerce of Love and the diversities of gallant Adventures, which make one
delight in the Courts of the World, and to endeavor to render ones self an
accomplished man, all this is unknown to them. They are only savage Events which
they delight in. I am thinking of that which you said just now; there are
always in those Countries some Adventures of Love and of War, but they are
such, that I defy Ariosto, Tasso, and even Sapho, to make a pleasant Romance
of them. If living so be happiness, that felicity seems to me very barbarous,
and I cannot believe, that any man of good sense can envy it. The greatest
pleasures, if people know not how to manage them, and that there be not wit
intermixed with them, or some sense of Honor, last not long, and that may be
some comfort to those who have not all that they desire.

I look upon it, that these Princes debase rather than exalt themselves, in
affecting such a Grandeur, which no body has any thoughts of disputing with
them. I think that Civility and Majesty both together, which makes people find
with pleasure, that such Princes are their Masters, is much better; the more
they condescend, the more one is ready to submit, especially those that are
well bred persons, who never presume too much.

I think that the most eminent men were wont to communicate freely with their
Friends, and that they were very familiar, at least Caesar was so, said the
Chevalier, even with his Soldiers, so far as he took delight, to remember in
any of their remarkable sayings, this familiarity. Which to say the truth,
accompanied with other kindnesses, had charmed them so, that when they were to
fight for his Glory, they thought nothing difficult to them, and were not
apprehensive either of peril or death. If by chance they were made Prisoners,
and had their lives offered them, they refused it, and said, that it belonged
to the Soldiers of Caesar to give, not to take Quarter.

I wonder not then at all, said the Mareshal, that such a man followed by such
people, although the smaller number did always conquer: That which I said, that
Heaven takes these great hearts into its protection, it appears also in this
Hero, who amidst all those Combats, in which he was very active, received not
the least hurt.

Princes of great Designs and high Enterprises, said the Chevalier, are always
beloved; although Fortune, which we know is inconstant, leaves their side, yet
Glory and Honor never forsake them. Caesar was of this number, he had nothing
in him which was not noble, and which savoured not of Grandeur. He was so
brave, and so full of courtesy both together, that he would have hazarded his
person to have saved the meanest of his Soldiers. He loved all those that
followed his Fortune. He shared with them the glory, as he did the danger. And
it was without doubt the surest way to gain, as he did, fifty Battles, without
losing one, first to gain their love and esteem.

A few days before that great fight, wherein the Almans and the people of the
North were defeated, he had sent Ambassadors to their Prince Ariovistus, who
contrary to the Law of Nations detained them, and put them in Chains. Caesar
said that he was not more glad of gaining the Victory, than he was to embrace
them, and knock off their Fetters. But this that I am about to tell you, shows
much of his nature, and to what degree he was beloved.

Curio, who was one of his Generals, was making War in another corner of the
World. He was a young Man of a great Courage, but of little Experience, and had
to deal with the Africans, who were grown old in the Trade. This young Man
being fallen into an Ambuscade, and finding it was in his power to save
himself; but that he had not had prudence or good fortune enough to secure the
Troops which Caesar had committed to his trust, he chose rather to dye than to
present himself before him. Every word that Caesar said of his Friend, seemed
to be accompanied with sighs and tears. Neither was it the fear of an ill
reception or usage, which made Curio take so desperate a course; but it was a
certain apprehension which makes us fear the sight of our Friends, when they
are of so high a Merit, and that we are sensible they have no reason to approve
of our actions.

We are apt to lessen peoples Merit, according as we love or hate the persons
(said the Mareshal) and Caesar understood very well how to make himself be
loved. I remember the Borders of Lignon, where I delighted my self so much when
I was young, and the answer of the Oracle,

Vt ameris, ama. This is a very sure way, at least if it be performed
handsomely. For it is not enough to devote ones self to gain people: the
principal Secret consists in managing it so, that the person whom one loves,
should be glad of it. The manner of doing it, which seems not to be so
considerable, imports more than all the rest, and I see that the craftiest are
taken with it as well as the simplest; but I hardly remember where I lest off.

You need not take much care for that, said the Chevalier, for you never leave
a Subject, but those who have heard you are very well satisfied with that which
you have said. Besides, a little of negligence is very convenient, (could one
live easy with people who are so very exact and regular) but I think you were
speaking of Caesar, and I was thinking, I remember, that the most eloquent man
of those times told him one day, that he had done more than conquered his
Enemies, for he had vanquished Victory her self. And that he had set himself
above her, in pardoning all those who had a mind to ruin him. This
commendation which was so justly due to him, gives me a great Idaea of him; but
there is one thing of him, which angers me much, that is, his calling of us
Barbarians. I am not the only person that suffers this injury with impatience:
it has so dissatisfied one of our Romance-makers, that without any difficulty,
he writ that Caesar was no Courtier. Upon my faith I am glad of it, said the
Mareshal, and it was but what he deserved; for what made him use our Ancestors
so ill?

However, said the Chevalier, this reproach which has made you laugh, is not
so ill grounded, that it may not be maintained, and without examining what it
is to be a Chevalier in that manner that we understand it. People are always
more so at the Court of a Prince, than in a Republic. Also it seems to me,
that the Manners of Cities, and their ways of doing things are not noble; you
know that the great World cannot suffer them. That which savours of the
Country-savageness may be noble, although far different from the Nobleness of
Courts. That is because there is to be discerned I know not what of Worth and
Greatness, plain and without Art. Imagine to your self those thick dark Forests
of Africa, the infinite number of Lions, and many other wild Beasts, all this
appears to me more noble than the Gardens of the Grand Signor.

That which you were saying but now interrupted the Mareshal, makes me call to
mind, that it is not enough when one speaks, or when one takes a Journey, to
know to what place one would go, nor to take the right way to it; but one must
think how to make the Journey as pleasant and easy to us as we can.

To return to Caesar, people held that he was the greatest Man in the World,
and I believe, if we consider him every way, there is reason for it, as well
for the Wonders of his Life and Fortune, as for the Greatness of his Wit and
Virtue. Is it not he who so long time since gave the example and invention of
all those extraordinary things, that are at this day practiced in War? Might we
not be able to know yet little better what kind of man he was; for they speak
differently of him.

It is very difficult, answered the Chevalier, to judge rightly of those whom
we have not seen, and who have lived in an Age so remote. But if it were
possible to discover and unfold a man so far back, and truly examine him,
certainly it must be Caesar. He has done so many things, and his life (though
full of variety) is so equal, that there is seen some correspondence in all his
actions, and likewise the causes of it may easily be discovered. It may also be
said, that crafty people had observed him, who talked very boldly and freely of
him to one another. One of the clearest sighted men of those times (but one
perhaps also, who was unreasonably fond of the Laws of his Town and Country)
said, that never any man better understood Justice, nor had been more unjust
than Caesar. This shows on the one side, that he had a good discernment of
things, but as to the rest, he slighted those common Virtues.

That which makes me know so much of his Spirit, and his Actions, is the
Writings which he has left (at least if it be his own) for there is a very
Learned man who would persuade me, that it was not his. Whose then, said the
Mareshal? Of a certain, I know not who, answered the Chevalier. I believe for
all that, it had been more easy for this certain I know not, who to have
conquered and rendered himself Master, than to have written in that noble Style.
You know that in matter of Conquest, happy Conjunctions may help very much:
'twas necessary to be Caesar to express ones self in that manner, and chance
has nothing to do in it. His Merit and his Greatness is seen in the smallest
things that he says, not that he speaks in Pompeys words, on the contrary. His
way is plain, without Ornament; but has in it a pureness and nobleness, not
easily expressed, which proceeds from a good Education, and from the height of
his Genius.

These Masters of the World who are, as it were above Fortune, look with
indifferency upon the most of those things, which we admire, and because they
are but little affected with them, they speak but slightly of them. In a place
where he was relating how two or three of his Legions were for some time in
disorder, fighting against those of Pompeys; People believed, said he, that
there would have been an end of Caesar, if Pompey had known how to overcome,
that Victory had decided the Roman Empire. You see in how few and plain words
he expresses a thing of so great consequence.

Caesar was born with too violent passions, Glory and Love, which carried him
away like two Torrents. Those infinite numbers of Designs which he had laid
from his infancy even to the end of his life, (for he was of a very active
Spirit) tended only to them. Not but that he had other sentiments, which you
know make people desire the society of men, and take delight in their Company.
For to be an accomplished man, as Caesar was, one must take part in all things
that may render ones life happy. But these two passions transported him, he was
not very sensibly touched or concerned at any thing, but only so far as it
might be of advantage for his main Designs, the ends beforementioned; and
although he had been so famous in the Wars, he loved it not so much for it
self, as that he might thereby seat himself above all.

He was liberal and acknowledging, fierce, but not revengeful, and as to that
great injustice, which people blame him for, and lay as a stain upon so fair a
life, it may be said in two words, that he who was of all the Romans fittest to
govern, had a mind alone to do that well which so many others did ill.

He was tall, of a reasonable shape, handsome, of a good Mien, dexterous in all
Exercises of Arms, and a good Horseman. He had a fair Complexion, and smooth,
black Eyes, quick and cunning. He had a strong and piercing Voice, and a great
Grace in speaking. He was of a delicate Complexion, as the most part of those
are who are of that kind of Wit and Temper. It is said, that he gained health
by neglecting it; and that he used so much Exercise, that he rendered himself by
it indefatigable.

He had Mistresses in all parts where he came, at Rome, in Spain, in Greece,
and amongst the Gauls. He was as it were enchanted in Egypt; for what was it he
undertook not for the Princess of that Country? And further up in Africa, was
he not again in Love with a Black-a-more Queen? His aim was at Ladies of the
highest Quality: I know not whether it were because that the Behavior of men
added more grace to their natural Beauty, or that a sense of Glory joined with
Love, made him look upon Ladies as a kind of Conquest. He affected a little,
perhaps, too much to be talked of; but I do not pretend to represent him as a
man without failings; for who is it that can boast himself to be without any?
but I speak of him as an admirable Conqueror, and of immense natural parts.

In the most hazardous and hottest Actions of the Wars, he alone was the joy
and hopes of his Army. They all believed him so able and so resolute, that they
despaired of nothing under his Conduct; and with that he had a certain gayety,
which sparkled in his eyes, and on his face, which animated them on all
occasions. And if they were at any time in doubt concerning the event of
things, it was only their care for him; for few cared for surviving him
themselves.

He loved fine Clothes, and his rich Dress made him always to be known, and
principally on a day of Battle. He would have his Soldiers to be neatly
attired, and always ready: and in my mind it is a great sign that those sort of
people have honors in them, when they love to have a good Equipage* and to be
very curious and neat in their Arms. He regarded not whether his men were of
great stature or no. That, said the Mareshal, depends upon fancy: there are
many who are not very promising, yet who make themselves to be taken notice of
enough. This great man was never mistaken in any thing; and I admire that he
was a Prodigy both in Wit and Valor.

I should not be surprised at an extraordinary Valor in a Brute, all persons
who know neither pleasure nor pain, and who are not sensible what it is to be
dead or alive. But for a man of so sensible a temper, and so delicate, and of
so subtle and high Understanding, that it is in truth which seems rare to me.
It is indeed, said the Chevalier; but for all that we must only wonder at the
greatness of his Wit. For although one may find ones self very sensible of
pain, and cannot make it easy to our selves to dye, yet when one has a
courage firm and resolute to a certain degree, and that is no hard matter to
have, one may be as brave as one has a mind to be; one may manage ones life or
abandon it as one judges best, and as occasion requires. There needs but an
ordinary firmness to make one resolve indifferently either way, and Caesar had
always Glory before him, which made him choose that which was most becoming a
Hero. I had not considered nor examined him in this way, said the Mareshal, and
I believe that you are in the right.

They were till night by the River side, sometimes sitting, sometimes walking,
and always discoursing of many things; but Historians never relate all.

FINIS.

