A DIALOGUE Between a Country Gentleman and a Merchant, Concerning the Falling
of GUINEA's: WHEREIN The whole Argument relating to our MONEY is Discussed.

LONDON, Printed by John Astwood for Samuel Crouch, at the corner of
Popes-head-Alley in Cornhill, 1696.

A DIALOGUE Between a Country Gentleman and a Merchant, etc.
Merchant. SIR, you are well met: Pray when came you to Town? and what is the
best News in the Country?


Gentleman. I came to Town last Night, Sir, but for News I have none good: We
are quite confounded, and know not what to do either in receiving or paying of
Guinea's; and we think you Citizens are to blame for Petitioning the Parliament
to have them brought down, when if they were let alone they would pass more
currently than any Money we have at 30 s. a piece, and every one would be quiet
and contented.


Merch. Ay, Sir, But we see further than you do in this Matter, and therefore
cannot be contented, because we know we shall have no Silver left in a little
while, if Guinea's are kept up above the old Value.


Gent. We have Silver little enough already, though Gold be plentier than ever
'twas, and do you think they will not carry that away too when we shall lower it?
What is it keeps it here now, and brings us in more, but our making it pass for
more than 'twill in any other Country? I think if we were wise, we should
raise our Silver also, and so keep both at home.


Merch. Well Sir, since that is your Opinion, and it seems so plausible, that I
doubt a great many more lie under the same Mistake, I Will try if I can bring you
to a righter understanding of this matter; in order whereto, I Will first ask
you, What do you think our silver has been carried away for? and for what will it
continue to be sent away?


Gent. We think it goes to pay the Army in Flanders, and that more will go,
'till we have none lest, if some better care ben't taken.


Merch. Don't you see the Parliament finds it for our safety to maintain the
War abroad, and therefore do appropriate part of the Taxes every year for the
payment of the Army; and would you then have the King keep the Money at home in
his Exchequer, and let that part of the Army that is abroad starve the while?


Gent. God forbid; I had much rather pay toward the maintaining an Army
abroad, than let the French come and plunder us at home, and at last reduce us
into French Slavery. Then we must be forced to pay what they will please to
take, and now no more can be taken from us than what we by our own consents in
Parliament give. But why cannot we send out Goods, our own Manufactories, to pay
our Army, and keep our Money at home?


Merch. You may be assured that we do yearly send as much Goods as the Foreign
Markets will take off, but we cannot force 'em to buy more than their Occasions
require: And as Matters stand now, that is not enough to supply all we want?


Gent. But I have heard that Money may be remitted by Bills of Exchange, and so
we need not send away our Silver and Gold


Merch. You must know, Sir, that Bills of Exchange will signify nothing,
unless we put a value in the Persons Hands on whom we draw to pay them withal:
Now as I told you before, if all the Goods which our Neighbors can take off
from us be not of Value sufficient to pay to pay all the Money we have occasion
to use there, if we draw Bills for above the Produce of our Goods, we must send
Silver or Gold to pay our Bills, there being no other way to enable our
Correspondents to do it.


Gent. Well, Sir, I am now satisfied that it is not possible for us to maintain
our Army abroad, without sending out some of our Silver and Gold; that is to
say, so much as the Goods our Neighbors buy of us fall short of raising the
Value we want in those Countries; but I should have thought that this
difference could not have been so great, as to have required such large
Quantities as they say have been sent.


Merch. Now you bring me to the matter; and as I have been telling you, that
the Produce of our Trade abroad is not at this time sufficient to pay for all
the Foreign Commodities which we bring home for our own Expense, and maintain
our Army also, yet as you have well guessed, that Occasion would not have
drein'd our Silver so fast, but it is the vast Stock of Gold that has been
brought over, has robbed us of great quantities of our Silver.


Gent. Why, Sir, is it Matter of Complaint, that we have plenty of Gold brought
into the Kingdom? are we not so much the richer for it? how can that rob us of
our Silver?


Merch. We should indeed be the richer, if we imported Gold as the Produce of
our Trade, and not at an Overvalue; but I see, Sir, your Understanding is not
quite opened in this matter; pray consider, if we could not before pay our Army
without sending out some silver, do you think that Foreigners gave us their
Gold for nothing? or will you not rather believe our Silver went to pay sor't?


Gent. I now see what you drive at, it is to show me that much of our Silver
has been sent abroad to buy Gold; but I have been told that Foreigners sent
their Gold hither to buy Goods, and I know the Country had a brisk Trade all
the last Summer in selling their Manufactories at extraordinary rates.


Merch. The Matter does indeed look so, but it is all a Fallacy, and I Will show
you plainly how this Business proceeded; and there is too much reason to doubt
that 'twas projected amongst our selves, by some Persons who would let slip no
opportunity of raising their own private Fortunes, though it were to the ruin
of the Public; for we saw plainly that the Guinea's were raised upon us the
beginning of last Summer by artifice, and 'twas at first given out that they
would soon come to 30 s. the Pretense for it being the badness of our Money;
immediately upon this we had great store of Gold brought over in all the Men of
War and Yatchts that came from Holland, not only in Guineas, but also in the
Coins of Holland, Germany, Denmark, and all those Adjacent Countries.


These Traders in Gold then fell to buying up the Silver so fast, that in a
little time they run it up from 5 s. 8 d. to 6 s. 9 d. or 7 s. per Ounce; and
as that rose, they struck in for all the Bills of Exchange they could find, and
those were presently brought to above 25 per Cent. loss to us. It Is true, that
the badness of our Money gave some reason for this: But it is observable, that
before these Guinea-Jobbers did by such means administer the occasion, People
did not begin to disesteem the Value of our Money, but did as it were rely upon
the Honor of the Government to make good the deficiency at sometime or other:
Then they fell upon buying up our Manufactures, or any thing else they could
lay their Hands on, for which they could put off their Guinea's amongst us, and
hope to sell it again in some Country or other for silver, though it were at a
lower price then it cost them. It Is true, that our People were not so silly as
not to make an advance upon their Commodities, when they saw such a Demand: Yet
even that advance was less than the worth of their Goods, when they were paid
in Guinea's at 30 s. and you will find at last that this was but a bad Trade for
the Kingdom, when you come to consider that all the Bills or Silver these
Gold-Traders sent over, was what would otherwise have gone to supply the King's
Occasions, who must send so much silver the more in lieu thereof; and that the
great advance upon all Foreign Exchanges which was chiefly occasioned thereby,
was some hundreds of thousand Pounds loss to the Nation, not only in the
aforesaid occasion of paying our Army, but also in the maintaining of our Fleet
abroad, and furnishing that at home with Naval Stores, which must cost the
dearer perhaps by one third part: That all these Goods of ours, were not bought
up to supply the demands of any Foreign Market, but do yet lie the greatest
part of them on hand, and you may now buy them cheaper in Holland than here, so
that we must not expect any great demand for our Manufactures 'till this glut
is gone off; and in the end, I doubt the Nation must lose little less than a
Million of Money by the fall of this dear bought Gold, although those Persons
that have taken care to put off their Gold in time, may bear little of this
Loss.

Gent. I now see plainly that our suffering so great a rise upon Guinea's, has
been very prejudicial to us; but now since they are up, why cannot we keep them
up, and save all that loss?


Merch. To answer you to that, you must consider, that whatever People may form
in their Imaginations, there is as it were a Standard for the Value of Gold,
which is pretty nearly assented to by most of the People of Europe; and the
highest proportion it bears to Silver is as one to sixteen; and our Guinea at
21 s. 6 d. is the Extent of that: Now then if we should continue to value our
Gold above this Proportion, our New Money would infallibly be sent away as fast
as it comes out of the Mint to buy more Gold, where it can be done to profit:
And I can assure you, that at this time somewhat less than sour of our New
Crowns, and two Shillings, will buy a Guinea in Holland; and is it not plain
then that these People will continue this Trade as long as they can get profit
by it, and that when Gold is reduced to its true value, their Trade must cease.


Gent. But if we raised our Silver in proportion to the Gold, they could not
then make Profit in sending it abroad to buy Gold.


Merch. That Is true, Sir, but we should by that means run the Nation into as
great, nay, greater Mischiefs.


Gent. How can that be? for if we are content to take it so amongst our selves,
and could buy the same quantity of Provisions or Clothing as we do now for 30
s. when five Crowns were made to pass for 30 s. where is the harm on it?


Merch. If it were to be imagined, that we could be entirely separated from the
rest of the World, and should have nothing to do with other Countries, it might
do well enough; but as we are People as largely concerned in Trade and Commerce
as almost any other, we must have regard to other Nations in this Matter.


Gent. Why, Sir, I am told that the price of Silver is risen amongst all our
Neighbor Countries.


Merch. How do you mean risen, Sir?


Gent. That our Crown is really worth 6 s. or more, of their Money.


Merch. Which is downright Nonsense; You Will pardon me, Sir, I intend no
reflection upon you but upon the absurdity of the Notion, and the Broachers of
it, being sorry to see how much it has obtained upon many honest Gentlemen,
who are not acquainted with Foreign Affairs; and I will convince you of the
inconsistency of it, by undeniable arguments. You must know then, that there is
no such thing as six pounds, six shillings, or sixpence, (understanding the
same value by it as we do) in any part of the World, but under the English
Monarchy. The French make their computation by Livres, Sols and Deniers, the
Dutch by Guilders, Stivers and Groots; in like manner all other Governments
have Denominations, or Valuations for their Money, peculiar to themselves: Now
these are only as Foreign Languages, not understood but by such as are
conversant in them; but People that are concerned in Foreign Trade soon come
to understand this Money Language, and are able as it were to translate it into
the Language of their own Country; so that if one English Man would ask
another that is a Trader, what a French Crown was wont to pass at in France? he
would be apt to answer him according to his Understanding in English, that it
passed for 4 s. 6 d. because the silver in such a piece is worth nearest that
Value in our Coin, yet the most proper answer would be, that it passes for
three Livers, or sixty Sols, but then that would have been all Foreign
Language, and unintelligible to him: In like manner an Inhabitant of France
would be as much puzzled, if you should tell him that an English Crown passes
for 5 s. but if you tell him it is worth 3 Livers and 6 Sols, he understands you
presently, and it is after this manner that the Mistake of calling the Coins of
one Country after the Denomination of another is introduced. But now you will
readily agree with me, that if the French King should raise the Denomination of
his Crown, and cause it to pass among his own People for 4 Livers, we should
still esteem it worth no more than 4 s. 6 d. as we did before, because it had
nothing added to its former weight of Silver; so that in reality the true value
of Money is only to be reckoned by the weight of the Silver and Gold that it
bears, and it is altogether needless for us to trouble our Heads with the nice
distinction of extrinsic, intrinsic, and real Value, for it must all be
resolved into this one Proposition of Weight, every Man's or Nation's Riches
being truly to be measured, according to the more or less weight of Silver
which they possess: And that I may give you an infallible Demonstration that
silver is only a standard to its self, and as such, is not capable of being
raised or lowered with respect to Foreigners: If you should carry an ounce of
fine silver into Holland, in expectation of Profit, do you think that a
Dutchman would give you an ounce of his fine silver, and a penny weight more,
for your encouragement to come again: You may certainly resolve your self that
no Nation is so foolish.


Gent. This, Sir, seems so reasonable, that I know not how to argue against it,
but yet we find it otherwise in fact amongst our selves; for your self told me
just now, that silver had been risen from 5 s. 8 d. to 6 s. 9 d. and 7 s. per
Ounce.


Merch. You Will please to note, Sir, that I had the Caution to say, that it
could not rise (in that sense) with respect to Foreigners; and yet I Will make
it as plain to you, that (excepting a small matter) silver is not really
capable of rising and falling amongst our selves; for this seeming and nominal
Advance upon it was indeed no advance at all, for you must note, that he that
bought silver at 7 s. per Ounce, was to pay for it either in Guinea's at 30 s.
(and in that sort of Payment his Ounce of silver was indeed worth about 7 s. 3
d.) or in the clipped and counterfeit Money, of which perhaps the true value of
what was called 7 s. might not be 4 s. but you may assure your self, that none
of these Buyers of silver would give a new milled Crown and a 6 d. for an ounce
of silver, because they know how to throw them into the melting Pot, and bring
out above the weight of an ounce; and this Rule is so certain, that it can
never vary more than such a Value, as People will be content to give for silver
when they have occasion to transport it, rather than incur the danger of the
Law by melting down, or transporting the current Coin; and that difference
(when our current Money was good) has rarely been known to be more than 3 d.
or 4 d. per Ounce: If you should yet have the least scruple, pray try whether
you can by any sort of reasoning persuade your self, that an Ounce of ^nncoyn'd
Silver can have more real Value in it than an Ounce of Silver of the same
fineness coined into Money, as a late Ingenious Author has well observed.


Gent. Sir, I thank you, you have effectually convinced me in this poinr, the
Matter is self evident.


Merch. Yet before I have quite done with this Argument, I would show you in
what sense Silver may be said to rise in its esteem, and that is only when any
Country may be brought to such a want of it, as they must be content to part
with their Product or Manufactures for a less weight of it than formerly, which
if Riches is to be reckoned from the plenty of Gold and Silver, is an
infallible sign that such a Country is declined in its Riches, and growing
poor. But this is not the case of our Neighbors the Dutch, with whom some
People would have us think that silver is grown dearer; for on the contrary, we
rather give more weight of silver for their Commodities than formerly. And this
leads me on to show you how, if we should be once reduced to a necessity of
raising the denomination of our Coin, it might be truly said of us, that we are
not only grown poorer, but should be in a manner put out a of condition to
recover riches again; for however indifferent it might seem to Country
Gentlemen to submit to the raising of our Crown to pass for 6 s. because that 6
s. might buy as much Provision or Clothing as it would when the Money was at
the old weight, and therefore seems to be no inconvenience, if we were content
amongst our selves; yet the matter will appear to be far otherwise, when we
come to consider our selves as a Trading Nation, and that National Riches are
no otherwise to be acquired but by our Commerce with Foreigners; and to show
you after what manner this advance of our Money would affect us in that
respect, I will suppose that a Forreigner brings hither 20 Ounces of Silver,
which (to avoid Fractions) I will call 20 Crowns, or five Pounds, and with this
he buys 10 yards of our Cloth: The next year he returns again with the like
quantity of Silver, and finds that we have altered the Denomination of our
Money, and will allow him 6 l. for his 20 Ounces, so that he can then have 12
Yards of the same sort of Cloth for the same weight of Silver, which the Year
before bought him but 10 Yards: Is it not plain that we hereby give away, or
lose two Yards of Cloth in ten? Or to put it the other way, will not this
lessen the whole produce of our Nation with respect to Foreigners full one
fifth part? although we must pay as much Silver for all that we buy of them as we
now do. An unhappy Device: And sure all Men that love their Country, when they
shall come thus to understand it, will oppose such a Design with all their
power. But I would have you consider its Consequences a little further; as we
compute the value of our Estates by Money, the Man that has an Estate in Land,
which would now sell for 1200 l. which I Will compute at 4800 Ounces of silver,
if he should come to sell it after the Money should be so advanced, will the
Money he should receive then, although they call it 1200 l. weigh above 4000
Ounces? he that has 600 l. or 2400 Ounces per Ann. in Leas'd Rents, will this
New Money bring to his Coffers more than 2000 Ounces? and though he has 600 l.
in Name, has he not certainly lost a 100 l. in value? Is not this a plain
robbing the Landedman of one fifth part of his Estate or Substance? In like
manner, if a Man has lent 120 l. or 480 Ounces at Interest, should he receive
any more than 400 Ounces of Silver for his 120 l. and would he not utterly lose
the 80 Ounces? A Man that by his good Husbandry used to lay up 60 l. or 240
Ounces of Silver yearly, toward the increasing of his Estate, or raising
Portions for his Children, must he not lose the 6 th. part of his Industry,
when he shall come to have but 200 Ounces, that is 40 Ounces of silver less
than his old 60 l. would have yielded him. In short, would it not be a lowering
the whole value of all the rest of the Nation in that proportion, for no other
end but to advantage those Men as much who had large hoards of Money by them?
But I should not omit to show how it will touch the Public: If the King has
now occasion to use two Millions yearly abroad for the payment of the Army, the
Fleet in the Streights, and providing Naval Stores, etc. when the Money should
be thus raised, and would weigh one sixth part less, will Foreigners think you
abate him one Ounce of the Old Weight of what he shall send in Silver? And will
not the Merchant that furnishes him with Bills have as much more Money in Tale
as will make good the old weight, because he must pay by that weight abroad?
And is it not then plain, that this part of the King's Money will fall short by
one third part of a Million? and must not this naturally heighten the next
Years Tax? Thus then it must affect us at home, and I think I need use no more
words to show you that Foreigners do not at all regard the raising the
Denominations of the Coin of their Neighbors, and will never esteem it
otherwise than by its weight; for which reason it is a great Folly to think, if
(as is beforesaid) we shall continue to have occasion to use more Money in
Foreign Countries than we can put there by the produce of our Trade, that we
can avoid sending so much Silver or Gold as will make up the Balance in its
Value by weight, although we should double or trebble the Denomination of our
Coin amongst our selves.


Gent. But, Sir, as you have grounded the main of the Argument upon a
supposition that our Goods would continue to be bought for the same number of
Pounds, Shillings and Pence, as before the raising of the Money; suppose we
raise our Commodities proportionably, and make the Stranger pay 12 s. for a
Yard of the same Cloth he bought before for 10 s. shall we not then keep up
our Markets abroad, and bring home as much Silver for our Manufactures as
before? and would not all things run as smooth at home, when we sold every
thing from one to another as much higher in Price as the difference of the
Money?


Merch. What good would it then do us to raise the Denomination of our Money,
if we must then give just so much more for every thing we buy? is not this
puzling our selves to no purpose, if it should have no worse effect? But I
thought I had shown you clearly, that all our Debts, the Rents arising from
Lands leass'd out, the King's Revenue, etc. would then be paid in so much a
less proportion of Silver, and then the King, Creditors and Land-holders will
be in a fine Condition, when they must receive all that is due to them in a
lesser Value, and yet pay the old value for all they buy; would not this be
plainly the doing a great deal of Injustice and Injury to a great many, and
doing real good to none? But yet I Will tell you, Sir, it is my Opinion that it
would be more likely that our Product and Manufactures would by degrees fall to
the old Denominations of Price, for that I have observed it to have had that
consequence in other Nations, where this Trick of raising their Money has been
practiced; and shall we not then infallibly fall under the Mischief of
Beggering our selves, as I have formerly shown you?


Gent. I must confess this raising our Money does seem to be attended with many
inconveniences, with respect to our selves, but I have been told the Nation is
greatly in debt to Foreigners, who would be apt to carry away our New Money,
as fast as coined, to pay themselves, should we not by this means prevent them,
and by paying our Debts with less Money save so much to the Nation?


Merch. If we are in debt to Foreigners, we are doubtless obliged to them for
the Credit they have given us, and ought we not in prudence as well as Justice
to be tender in preserving that Credit, least if we should ever hereafter have
the like Occasion, we should find no Nation that would trust us. Doubtless it
ought to be the greatest Care of Governments to prevent as much as possible the
running into Debt, but if such Debts are once contracted, it highly concerns
them that they be discharged punctually, justly and honorably, otherwise they
loose their Reputation with all the World, as a great Nation that might be
named has too apparently done. It Is not to be doubted that some Foreigners
have been large Contributors toward the great Sums that have been paid into
our Exchequer upon the Million Adventure, the Lives, and other Funds, and all
that Money was paid in fair and true value, before the Cheat of Guinea's, and
the advancing the Exchanges: Neither can these People withdraw this Money, as
is suggested, for they can only receive the Interest accrewing by it, as it
comes in gradually. Can any Man then that has the least regard to Justice and
Honor entertain so base a thought as to persuade the breaking through the
Sanction of our Acts of Parliament, and the falsifying our Contracts, that we
might pay these People in Money of a less Value than they really brought us? I
must indeed confess that our Nation has been greatly abused by the bringing in
Gold, and the Extravagance of the Exchanges this last Summer, but I am much of
the Opinion that those Traders kept turning the Penny, and continually sent
Effects for the carrying on the Trade: So that I hope though it cost us dear,
yet that we cannot remain much in debt for that. And to speak my Mind, I
believe, if the Truth were known, that Trade was chiefly managed for the
account of Natives of our own Country, and Foreigners that live amongst us,
and not of the other side of the Water. And though I will not argue against our
taking Satisfaction of the Persons that have injured us, yet I think we were
better let them alone 'till we can find them out, than seek such a general
Revenge that may fall least upon them, and do more hurt to those kind
Neighbors that have done us good by trusting us with their Estates, and most
of all to our selves, by plunging us into those fatal Mischiefs, which I have
before noted.


Gent. Sir, I must acknowledge, that you have very much opened my Understanding
in these things, and I am now fully convinced, that 'twould be ruinous to us to
raise our silver, and no less to hold up Guinea's higher than 21 s. 6 d. if
that be, as you say, about the proportion that other Countries keep between
them. But pray, Sir, is there then no way for us to keep our Army abroad, and
avoid the sending out of our Silver or Gold to maintain them?


Merch. If we could furnish our Army with the greatest part of the Provisions
they need abroad, protect our Foreign Trade, lessen our Expense of Foreign
Commodities, (which I would earnestly recommend to all Gentlemen to reform as
much as possible in their own Families) and manage all our Affairs with such
good Husbandry, as to bring all our Foreign Charge within the compass of the
Value which we can put into Foreign Countries by the exportation of our
Merchandises, we might do it, otherwise it is impossible. For the whole Matter
of bringing silver into the Kingdom, or carrying it out, may be resolved by
this easy thought, if we live within the Bounds of our Exports, we cannot send
out our Money unless we will give it away for nothing; but if we spend more
than we export in Goods, we must send out our silver as long as we have any,
because Foreigners will not furnish us with what we want longer than we pay
them to the full.


Gent. But now, Sir, since the Guinea's are so largely dispersed into the Hands
of the Common People through the Nation, will it not be very hard upon them to
bear so great a loss? and may it not be reasonable for the Parliament to give a
recompense for this loss?


Merch. I would have all the Tenderness possible for the People, but if they
will foolishly run themselves into a loss that they had warning to have
avoided, seeing the King's Receivers did all along refuse to take them at the
advance, they are the less to be pitied; and 'twas their easy giving way to it
that made it possible for the ill Men that contrived it to put this abuse upon
the Nation; whereas if all had been of my Opinion, (not to distinguish my self
from many others who were always of the same Mind) they would never have made
them pass current for 23 s. for 'twas long before I would take any, and never
after but when I knew where to put them away again presently. I could wish
indeed that the Persons who invented and promoted this Trade could be found
out, and made to repair the loss so far as they were able; and it being said
the Parliament are passing an Act, by which they will appoint Commissioners to
be named through the Kingdom, who shall take in all the clipped and silver Money,
though of a baser allay, (which has not been paid into the King for Taxes) and
give the People broad or new Money in Exchange for it, I think every one is
much to blame who will not rather choose to take what is due to him in any sort
of silver Money, by which he cannot lose, than in Guinea's at the present
rates, because he may well expect to lose whatsoever he takes them at above 21
s. 6 d. And upon these Considerations there may be good reason to believe that
the Parliament will not at this time lay an Additional Tax upon the Nation to
make good the deficiency of Guinea's, which the People that have them have
brought upon themselves, when they find so much difficulty to raise Money
enough to supply the unavoidable necessity of the Government. And I must
farther give you my Opinion, that I think the People in whose hands they now
are, may best bear the loss: For as to the meaner sort of People, their stock
seldom reaches so high as to be Possessors of Guinea's; the middle sort of
People, such as Farmers or Tradesmen, have commonly as much occasion to pay as
receive, and therefore it must be a fault in them if they have many upon their
hands, and what loss may befall them they may the more contentedly bear,
because it is not to be doubted but that, (generally speaking) they have gotten
more by the raising the prices of their Goods in consideration of such pay. The
greatest Quantities then I should think to be now in the Hands either of such
who have kept them out of a Covetous Design of gaining by them, through a send
imagination that they would rise to 35 s. or more, by the scarcity of the
Silver Money, whilst it was passing through the Mint; or of such who have been
the Traders in them, neither of which deserve Consideration.


Gent. But pray Sir, have we not indeed reason to fear that we shall not have
Money to answer our Necessary Payments whilst the silver is in coining?


Merch. Truly, Sir, I can have no such fearful apprehensions of it, for there is
nothing to hinder any Man from keeping the possession of his own proper Cash,
till he can change it for better, and therefore all People that have now Money
enough to serve their Occasions, will have no need to want; the Bills and the
Guinea's (which will circulate quicker than before, when the shall pass at 21
s. 6 d. and no body fear to lose by them) will continue, as they have for some
Months past, to supply us in the larger Payments; and for Market-money
Laborers Wages, etc. a small Quantity will serve that occasion, it being
always in Motion; so that there is not the least reason to doubt but that enough
of the present Money will be kept for that use, 'till better comes out to
change it.


Gent. I heartily thank you for the great satisfaction you have given me in
these difficult matters, and shall not presume to detain you with further
Questions.


Merch. I shall be very glad, Sir, if I have been able to make you so far
Master of the Argument, as that you can convince your Neighbors, that there is
a Necessity for the falling of Guinea's, if we ever desire to see the New Money
plenty amongst us, and that they were better contentedly to submit to the loss
which will befall them when they have but ten, than to be subject to the
greater loss which they must bear, if through the importation of greater
quantities they should come to be Possessors of fifteen; as also, that the
raising the denomination of our Money must have a direct tendency to beggar the
Nation.


FINIS.
Some Books lately Printed for Samuel Crouch.
AN Essay on the State of England, in relation to its Trade, its Poor, and its
Taxes, for carrying on the War against France. By John Carry, Merchant in
Bristol.

A Letter from an English Merchant at Amsterdam, to his Friend at London,
concerning the Trade and Coin of England.

Sir Thomas Row's Speech at the Council Table, about the Alteration of the
Coin, in July 1640. With some Observations thereon.

Some Thoughts concerning the better Security of our Trade and Navigation, and
carrying on the War against France more effectually: Humbly offered to
Consideration.

Some Remarks on a Report containining an Essay for the Amendment of the Silver
Coins. By Mr. William Lownds.

Considerations, requiring greater care for Trade in England, and some
Expedients proposed.

A New Discourse of Trade, wherein is recommended several Weighty Points
relating to Companies of Merchants, the Act of Navigation, Naturalization of
Strangers, and our Woolen Manufactures, the Balance of Trade, and the Nature of
Plantations, and their Consequences, in relation to the Kingdom, are seriously
discussed. And some Proposals for Erecting a Court of Merchants for determining
Controversies relating to Maritine Affairs, and for a Law for Transferring of
Bills of Debt are humbly offered. The Second Edition. By Sir Josiah Child.


