A DISCOURSE OF THE General Notions OF Money, Trade, and Exchanges, AS They
stand in Relation each to other.

Attempted by way of APHORISM: With a Letter to a Minister of State, further
Explaining the Aphorisms, and Applying them to the present Circumstances of
this Nation.

Wherein also some Thoughts are Suggested for the Remedying the Abuses of our
MONEY.

By a Merchant.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1695.

A DISCOURSE of the General Notions of Money, Trade and Exchanges, as they
Stand in Relation each to other, etc.
CHAP. I.
Of the Introduction of Commerce and Money.
1. IT IS not to be Doubted, but that the first Ages were altogether
unacquainted with Trade and Commerce.

2. For being content with the simple Productions of Nature, every one
Furnished themselves therewith by the Labor and Industry of their own
particular Families.

3. But when the World became more Populous, diverse Persons addicted themselves
to more peculiar Managements, either from the Propensity of their Genius, or
the Convenience and Aptitude of those Habitations that fell to their Lot; some
Employing themselves chiefly in the Breeding of Cattle, others of Corn, some
acquired Skill in Architecture or Building of Houses, others Applied themselves
to the Making of Utensils and other needful Conveniences.

4. And thus People found a greater Convenience in making use of each others
Assistance, and that they were better Supplied thereby, than when they were
forced to divert themselves from their own more peculiar Employments, to
Attempt those things for which they were not so well qualified.

5. By this Means then was Commerce begun.

6 Yet in the Beginning 'twas Managed no otherwise than by Exchanging
Commodities for Commodities.

7. But this Method became very difficult, when People could not readily find
mutual Demands for those things they had to Exchange.

8. Some things, either by Reason of their being more Rare of Production, or
Requiring more Art or Labor to acquire them, came to obtain a greater Value or
Esteem among Men.

9. Of these it is probable that Metals gained the first Estimation, because of
their Hardness, and the many Uses they were Applicable to: And among those,
Gold and Silver came to be most Valued, as much Excelling the others in the
Perfection of their natural Fineness and Duration, and being more Rare to be
found.

10. A small Bulk or Weight of these Finest Metals, being Esteemed of great
Value, they were therefore made Choice of as the fittest Medium for the
Exchange or Purchasing of all other Commodities.

11. But as these were subject to be Adulterated by the Mixture of Baser
Metals, certain Standards were Agreed upon to Adjust the Fineness; and the
Value thereof was Computed by Weight.

12. Yet that the same might become Current, and the trouble of proving every
Piece be avoided, 'twas found needful, that every Prince or State should affix
a Mark or Stamp on such Pieces as were Current in that Country; thereby giving
Public Credit to the Truth thereof: And this obtained the Name of Money or
Coin.

CHAP II.
Of the Progress and Various Methods of Trade.
13. MOney then becoming the Means whereby all things necessary for Human Life
might be Purchased,

14. People exerted their utmost Industry for Procuring the same, esteeming it
their chiefest Treasure.

15. But the Almighty Creator had so disposed the World, that as particular
Persons, so also did different Nations, stand in need of the various
Productions of each other.

16. And this made way for Trade and Merchandise, by the Carrying and Vending
the Commodities of one Country into another; which also occasioned the more
frequent Use of Money.

17. Yet did Trade admit of very different Kinds of Management, according to
the different Occasions of diverse Countries.

18. Sometimes the Merchant carried his Goods to another Country, and brought
home the whole Produce in other Commodities of that Country which were
required in his own; sometimes he brought part Goods and part Money; and to
some Places he was forced to carry the greatest Value in Money for the
Purchasing such Goods as were wanted in his own Country.

19. Either of these Trades might be equally profitable to the Merchant; but
that Trade brings most Profit to his Country, when he returns with most Money.

20. Yet it may not be disadvantagious to a Nation, to send out its Money for
the Purchasing some Profitable Commodities; if so be the Money they draw in by
their Trade with other Countries, does in the whole surmount the Value they
shall so send out.

21. For by this means their People, Beasts of Burden, and Ships (where they
have them) come to be employed, and the greater Circulation of Riches is made
among them.

22. Nay even Superfluities may be admitted, where they have no worse a
Consequence upon the Public, than the drawing Money from those that most
abound in Wealth, and causing it to Circulate among the Needier sort who depend
upon Trade.

23. Likewise when a Trading Nation does by such Means procure Commodities, to
Export them to other People, who are less Industrious in serving themselves;
such a Trade is to their Advantage, for as much as it returns at last with a
Surplus of Money.

24. From hence it is Evident, that the Profit of a Trading People, is not to be
Computed from their Negotiations with any particular Country, whether it be by
Money or Goods, but from the Balance of their Trade in General.

CHAP. III.
Of the different Computations of Money in distinct Governments.
25. AS we have already Noted, that Money is become the Medium of all Commerce,
we are yet to Consider that different Nations have very different Computations
of the Value even of this Medium.

26. For distinct Governments made the Allay of their Metals Finer or Courser,
and gave their Coins such Denominations, and as many different Species, as they
thought necessary to themselves, without regard to the different Usage of their
Neighbors.

27. Therefore People do not currantly Receive or Esteem Foreign Coins
according to the Value or Computation that Foreigners put upon them; but
according to the Weight that the Silver and Gold will yield, reduced to the
Standard of their own Country.

28. Moreover, Silver and Gold themselves (which we may call by the general
name of Bullion) are to be considered but as a Finer sort of Commodities; and
as such, are capable of Rising and Falling in Price, and may be said to be of
more or less Value in diverse places, according to their Plenty or Scarcity.

29. Bullion then may there be reckoned to be of the Higher Value, where the
Smaller Weight will purchase the Greater Quantity of the Product or Manufacture
of the Country.

30. And according to this Rule, the Riches or Poverty of a Country is to be
Computed; even as the Riches of a Private Man is to be reckoned from the Weight
of Bullion he can command.

31. It Is therefore an Infallible Demonstration of the decay of Wealth in any
Country, where they are reduced to a necessity of abating the Standard of
their Coins, or causing it to pass above its wonted Value; because he that
parts with his Commodities, becomes then Possessor of a less Weight of Bullion
in lieu thereof.

32. Also when the Merchant Trades to such Countries from whence he must make
his Returns in Bullion, he does not only regard the Weight thereof, but has
also consideration to the Hazard, Time, and Charge of Transporting it into his
own Country.

33. And this Charge is sometimes more, sometimes less, and according to the
more or less difficulty of Transportation or Carriage, occasioned by War or any
other Contingencies.

34. Wherefore there can be no constant Standard or Adjustment made, to Reduce
the Computations of Foreign Coins to the exact Value of those of our own
Country.

35. Yet such Alterations upon these most Staple and Precious Commodities can
never be great, unless by some extraordinary Accidents, which rarely happen.

36. So that a very near Regulation is always made by the Exchanges: Of which
we come next to Treat.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Introduction and Nature of Exchanges.
37. IN taking Notice of the many different Managements of Trade, we have
before shown, That Trading People do from some places Import Bullion in Return
of their Merchandise sent out, and yet must send Bullion to other places, for
the purchasing of such Goods as they have need to Import from thence.

38. Those Countries also that take Bullion from some places, because they have
no Occasion for the Commodities that they produce, must yet send Bullion to
other places, to procure what themselves need, and have not other Commodities
to purchase.

39. Some Merchants also that Trade to the same places, apply themselves only
to the Importing of Commodities purchased with their Money; whereas others, on
the contrary, Trade only by sending of their Goods to the Market, and making
their Returns by Money.

40. To avoid then the Charge, Trouble and Hazard in Carrying Money in Specie
to and again for the Supplying all these differing Occasions, the Method of
Drawing and Remitting Money by Bills of Exchange was found out.

41. For hereby People were mutually served, the one delivering his Money to
the Person who wanted it at home, to receive the Value where his Occasions
required it abroad.

42. But in this also it was difficult for particular Persons to find out each
others Conveniences.

43. Therefore some Merchants applied themselves to study the Advantages of
different Exchanges, and made it their Trade to furnish all People according to
their Demands.

44. But whenever the Demands for Bills to any place is greater, than that
these Exchangers can find other Remittances to imburse their Correspondents,
they are then necessitated to transport so much in Bullion as will make the
Balance.

45. And here again it may be Noted, That in this Case they are not to have
regard to the Computations of their own Money, but to the Value that the
Foreign Nation puts upon the Weight.

46. The Exchanger also takes such a Consideration from the Remitter, as may
not only pay his Charge and Hazard, but also redound to his Profit.

47. Yet this Praemio, or Advance on the Exchanges cannot be great, unless (as
is aforesaid) upon some extraordinary Emergencies.

48. Because People would then rather choose to send their own Bullion to answer
their particular Occasions.

CHAP. V.
Of the Rising and Falling of Exchanges and Bullion.
49. AS we have before said, That Bullion is capable of a small Rising and
Falling in Price.

50. Exchanges are also reciprocaly subject to the same Alteration; the one
being commonly influenced by the other.

51. And in the Commerce of most Countries there are Times and Seasons when the
Exchanges are subject to rise and fall.

52. At such times when Ships usually come to carry off the Product of any
Country, the Exchanges are wont to Rise; but when that Demand ceases, the
Exchanges generally Fall.

53. These are the Occasions by which Bullion and Exchanges do ordinarily come
to Rise and Fall; but these Alterations, as before Noted, cannot be great.

54. Yet there are some extraordinary Emergencies whereby the Exchanges, and
consequently Bullion, may come to Advance much more considerably.

55. As when any Nation shall become so profuse as to Expend more of the
Product of other Commodities, than the Value of the Commodities they send
abroad.

56. Or if being engaged in a Foreign War, they shall be obliged to maintain an
Army out of their own Country, the Charge whereof shall come to exceed the
whole Balance of their Trade.

57. In either of these Cases it is evident, That what the Value which that
Nation sends to Foreign Countries shall fall short of the Expense, must
unavoidably be sent out in Bullion.

58. And as this will first cause the Exchanges to Rise extravagantly, so the
necessity of purchasing Bullion to Export for the satisfying the Over Balance
of their Trade, will of Consequence cause an Advance upon the Price of Bullion.

59. Neither can such a Nations Raising the Computation of their Coins, or
Abasing of their Allay, prevent the sending out One Penny the less; because
there is no other Medium of paying the Over Balance: And therefore the
Exchange will infallibly Rise proportionable to the same Alteration they shall
make in their Coins; because (as is before Observed) Foreigners will only
respect the Weight of the Bullion we bring them, without having any regard to
the Computations we put upon it.

60. Such a Nation then must infallibly grow poor, if this Expense continue
long; even as a Private Man will be Impoverished, when he spends more than his
Income; though a Rich Man, or Nation, may hold it out longer than a Poorer.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Abuses of Money, and the Remedies.
61. THere is scarce any Nation that has been free from the Practices of Ill
Men to Corrupt and Abuse the Current Coins.

62. And this is done either by Counterfeiting the same in baser Metals, or by
Clipping or Diminishing the true Moneys.

63. Either of these are made Capital Crimes in all Governments.

64. To prevent the Counterfeiting, the Government usually Employ the most
curious Artists to make such Stamps as may not easily be imitated.

65. So that for the most part, this Abuse is discovered by those that are
skilful in the Knowledge of Money.

66. Yet there are some Counterfeits so neatly done, that even the most skilful
are sometimes deceived by them.

67. To obviate which there is no means so certain as to try the Money by
Weight; for there is such a difference between the Weight of Metals as may
Discriminate the Fraud.

68. If any shall Attempt to make their Counterfeit Pieces of the due Weight,
they will so much differ in Breadth or Thickness, as may make it discernable by
the Eye: And People that want that Judgment, may as well keep a Pair of small
Calliper Compasses as a Pair of Scales, a Trial by both which would infallibly
discover all Frauds. And then the False Pieces might be ordered to be
immediately broken, and the Offerer questioned how he came by them.

69. And this Method would not only destroy all the Bad Money as fast as it
should be Discovered; but also so soon hinder the Vent of it in Quantity, that
it must utterly discourage the Undertakers from Proceeding in a Business of
that Hazard, when they could make but small Earnings of it.

70. The Clipping of the Coins can never be introduced, but through the Neglect
of the Government.

71. Yet this Mischief has proceeded so far in some Countries, as to spoil a
great Part of the Current Coin.

72. And though several Methods may be Attempted to prevent it, yet none can
ever prove Effectual, but the Calling it all in, and Causing it to be New
Coined, and the Loss made up to the Proprietors at the Public Charge,
Prohibiting the Passing of any such for the future.

A LETTER to a Minister of State, further Explaining the foregoing Aphorisms,
and Applying them to the present Circumstances of this Nation.
May it please your Honor,
OBserving the Remedies that have been Proposed for the Preventing the Carrying
out the Bullion of this Kingdom, and Reforming that intolerable Abuse of
Clipping our Money, to be different from my Apprehensions thereof; and the
Difficulty there is to convince People by Discourse, That the Abasing of our
Coin, or Raising the Value of our Current Money, would prove no effectual Means
for the Remedying of the former, made me think of Digesting my Sentiments
thereof into Writing; thereby to give such Men who look no further than the out
Side, and search not into the Bottom of things, a clearer Understanding of what
Money is in its own Nature, and how it is subject to Alter in its Value, by the
Various Influencies of Trade and Exchanges: But then I found it would be
absolutely Necessary to give the General Notions of all these, and to show how
they stood in Relation each to other.

And this I have Attempted by way of Aphorism, because I have thought that the
most Concise Method of Arguing; and which (if the Writer be not Mistaken in his
Propositions) cannot fail of Leading People to the Truth, without a Multitude
of Words, which in Discourses of this Nature especially, does more often Puzle
the Cause than give a Clear Understanding of the Matter.

Such then as I have been able to make them, I take the Liberty humbly to Offer
them to your Honors Perusal, with a Resolution never to trouble the Public
with them, unless they may seem so Valuable as to pass the Test of your Honors
Judgment.

;Yet for as much I have been Necessitated to confine my self to Shortness, and
only carry on my Argument in General Terms, I think it needful to add some few
Remarks, partly for Explanation, and partly to Enlarge the Discourse with some
necessary Additions Applicable to the present Circumstances of our Nation,
which the Brevity of the Aphorisms would not admit: With which I shall proceed
in order.

In the Second Chapter then I take Notice of the different Managements of Trade
between Nation and Nation, and conclude that the Profit of a Trading People is
not to be Reckoned from their Trade with any one Country, but from the
Balance of their Trade in General.

To Illustrate which Argument, I will Instance in the Trade of this Nation with
France in time of Peace, from whence we brought a far greater Value of their
Commodities than they Received of ours; so that the Balance of that Trade was
in that respect Apparently to our Loss: Yet when it shall be Considered that we
sent a greater Over Balance of our Product to Spain, Holland, and Germany,
than we Required of their Productions; it will appear, that we had no need of
sending out our Bullion, but that we could Supply our Occasions in France, by
Remitting thither by Bills of Exchange, the Over Balance of Trade which we had
with those Countries. And the Advantages we made to our selves by the French
Trade was, That it Employed our Navigation, and caused the Money of such who
Consumed those French Commodities to Circulate among Merchants, and all
Tradesmen that had a dependence upon that Business, and to Contribute
considerably to the Public Revenues arising by the Customs; neither may we
expect to drive a Public Trade in the World without some such seeming
Disadvantages, with more Reason, than that a Private Man should Refuse to Buy
of his Neighbor what his Necessity Requires, and he cannot so conveniently
procure from another, because that Neighbor has no Occasion to lay out any of
his Money with him.

Yet to Apply this last Instance to our Trade with France, it is but Common
Reason that we should rather choose to reject theirs, and use our selves to the
Drinking of the Wines of Spain and Portugal, since they take off much more of
our Commodities than the French do; and more especially, since the last
Prohibition with France has shown us, that we might find out Wines in those
Countries, which are better in their own Nature, and with use become even as
pleasing as those of France. And it might be a Thought not unworthy the
Consideration of our Government, whether we may not Reasonably lay Four times
the wonted Duty on French Wines, when ever that Trade shall come to be Open; to
continue, until that Prince shall Recall that extravagant Duty which before the
War he laid upon our Manufactures, amounting to little less than a Prohibition.

What I Hinted in the Twenty third Aphorism of this Chapter, may be well
Instanced in our Trade to the Indies, whether we sent considerable Quantities
of Bullion; for which many People were apt to Censure that Trade as wholly
Prejudicial to the Nation: Yet if it shall appear, that if that Business were
well Managed, we should be able to send so much of the Goods brought from
thence to our Neighbor Markets, as would return us more Money and Moneys Worth
than what we first sent out for India; they will then be fully Convinced that
such Trades are not to be declined: And that we have so done, is well known to
those who understand Trade.

From the Consideration of this Chapter also, may well be Argued the
Irrationality of any Peoples making severe Laws to Prohibit the Transportation
of their Bullion: For the Experience of all the World shows, That wheresoever
the Advantages of Trade require it, People do and will find ways enough for the
Conveyance of a Commodity whose Bulk is so small. Neither can it be any
Prejudice to an Industrious Trading Nation, because the more Demand there is
for its Exportation, the higher the Price will be, and that never fails to
Encourage the Merchants, whose Trade it suits with, to Supply the Market with
more.

But if any one will take Occasion here to tell me, that People under this
Liberty, may come to carry out more Bullion than they bring in; I have shown in
the Fifth Chapter, That any Nation that shall continue to do so, must
infallibly ruin themselves in time: But then I cannot call that an
Industrious, but an Improvident Nation.

The Third Chapter is to Convince such of their Mistake, who may think that
Foreigners are Governed by the Computation or Value we put upon our Coins; and
that if we Raise its Worth amongst our selves, they must be obliged to Esteem
it at the same Rate, or else cannot afford to carry it from us; whereas I think
nothing is more plain, than that the Weight is the only True Standard of its
Value; and if we should make our Crowns to pass for Five Shillings and Six
Pence, the Exchange must Advance just Ten per Cent. more to answer it; because
(as it is shown in the Fifth Chapter) if we have occasion to send out Bullion
for the payment of our Bills, we must send so much in Weight as will make up
the Value which Foreigners expect from us; and consequently not one Ounce the
less will be sent out while our Occasions require it Abroad: And then the
effect upon our selves will be, That every Man will be really so much the
Poorer, as he shall become Possessour of so much the less Weight of Bullion for
the Commodities he parts from: Which I take to be a general Declination of
Riches in a Nation.

The Fourth Chapter shows the Cause and Nature of Exchanges; and that though
some Men have skill to Manage that kind of business to a competent Advantage,
yet there can be no such Miracles wrought by it, as an Ancient Writer has
imagined; because it is wholly influenced by the Balance of Trade between
Nation and Nation; and when that falls short, it must be supplied by the
sending of Bullion: For that there must always be a Value to answer the
Draught, or else the Credit will be broken: For the Drawing and Re-drawing
without a Fund, is only a Trick of necessitous Men, and if continued will end
in Loss and Ruin.

The Fifth Treats of the Rising and Falling of Exchange and Bullion: And what I
shall here take Notice of on that Head, is the extraordinary Emergencies which
cause a considerable Advance thereon; and this can never happen, but when a
Nation has occasion to send out more Bullion than it receives in from Abroad:
And these may be reckoned the Unnatural Affects of Trade, and are like
Convulsions in the Body, the continuance whereof cannot but be Dangerous; and
the way to Remedy them, is not to begin with the Effect (as I have before
Observed, in showing the Deficiency of Prohibiting Exportation, or Advancing
the Value of the Coin, etc) but to apply such means as may take away the Cause.

How the Case is with us is no Mystery, because it is Evident, That the Charge
of Maintaining our Army Abroad does exceed the Balance of our Trade; yet the
inevitable Necessity for that is such, That no Man who loves his Country can
grudge the Expense, because we are thereby preserved from the Devastations,
Plunderings, Sackings, Burning, and Slaughter, which we must have been Subject
to, if the Seat of War had not been kept out of our own Country.

And indeed nothing could have given so great an Evidence of the incredible
Riches of this Nation, as the being able to bear so great a real Expense (for I
call not that so which Circulates amongst our selves) so many Years, with so
few Inconveniences as we have hitherto felt: So that we may yet think no worse
of our selves, than we would say of a Nobleman that might have Ten thousand
Pounds per Annum, and One hundred thousand Pounds in his Purse, if he should be
forced to Spend Forty thousand Pounds of it in the Defense of his just Title
to his Estate, that he yet remains in a good Condition.

However the Continuation of this Expense must in time prove more Injurious;
and therefore it cannot be amiss to think of some Expedients that might make
the lengthening of the War less burdensome to us: To which I should freely offer
my Mite, but that I fear to go beyond my Line; lest I might justly Incur the
Censure due to such, who being over confident of their own Notions, Expose
themselves, by publishing their Thoughts, before they have tried the Soundness
of them, by Conversing with other Men of better Judgments in those Matters than
themselves.

But as to the business of Carrying out our Bullion, (excepting our present
Occasion of Paying our Army Abroad) we of all Nations of Europe have least
reason to be apprehensive of it; because our own Native Commodities are so
Valuable in most Foreign Markets, that they turn to much more Profit than the
Carrying of Money would.

The last Chapter Discourses of the Abuses of Money, and I think needs no
Explanation till I come to the Sixty seventh and Sixty eighth Aphorism; and I
will only add to that, That I think upon mature Consultation, such a Scheme
might be framed from that Foundation, that might effectually answer the Design.
For it is to be considered, That upon the New Coining of the Money, most
Payments would be made in the Milled Crowns, and Half-Crowns, or in the Old
Money of its true Weight; and People would immediately learn to Try all their
Money, both by the Scales and the Calliper, so that few Pieces would escape
Three Hands; for it would behove all People to be very Exact and Curious, both
to avoid the Loss and the Suspicion that the offering Bad Money would subject
them to. And though this Method at the first may seem troublesome, yet it is to
be Considered that in paying Sums, there would be no need to try many Pieces,
so that the trouble would indeed be less than now it is; besides the Loss would
be avoided, and a little time would quite put a stop to it.

And I will here take Occasion to suggest a Thought which I have had for the
Putting a Speedy End to the Vexation, Trouble and Loss that People Daily Endure
by the Abominable Money which they are forced to Receive; the Current Cash of
the Nation being in a manner quite Spoiled by Clipping, or by the introducing a
sort of Counterfeit Money, even worse than that, which daily increases upon us,
and will continue so to do as long as any Clipped Money shall be permitted to
Pass.

I would Propose then, That the Government should Issue a Proclamation,
Declaring, That for the putting a stop to the Abuses of the Money, the Laws
should be put in Execution against any Person that should presume to offer any
Clipped Money after a certain prefixed Day.

But that for the ease of the People, Officers should be Appointed in the Tower
of London, for that City, and Parts Adjacent; and a convenient Place should be
Appointed by the Magistrates in all the Cities and Market Towns through the
rest of the Nation, where the like Officers should Attend to Receive in all the
Good Clipped Money that should be brought them; and that they should Enter the
Sum and Weight of every Man's Parcel in a Book, and Seal the same up in Bags,
giving them as many Certificates as they please in Parchment, to the Amount of
the Sum they brought in.

These Certificates, with an Indorsement, should be delivered from Man to Man
in Payments: But if any one should doubt the verity thereof, he might go to the
Officer and Examine it.

If any Man shall Refuse these Certificates, and Demand to be Paid the Money in
Specie, the Debtor should only be obliged to carry him to the Officer, and
calling for the Bag Certified, count it over to him before the Officer, and so
discharge himself; the Officer Sealing the Bag again, as before.

If any Persons should not like to have their Money kept in such Appointed
Place, they should have liberty to keep it themselves, or lodge it where they
please, but not to open the Seal but in the presence of the Officer: Yet it is
rather to be supposed that the Money would be in less danger of Thieves, by
being kept in a Strong Place, secured by the Public, than if it were kept in
Private Houses: Neither can the Sum be so large, as to Encourage a great number
to make any attempt upon it; for there are above Eight hundred Market Towns in
the Nation, which having One thousand Pounds one with the other, would make
Eight hundred thousand Pounds; which perhaps may be double as much as will be
found, out of London, and Three or Four of the other Cities; and it is certain
that the most will always be in the largest Towns, and therefore most Secure.

The trouble of this will be less than might at first be imagined; for all
people of business in the Country generally Meet at the Market, where the
Officers should give their attendance: So that this business would be dispatched
with as much ease as people could do it at home, and with no hazard of losing
by Bad Money. Neither would there be any injury offered to any Man, for he that
will keep his Money himself may; he that is content to take the Endorsed
Certificates, cannot be unsecure, because the Fund for them is unquestionable,
being no less than the very same Money, which otherwise he should have received
in Specie; and he that desires to receive his Money by Tale, as before, may
continue to do so, only he must submit to the trouble of doing it before an
Officer, which no honest Man can think too much for the preventing such a
Mischief.

Also when there may be Occasion to carry Money from one Place to another, the
Person should have his Money Told over and Sealed up a new, his Old Certificate
Cancelled, his Credit in the Book Discharged, and another Certificate given,
mentioning to be carried to such a Place; and the Officer, Appointed for that
Place, should Receive it, Enter it in his Book, and Give him Certificates
thereof as before: But to prevent Abuses, any Person, not well known, should be
Obliged to bring some Credible Person of the Place to Vouch for his Honesty.

Some may Object, That Money will be wanting to Supply the Running Cash; but
the Project it self Answers them, if they Consider, That all the Money
continues to have the Effect of Running Cash; for every one may take the
Certificate as Low as he pleases; and then the Circulation of a very little
Broad Money, will serve the Occasion of daily Expenses; of which there could be
no want: For besides, that most People will be able to Pick out some Broad
Money out of the Parcels they have in their Custody; those people who have been
able to keep Money by them, have made such sorry Money, as they are forced to
take, serve for their Necessary Payments, and laid up the best; which they will
not scruple to bring out, when they shall be Assured that no more can be Clipped.
And from this Reason it may well be supposed, That the Quantity of Clipped Money
will prove much less than is generally thought.

Yet if the want of Changing Money, as I may call it, proves somewhat
troublesome in some Places, People might and would Invent Ways of helping
themselves; and this might be much better born for a while, than the
Continuation of so great a Loss, which we see daily Growing upon us. As for the
Poor, the Overseers may be Obliged to Change what small Matter they have out of
the Parish Stock.

Also if this Method were put in Practice, an exact Account would be taken of
all the Clipped Money in the Kingdom against the next Sessions of Parliament;
which would much facilitate their Settling such a certain Tax upon the Public,
as would make good the Loss, and give every Man New Milled Weighty Money for
the Clipped Money he had brought in; likewise the present Counterfeit Money would
be destroyed, because it is all Clipped.

Neither need the Government be put to any Charge, for it is Presumed, that no
People who are Perplexed with the Base Money, which now they must take, will
bethink the giving Two Pence in the Pound to be eased of that Trouble and Loss;
which it is probable might Defray the whole Charge of this Management.

I will add but one thing more, and that is my Observation on the late Rise of
Guineas amongst us, and the Ill Consequence that attends it.

The Reason that is pretended for this, is the Badness of the Silver Money;
when as People should Consider, That it is their own Fault if they Receive the
Counterfeit Money; and for the Clipped, they may be sure to have it Exchanged for
Good Money without Loss, when the Parliament can Settle it; and then
consequently (if not before) Guineas will fall again: But there will be no
Reparation for the great Loss which such must suffer, who shall have Quantities
of them Remaining on their Hands.

But some Argue, That Gold is Risen Proportionably, and therefore the Price of
Guineas must keep up; and that this does not only keep our own Guineas at Home,
but also cause them to be brought over to us from Holland and other Places
whither they were carried.

But to Answer these, Gold is only Risen amongst us, because of the Rise of
Guineas: And though this may make Gold to Advance also something in our
Neighbor Countries, when they see us so Imprudent to take it from them at so
high a Price; yet their Advance is through our Demand, and we shall find in the
end that we may Buy Gold too Dear; which our Neighbors of Holland have Wit
enough to know, and therefore they will Coin all the Gold of their own Country
into Guineas for us, if we will give them (as we lately did) Five Ounces of our
Standard Silver for a Guinea, which a little time before they would part with
for Four Ounces: but as there is a Necessity for sending out Bullion for the
Payment of our Army, so if this also continues, we may be sure to have but
little Silver left in a short time; and both our Silver and the Exchange to
Holland is already Advanced, yet more in our Disfavour by this Occasion. I am
not Ignorant that it is common among Merchants to call the Exchange to Holland
Falling, when the Dutch give fewer Schillings for our Pound, and this indeed
may well be Reckoned Falling in their Favor; but with respect to us, if we
could formerly Purchase Thirty five Schillings for our Twenty Shillings,
whereas we must now Pay Twenty five Shillings for the like Number of Dutch
Schillings, I am sure we may more Properly say it is Risen Twenty five per Cent.
to us.
Neither shall we be so Rich as those People imagine, by having such High
Prized Gold in the stead on it; for those that Treasure it, will find their
Coffers lighter than they would have been at the Old Rate, by near One Third;
and those that should send it to India (for we send little or none to any other
Parts) would find that those People will give them no more of their Commodities
for it, than it would Purchase when it Cost them but Four Pounds per Ounce at
Home; and whether then it may not be more likely to Fall again to the Old
Price, than to keep up, let all Prudent Men Judge. Moreover all that now have
them, know that they are Held up at a Strained Value; and though they are
forced to take them in Payment, or be without their Money, yet every Man is
willing to be rid of them as soon as he can: So that when once they begin to
fall, all People will be for parting with them before they come Lower, and so
they will come to tumble down faster than at first they Rose. And all these
Inconveniences are brought upon us by certain Tricking Men amongst us, that
having the Command of large Cashes, do contrive, by such Means, the Raising
great Advantages to themselves by the greater Injury of the Public; and I am
sorry to see that People are content so tamely to Submit thereto, and do not
represent these Mischievous Practices to the Government, in order to stir them
up to Apply some speedy Remedy.

But before I have quite done, I will Offer One Remark more, to show that
notwithstanding what any particular Government may do amongst their own People,
it will yet be impossible to make a greater Advance on the Value of Silver and
Gold through Europe; because the great Supplies thereof, which have been
brought into these Parts of the World, since the Discovery of those Rich Mines
in America by the Spaniards, have made it much more Plenty than it was in
former Ages; and while these Mines continue, we may always expect a greater
Increase; by which Means its Value may come to be less, but can never be more.
Since Writing the above, I am Informed by very Worthy and Knowing Persons, That
within late Years, very Rich Mines of Gold have been Opened in the East Indies;
so that we should not only have no need hereafter to send Gold thither, but
that Gold might be brought from thence Purchased with Silver, to yield in
Europe Sixty to Eighty per Cent. Profit; from whence we may certainly expect,
That the Value of Gold must, in some short time, become of less Worth in
Proportion to Silver than it has been formerly.


And let me add (though it be a Digression) That the Trading Nations do get the
greatest Share of this; which is the Cause why we see that the Potentates of
those Trading Nations, are become much more Powerful, being able to Maintain
far greater Forces than they could in the last Age: Whereas on the contrary, we
may Observe some other Great Governments, who throught the Extravagant Expense
of their own Treasure, and for want of Trade, and Industry to Acquire to
themselves a Proportion of this General Increase of Riches, are extremely
Declined in their Strength, though perhaps their Territories may not be much
less, nor the People they Govern fewer than they were formerly.

May it please your Honor,

My Thoughts on these things would Carry me much farther; but when I Consider
that I have already Touched at diverse Great and Weighty Matters with too
Unskilful a Hand, I think I have Adventured but too far at the first Attempt,
and therefore shall Close my Discourse with a Good Observation made by a late
Ingenious Author; That so Curious a Subject as Trade is, would not have wanted
many Excellent Discourses, to show the great Advantages it brings to a Nation,
and the Proper Methods to seek its Improvements; but that Men of Learning are
but little Acquainted with it; and those that are in the Practice of it, do,
for the most part, either want Ability or Leisure from their Private Affairs to
do their Country that Right. And though I have addicted my self to Search
after the True Notions of these Matters, beyond many other Merchants, who have
their Heads continually filled with Business; yet I see my self so Defective in
these Respects, that I can rather Wish, than ever Hope to be Master of those
Accomplishments, that might Render me Capable of Expressing my Thoughts with
less Difficulty to my self, and more Clearness to others; And from this Reason
it is, that I can never Read over what I have Written, without Mending some
Faults, or Espying others that I have not Skill enough to help: And I cannot
but expect, that all Men, of your Honors Judgment, must find yet a great many
more; for which I can make no better Apology than this, by Acknowledging my own
Imperfections, and Begging your Honor only to have Regard to the Notions that
I Aim at; neither in those dare I to be too Confident of all that I have
Offered; but if your Honor shall think any of them to be Instructive, I humbly
pray you thereby to Esteem of the Good I Designed to the Public, by doing what
I was Able, and Offering nothing but what according to my present Understanding
seems Right: And I Promise your Honor, That when ever I shall be Convinced to
the contrary, I shall not only be willing to Retract my Error, but also to make
Amends by doing better for the future, if ever I shall be Capable; and in the
mean time I Crave Leave to Subscribe my self,

May it please your Honor, Your Honors most Obedient Humble Servant.

AN APPENDIX Offering some further Reasons against Raising the Value of our
COIN.
THE foregoing Papers were written last Summer, in hopes that they might have
been of Service, in order to the putting some Stop to the daily Increasing
Abuse of our Money, and the Injury accruing to the Nation by the Extravagant
Rise of Gold: But finding that the Government did not think fit to meddle in so
Weighty a Matter out of Parliament, the Publication was omitted till the
Opening of the present Session.

But since my having finished the former part of this Discourse, Mr. Lowndes,
Secretary to the Right Honorable the Lords of the Treasury, and a Worthy
Member of the present Honorable House of Commons, did me the Honor to show me
a Tract of his upon the same Subject; in which he has given a very Exact
Deduction of the various Alterations that have been made in the Coins of this
Nation, since the first Institution of our Mints; showing the Measures that
have been taken from time to time for Regulating the Abuses of the Money; and
Proposing a Method for the Rectifying the present Defects thereof: The whole
Discourse being most Ingeniously performed, and furnished with many Excellent
Notions on that Subject, worthy the Observation of all Curious Persons.

Yet, as he proposes that in Consideration of the present high Price of
Bullion, our Money ought to be made adequate thereto, that thereby
Encouragement may be given for People to bring in their Silver to the Mint, and
that there may be no Temptation hereafter for the Melting down or Exporting our
Coin: having already given my Opinion so contrary thereto in the foregoing
Discourse, I cannot yet bring my Judgment to agree with him for the Raising of
our Money to 25 per Cent. above its former Value: although I will confess, That
I think the System which he has framed for the Effecting the Matter in that
way, to be the most complete that can be, if it shall be thought absolutely
necessary for us to proceed upon the Foundation of Raising the Value of our
Money.

And although I am not willing to contravert this Point with a Person, whose
Abilities I esteem so much beyond my own; yet forasmuh as I expect this Matter
will become the Serious Debate of the Parliament; and that I am very confident
that that Worthy Gentleman will readily Acquiesce in whatsoever shall be
thought most Expedient for the Public Good; I cannot think it will be any
Offense to him, if I here add some Reasons why I continue to Dissent from him
in that Notion.

First then, I doubt it will not in the least measure prevent the Carrying out
of our Bullion, or Exporting our Coin; because (as I have already shown) if our
Occasions shall continue to require more Money Abroad than does arise from the
Balance of our Trade, there can be no other way of Supplying it, than by
sending the Overplus in Bullion; and this must be had in the full Quantity by
Weight which shall be wanted: And therefore, if we should advance the Value of
our Money, so as to make our present Crown pass amongst our selves for Seven
shillings Six pence or more, the Price of our Bullion would yet be somewhat
higher. For I believe it may be admitted for a certain Rule, That whenever
there is such a Demand, the Price of Bullion will always advance something
above our Coined Money, because of the Penalty and Hazard that attends the
Melting or Transporting the latter; and yet notwithstanding that Hazard, we see
People are not to be deterred from it, when a considerable Profit tempts them
thereto, by the Price of Bullion rising much above it; so that it seems to me
altogether as impossible to find out any Regulation that can keep our Silver,
either Coined or Uncoin'd, at Home, whenever our Necessities Abroad demand a
greater Value than the produce of all our Merchandise Exported can furnish; as
to take away the Effect, while the Cause remains.

Secondly, I think that an Advance of Twenty five per Cent. upon our Money, if
it has any Effect at all upon us, must tend very much to the Impoverishment of
the Nation; to confirm which Opinion, two Dilemma's will offer themselves, and
I know not how they can be avoided.

For, if the Species of our Coin be Raised to pass for one fourth part more
than formerly, either the Price of the Product of our Lands and Labor will
rise in the same Proportion thereto, or else they will be bought for one fourth
part less than the due Weight of our present Coin.

Now if it may be supposed that our Product will rise in the same Proportion,
then this Alteration will conduce nothing, either to the Multiplying of the
Current Cash necessary for the Circulation of our Trade (because every Man will
have need of the same Quantity of Silver and Gold in Weight as before) or to
the giving any Encouragement for the bringing in of Silver from Abroad, because
it would really buy no more of our Goods to Transport than it did before: So
that thus the Difference would be nothing more to us than in the Computation,
and will only appear in the Swelling of the Figures of our Accounts.

But if this Alteration shall obtain, to Cause the Product of our Lands and
Labor to be sold for the same Computation of Pounds, Shillings and Pence, as
now, although the Coin will be one quarter part less in weight; it must
consequently have a very fatal Influence upon the Trade, from whence we draw
all our Wealth. For to instance in the Trade of Spain (because that is as the
Fountain of Silver and Gold to all Europe) when the Merchant shall come to find
that his Bullion Imported thence, will purchase in England one quarter part of
our Commodities more than formerly, the Encouragement by this extravagant
Profit will be so great, That not only our own, but foreign Merchants also,
will presently be at it, and bring all their Bullion hither to lay out in our
English Goods. And this will certainly be a Brave Trade, and will seem to
answer the end of drawing in Silver and Gold to us for a while: But what will
follow? Why, in a few Months time, the multitude of Seekers after this
profitable Trade, will have crowded the Spanish Markets with such gluts of our
Goods, that they will presently find out the blind side, and will infallibly take
Occasion by the Over-plenty of Goods at Market, to beat down the Prices, even
lower than the Twenty Five per Cent. which he hoped he had gained by the Laying
out his Money in England; neither will they ever rife again higher than just to
afford such a Profit, pro rato, to the Money, which used to content the
Merchant, when he formerly kept jogging on in his Spanish Trade: So here our
violent Start will last but a little while, and ever after we must not expect,
that the Product of our Nation will afford us, in Foreign Countries, any more
than three quarter parts of the value it yielded before this Alteration.

But the Mischief will not end here; for Foreigners will not be hereby
persuaded to part with what we want of their Product, for less weight of
Bullion than they used to have before; so that if we formerly could afford to
consume amongst our selves, above three quarter parts of the Produce of our
Foreign Exports (which I doubt we did, and yet were good Gainers by our Trade
too) we shall then come to spend more than our Income; which I am sure will be
the way to impoverish us quickly, unless we alter our Course of Living, which a
Nation that has long been used to such Plenty, is not apt to be brought to.

Let us see then how this will operate amongst us at home: The Labourer and
Manufacturer must come to take less weight of Silver for their Wages, and yet
must continue to pay the same weight as formerly, for what Foreign Commodities
they spend; whereby they will be reduced to a necessity of faring harder, and
spending less in Provisions, which must cause the Product, and consequently the
Rents of our Lands to fall in the same Proportion. The Gentleman then, who
lives upon the Rents of his Lands, must expect they will fall one fourth part
in their yearly Value, and yet he must give at least Twenty five per Cent more
for all the Foreign Commodities he spends, which to Persons of that Rank, may
modestly be computed to affect them Ten per Cent. more; so that hereby they
will be reduced above one third part of their Subsistence.

But what is yet worse, there will be a stop put to the Increase of our Riches
arising from Foreign Trade, the only Source of National Wealth; and that must
reduce the Strength and Power of the Kingdom, and make us unable to resist the
Insults of such of our Neighbors, who shall use more prudent Methods for the
introducing Plenty of Gold and Silver among them: And indeed I cannot determine
wherein the Happiness of a Nation, Rich in that kind of Wealth consists, above
others, which abound in plenty of all things necessary for human Life, only in
that the former are enabled to sustain the chargeable Provisions of War, as it
is now managed, when as the latter must be enforced to submit to the
Oppressions of others, for want of such means to defend themselves; there being
nothing more plain, than that according to the present Constitution of these
Parts of the World, he that has the longest Purse, will certainly have the
longest Sword.

But here will now arise another Dilemma; for, either this Alteration must
continue amongst us, or our Money will come to revert to its former Standard of
Value. If the Alteration continues, and have its effect, I think the fatal
consequences shown in the foregoing Argument cannot be avoided: But if the Coin
shall, after such an Alteration, return again to its old adjustment, manifold
injuries and inconveniences must attend it, of which, I will offer a few
Instances:

If a Man has lent Two thousand pounds upon Personal or Land Security, the
Debtor shall upon this Regulation be able to pay off his Debt with such Money
as will be really worth but One thousand six hundred Pounds; and on the other
hand, if a Man borrow Two thousand Pounds of this Regulated Money, and continue
the Debt till the Money be again reformed to its former Value, it will cost him
Five hundred pounds more than he at first received, to pay off this Debt of Two
thousand pounds. All Debts due from the Crown, will be paid to the Lenders in
one fourth part less Value than the Money Lent; so likewise what Moneys the
Crown may Borrow under the Regulation, must be paid again after the Reformation
thereof, with the Addition of one fourth part Value more than Borrowed. All
Tradesmen must on the Regulation, receive but three fourth parts real Value for
all the Debts they have trusted out; but on the Reformation, all People that
owe Money to the Tradesmen, must really pay one quarter part more than the
Value of what they bought. Now as it is not to be thought but that this Loss and
Gain will fall very unequally among the Mass of the People, according as the
Accidents of their Affairs may bring them under the Influence of it; let us
next Consider what Profit the Crafty Moneyed Men may infallibly raise to
themselves, by taking the Natural Advantages of such Alterations of our Money.
Suppose then a Banker, worth Twenty thousand pounds of his own Estate, had a
Prospect of this Rise, it will easily be allowed, that such an one by Drawing
in all the Money he could into his Hands, might certainly command Sixty
thousand pounds, by which Sum he will immediately upon the Proposed Advance,
gain Fifteen thousand Pounds Profit, and whenever he shall be Apprehensive of
a Reformation of the Money to its old Standard, he may pay off his Debts in the
Light Money, and lay out his own Estate on good Securities or Purchase of
Lands, till it will bring him in the same Sum in Heavy Money, and so Secure him
in the aforesaid Profit. In like manner, Foreigners may on the Prospect of so
large a Profit (besides the Common Interest) bring Money into our Nation to let
out on Valuable Securities, while this Regulation continues; but when the same
is Reformed, will be paid again in Money worth Twenty five per Cent. more than
what he Lent; which will be so much clear loss to the Nation, in as much as
they Carry away from us both Principal and Profit. I shall only Note further,
That it will be in this as in the Case of Guineas, that as some will seem to
get, and none to lose by it in the Beginning, the People will admit it to be
introduced without any uneasiness; but when the Money shall come to be Reformed
again, the Loss will affect them so generally, that it may endanger the Raising
of Mutinies and Disturbances among the People.

Thirdly, With Submission to better Judgments, I humbly conceive that better
and more effectual Methods may be provided, for the bringing down the Price of
Bullion, and making it near Adequate to the Value of our Current Coin; which
(as that Worthy Gentleman well Observes) will be the proper Means to prevent
the Melting down of the one, and hindering the Exportation of the other. And that
would be by bringing our Affairs into such a posture, as that our Expenses
Abroad may be kept within the Compass of the Balance of our Trade: For this,
and this only, will be able to take away the Evil by the Cause; and is of that
Absolute Necessity, that without it 'twill be impossible for us to Maintain an
Army Abroad much longer, without being Drained of all the Riches in the
Kingdom. Which being a Matter of that great Consequence, if I should, (contrary
to my Intent in the first Writing of these Papers) presume to Suggest my
Thoughts of such Courses as may be requisite to be put in Practice in order to
attain that End; I hope I shall at least deserve Pardon, if I may be mistaken
in any of them; since the deep Sense I have of the Injury daily accrewing to
the Nation under the present Methods, and my not having seen any thing of that
Kind offered by Abler Hands, is what prevails upon me thus to Expose my Humble
Opinion to the Scrutiny of Stronger Judgments. What then occurs to me as fit
Measures to be taken, in order to bring our Expense within the Compass of the
Balance of our Trade, I shall recommend in the following Particulars:

1. By sending all Provisions necessary for the Sustenance of our Army Abroad,
as full and complete as we provide for our Seamen on Board our Ships; by which
Means, and by Lessening the Subsistence of the Officers to what should be but
of absolute Necessity, Reducing also all their unnecessary Equipages (which
would be much to their Advantage) it is probable we might Sustain our Army for
less than one half of the Money we now pay Abroad. If it should be Objected,
That all such Provisions may be had Cheaper there than we can send them from
hence; let it be considered, That if we lost Twenty per Cent. in the Cost
(which is not to be supposed) the Nation yet Gains Eighty per Cent. by keeping
so much Money at Home: for whatsoever is sent out of the Kingdom, is so much
clear loss to it.

2. It might be Reasonable, That since the Maintaining so great an Army Abroad
is very Injurious to us being an Island, That our Confederates the Dutch might
be prevailed with to make some Commutation with us, by their taking some
Regiments off our Hands into their Pay, and we to take upon us and Excuse them
from as much or more Charge in the Sea-Service: all which would be so much
saved to us, whilst the Money Circulates amongst us at Home, and no Injury to
them; because by a Treaty on this Foot, we might afford, even somewhat to
lessen theirs, and heighten our own Quota of the general Charge of the War.

3. By Lessening our Expense of such Foreign Commodities which we can well be
without; which may be Effected by Prohibiting for a time the Importation of all
sorts of Red Wines, and all other sorts of Fruit and Wines, except such as are
of the Growth of Spain or the Rhine; all sorts of Fine Linens, and all other
Linens, except some few sorts to be particularly named; all kinds of Silk
Manufactured Abroad (except what comes from India) and making it Penal to Sell
or Wear such, or any sort of Foreign Lace I know this may be Thought Hard to
some People, whose Trades chiefly Depend upon such Commodities: But I think we
ought to have more Regard to the Public Good of our Country, than to any
such, who will not be Content for its sake to Divert their Trades, and Shift as
well as they can for a Year or two.
. For all these things, conducing but to Luxury, people may very well content
themselves for a while without them, when the Public Weal of the Kingdom is so
much at Stake, especially since they will not be denied the Use of them but by
degrees; for it may be supposed that the Stock which will be in the Nation at
the time of such Prohibition may last Two Years; by which time it is possible we
may be in a better Condition to Indulge them again. Moreover, by this Means the
Product and Manufactures of our own Country will be highly Encouraged, and
perhaps some of them be brought to that Perfection, as that we may never more
need Foreign of the same kind. If the Defect of the Revenue arising from the
Customs should be Objected, we shall be hereby Enabled the better to Supply
that and more by other Taxes.

4. By Reducing the price of Gold so, as that People may not make Profit, by
sending out our Silver in Exchange for it.

5. By Regulating our Money, and bringing it to its just Standard; by which
Means the Exchanges between us and our Neighbors will be brought to be near
equal: Because when the Money of any Country is of its True known Weight and
Goodness, it cannot fail to Obtain near the same Weight of the Money of any
other Country alike Fine upon Exchange, Allowance being only to be made for
the Time, Charge, Hazard and Profit of the Exchanger, which is called the
Praemio, and (as I have before shown) can never be great between Neighbor
Nations; because People would then decline the Charge, and Transport their own
Money, which common Sense tells every Man, must needs be Valued at its own
Weight in any Country. However, to prevent Exchangers taking Advantage by the
Demands of so great Sums, the Government may enjoin that all the Money they
want Abroad, may be sent in Coin (by which we could lose but the Coinage, and
that too is Earned by our own People) whenever they cannot get it Returned by
Exchange at a certain Moderate Rate to be set; and this would Infallibly keep a
Just Regulation upon the Prices of Bullion and Exchanges, and Consequently
bring more Silver to the Mint, especially if some small Encouragement of Two or
Three per Cent. were given by the Public, when we find Running Cash Scarce
among us.

6. By taking more Care in the Protection of our Trade than hitherto has been;
for perhaps what we have Lost this Year by our East and West India Ships, would
not have put us less than a Million Value into Foreign Parts; and that would
have saved us the sending out of the same Value in Silver; which if it were
duly Considered by our Government, they might easily be persuaded, That no part
of the Public Charge could be better employed for the Service of the Nation,
than in taking due Care of our Merchants Ships.

By what I have said then, I hope it will be evident to all Men that are
Solicitous for the good of their Country, That unless these or such like
Methods are taken, whereby we may be made able to Support our Foreign Expense,
without being Obliged to send out more Silver Yearly than we Receive in from
the Product of our Trade with other Countries, the Scarcity of Bullion amongst
us will become so great, that we shall soon be put under an Incapacity of
Maintaining the War. And, I believe, I may further presume to say, That the
Nation might be able Longer, and with more Ease, to bear Seven Millions per
Annum in Taxes, which should only be Expended, and have their Circulation
amongst our selves, than to pay but one Million per Annum, to be Exported in
Silver while the Balance of our Trade could bring us in none. But could we
once Effect this great Thing, of making the Product of our Foreign Trade
Support our Foreign Expense, the War would not make the Nation Poor though it
should last these Seven Years: And I hope this short Essay has given a
Specimen, how it may be possible for us to do so, if we have Virtue enough to
Retrench our Luxury, and Manage our Affairs with Prudence and Integrity.

And now, though I have done with this Argument, I cannot yet finish, 'till I
have added a further thought touching the Reformation of the Money, in which I
heartily agree with that worthy Gentleman, earnestly to recommend it as a
Matter of Necessity, to be done with as much Speed as Possible; neither do I
think, there can be a better Method than what he has proposed, by Erecting
Mints and Officers to Receive in, and New-Coin the Money in diverse parts of the
Kingdom: Yet I will beg leave to offer as my humble Opinion, That we need not
at present be over Solicitous for the Coining more Silver than shall be
Voluntarily brought in; nor for the delivering to the Proprietors more
New-Coin'd Money than the Weight of the Silver they bring; and for the
Remainder, to give them Tickets Payable with Interest, upon a certain Fond to
be settled for that purpose, till the Nation may better Spare Money to
discharge the Principal; which would certainly be more Current than Money it
self, by the constant growing of the Interest.

But I know the Doubt is, That we shall not then have Money enough to Circulate
in Trade: In Answer to which, I would observe, That Money may be considered to
have a Threefold Use, viz. for Treasure, or Hoarding up; for Supplying the Use
of Trade in Gross Sums; and for going to Market, or small Expenses. The
Possessors of the first sort can never want Money, and so they may be out of
our Care. The Second is what requires the greatest Regard: And yet, even now,
when Silver Money is the most scarce that ever was known in our time, People do
by means of the Plenty of Gold, and the help of Goldsmiths and Bank-Notes, for
ought I can perceive, make their Payments well enough: From whence I am
inclined to think, that when, besides the present Banks, the Land Banks also
(which are now in a fair way of being Established) come to be opened, they will
Supply the place of Running Cash as Largely, as ever it was in the Plentiest of
Times; for I cannot but think, that Lands securely settled will be esteemed so
Certain and Valuable a Fond for a Bank, that it must obtain as Solid a Credit,
as if the whole Value were Coined into Money; and that it will become no less
Serviceable in Trade. And when I further consider, that our Clipped Money of the
True Coin, was Plenty enough before the rise of Guineas, and the Introduction
of the Counterfeit Money that is now so Common, but soon after did for the most
part vanish away; I am ready to Conclude, that upon the Apprehension of its
being Called in, and the Loss made up by the Government, People chose to Lay it
by, and make the Guineas and False Money serve for their Running Cash, as what
they were willing to be rid of, as soon as they could, for fear of a Loss at
last; but in as much as the Clipped Money is not worth the Melting down, I expect
it will be brought out again in greater Plenty than People may imagine from the
present Appearance of it, when it shall be Called in to be Changed; neither is
it to be doubted, but that considerable Quantities of the Old Unclipt Money
will appear again, when our Coin shall be Regulated: So that I am of the
Judgment, that by all these Means, the Circulation of the Larger Payments will
become much easier than now: And then for the Lesser Expenses, so small a
Quantity will Supply that Occasion, that it cannot be wanting.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
UPon further Discourse with the forementioned worthy Gentleman, he offered me
a very weighty Objection against the New-Coining of our Money to the old
Weight: For that the Nation is at this time very Largely Indebted to
Foreigners, as well for the great Quantities of Gold they have of late brought
us, as otherwise; which because of the high Price of Bullion, and the Exchange,
they have not yet been able to withdraw; but will certainly carry it away in
the New Moneys, as soon as the same shall be made of its old Weight. To which I
can give no better Answer, than that I am sorry that we have been so Negligent
in not Preventing the Cause; for I doubt the Consequence is too Natural to be
easily avoided: And therefore I must refer it to abler Heads than my own, to
Consider, Whether we were not even better to Submit to bear that Loss, than to
draw upon our selves the Fatal Inconveniences I have before mentioned.

Yet I will add a sudden Thought, Whether we might not upon this Occasion lay a
Temporary Duty of Sixpence per Ounce upon all Bullion to be Transported;
admitting none to be entered Out, but such of which due Proof was made of its
Importation; and not only Confiscating all that should be found Shipped without
Entry, but adding very severe Penalties upon all that shonld be Concerned
therein: And a little Diligence in the Execution of this, might quickly Operate
so far upon those wary People, who are the Common Traders that way, as that
they might rather choose to pay a Duty of Ten per Cent. than Run so great a
Hazard without it.


