The Clothiers REPLY to the Dutch Interloper, and REASONS for a Hamburgh
Company.
WHEN above Two Hundred of the most considerable Clothiers in England of the
Counties of Wilts and Gloucester, (upon Consideration of the late Imposition of
Guineas at exceeding advanced Prizes, Exaction of Measure, intolerable bad
Debts, and full Trial of this Merchant-Allien) are Petitioning the Parliament
to give all Encouragement to English Merchants to Export our
Woollen-Manufactures to Germany, Flanders, and Holland; to find a Dutch
Interloper in the Disguize of a Clothier, addressing himself to an English
Parliament for an equal Liberty in the highest Part of our Commerce with the
Native Subject; nay, impudently affirming, that there is no need of an English
Merchant or Hamburgh Company; for that he is so much at England's Devotion, to
take Care of that Part of our Merchandise, and spare us that Charge; is too
manifest a piece of Flattery, to pass in a Kingdom enriched with so many
valuable Benefits, and chiefly secured by Navigation.

He introduces himself by way of Answer to a certain Paper, Entitled, An
Humble Representation of the State of our Woollen Manufactures; and most
readily concurs with the Representer, that our Woollen Manufactures are
miserably debased, that the measures of Cloth ought to be regulated, and the
goodness of our Manufactures kept to a Standard, and seems fairly to offer his
Guardian-ship in these Particulars.

That we may not Split our Interest twice upon the same Rock; I will assert,
First, That our Woollen Manufactures have been debased through the Management of
these Interlopers; Commissions to lower the Price of Goods having been always
sent over, which has forced the Maker to make his Goods worse to secure a
living Profit. Extraordinary measure have been Exacted, which has occasioned
extraordinary straining. And before the Year 1663. When this Trade was carried
on by English Merchants, Cloth was kept to a good Making, and no way falsified.

But he desires that these wholesome Regulations may be Established by the
Wisdom of the Parliament.

In the Third and Fourth Year of Edward the Sixth, when our Trade to these
Parts was carried on by the Foreign Merchants of the Still-yard; and our
Manufactures much debased: A Law was made for the true making of Cloth, and in
this Law there was an Injunction upon every Clothier to make the Letter E.
Crowned upon each Cloth to show the Reformation, whilst the Trade remained in
the Hands of these Foreign Merchants. But the Nation at that Time was so far
from receiving a Benefit from this Law, that our Manufactures became more
debased.

In the Fifth and Sixth Year of this Reign, the Guardianship of our Woollen
Manufactures was committed to the Hamburgh Company, and these Foreigners
excluded; and a Law was made, in which there is this Clause; That during the
space of Two Years, the Letter E Crowned, shall not be made into any Cloth, to
distinguish the bad Cloth from Good; and the Clothing Trade flourisht for many
Years under their Management.

He tells us next. If our Woollen Manufactures are not rendered Cheap at
Foreign Markets, all Regulations will fail; and that the Hamburgh Company are
the means to render them Dear.

To suffer our Woollen Manufactures to be clogged with any unnecessary Charge,
is doubtless Prejudicial; and during such Time, that this Trade was wholly
carried on by the Hamburgh Company, there were no Factors or Wooll-Broggers, in
which respect Cloth was rendered Cheaper abroad: But to persuade us, that it is
our Interest to Sell our Woollen Manufactures Cheap to Foreigners, has in it
more Dutch then English; the better Price through good Management the Merchant
gets abroad, the better Price the Clothier receives for his Cloth, and the
better Price the Grower gets for his Wool.

But the having but one Seller of Allom, favors of Monopoly; and the Hamburgh
Company has been, and would be if encouraged, the greatest Monopoly that has
been known.

The Hamburgh Company in Queen Elizabeth's Reign consisted of Four Thousand
Members, each Member Trading with his own Stock, and their Regulations in Trade
most agreeable to the Public Good; they were limited unto Two Shipings a Year
by a Law in the first Year of Queen Elizabeth; which was no way Prejudicial to
the lesser Clothier, if the Wealthy Merchant put off his Buying, until the
Shipping, he was sure to pay something the Dearer for Cloth, which occasioned
constant Buying; so that in this regulated Company, consisting of so many
Members, Trading with their own Stock, the Proof of a Monopoly is not so clear,
as where there is but one Seller of Allom.

He tells us next, That whilst the Trade was limited to the Hamburgh Company
only, several Woollen Manufactures were set up at Liege, Viviers, Cologne,
Silesia, etc. Which during, a free Trade have been discouraged.

When these Woollen Manufactures have been actually set up, since the Hamburgh
Company was invaded in their Rights, in the Year 1663. and very much increased
at Zell, and Hanover, at Dusburge, and in several Places in Holland since the
Revolution; as is well known to several Gentlemen and Merchants, who have
Traveled abroad.

He shows next, That England reaps no Benefit, by the trifling and petty
Immunities of the Hamburgh Company abroad.

To enumerate the Privileges which the English enjoy at Hamburgh would be
tedious, where the English enjoy more Privileges then the Burghers themselves.
Callice in former Time was the great Mart for English Goods, which was Lost in
the Reign of Queen Mary, to her great Grief and Sorrow; this Loss was in some
measure made good by Queen Elizabeth in the Settlement of Trade upon these
advantageous Terms at Hamburgh the Inlett of Germany, this being a Free Town
bordering upon the Empire, Denmark and Sweden; if any Difference should happen
between us and any of these Princes, it would no way Influence our Trade, and
the Charge to maintain this Company is so small, that it is sufficiently
Compensated by the Privileges we enjoy at Hamburgh in the ease of Customs, etc.

But (says he) Experience showed that more Goods was Exported in three Years
after the Free Trade, than in three Years before; That Merchants were
discouraged from Trading to the height, from the Apprehensions of the
Difficulties we were falling under at that Time, is not unlikely; a greater
Consumption was occasioned by our Armies abroad, vast Quantities of Woollen
Goods were sent through Hamburgh into Italy and other Parts, the lowness of the
Exchange, and other temporary Reasons might be assigned for this increase, and
I am sure that the Exportation is very low at present.

As to what is Asserted in the Third Article. That the numbers of Buyers are
increased, that the Clothiers Sell for ready Money, and at better Prizes than
when the Trade was confined to the Hamburgh Company only, and Wool one Third
Part Dearer than it was at that Time; is contrary to plain Demonstration. When
this Trade was carried on by the Hamburgh Company only before the Year 1663.
Cotswold Wool was currently Sold at Twenty Eight Shillings per Tod, the Cloth
now Sold for Six Shillings per Yard was Sold for Eight, and the Clothier had
more ready Money for Cloth in those Days, than now; all which is well in
Memory, and can be proved; and the Germans came constantly down, and bought
vast Quantities of our Goods at Hamburgh.

As to the Constitution of the Company which he complains of, if the Wisdom of
this Parliament, by inspecting their Charter and Bylaws, can find out a more
Effectual Way to secure the Trade to English Merchants, and make it more
National, it would be grateful to the present Members, as well as those to be
admitted.

The Hamburgh Company has been the Fence and Guard of the English Merchandise
and Navigation between us and Holland, Flanders, and Germany, from the Eighth
Year of Henry the Fourth, until the beginning of King Charles the Second; and
upon a just compare between our numerous Flocks of Sheep in our spacious Downs,
which afford such a variety of valuable Manufactures, our Fullers Earth,
Coperas, Allom, peculiar Commodities to the Improvement of our Woollen
Manufactures; our Leather, Lead, Tin, etc. and the frigid Enjoyments of the
Easterlings there, can be no wonder at this struggle for a Free Trade.

The Reasons for a Hamburgh Company.
I. THE Plausible Argument for a Free Trade was, That it would increase the
number of Buyers. Whereas Experience now demonstrates the contrary, and that we
have only changed Hands, and got a Dutch Merchant instead of an English; nay
the Trade for Germany and Holland as we are well informed, is fallen into the
Hands of very few Foreign Buyers.

II. That hereby more Money would be brought into the Cloth-Trade. When it is
manifest, greater Credit has been given with Cloth to these Foreigners, then to
English Merchants, and more Losses. A Stock of Cloth is now kept upon the
Clothiers Hand to match Patterns, which was formerly kept by the English
Merchant in his Warehouse abroad, which is another hardship upon the Maker.

III. That the Consumption of English Cloth would hereby be increased abroad.

The decay of our Trade, and general Complaints from all Clothing Parts, does
Evidence the contrary: Our Woollen Manufactures are at this Time much debased,
and vast Quantities of our Wool Exported of late Years.

From all these Considerations it is humbly hoped, that the Wisdom of the
Parliament will put the Guardianship of our Woollen Manufactures into the Hands
of English Merchants, who must be the truest Friends to our English Interest.


