^he COAL-TRADERS and CONSUMERS CASE, humbly offered to the High Court of
PARLIAMENT, in Relation to the ORPHANS of the CITY of LONDON.
THERE has been ever since Queen Elizabeth's Reign paid to Her Successors, or
their Assigns, Twelve Pence per Chaldron at Newcastle, out of which the
Citizens of London have, for the Benefit of the Poor of the said City, two
hundred Pounds per Annum.

Next, at Newcastle there is paid to the Poor and Townhouse, and at other
Places betwixt London and Newcastle, for Lights, Buoys and Beacons, in all the
Sum of Twelve Pence per Chaldron.

Next, at London is paid to the Building and Finishing S. Paul's, 1 s. 6 d. per
Chaldron.

Next, at the same Port of London is paid 4 d. per Chaldron, by way of
Meetage-Money, out of which 1 d. per Chaldron goes to the Coal-Meeter, that
really measures the Coals; but the other 3 d. per Chaldron, which amounts to
(and has so done for six or seven Years past) 4000 l. per Annum, little more or
less, goes to sundry Gentlemen called Master-Meeters; but what Service they do
for the said 4000 l. per Annum, more than paying a Clerk, and finding of Vatts
to measure the Coals with; or by what Authority they receive the same, is
unknown to such who pay the said Money into the Meeter's-Office.

These sundry Taxes on Coals at all Places amount to 3 s. 10 d. on every
Chaldron, which falls very heavy on two forts of People; First, on those that
relate to Navigation or the Importers of them, for they advance the Money in
every Place.

Next, on the Consumers of Coals, who by reason of such Tax must pay the dearer
for them; and they are the ordinary sort of Tradesmen, and those who live not
in the City, but in the Out Places, and all the Counties both East and West
from London, bordering on the River of Thames, are the greatest Consumers of
the said Coals.

Yet notwithstanding there is so much as 3 s. 10 d. already paid pro Coals, the
Citizens of London Pray, That a further Duty of 18 d. per Chaldron may be laid
on Coals to pay the Orphans Debts, (which will make in all 5 s. 4 d. per
Chaldron) the said Citizens alleging, That it was once paid to the City
before, and they felt not the Burden of it: It would be well if the poor
Inhabitants in the Out-Parts, and the great Consumers of Coals in all other
Places could say the same; or that the great Towns to which the Shipping of the
Coal-Trade belongs, viz. Ipswich, Albrough, Yarmouth, Scar^ough, Burlington,
Whitby, Newcastle, etc. had no Reason to address themselves to the High Court
of Parliament, to prevent any further Tax being laid: The Just Complaints they
have to make are too many to be here inserted, for the twenty Years last past;
during which Time, or thereabouts, the City of London have for their Share had,
by way of Impost and Meetage, about 800000 l.

However, if the High Court of Parliament shall think fit to lay a further Tax
on Coals, toward paying the Orphans Debts, the Coal-Traders, and the greatest
Consumers of Coals do in all Humility Pray, That a small Sum on every Chaldron
be added to the 4 d. per Chaldron already paid for Meetage, as is under-neato
proposed; which will be far easier to be paid for ever, than 18 d. per Chaldron
for twenty Years; for 8 d. in that nature will answer the same End, and pay
250000 l. of the Debt.

The Orphans of London have owing to them 508000 l. Principal Money; and such
who have lent their Money about 100000 l. As to the Orphans, their Money was
compelled out of their Hands into the Chamber of London; so it is a Debt most
highly reasonable to be paid, by such equal Ways and Means as may the least
burden one sort of Poor to pay the other.

But as for the 100000 l. lent by such who might have chosen whether they would
have lent it or not, seems not reasonable to come under equal Consideration
with the Orphans.

So shall only cast up what the Interest of the Orphans Money comes to, for it
is to be feared that so great a Sum as 508000 l. cannot be raised to pay them
down; and the Interest of the same, at 4 l. per Cent. per annum, comes to 20340
l. lb First, toward Payment of which, the City-Lands may yearly advance 4000
Next, the adding of 8 d. per Chaldron, per way of Meetage, to the 4 d. already
paid, will yearly raise, besides a sufficient Sum to pay all the Coal-Meeters
off, that hold their Places by Lives, even to the full of what they are now
worth, and to defray all Charges relating to managing the said Employ; and also
to pay every Lord Mayor full as much as ever has been yearly paid by the said
Meetage. 12000 Next, the Meetage on all sort of Grain, Salt, etc. imported into
London, if so small a Matter as 1 d. per Quarter be added to what is already
paid, and be appropriated to the Benefit of the Orphans, is hoped, will raise,
toward a farther satisfying ^^e said Debt 2000 ^^xts, If the Benefit of
Hackney-Coaches be also appropriated to the said Use, and if the same shall
amount to the Sum of 2340 Then all the above Sums together, will amount unto
the Sum of 20340

which 20340 l. if settled by Act of Parliament for ever, will be a sure Fund
for the Orphans from Age to Age, on which the Young Orphans, during their
nonage, may safely pay those off that are now in want of their Money; and so
the Chamber of London may once more regain that Credit, which on good Grounds
it has not had for many Years past, and yet never be in their Power to wrong
Orphans any more, because a Public Register may be kept in such Manner and
Form, as the Fund can never be exceeded.

As to 4000 l. on City-Lands and 12000 l. on Coals, if the Parliament think fit
to lay it, will be a sure Fund for 16000 l. per Annum.

And as to the the 2000 l. on Meetage of Corn and 2340 on Hackney Coaches, if
the Parliament do not think fit to lay it, or that if laid, they may not amount
to 4340 l. per Annum, there are many other things, which if put together, may
easily answer in the room thereof.

But seeing there is already 3 s. 10 d. per Chaldron, Taxes on Coals, how shall
8 d. per Chaldron more be added, and not be burthemsome to the poor Tradesmen,
etc.

I answer: If the High Court of Parliament shall think fit to take 6 d. per
Chaldron from the 18 d. now paid to the Building and Finishing S. Paul's; and in
lue thereof give a longer Time for 12 d. than the present Act has allotted for
18 d. And also a Power to borrow Money on the Credit thereof, S. Paul's will
not at all be hindered thereby; And then put 2 d. more to the Tax paid, so taken
off from S. Paul's, which makes the 8 d. above specified, and add them to the
Meetage-Money already, and make it in all 12 d. per Chaldron to the Orphans, as
well as 12. per Chaldron to S. Paul's; then still S. Paul's will be built, and
the Orphans paid too; and so one sort of Poor will not be burdened to pay the
other, any more than 2 d. per Chaldron more than what is already paid by Coals.

May not every Landlord, having the Benefit of a House within the City, and
every Tenant the Benefit of a Trade within the City, pay some small matter
toward the Orphans Debt, as well as so many, unconcerned with the City, should
pay to it by Coals?

Such a Way has been sometimes mentioned, viz. an equal Tax on Landlord and
Tenant; but the Citizens will by no means hear of that, alleging, That they
had nothing to do with what the Government did twenty or forty Years past. If
so, pray if they that dwell in the City, and are the Freemen thereof, say,
It Is unreasonable they should pay the Orphans, how much more unreasonable must
the Citizens acknowledge it to be, for such to pay them, as never Eat or Drank
for the Money so spent? yet such must pay it, if the Parliament think fit to lay
a further Tax on Coals.


