Engraving of a raven flying over a town Look into Colossians ye 3. v. 15




IF a dumb Beast could Natur^s Silence break,
And Bal^am's Ass at Heaven's Command could speak:
Let Us wonder less, that the same God could reach,
The Voice of Ravens his great Truth to Preach.
^ut it is his own kind Call, no less a Grace,
Than to invite us his Rich Peace ^'embrace.
V^ion and Love, (Oh happy Is^ael!)
When in Thy Gates such Heavenly Guests can dwell.
VOX CORVI: OR, THE Voice of a Raven. That Thrice spoke these Words distinctly:
Look into Colossians the 3d. and 15th.

The Text it self looked into, and opened, in a Sermon, Preached at VVigmore,
in the County of Hereford.

To which is added, Serious Addresses to the People of this Kingdom; showing
the use we ought to make of this Voice from Heaven.

By Alex. Clogie, Minister of Wigmore, etc. Licensed according to Order.

Matthew. 21. xviii. And Jesus says unto them, Yea, have ye never read, Out of
the M^uths of Babes and Sucklings, thou have perfected Praise. London, Printed
by W. B. And are to be sold by R. Baldwin, at the Oxford-Arms, in Warwick Lane,
and by, most Booksellers, in London and Westminster. 1694.

TO THE Christian Reader.
THis following Discourse is presented to thy Perusal, under a double
Recommendation, not only as containing so Evangelical a Blessing, (as the Peace
of God in the Text) offered to thee; our heartiest endeavors for the obtaining
whereof, is so much our highest Christian Importance, and Duty; but likewise
more particularly the Occasion that gave the Reverend Preacher the choice of
this Text; which first in the plain matter of Fact take as follows.

On the 3d. of February, 1691. about Three in the Afternoon, this Reverend
Divine, a Person of the venerable Age of Eighty Years, and Forty of those a
Laborious Teacher of God's Word, in the Parish of Wigmore, in the County of
Hereford, being in the Hall of his own House, being with the Pious Matron, his
Wife, some Neighbors and Relations, together with two small Grandchildren of
his, in all to the number of Eight Persons* Thomas Kinnersley, one of the said
Grandchildren, of but Ten Years of Age, starting up from the Fireside, went
out of the Hall-Door, and sat himself down upon a Block, by a Wood-pile,
before the Door, employing himself in no other Childish Exercise than cutting
of a Stick; when in less than half a quarter of an Hour, he returned into the
Hall in great Amazement, his Countenance pale, and affrighted, and said to his
Grand father and Grand mother, Look in the Third of the Colossians, and the
Fifteenth, with infinite Passion and Earnestness, repeating the Words no less
than three times; which Dep^rtment and Speech much surprising the whole
Company, they asked him what he meant by those words; who answered with great
Ardency of Spirit, That a Raven had spoken them Three times from the Peak of
the Steeple and that it, looked toward W. W.'s House, and shook its Head and
Wings thitherward, directing its Looks and Motions still toward that House.
All which words he heard the Raven distinctly utter three times, and then saw
it mount and fly out of sight. His Grand father hereupon, taking the Bible, and
turning to the said Text, found these words.

And let the Peace of God rule in your Hearts, to the which you are also called
in one Body; and be ye thankful. Upon reading whereof, the Child was fully
satisfied, and his Countenance perfectly composed again.

Now, as the Voice of a Raven, to speak in such a mavelous manner, may seem
an incredible Relation, especially in an Age of such little Faith, yet we do
here offer these serious Considerations for the Manifestation of this real,
though amazing Truth. First, What may stagger some People, viz. That the
greatest, and indeed only Authority in so weighty a Concern, is only from the
Testimony of a Child, of but Ten Years old, is upon due and full Examination,
one of the strongest Arguments of an undoubted Truth. For first, here were no
less than Eight People, of honest Credit and Reputation, that heard this
Declaration of the Child, and were all Witnesses and Observers, both of the
Child's Countenance, Gesture and Behavior in the whole thing. Now, though but a
Child of no more than Ten Years, to come running from his Play, with so altered
and changed a Countenance, and so much Vehemence of Spirit, and Earnestness of
Expression to press an aged Grandfather and Grandmother to so serious a work,
as the search of a particular Text of Scripture, had something extraordinary in
it.

Now, had any Person of riper Years or any other single Authority, come in the
like manner, and with the same Vehemence, advised the Inquiry into such a Text,
and given any such credible Relation of hearing a Raven speak, here might have
been some Grounds of Suspicion in the Veracity of such a single Testimony; for
at those elder Years, the change of Face, and passion of Expression, might
possibly be Vizor and Artifice, and consequently afford matter of Doubt and
Scruple. Nay, possibly a Person of Maturity, as knowing the Fewds and Jarrs of
the Family, toward which the Raven directed this Text, might, even out of a
good and honest design, have feigned such a Relation, as thinking thereby to
have reconciled the long Disunion and Discords of a Neighbor's House, by so
amazing a warning-piece for Peace and Concord, as coming from the Mouth of a
Raven, though in reality a Fictitious story. But in the case of a Boy, all this
shadow of Doubt is utterly removed; for, both the forementioned change of
Countenance, and importunate Earnestness, together with the Child's constant
Asseveration of the Truth of this astonishing Accidents were all beyond the
capacity of a Child, to feign or counterfeit; as being a Masque, morally
impossible for his young Face to wear: And not only so, but the matter and
manner of his Delivery were Alien to his Years; for a poor Infant, then out of
doors a whitling of a Stick, or some such piece of innocent Childhood, to come
running home on such an important Errand, (as indeed no less than a Message
from God, take it in all the Circumstances) was beyond the possibility of Art
or Cunning. And moreover as a thing done at Noonday, here was the plain and
sensible Conviction, both of the Child's Eye and Ear in the case, and not as
people in the Dark, many times frighted and Bug-bear'd into the seeing
imaginary Chimeras and Fantoms.

To sum up the Evidences therefore; Here is possibly a full Testimony, even to
demonstration it self: And undoubtedly, the Almighty was particularly pleased
to deliver this unusual Warning from Heaven, only to the Ear of a Child, that
Innocence and Simplicity might be the greater and stronger Commissioner of his
Divine Will and Pleasure, on such an occasion.

Now, the Reasons why this Reverend and Pious Divine has appeared thus in
public, and so long after (now above Two Years since) the thing was done, are
these: As a modest sober good Man, it never entered into his Thoughts of
appearing in Print, as contenting himself, with doing his Duty to God, in
teaching of his Flook at home, and preaching Christ, and him Crucified with in
his own Precinct and Province, the care of those Souls under his Tuition, being
the ultimate of his Work and Study, where accordingly he took occasion to lay
hold of so Heavenly an Admonition, and Preached to his Parishioners, on the
very Text, so warned by the Voice of a Raven; but when in a remoter station in
the Country, he had understood that several little trivial Penny-Books and
Ballads had been printed, and dispersed here in London, giving a Narration of
the said wonderful thing, and considered that so great a Truth was published in
such a manner hereupon, as he very well knew; how many Notorious Fictions, and
Fooleries, are daily imposed upon the World in such trifling Pamphlets;
(searce one in three truth) Therefore, to rescue this serious Narration, from
falling under Scandal and Reproach, from such a Publication, as such may render
it doubted and suspected, he persuaded himself, together with the prevailing
importunity of Friends, to let this Discourse of his, (contrary to his usual
modesty,) be made public in the World, as indeed, hoping in some measure to
do some good Christian Service therein, as far as lay in his Power.

It Is on this Account (Christian Reader) that this following Discourse is
presented to thy Hand, and under such Credentials, it is hoped (with the Grace
of God) that the seasonable Precepts contained therein, may be of Efficacy and
Force, to work a lively sense in thy Heart, of that just and high value we
ought to set upon the Peace of God, here offered by the Apostle to thy most
earnest seeking and desire: And withal, though this Voice of a Raven, thus
Commissioned from above, in the utterance of such a Heavenly Admonition, seemed
to direct his stupendous Language, to a particular private Family, (which
Private Family, through God's great Goodness and Mercy, have since received the
wonderful effects of the said Heavenly Admonition, being all reconciled and
united in a most perfect Love and Amity,) undoubtedly the purport of that
Language, so mavelous in our Ears, had a further and larger Extent, as being
indeed a general Awakning Alarm to all Mankind, Union and Concord, being the
fairest and largest Branches of that greatest of our Divine Apostolical
Instructions, Charity. Most certainly this wondrous Warning piece, though more
immediately pointing to a single Family, was intended for an Universal Call,
and Thou and We, and all the Professors of Christianity, are thus called by a
gracious God (from the highest to the lowest, from the Cottage to the Throne,)
to Unity and Love, as the effectual means of attaining the Peace of God, which
is the Fundamental and Basis of our Happiness, both in this World, and the
World to come, the Blessing both of Heaven and Earth.

As such therefore, (kind Reader) be pleased to accept it; and if it may be any
ways instrumental toward that great end, the obtaining the Peace of God to thy
Soul, the Author has his Labor more than rewarded. And so Farewell.

COL. Chap. III. Ver. xv. And let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the
which also ye are called in one body, and be yo thankful.
THese Words (well Beloved in our Lord) have ever since run in my Mind, since
we were in so unusual and miraculous a manner directed unto them, by the
unsearchable wisdom of God, that does nothing in an extraordinary way, but for
most excellent Ends and Purposes: And although the more I have thought of them,
the more Difficulties have presented themselves unto me, insomuch that I have
endeavored to remove my Thoughts from them, to some other place; yet I know
not how, I have been still rolled back to them again: for to use the words of
the Prophet, They were in mine heart as a burning fire shut up in my bones, and
I was weary with forbearing, and I could not stay, Jer. 20. 9.

I resolved at length, to make them the ground of my Speech to you at this
time, which the Lord grant may be with as much profit to you all, as both I
bring desire unfeigned, and the Scripture it self affords occasion thereto. And
that indeed is very remarkable in many regards.

They are first the words of God, not only as all other holy Scripture, from
Divine Inspiration, 2 Timothy 3. 26. in which sort, the words of holy men, yea, of
wicked men, yea, of wicked Spirits themselves, at least, as far forth as to the
recital of them, are the words of God; but these of my Text have been pointed
at of late, by a new Inspiration from God in the Mouth of a Raven, in a
distinct and audible Voice. He that spoke of old from Heaven on Mount Sinai, in
the sight and hearing of all Israel, has commanded us to look seriously into
this Scripture. If Paul said to King Agrippa, That he was not disobedient unto
the heavenly vision, Acts 26. 19. Why should I or you be disobedient to the
heavenly* Voice of this Text? and not say with the Psalmist, I will hear what
God the Lord will speak, for he will speak peace unto his people, and to his
Saints, Psalm 85. 8. (Never more necessary than in this Contentious Age) but
let them not turn again to folly.

Now because this Voice came not because of me, or the Child's sake only that
heard it, but for your sakes also, and for all that are a far off, Isa. 57. 19.
that are concerned with us in this peace of God, I will endeavor to look into,
and open this Scripture unto you, that all that have an Ear to hear, may hear
with Reverence, what the Spirit of God speaks to the Churches 1. Sam. 3. 19.
Rev. 2. 17.
in it; that we may not let it fall to the ground.

That which Chrysostom has in his Entrance to entreat upon this Epistle, seems
to me not untruly, nor unfitly said: These Epistles which the Apostle writes
out of Prison, (such as are to the Ephesians, whereto this has wonderful
likeness to the Philippians, to the Hebrews, to Philemon, the 2d. to Timothy)
have I know not what, more than ordinary Portion of the Power of Paul's Spirit
appearing in them; 1. Whether because he was now come near to the end of his
Life, and so the Graces of God's Spirit in him to perfection. Or 2. that
Afflictions have a special power to enlarge our hearts, and make them apt for
heavenly Exercises; (as indeed the Truth never thrives better than under the
Cross.) Or 3. that the Auditor now conceives Paul, (as the same Chrysostom
speaks) like a noble Conqueror, Inditing or Writing amidst his slaughtered
Enemies, amidst his Trophies, the durable Monuments of his Glory:

Now, if you please, I will add a word or two, touching the Argument, or
general scope of this whole Epistle, before I come to the particular handling
of the Words of the Text It may appearby that which the Apostle writes in the
Second Chapter and first Verse, that these Colossians were not Converted by
himself. He writes thus: For I would that ye knew what great Conflict I have
for you, and for them of Laodicea, and for as many as have not seen my face in
the flesh: They were then Converted by the Ministry of some other, possible by
Epaphras, whose Preaching he mentions, verse 7th. of the First Chapter; as ye
also learned of Epaphras our dear fellow servant, who is for you a faithful
Minister of Christ. Yet (the common case of all the Churches at that time and
almost of all times alike) Satan left no Stone unmoved to disturb them, and
corrupt the Truth they had received, with Men's Traditions and Inventions; so
hard a thing it is to keep us to the Simplicity that is in Christ Jesus, as the
Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 11. 3.

The evil Seeds that were scattered by his malice and curiosity of his
Ministers, were those about Meats, Observation of Times and Days, worshipping of
Angels, and the like: whereof in the latter end of the Second Chapter. The
Apostle's purpose then in this Epistle, is, to recall them first to Christ, and
his sufficiency of Redemption, etc. Secondly, To stir up their minds to the
practice of the duties of Love, and the showing the fruits of Sanctification,
unto which two Heads this whole Epistle (setting the wonted Complements of
Salutation, Entrance and Conclusion aside,) may fully be reduced. Now since we
know the general Scope of the Epistle, let us come to these words that were
read even now, and their Connection with the foregoing.

The Apostle in the 12th verse of this Chapter, with courteous and alluring
language, in the terms which he gives these Colossians, styling them, The Elect
of God, holy and beloved; and that which hereby he would work them to, commends
unto them sundry and diverse Duties of Christianity to be practiced, and has
opened a rich Wardrobe of certain Excellent Virtues to put on, and cloth our
selves withal, as parts of Sanctification. Put on (says he) bowels of mercies,
kindness, bumbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering: Five Duties near of
affinity together; the last whereof, long-suffering, he sets forth by two acts
of it, and by the worthiness of the Pattern out of which it is taken, verse 13.
Forbearing one another, forgiving one another; if any man have a quarrel
against any, even as Christ forgave you, so do ye. Which words of the Apostle
do to us declare, That our Lord Jesus Christ himself, as always, so eminently
in his Passion was thus clad and invested; a great inducement to us, to like
either the Stuff or Fashion, whose whole Life ought to be an Imitation of so
great an Author, as he speaks; For I have given you an example, that you should
do, as I have done to you, John 13. v. 15.

The Apostle has not yet done, but persists in the same Argument in the 14,
and 15 verses, which are a Declaration of the formerly mentioned Duties of
meekness and long-suffering, wherein (you see) are contained three Virtues more
exhorted unto, Love, Peace, and Thankfulness, verse 14. Love; and above all
these things, put on Charity which is the bond of perfectness. As if he had
said, Besides all the former (as continuing in the manner of speaking, taken
from Apparel) aloft over all these, as an upper Garment, put on Love which is
the bond of perfectness.

Now in the 15th verse which I have read unto you, the Apostle calls the
Colossians to two Duties of Sanctification, Peace and Thankfulness: and first,
of Peace, an Argument always worthy to entertain us, the very Name whereof is
sweet, the thing it self not only delightful, but healthful, sweeter than honey
and the honeycomb, including all good, by Scripture-use, and all Blessings
that God will bestow upon his People, as the Psalmist concludes the 29th Psalm;
He will bless his people with peace, all happiness, outward success, and
prosperity.

Touching the Sense and meaning of these words, that we may proceed on good
ground, and the better understand the whole Order and Web of the Discourse.

The Peace of God, here spoken of, is not properly, Peace with God, Luke. 19.
38. whereof the Apostle speaks, Romans 5. v. 1. Therefore being justified by
faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ: and John 14. v.
27. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you, not as the world gives,
give I it unto you. But peace with men, which we are bidden to hold withal, if
it may be, Romans 12. ver. 18. If it be possible, as much as in you lies, live
peaceably with all men. The peace one with another, which he would have us to
keep, as Heb. 12. 14. Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no
man shall see the Lord: and, Be at peace among your selves, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 13.

But yet it is called God's peace.

1. Because he is the Author of it; for God is not the Author of Sedition, but
of Peace, as in all the Churches of the Saints, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.
33. and 2 Thessalonians. 3. 16.

2. Because God has called us to it, into one body, 1 Cor. 7. 15. But God has
called us unto peace, for the keeping of which, the fault of departing must be
in the Christian-man or woman, says the same Apostle.

3. Because it is given of God, and approved by him, he it is that gives it to
us, and commands us to keep it, by the Prophet Zachary 8. 19. Love the truth
and peace: And our Savior, Have Salt in your selves, and have peace one with
another, Mark 9. 50. Yet if any, because of the likeness of this place with the
Seventh Verse of the Fourth Chapter of the Ep^stle to the Philippians, (And let
the peace of God which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds
through Jesus Christ) shall take this, Peace of God, of the Tranquillity of
Conscience, I will not much stand against it, though these words (in one body)
serve more for the other sense, of peace one with another. Rule in your hearts,
(...), hold the Prize. In the Greek the word is taken from the Gamings and
Masteries then used in Greece, when the Apostle wrote this; such as were
running, wrestling, fencing, fighting, etc. to which there were wont to be
appointed a Master of the Game that should order the whole, and did give the
Garland to the best Doer; from which Garland or Prize, this word is also taken;
it may be Englished, Hold the Mastery, or, Give the Garland. Marshall, or, have
the pre-eminence. Chrysostom, Have the Garland, and bear the sway. [In your
hearts] and in your minds, souls and consciences, unto the which you are called
in one body.] That is, the mystical body of Christ, often in Scripture, see
Chap. 2. v. 19. And not holding the head, from which all the body by joints and
bands, having nourishment min^stred, and knit together, increases with the
increase of God. And the Apostle to the Romans; So we being many are one body
in Christ, and every one members one of another, Romans 12. v. 5. and 1 Cor. 12.
12, 13. There is one body, and one spirit: and Ephesians. 4. 4. and v. 12. For the
edifying of the body of Christ: So Ephesians. 5. 23. He is the head of the body,
the Church: and Col. 1. 18. and Chap. 2. v. 17. Which are a shadow of things to
come, but the body is Christ. [And be ye thankful] (...). The former
Translation reads it, and be ye the amiable: This word is not found any where
that I know, or can meet with in this sense: diverse of the same Stock, (I may
say) and mark, still signify thankful, and so do others beside Chrysostom, the
Syriack Interpreter, referring it to Christ, although seeing it is put in rank
with Duties pertaining to men, I rather take it, of thankfulness to men each to
other: of that after.

Such then is the sense of the words, wherein we are exhorted to two Virtues,
Peace and Thankfulness. There be two parts of the words that concern Peace;
first, the Duty, Let the peace of God rule in your hearts: Secondly, two
Reasons; 1. God's calling, You are called to peace. The second Reason is, That
you are in one body.

Peace, which is the Duty that we are exhorted unto, is a Moral, or (to speak
in Christian language) a Theological Virtue, of that worth and excellency,
which we are bidden, to suffer to marshal us and all our actions, to give Peace
the pre-eminence; let it rule, in God's Name, in us and over us: It is the
Peace of God.

The Evangelical Observation is this; Observe. That when there shall be a*
Conflict in our Thoughts, between Anger, Swelling, Disdain, Ambition, Revenge;
and on the other side, Meekness, Mercy, Humility, Love, yea sometimes Justice:
then let Peace bear the sway, and order all things. It is not then (though still
to be desired yet) to be hoped for so much, to be without Conflict with our
Passions, as regarded, that at least they be well Marshalled; a wrestling there
will be, only beware this Contention be not without a Moderator of the Strife,
which must be Peace. Trem. renders it thus, Pax sit moderatrix in cordibus
vestris; Let Peace be the Moderatrix in your hearts.

It is not to be expected then, but there will be Contentions, Discords, and
thereupon troublesome Affections, which will strive for the Mastery and
dominion, as was amongst the Apostles themselves; for by the way they had
disputed, Who should be greatest, says St. Mark, 9. v. 34. but yet let Peace
rule, let her always in your hearts, win and have the upper-hand, (as Erasmus
renders this Phrase in his Paraphrase upon this Epistle. This was the case
between Abraham and his Nephew Lot, when there was a strife between the Herdmen
of Abraham's Cattle, and the Herdmen of Lot's Cattle, and the Canaanite and the
Perizite dwelt then in the Land, Genesis 13. 7, 8. And Abraham said unto Lot, Let
there be no strife, I pray thee, between me and thee, and between my herdmen
and thy herdmen, for we are brethren. Heb. (...) we are menbrethren, and so
Peace and Love decided the Controversy, and prevented all future occasions of
difference between the two Families.

The Reasons of Dissentions are either inward or outward.

1. Inward are many; first, Defects of Understanding, when men are not rightly
informed and acquainted with all matters: Abimelec pleads thus, and justifies
himself to Abraham, who had reproved him, because of a Well of Water, which
Abimelec's Servants had violently taken away, Genesis 21. 25. And Abimelec said, I
wot not who has done this thing, neither did thou tell me, neither yet heard
I of it, but to day. A right understanding prevented a sad falling out, and
danger of War, between the Israelites and the men of Gilead, about the Altar of
memorial that was reared up at the Banks of Jordan, till the true meaning
thereof was known, Josh. 22 12. The whole congregation of the children of
Israel gathered themselves together at Shilo, to go up to war against them.

2. Weakness of Judgment is a second Reason of Dissension; for though in
general we may discern what is good or evil; as that, no man is to be wronged,
and that we must do unto others, as we would be done unto; yet when we come to
the particulars, we resolve far otherwise, Deteriora sequor.

3. Stifness in Opinions once received and entertained, is an occasion of
continued Differences, even amongst men of the same Profession; as between the
Pharisees and Saduces; there arose a Dissension, and the Multitude was divided,
Acts 23. v. 7.

4. Pride is a great Makebate; only by Pride comes contention, says Solomon,
Prove. 13. 10. Men have forgotten that exhortation of the Apostle Peter; Yea all
of you be subject to one another, and be clothed with humility: for God resists
the proud, and gives grace to the humble, 1 Pet. 5. 5.

5. Envy is a cause of deadly Dissentions; insomuch that Solomon asks the
Question, Prove. 27. 4. Who is able to stand before envy? before this Son of
Anak? The ground of the first Quarrel between Cain and Abel, that ended in
innocent blood, Genesis 4. 5. The Lord had respect to Abel and his Offering, but
to Cain and his Offering, he had no respect, and Cain was very wroth, and his
countenance fell. Moses tells us, That Jacob heard Laban's Sons say, Jacob has
taken away all that was our father's has he gotten all this glory; and Jacob
heheld the countenance of Laban, and behold it was not toward him as before.
This occasioned Jacob's stealing away from Laban secretly with all that he had,
as ye read, Genesis 31. 1, 2. 27. 31. See also Genesis 27. 41. where it is recorded,
That Esau hated Jacob, because of the blessing wherewith his father blessed
him; and Esau said in his heart, the days of mourning for my father are at
hand, then will I slay my brother Jacob. Again, Genes. 37. 4. 8. When Joseph'd
brethren saw that their father loved him more than all his brethren, they hated
him, and could not speak peaceably to him; and his brethren said unto him,
Shall thou indeed reign over us? and shall thou indeed have dominion over us?
and they hated him yet more for his dreams, and for his words.

Stephen the Proto-martyr quotes this Scripture in his last, Speech before the
Jewish Sanhedrim; and the Patriarchs moved with envy, sold Joseph into Egypt,
but God was with him, Acts 7. v. 9.

Enviest thou for my sake (says Moses to Joshua, that would have him forbid
Eldad, and Medad to prophecy in the camp?) would God all the people of the Land
were Prophets, and that the Lord would put his Spirit upon them, Numb. 11. v.
29.

What a dreadful Judgment did Envy bring upon Corah and his Confederates, when
they gathered themselves together against Moses and against Aaron, and said
unto them, Ye take too much upon you, seeing all the congregation are saints
every one of them, and the Lord is among them; wherefore then lift ye up your
selves above the congregation of the Lord, Number. 16. 3. 32. The earth opened her
mouth, and swallowed them up, etc.

Pilate had rather released Jesus than Barabbas, for he knew that for Envy they
had delivered him, Matthew. 27. 18.

And the Contention was so sharp (says Luke) between Paul and Barnabas, Acts
15: 39. that they departed asunder the one from the other, men that had had
hazarded their lives (often) for the Name of the Lord Jesus; as all the first
Synod at Jerusalem testify to the Gentiles, under their hands. v. 26. Two
Apostolic men, of whom the Holy Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul, for
the work whereunto I have called them; and when they had fasted and prayed, and
laid their hands on them, they sent them away, Acts 13. 2, 3. I find Strife and
envying always joined together; as Romans 13. 13. Let us walk honestly as in the
day -- not in strife and envying, 1 Cor. 3. 3. For are ye not carnal, whereas
there is among you envying and strife, and divisions (or factions) are ye not
carnal and walk as men? And James ^aith, That where envying and strife is,
there is confusion and every evil work: Or, as the Original bears it, Tumult
and unquietness, Jam. 3. 16.

Thus I have briefly searched into the inward Reasons of Dissentions, according
as the Holy Ghost in the Scriptures has laid them before us.

2. The outward Reasons of them, are; 1. Satan the old Serpent, that kept not
his first station, Jude 6. but brake his own peace with God in Heaven, and ours
with our God in Paradise, and ever since with one another, that slips no
occasion to sow the Tares of dissension in the Lord's field; and persecutes the
Woman that brought forth the Man-child, Rev. 12. 13. 17. as hotly as ever,
because he knows that he has but a short time between him and the Lake
(spoken of, Rev. 20. 14.) to break the peace, and hinder her prosperity; By
making war with the remnant of her seed, which keep the commandments of God,
and have the testimony of Jesus Christ; the things that shall come upon him and
his followers make haste, Deuteronomy. 32. 35.

Secondly, Wicked men set on by Satan, to set us together by the ears, that
they may weaken us by our own powers. The Church had sometimes rest from her
Paganish Enemies and Persecutors, but never from her own Children that she had
nourished and brought up, yet they rebelled asainst her, Isa. 1. 2. That came
to her in Sheeps-clothing, but inwardly they were Ravening Wolves; as our Lord
describes them, Matthew. 7. 15. Such were the Arians of old, whose Divisions and
Cruelties exceeded the Paganish, as much as the Popish exceed all that were
before them in Malice, Hatred, and Cruelty toward God's People; of which the
Apostle gave warning to the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, saying, For I know
that after my departing, shall grievous Wolves enter in among you, not sparing
the flock; and also of your own selves shall men arise speaking perverse
things, to draw away Disciples after them, Acts 20. 29, 30. And again, he would
have Timothy to know, that in the last days perilous times should come; which
he describes so exactly, as if he had lived in our days to behold them, 2 Timothy
3. verse 1, 2, 3, 4, etc.

The next Observation from these words, is this; Obs. 2. That the Peace of God
ruling in the hearts of Believers, is the only remedy against all Dissentions,
inward and outward, which is here called, God's peace, for these Reasons.

Reas. 1. For indeed he, and he alone, it is, that makes men to be of one mind
together, Romans 15. 5. 2 Cor. 13. 11. the work of godly union, is the
Prerogative of God; according to the Name that Gideon gave to the Altar that he
built in Ophrah, when he was made Captain General against the Midianites, he
called it Jehovah Shalem, that is, the God of peace; or, the Lord send peace,
which he did grant his people for forty years, after the defeat of their
invading, and presumptuous Enemies, by the Sword of the Lord, and the Sword of
Gideon, Judge. 6. 24. and Chap. 8. 28.

Reas. 2. Because it is God alone that makes the Enemies to be at peace
together, with those that he loves; as Solomon speaks, Prove. 16. 8. When a
man's ways please the Lord, he makes even his Enemies to be at peace with him.
I make peace, says the Lord, by the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 47. 7.

3. He is termed by the Name of, The God of peace, Prove. 15. 15. Not only in
respect of the giving spiritual peace of Conscience, which is a continual
Feast, but this inward peace of Affections, and outward carriage toward
others; as our Apostle concludes his Second Epistle to the Corinthians, (among
whom there had been many Dissentions and Contentions, 1 Cor. 1. 11.) Finally my
brethren farewell, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace, and the
God of love and peace shall be with you, 2 Cor. 13. 11.

4. Lastly, he is called, The God of peace, not only essentially, but also
personally.

Obs. 3. God in the unity of Essence, and Trinity of Persons, is the God of
peace; there is a most blessed and eternal peace between them.

1. God in the unity of Essence is the God of peace; the Apostle concludes the
15th Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, thus; Now the God of peace be with
you all, Amen: and to the Philippians he writes thus; The things which ye have
both learned, and received, and heard, and seen in me, do, and the God of peace
shall be with you, Phil. 4. v. 9.

2. God the Father, the first Person in order of the glorious Trinity, is
styled, the God of peace, as the Fountain and first Author of it; and who in
that he is our Father in Christ, loves us, and will not see us want any good
thing; Every good gift, and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down
from the Father of lights, says St. James 1. 17. and our Apostle concludes his
Epistle to the Hebrews, with this Prayer; Now the God of peace, that brought
again from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ, the great Shepherd of the sheep, by
the blood of the everlasting covenant, make you perfect in every good work, to
do his will, working in you that which is well pleasing in his sight, through
Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever, Amen; Heb. 13. 20, 21.

3. God the Son, the second Person in the blessed Trinity, is also styled, the
God of peace, as the Deserver of all that is to be given us, and Bestower, who
by Office and Authority, is able to dispense from the Father unto us his
Subjects, such things as we have need of, whereof Grace and Peace are the chief
Jewels. (as verse 2. of the first Chapter.) The Syriack reads this Text thus,
Let the peace of Christ rule in your hearts: He is our peace, says the
Prophet, Micah 5. 5. and this man shall be the peace, when the Assyrian shall
tread in our land: The Prophet Isaiah calls him the Prince of peace, Isa. 9. 6.
as typified by Melchisedeck King of Shalem, the true King of peace; as the
Apostle renders his Royal Titles, first, beng by interpretation King of
righteousness, and after that also, King of Salem, which is, King of peace,
Heb. 7. 2. and well may he deserve that honorable Title; For he is our peace
(says the Apostle to the Ephesians) Ephesians. 2. 14. Who has made both one, and
has broken down the middle wall of partition between us; between Jews and
Gentiles, and between our God and us; having made peace through the blood of
his Cross, says he, in the First Chapter of his Epistle and 20th verse.

He is our Peacemaker with God; Being justified by faith, we have peace with
God through our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 5. 1. At his Birth all the Militia of
Heaven sang this joyful Ditty in a Proclamation of Peace; Glory to God in the
highest, peace on earth, good will toward men, Luke 2, 14. At his Death he
left us a Legacy of peace; My peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you;
not as the world gives I give unto you, John 14. 27.

4. God the Holy Ghost, the third Person of the glorious Trinity, is the God of
peace, the Spirit of peace and love: And the very God of peace sanctify you
wholly; the conclusion of the First Epistle to the Thessalonians, chapter 5. ver.
23. He is the Sanctifier of all the Elect people of God. The excellent fruits
of this God of peace, are set down by the Apostle to the Galatians; But the
fruits of the Spirit are love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance, against such there is no law, Gal. 5. 22.

And because the God head and Consubstantiality of the Son with the Father, is
by all this discourse approved, and that also of the Holy Ghost; I will
conclude this Point after the phrase of the Athanasian Creed; The Father is the
God of peace, the Son is the God of peace, and the Holy Ghost is the God of
peace; and yet they are not three Gods of peace, but one God of peace: And with
that Prayer wherewith the Apostle concludes his Second Epistle to the
Thessalonians, which includes all this; Now the Lord of peace himself give you
peace always, by all means; the Lord be with you all. 2 Thessalonians. 3. v. 16.

Observe. 4. In the brief Application of this Point, before I proceed any
further, let us observe, for our Instruction, That this is a close Argument, to
persuade the more, to permit this Peace to hold the Mastery in us, because it
is God's, and so indeed God shall rule in our hearts by his peace.

The name of the King's Peace, is of no small weight, as to repress the Outrage
of the Unruly; It ought to be at least, when the Officer cries, I charge you in
the King's Name, to keep the King's Peace. God's Sacred Name is greater, that
is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; the greater their Sin that break his
Peace, at once offending God and the King.

Exhort. Let us not say then, we will not have his Peace rule in our hearts; as
those Ill-bred Citizens, that hated their Noble Lord, and sent a Message after
him, saying, We will not have this man to rule over us, Luke 19. 14. but rather
as the men of Israel said to Gideon, Rule thou over us, both thou and thy son,
and thy son's son also, for thou have delivered us from the hand of Midian,
Judge. 8. 22. And has made peace in our borders; as the Psalmist sings, Psalm
147. 14.

Let every one of us say with him, again and again, I will hearken what God the
Lord will speak, for he will speak peace unto his people, etc. Psalm. 85. 8.

To the which also ye are called in one body.

Now to the Apostle's Reasons, why this Peace of God should rule in our hearts;
which are two:

First, God's calling, Ye are called to peace.

For the meaning whereof, it is as much as to say, As God, when he severe you
from the World, would lay this task upon you, to have peace rule in you; for
this was the Prophecy of Isaiah, concerning the times of the Gospel, that cruel
and savage Beasts should lay down their fierceness, Lions, Wolves, Serpents,
learn other manners, and become at unity with Lambs, Oxen, Children, etc. This
purpose of God, you must become Instruments to bring to pass. The Wolf also
shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid, the
Calf and the young Lion, and the Fatling together, and a little Child shall
lead them; and the Cow and the Bear shall feed, their young ones shall lie down
together, and the Lion shall eat Straw like the Ox, and the sucking Child shall
play on the hole of the Asp, and the weaned child shall put his hand on the
Cookatrice den; they shall not hunt nor destroy in all my holy mountain; For
the earth shallbe filled with the glory of the Lord as the waters cover the
sea, Isa. 11. 6, 7, 8.

A great shame for a Minister of outward peace, to break the peace: A Justice,
who is the Conservator of the Peace, or a Constable, who is sworn to see the
Peace kent, to be a Fighter, or maker of Frays: Penal it is in a high degree,
when a man is bound to the Peace, to be a Striker. So it is surely, a shame,
and a just cause of shame, when a Christian, who by his Calling is bound to the
Peace, to be a Quarreller, Makebate, Ranter, etc. Christianus contentiosus, was
one of the greatest Paradoxes and Scandals in the Primitive Church. The Apostle
Paul in the Sixth Chapter of his First Epistle to the Corinths, reproves the
Corinthians for their breach of God's Peace, that ought to rule in their
hearts, for Lawing one with another, before Heathen Judges, (when there was not
so much, as a Christian Constable in the World) which Fault having very sharply
reproved, and told them of another course by Arbitrament, even of the meanest
of the Church, if there were no other wise or able man, amongthem: He presses
so far, as to say, They ought rather to suffer wrong, whereas they wronged
their Brethren; whereupon endeavoring to remedy this matter in the root, he
appeals to their knowledge, if Injustice, as many other Sins did not exclude
from the inheritance of the Kingdom of Heaven; yes, he avouches it, and so
falling off, into a more gentle manner, he tells them roundly, what they were
sometimes, but now by the Grace of God otherwise, he leaves it to be esteemed
then, that to those things they ought not to return again, that are
inconsistent with this Evangelical Peace of God: See 1 Cor. 1. 10. Now I
beseech you brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak
the same thing, and that there be no division among you, that ye be perfectly
joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment.

Exhort. Let us then for the better calming of our Passions, bethink us, and
ask our selves these few Questions.

First, Who, and what we are, and were? Our Lord resolves this Question,
chiefly in his Epistle to the Church of Laodicea; Because thou say, I am
rich and increased with goods, and have need of nothing; and know not that
thou art wretched and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked; I counsel thee
to buy of me gold tried in the fire, that thou may^st be rich, and white
raiment that thou may be clothed, and that the shame of thy nakedness do
not appear, and anoint thine eyes with eye salve, that thou may see, Rev. 3.
v. 17. 18.

Secondly, Who it is that calls us?

When our Lord commanded blind Bartimeus to be called, that cried after him,
Jesus thou son of David, have mercy on me: And they call the blind man, saying
unto him, be of good comfort, rise, he calls thee; and he casting away his
garment, rose and came to Jesus, Mark 10. 50. So ought we to cast away all our
Animosities and petty Dissentions, and admit this sweet and easy Yoke, of the
Peace of God to rule in our hearts; for faithful is he that calls you, who
also will do it, says the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 24. And again, God is faithful,
by whom ye are called unto the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord,
says the Apostle Peter, 1. 2. 9. 2. From the dominion of sin and Satan, unto
the glorious liberty of the children of God, Romans 8. 21. Gal. 5. 1. From the
troubles of this tumultuous World, that is like the raging Sea, that cannot
rest, and the Christians are as weary of it, as David was of Mesek; when he
said, Woe is me that I sojourn in Mesek, that I dwell in the Tents of Kedar; my
Soul has long dwelt with him that hates peace: I am for peace, but when I
speak, they are for war. And again he said, O that I had wings like a Dove, for
then would I fly away and be at rest, Psalm 55. v. 6. Upon which account, our
Lord calls his Church from the World, the Seat of cruel men, to Heaven, in
these endearing expressions; Come with me from Lebanon, my Spouse, with me from
Lebanon; lo^k from the top of Amana, from the top of Shema and Harmon, from the
Lions Den, from the Mountain of the Leopards, Cant. 4. 9.

Fourthly, Unto what are we called? God has called us unto peace, 1 Cor. 7.
15. Let our Calling admonish us of our Duty: We are called unto Peace, says
this Text also. Peace, peace, to him that is afar off, and to him that is near,
says the Lord, and I will heal him, Isa. 57. 19. Knowing this, that we are
thereunto called, that we should inherit a blessing, says Peter: 1 Pet. 3. 9.
And what greater blessing than peace, that in the bowels of it has all
blessings lodged: And our Apostle tells us above Sixteen hundred years ago,
That the God of peace shall bruise Satan (the grand Enemy of our peace) under
our feet shortly, Romans 26. v. 20. That we may know in this our day, the things
that belong to our peace, that they be not hid from our eyes; as our Lord spoke
when he wept over Jerusalem, Luke 19. 42.

I will conclude this first Reason, Why the peace of God should bear rule in
our hearts: Because we are called thereunto, with our Lords charge to his
Disciples, in bidding them, Beware of offenses: He concludes his Speech thus;
Have salt in your selves, and have peace on with another, Mark 9. 42. 50. Where
the Salt of true Grace is, it will make the means of peace sweet and savoury,
and no stain of corruption, or the least unsavouriness shall remain, to
disrelish any squeamish Stomach. Let us remember withal, That he that is the
God of peace, that has called us to peace, is also the God of all grace, Who
has called us unto his eternal glory by Christ Jesus; as Peter speaks, 1 Pet.
5. 10. And so an entrance shall be ministered unto us abundantly into the
everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1. v. 1 1
where we shall enjoy everlasting peace.

Reas. 2. The second Reason why the peace of God should rule in our hearts, is
this; That we are in one body.

For that this is a distinct Reason appears, because he says, Not unto our
body, (...), in one body. This Similitude more fully, is, as much as to say,
You Christians with Christ make as it were a body: Therefore as it were
monstrous, if one body should yield members fighting one against another, and
making as it were a civil war in the natural body. So it is, if disorder be
found amongst you Christians, that which Christ makes up a mystical body. The
resembling Christians to a body, is at large exemplified and garnished, 1 Cor.
12. and in diverse other places of Scripture mentioned. Val. Max. Flor. tit. 1.
P. 27.
Yea, we read in the Roman History, That upon a time, there was a great
Sedition in the City of Rome, the Commons complaining of the Senate and
Nobility, rose up tumultuously against them; One Menenius Agrippa, wiser than
the rest, brought them to peace and unity again, by this very Similitude of
Members and Body, and made such an Oration unto them; At what time, said he, in
man's Body, the Members did not as now agree in one, but each had his several
counsel and speech, the rest of the parts had indignation, that by their care,
labor, and industry, and ministry, all things were provided for the Belly, it
being quiet and at ease, in the midst; did naught else but enjoy the Pleasures
that were given it: Whereupon they conspired, that the Hand should not reach
any meat to the Mouth, nor the Mouth receive it, being given, nor the Teeth
chew it. Whilst thus enraged, they would needs master the Belly with Famine:
The Members themselves withal, and the whole Body came to an extreme
Consumption, whereby appeared that the Bellies Service was not the worst, nor
slackest, that it did not less nourish than receive nourishment, yielding back
into all the parts, the life and blood, which having digested the meat, it
labors thereout, and divides withal into the Veins and Conduits of the
whole Body: Such, said he, is the Civil Discord and Anger of the People against
the Senate.

By this means he persuaded the People to lay down their Arms, and so turned
their Minds from their intended Hostility and Violence to Unity and Pe^ace. And
indeed the Apostle's Speech, If ye bite and devour one another, take heed that
ye be not consumed one of another, Gal. 5. 25. tends to the same end; and
largely does he garnish this Similitude in the place I named right now,
pressing it to diverse Duties, which shortly to name, because they serve to the
maintenance of Peace in her Sovereignty, are these:

1. To rejoice each at others good; If one member be honored, all the members
rejoice with it, 1 Cor. 12. 26.

2. To suffer Compassionately each with other: And whether one member suffer,
all the members suffer with it, ibid.

3. To have Care each of another; That there should be no schism in the body,
but that the members should have the same care one of another (v. 25.) to
nourish and cherish them.

4. The more weak and base, to be compassed with Honor, with the more comely;
Nay much more, those members of the body that seem more feeble, are necessary:
and those members of the body which we think to be base, upon those we bestow
more abundant honor; and our uncomely parts have more abundant comeliness,
verse 22, 23.

5. The worthier not to think they may be without the baser, nor the baser
think they are not in any place or reckoning, because not the worthiest. And
the Eye cannot say to the Hand, I have no need of thee; nor again, the Hand to
the Foot, I have no need of you, v. 2.

6. If the Foot shall say, because I am not the Hand, I am not of the body, is
it therefore not of the body? And if the Ear shall say, because I am not the
Eye, I am not of the body, is it therefore not of the body? v. 15. 26.

Thus far the Apostle in his excellent Parallel between the Members of the
Natural Body, and the Members of the Body Mystical. These Opinions and
Practices befit such as would keep peace, such as are Members of one Body;
which very Consideration, that they are found in the Natural Body, should draw
us into the practice of them, in the Spiritual and Mystical: Christ our Lord
flows into us by his Spirit of Peace and Love, and gives us Grace so to do, and
this will enable us to obey the Apostle in the words before this Text. And
above all things, put on charity which is the bond of perfectness. This word
Bond, is taken sometimes for the Sinews and Ligaments of the Joints, as Chap.
2. v. 19. Sometimes for the Band that tieth a thing, composed of a great many
small parts into one; as a Sheaf or Faggot. so I think Peace is called, Ephesians.
4. 3. endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace. And
this Perfectness may be taken, 1. For the perfectness of every man in the Gifts
of the Spirit, which are dissolved, and fall one from another, without Love.
Or, 2ly. For the whole Body of the Church, which is dissolved and falls asunder
without love; of which in the two places last named. I will include herein,
both inward perfectness in private Christians, and public in the body of the
Church. So the Church, Christ's Body, it is capable of a kind of perfection,
even when it is most imperfect in the Eyes of the World; as now it was, and
when the Apostle wrote that, Ephesians 4. v. 3.

Observat. The thing that makes the Perfection of the Church, is Love. He
therefore that loves not, is imperfect in Christianity: A Child in Grace, (if
he have any) yet is Carnal, not Spiritual; a Babe, not a Man; as the Apostle
concludes of the Corinthians from hence, 1 Cor. 3. 1. 3. And those that take no
care to maintain Love with their even Christians, they do as much as they may,
maim, lame, and make imperfect the Body of Christ, laying aside his new
Commandment, That ye love one another, as I have loved you, John 13. 34. Let
Papists and such as rejoice in bitterness against their Brethren, think on
this: Let us learn by all means to maintain Peace and Love; the untimely
breaking of some Truth, is not worth so much as to break Love; As the curing of
some Disease, not worth the pain of the Cure; as of some Wens and Warts, etc.
worth the cutting, etc. and this is to be followed of us. It is more than
seasonable, that we were put in mind of this Point, for we are faulty in it
much: Now if one be more scrupulous than another, in Ceremonies and Matters
indifferent, Minister, or other; one sort there is that presently abate their
love. Again, if another take a little liberty in such things, the other side
bears not that hearty affection which should be unto him; Though thus either
think of the other, they are men that intend to do virtuously, yet there is not
this equal Communication of the Offices of Kindness, which this Form, Above all
things put on love, would require. What if men dissent from us in sundry Points
of Judgment or of Affection, as both may be, and justly; yet let the
Consideration, that they are Members of the same Body with us, Men reclaimed to
God; Men, which according to that which they know, endeavor to Serve and
Worship God, makes us to strive so much the more, that it might not seem to
come through our Default, that any Strangers should be between us; or
Differences grow to greater Extremities, we shall have the better in the
handling of the Cause; to say nothing of the Truth, whether we have it on our
side or no. I would to God that we could be content in Matters of no great
Consequence, when many Differences be among us, to comprise them with that of
the Apostle; If any man think otherwise, the Lord shall reveal this also unto
you, Phil. 3. 15. And in the mean space, in our Speeches, Countenances,
Gestures, Writings, be mindful of this standing Rule, That Love belongs to all
the Saints; as the Apostle describes these Colossians, by their Faith in Jesus
Christ, and their Love to all the Saints, Chap. 1. 4. So by letting go vain
Clamours, we shall find more Truth than we do, as being better disposed to seek
it, (which indeed no passionate man is;) and sure I am, we should have more
peace and comfort, and be freed from much foolish Suspicions among our selves,
and many slanderous and foul Imputations from our common Enemies. God give us
Grace to see our Faults, and put a Remedy thereto in time, before by our
Dissentions, we have weakened our selves; that both together, we be not
matchable to our third and worst Adversary; see Psalm 133.

And be ye thankful. The second Duty we are exhorted unto in this Scripture, is
the duty of thankfulness; what variety is between these two Words, Amiable and
Thankful; every man may at the first view easily conceive. But our latest
Translation of the Word is the best, that for Amiable puts in Thankful,
whereunto the propriety of the Word, and Authority of other Interpreters does
so lead me; as Ephesians. 5. 4. but rather, giving of thanks: and 1 Thessal. 5. 18.
In every thing give thanks: And although they (...) Chrysostom. Bruno, Osiandor.
refer it to God, or Christ, many of them; yet what should that do here, in the
midst of other Duties pertaining to Man, Christ being not named: Therefore I
will speak of it in that sense, which in my Conscience, I take it was meant. m.

Be ye thankful.] Be not unkind and ungrateful to those that have deserved well
at your hands.

Q. What is the thankfulness that is here required?

R. It may be described, a willing acknowledging and readiness to requite
Benefits, and good Turns received.

I did not say, a Requital, for many times there is no Power or Means so to do,
but at least there is Readiness to do it, and Mind of the good Turn; if either
of these fail, there is a Defect in Thankfulness.

The occasion of Thankfulness, is a Benefit received, (the greater Benefit
calls more Thanks) which has diversity from the Person.

1. Sometimes we are wholly prevented in receiving, before we have showed any
occasion.

2. Sometimes again we are first in some Office, but are exceeded in the
answering the same.

3. Sometimes the Persons are Superiors or Equals; of such quality I mean, as
there is no great odds between the Donor and Receiver.

To the First and Second of each, Thankfulness is the more to be showed; I
mean, we are more beholding, inasmuch as there is less desert on our part, and
in the one, nothing at all.

I would speak plainly. 1. To our Parents, Ministers, and Masters in Learning;
there is no Office we could show to deserve Kindness, therefore to them we must
be more bound to be thankful: So to a Stranger that shall first upon some
acquaintance, no expectation of Requital, bestow only upon us, in the same
measure of Beneficence, our Debt is more, than to one that we have, or may be
helpful, or show duty to again.

2. To our Superior, being kind, we owe more gratitude, than to our Equal; as
Ishbosheth David, 2 Samuel 19. 30. 28.

3. Even the Value of the Benefit, adds some degree unto our Debt of
Thankfulness, most, our selves; as Paul writes to Philemon, v. 19. Albeit I do
not say unto thee, how thou owe unto me, even thine own self besides.

4. And the Speediness sometimes adds to our Debt, especially if it be at the
first knowledge of our Want or Desire, and perhaps expects not our moving the
Matter, or if at our Suit, be given undelaiedly; Beneficium qui cito dat bis
dat, He gives twice that gives speedily.

5. But most of our debt of Thankfulness comes from the Mind of the Donor, as
proceeding from greater Love, though there be, by reason of want of power, less
worth in the good Turn.

We are then to be taught here:

Doctr. That to all those that have been Instruments of God's Providence to
procure good unto us, we are to owe Thankfulness; they are so many Blessings of
God to us. That which the Queen of Sheba once affirmed before Solomon, is very
true: The Instruments of God's Blessings, are the Arguments of his Love to us;
Because the Lord loved Israel for War, therefore made he the King to do
Judgment and Justice, 1 Kings 10. 9.

1. The first duty of Thankfulness that under God we owe, is to our Parents;
which is so necessary, that the Apostle would not have the Widows to be chosen
to the service of the Church, that had Children to maintain them, and perform
duty to them: Let them (says he) recompense their Ancestors; (So the Word
(...) signifies;) For that is good and acceptable before God, 1 Timothy 5. 4. The
Greek Elegantly expresses this, by a Metaphor taken from the Stock, (...)(...)
Which feeds her aged Parents, and carries them upon her shoulders; and in
that regard, in the Hebrew Tongue is called Chasida, that is, pious and
merciful. Let all Children hear this, and as they will have the blessing of
their Parents, and of God, that is tender of their honor, learn it, and fail
not to praise it; as Joseph did, Genesis 45. 10. There will I nourish thee; when
he sent for his aged Father from the famished Land of Canaan, to come into
Goshen, the most fertile Soil in all the Land of Egypt.

2. So we are to be thankful to the Ministers of the Gospel, to whom God has
committed the word of reconciliation; that break the bread of life unto us;
that have the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven committed to their trust; that
administer unto us the Seals of the Covenant of Grace, according to Christ's
Institution; that watch over our Souls, as they that must give account; that
they may do it with joy, and not with grief; as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 13. 17.

3. To our Teachers and Masters; as Philemon owned himself to Paul, v. 19. To
our Benefactors, to our Friends, to all that are loving and kind to us. David
sent a Present of Thankfulness of the Spoil of the Enemies of the Lord, to all
those places, where David himself and his men were wont to lament in his Exile,
1 Samuel 30. 26. 3. He makes diligent inquiry; Is there yet any that is left of
the house of Saul, that I may show him kindness for Jonathon's sake, whose love
to him was wonderful, passing the love of women to their Husbands or Children,
2 Samuel 9. 1. His thankfulness to the Living for the Dead's sake, to the Child,
for his Fathers sake, is again recorded: Then said David, I will show kindness
to Hanun the son of Nachash, as his father showed kindness unto me; and David
sent to comfort him by the hand of his servants for his father, 2 Samuel 10. 2.
What this kindness was the Scripture mentions not, nor when it was showed; for
David in his flight from Saul, fled first to Achish King of Gath, then to the
King of Moab. And he said unto the King of Moab, Let my father and mother, I
pray thee, come forth and be with you, till I know what God will do for me; and
he brought them before the King of Moab, and they dwelt with him all the while
that David was in the hold: He durst not trust them to Readiness mercy in
Bethlehem, that had exercised such barbarous cruelty upon the Priests of the
Lord, and to the City of No^, without any just cause, 1 Samuel 22. 17. 20.
Possibly the King of Moab might show some such kindness to David, out of his
hatred of Saul that had given him a great Overthrow, 1 Samuel 11. 11. But
whatsoever the matter was that had obliged David, he was not unmindful of it,
but studied to requite it to his Son Hanun, though ill entertained, and
misinterpreted to his destruction, and his Countries. The first Ambassadors
that David sent, after the Solemnity of his Coronation was over, is thus
recorded; And David sent Messengers to the men of Jabesh Gilead, and said unto
them, Blessed be ye of the Lord, that you have showed the kindness to your
Lord, even unto Saul, and have buried him; and now the Lord show kindness and
truth unto you, and I also will requite you this kindness, because you have
done this thing, 2 Samuel 2. 5, 6, 7. Here is kindness upon kindness requited to
the Living for the Dead's sake: The valiant men of Jabesh Gilead hazarded their
lives in the midst of the victorious Philistines; (like those three valiant
Captains that broke through the Host of the Philistines, and drew Wrter out of
the Well of Bethlehem, when the Philistine's Garrison was in it, to satisfy
David's longing; when he said, O that one would give me drink of the water of
the Well of Bethlehem that is at the gate, 1 Chronicles. 11. 16, 17, 18. to rescue
the dead bodies of Saul and his sons, that had rescued their lives from the
bloody Articles of Nahash the Ammorite, that would make no Covenant with them,
but upon this condition, That I may thrust out all your right Eyes, and lay it
for a reproach upon all Israel, 1 Samuel 11. 2. Now as one good turn requires
another, so King David requites their Valor with Honor and Advantage.

How thankful was he to good old Barzillai the Gileadite, that had provided the
King of Sustenance, while he lay at Mahanaim, (when he fled from Absalom) for
he was a very great man; and the King said unto Barzillai, Come thou over with
me, and I will feed thee with me in Jerusalem, 2 Samuel 19. 32, 33. and v. 38.
And the King answered, Chimham shall go over with me, and I will do to him that
which shall seem good unto thee, and whatsoever thou shall require of me, that
will I do for thee. David even upon his Deathbed, was not unmindful of the
Courtesies he had received of one of the Nobles of Israel, in his extremity,
but when he was making his last Will and Testament, and resigning his Kingdom
to his Son Solomon, and putting all into his hand, and his sole Executor; he
speaks thus, after his Item for Joab and Shi^ei, for their base carriage
toward him, (a sad Legacy:) But show kindness to the sons of Barzillai the
Gileadite, (as he desired and I promised;) and let them be of those that eat at
thy Table, for so they came to me when I fled before Absalom thy brother, 1
Kings 2. 6. And the Hebrew Doctors say, That the habitation of Chimham near
Bethlehem, mentioned in the 41st. Chapter of Jeremiah, v. 17. was part of
David's own Patrimony which he conferred upon him, to be a perpetual Memorial
of his Gratitude to that Loyal Family, that stuck to him, when so many forsook
him, as he complains to God, Psalm 3.

I have been the larger in this Point, because it is a Vice, than which, none
is more Enemy to Humane Society; Ingratitude is reckoned by the Apostle, as one
of the predominant Sins, of the perilous times that shall come in the last
Days, unthankful, unholy, are joined together, 2 Timothy 3. 2. It draws with it
sometimes, and so all Vices; as Xenophon speaks. The wisest of the Heathens
have detested it extremely; the Persians accounted it the greatest Dishonor in
the World. Darius dying, having had a little Water from a Soldier, esteemed it
his greatest misery, that he could not live to requite so great a Benefit; but
recommends it to Alexander his Conqueror, says Curtius. The Spaniards count it
now the most renroachful word a man may be called by, to say, Ingrate, si
ingratum dixeris omnia; an old Saying among the Heathen.

Ingratitude was the Ruin of the Apostate Angels, that left their own
habitation, (says Jude, v. 6.) he has reserved in everlasting Chains under
darkness, unto the Judgment of the great Day: Of our first Parents in Paradise;
of the Gentiles, because when they knew God, they glorified him not as God,
neither were they thankful, but became vain in their imaginations, and their
foolish heart was darkened, Romans 1. v. 21. of the Israelites, that God had done
so great things for, above all Generations of the World, Am. 3. 3. and of the
Jews, that Crucified the Lord of Glory, and are under God's Wrath to this day,
For the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost, says the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians.
2. v. 16.

Obs. It is God's will, we should not be so unjust, as to take all, and repay
nothing; therefore the Palmist asks this question of Angels and Men, What shall
I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me? Psalm. 16. 12. we ought
rather, as Cyrus was wont to make his Prayer, so to make our wish, to exceed
our Friends in beneficence and kindness; which Sylla (as it is said) caused to
be set on his Tomb, that he had done, as Plutarch writes of him. It becomes
upright Men to be thankful, says the Man after God's own heart. Psalm. 33. v. 1.

There be two parts of Ingratitude; the first, not to acknowledge benefits, but
to forget them, Deuteronomy. 32. 18. as is recorded of Pharcah's Butler to his
Disgrace, concerning Joseph, the Interpreter of the Dream, that advanced him to
his former place and dignity at Court, yet did not the chief Butler remember
Joseph, but forgot him, says Moses, Genesis 40. v. 23.

The second part of Ingratitude is the worst: To requite Evil for Good, the
Prophet Jeremiah cries out against this, with a grievous cry, and a bitter,
Shall evil be recompensed for good? Jer. 18. 20. as a monstrous piece of
Ingratitude. Who so rewards evil for good (says Solomon) evil shall not depart
from his house, Prove. 17. 13. The Psalmist says, They rewarded me evil for
good, to the spoiling of my Soul; yea, they hated me without a cause, Psalm. 35.
12. 19. and again, They also that render evil, for good, are mine Adversaries,
because I follow the thing that good is, Psalm. 38. 20. Not only Saul, but the
Men of Keila were guilty of this sin in a high degree; who after David had
rescued them from the Philistines, that were plundering and robbing their very
threshing Floors, yet upon the first summons, were resolved to deliver up David
and his Men into the Hands of Saul, to be destroyed by him, as you read, 1 Samuel
23. 1. 12. Gideon made the Men of Succoth and Penuel smart soundly, for their
ingratitude to their Deliverer, that refused to give a morsel of Bread to his
conquering Army, that were still in pursuit of the flying Kings, Zeba and
Zalmunna, and the party that was with them, he tore the flesh of 72 Ringleaders
of the Men of Succoth, and taught them better manners, and beat down the Tower
of Penuel, and slew the Men of the City, Judge. 8. 6, 7, 8, 9, 16, 17.

David expresses his deep Sense of this sin of Ingratitude, as a lively type of
our Savior in this particular, and in many more, when he says, For my love,
they are my Adversaries: but I give my self unto Prayer, and they have rewarded
me evil for good, and hatred for my good will, Psalm. 109. 4, 5. This sin is
sorely laid to the charge of the Men of Sechem, and set home upon their
Consciences by Jotham, to the mutual destruction of them; and Abimelech, whom
they had advanced over them upon the ruins of the 70 Sons of Jerubb^al: For
(says Jotham) My Father fought for you, and adventured his Life for you, and
delivered you out of the hand of Midian, and ye are risen up against my
Father's House this day, and have slain his Sons, threescore and ten persons,
upon one Stone, and have made Abimelech, the Son of his Maidservant, King over
the Men of Sechem, because he is your brother, etc. Judge. 9. 17. Then God sent
an evil Spirit between the men of Sechem and Abimelech, to punish their cruel
ingratitude. v. 23. Which is the Substance of that whole Chapter of Judges 9.
And after they had destroyed one another, that sad History, (as any in the Book
of God) is concluded thus: Thus God rendered the wickedness of Abimelech, which
he did unto his Father, in staying his seventy brethren, and all the evil of
the men of Sechem, did God render upon their heads, and upon them came the
curse of Jotham, the Son of Jerubbaal, v. 56, 57. So that now you see this
horrible sin of Ingratitude that is punished by God in so high a degree, must
needs be an accursed and destructive thing.

Another said instance of the like sin, and punishment, we have recorded,
concerning Joash King of Judah, who was marvelously preserved in the Massacre
of the Royal Family, from Athaliah's bloody Fingers, by Jehoiada, the High
Priest, and his Wife Jehoshabea, and kept safe in the House of the Lord six
Years, under the tyrannous Usurpation of that wicked Idolatress. 2 Chronicles. 22.
10, 11, 12. Jehoiada set the Crown on his head, put down the Usurper, restored
the Kingdom to their former freedom, and raised the Royal Family to their
former Splendour and Dignity, and left it flourishing in Peace and Plenty: But
after the death of his (...) Tutor, Governor, Gua (...) Protector, it is
recorded, Th^^ this (...) (...) God, and turned (...) and Murderer, (two
i^separable Companions) and commanded Zachariah the Priest, the Son of
Jeho^a^a, to be stoned, even in the Court of the House of the Lord, for
reproving his Idolatry, and saying, Because ye have forsaken the Lord, He also
has forsaken you. Thus Joash the King remembered not the kindness, which
Jehoiada his Father had done unto him, but flew his Son; and when he died, he
said, The Lord look upon it, and require it. Which Prayer of this dying Martyr,
the Lord heard, and recompensed this cruel ingratitude of Joash toward God and
Man, speedily upon his own head, to the ruin of himself, and of all his
Princes that seduced him, and of all his Armies, in which he trusted, by an
inconsiderable party. For the Army of the Syrians came with a small company of
Men, and the Lord delivered a very great Host into their hand, because they had
forsaken the Lord God of their Fathers: so they executed Judgment against Joash.

And besides all this; The Lord smote him with grievous torments in his body,
by incurable diseases, (as in the case of Jehoram, that murdered his Brothers,
2 Chronicles. 21. 18.) And at last, to put an end to the miserable life of this
godless Wretch, his own Servants conspired against him, for the Blood of the
Sons of Jehoiada the Priest, and flew him on his Bed, and he died; But they
buried him not in the Sepulchers of the Kings, (2 Chronicles. 24. 18, 20, 21, 22.)
an honor that was bestowed upon Jehoiada the High Priest, his Preserver and
Restorer. v. 16. though out of indignation denied him, as to Jehoram before
him, that lived undesired, and died unlamented. 2 Chronicles. 21. 20. Thus did God
plentifully reward this proud Doer, as the Psalmist speaks, Measuring to him
again, with the same measure that he had meted withal, a just measure of Wrath,
pressed down, and shaken together, and running over into his Bosom, as our
Lord speaks, Luke 6. v. 38.

Obj. Some will say, My Will is good, but I want means and abilitiy to requite
any henefit received hy me.

Answ. 1. Profess and acknowledge always the good Turn; it is a part of an
ingenuous Disposition, to profess who has done thee any pleasure, yea, half a
requital, Ephesians. 5. 20.

Secondly, Use Prayer to God for their good Estate; if thou be poor, he is rich
to requite; and doubtless, as the cry of the poor can awake His Justice, as
Himself speaks, For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy,
now will I arise, says the Lord, I will set him in safety, from him that
puffs at him. Psalm. 12. 5. So can the joyful Thanksgiving, by the mouth of
them that are partakers of the benefit, and withal, their Prayers, for the
means of it, awake His Liberality, as Paul undertakes; My God shall supply all
your necessities, according to his Riches in glory, by Christ Jesus. Phil. 4.
19. Here I cannot but put the Poor in mind of their duty, which receiving good
at the hands of them that relieve them, are very unjust, if they give not again
this Duty back to them, to Pray for them.

So Ministers, which in that very Name, as one part of their Ministerial Duty,
for the whole, is the Word, and Prayer (as the Apostles speak; But we will give
our selves continually to Prayer, and to the Ministry of the Word. Acts 6. 4.)
receive temporal things.

Lastly, Before I close up this place of Thankfulness to Men, we must not pass
by our Thankfulness to God: For if to Men we must be Thankful, How much more to
GOD? And the ground of Unthankfulness to Men, is from their Unthankfulness to
GOD.

There is not any other fault more generally blamed, even by those that have
but the Light of Nature, than ingratitude (as I have largely showed) nor any
Ingratitude greater than toward God, because of none we receive more, or
greater Benefits than from him: to say nothing, that it being impossible, that
we should attain to that degree of Thankfulness, which should be in requiting
the Benefits, we daily and hourly receive of him; he is contented to take the
Acknowledgement of them for Payment, so as it must be the effect of a most
Villa^nous Injustice to deny him that: For which cause, in the Scriptures we
have the Invitations of Holy Men to Thankfulness, the praise of this Duty, and
the Precedents of good Men performing it. In special, the Book of the Psalms
has his name in the Hebrew Tongue, as ye would say, (...) The Book of Praises;
not as if the whole Book had nothing else, but because it is the chief part,
and most principally intended. And for this cause does the Church use in the
beginning of her solemn Service, the 95 Psalm, as a means to invite us to that
Duty, so good and come^^, yea, so just and necessary, as the Psalm for the
Sabbath Day begins; It Is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, and to sing
praises to thy name, O thou most High. Psalm. 92. Men are not so forward to this
Duty of Thankfulness as they ought; so it is, to Prayer we are more ready, as
being sensible of our wants; not to Thanksgiving, as having them furnished, and
so now in good case. This appears in the Gospel, in the ten Lepers, one only of
which returned after his cleansing, to give Thanks, though nine entreated
cleansing. And Jesus answering, said, Were there not ten cleansed, but where
are the nine? There are not found that returned to give glory to God, but this
stranger. Luke 17. v. 19, 20.

The more untoward we be to this Duty, the more must we be called on, and the
more enforce our selves unto it, in the words of the Psalmist, Come, and hear
all ye that fear God, and I will declare what he has done for my S^ul. Psalm.
66. 1^. Wherein he calls, and provokes others to the like Duties; as showing,
That we ought not to hold it enough, that we, for our own parts, serve God, but
he draws others to it, Superiors by Authority, Equals and Inferiors by
Persuasion, all by Example: See the practice; Sing praises unto the Lord, ye
Saints of his, and give Thanks at the remembrance of his holiness. Psalm. 30. 4.
And again; O magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his name together;
Come ye Children, hearken unto me, I will teach you the fear of the Lord. Psalm.
34. 3. 11. Yea, so far is this affection of gratitude toward God intended, as
the very Angels, and all other Creatures are invited to this Duty, as the 103,
and 148 Psalms show throughout.

Whether because company increases courage in us in any work, or else we would
show, that we account our own endeavor too little, and too defective; whence
we desire that which we lack, others with us should help to supply. This is
also wonderfully well fitting to our natural Inclination; for Man is a Sociable
Creature, and loves company, even in civil life: wicked men are companions in
evil, and say, Come with us, let us lay wait for blood; let us lurk privily for
the innocent with out a cause. Prove. 1. 11. And how much more in the highest
Acts of Religion, wherein our life is best employed, ought God's Saints to do
the like?

1. Here then are we to be encouraged in the solemn Worship of God, (which is
altogether Eucharistical,) to frequent those Assemblies, yea, and privately to
encourage, and stir up one another, as the Apostle speaks; Not forsaking the
assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is, but exhorting one
another, and so much the more as ye see the day approaching. Heb. 10. 25. A
Matter that the Psalmist professed, joyed his heart, when he found in his
People; I was glad when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of the
Lord. Psalm. 122. v. 1.

2. On the other side, here is blamed the backwardness of those that even
invited and encouraged, yea, enforced in a manner, by Authority, refuse to come
to give Thanks to the Lord, in a Service of God, wherein themselves can find
nothing to blame, unless that it is understood, and not standing in an unknown
Tongue, and consequently a dry and fruitless Devotion: The same, if it were to
run to Creatures, and visit the Sepulchers of the Saints, would count no labor
too much, nor way too long.

3. And the like is to be said of others that separate themselves from such
Eucharistical Assemblies, where the Name of God is called upon with Joy and
Thankfulness, upon surmises of Blemishes and Defects, or mislike of the
Society. Not to enter into the Question at this time, Where God is to be
praised? All company that truly fears God, is good; and if not in our Assembly,
Where have they either learned, that he is to be praised, or found those great
benefits of His, whereupon they acknowledge, that they are bound to praise Him,
and to give Thanks unto His Holy Name for them?

4. We have Precept upon Precept for the practice of this Duty of Thankfulness;
Offer unto God Thanksgiving, says David, Psalm. 50. 14. Let us come before his
face with Thanksgiving, says our Translation; but the Original is (...) with
Confession. There be two things included in this Confession, and they be the
very proper parts of Thankfulness. First, That we have received the favors,
and good things we have, from God. Secondly, That we are obliged, and stand
Debtors to Him of our Service and Duties for them.

So here is forbidden, either malignity to conceal, or arrogate to our selves,
as our own purchase, what we have received of him: or else to detract that
Duty, which in all reason, we are bound to perform, in that consideration,
especially, because to Men we may go further, to some degree of recompense; but
to God, there is the uttermost we can do, and therefore we ought to apply this
to particulars, as in mentioning God's particular Favors to his Redeemed ones,
to Travelers, to Captives, to Sick-men, to Seamen; this is all he calls for:
O that men would praise the Lord for his Goodness, and for his wonderful works
to the Sons of men: Let them exalt him also in the Congregation of the people,
and praise him in the Assembly of the Elders. Psalm. 107. v. 13. 21. 3. 32.

The form of Thanksgiving, which is prescribed to every Israelite, that sells
any Possession, or part of the Holy Land, is at large set down by Moses, Deuteronomy.
26. from the first Verse, to the 12. which well deserves our Meditation and
Application; for with such Sacrifices God is as well pleased, as with hilastick
Oblations under the Law, for the Peace Offering, and Thank-offering, were of
all others the most chargeable. It Is recorded, that Solomon offered a Sacrifice
of Peace Offerings, which he offered unto the Lord, two and twenty thousand
Oxen, and an hundred and twenty thousand Sheep, at the Dedication of the House
of the Lord, 1 Kin. 8. 63. The greatest that we read of, though great
Sacrifices are mentioned in many places, yet none like this, that might seem to
destroy all the Cattle in a whole Country. By the Multitude of Gratulatory
Sacrifices, the People of God were wont to testify their Zealous and Grateful
Affections to God, the Donor of all, in Signification and Expectation of that
plenteous Redemption, wrought by Christ, as the Psalmist concludes the Psalm
130. v. 7, 8.

The like Affections ought to be in us all, for these Considerations:

1. For the multitude of his Mercies, how many are they that we have received
already, and daily do enjoy? what have thou (says the Apostle) that thou did
not receive? 1 Cor. 4. 7. Many O Lord my God are thy wondrous works, which
thou have done, and thy thoughts, which are to usward; they cannot be reckoned
up in order unto thee; if I should declare, and speak of them, they are more
than can be numbered, (says the Psalmist) Psalm. 40. 5. And again, How precious
are thy thoughts unto me, O God! how great is the sum of them! If I should
count them, they are mo in number than the S^n^, Psalm. 139. 17, 18. David
confesses in the Contemplation, and review of God's Favors, that his
Arithmetic fails him and comes short in a sacred Hyperbole, as being far above
our Capacities, we cannot so much as tell them in order: If you begin at your
Conception in the Womb, where the Psalmist begins, I will praise thee, for I am
fearfully and wonderfully made; Psalm. 139. 14. or at God's Election, in laying
the foundation of your Salvation in Christ, before he laid the foundation of
the world, as the Apostle speaks, According as he has chosen us in him, before
the foundation of the world. Ephesians. 1. 4, where will you end? You must in plain
terms resolve to say with our Psalmist, Such knowledge is too wonderful for me;
it is high, I cannot attain to it. Psalm. 139. 6.

Secondly, Consider how continual are his Mercies, without any Intermission or
Interruption; They are renewed every Morning, says Jerem, As he makes his Sun
to rise on the evil, and on the good, and sends rain on the just, and on the
unjust, Matthew. 5. 45. as our Lord speaks. He holds our Soul in Life, when we
think there is but a step between us and Death, (as David thought, when he fled
from Saul, 1 Samuel 20. 3.) and suffers not our feet to be moved, Psalm. 66. 9.
but according to his pleasure, in whom we live, and move, and have our being,
Acts 17. 28. as the Apostle speaks: The Manna that came from Heaven, was not
restrained one day in forty years perambulation, and peregrination in the
wilderness; thou with heldest not thy Manna from their mouth, says Nehemiah,
nor the water that flowed out of the rock, but gave them water for their
thirst. Notwithstanding the many, and great provocations of God's People, The
Pillar of the Cloud departed not from them by day, to lead them in the way, nor
the Pillar of fire by night, to show them light in the way that they should go,
says Nehem. 9. v. 9. 20.

In the Element of his Mercies, we draw our Breath continually, to stir us up
to continual Thankfulness.

Thirdly, Consider how great are the benefits that we receive from God, that
call with a loud Voice, for this duty of Thankfulness for them, which makes the
Psalmist cry out, O how great is thy goodness, which thou have laid up for them
that fear thee, which thou have wrought for them that trust in thee, before the
sons of men! The Scripture is quoted by Isaiah, Isa. 64. 4. and by the Apostle
rendered thus: Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has entered into the
heart of man the things which God has prepared for them that love him. 1 Cor.
2. 9.

What greater thing has he prepared, or can he prepare for them that love him,
because he loved them first, 1 John 4. 19. (as St. John speaks) than Jesus
Christ, the Son of his love? Is not this gift of God (as our Savior speaks to
the Woman of Samaria, Joh. 4: 10.) the gift of gifts? It is then all our
duties, to acknowledge with Joy and Thankfulness, the truth of the Lord, and
this Mercifulness of God our Savior in regarding our Vileness so far, as to
save us from our spiritual Enemies, giving for us the ransom of the precious
Blood of his dear Son: and to end we ever-more keep a grateful Memory of this
benefit, he has appointed the use of the Holy Eucharist, a name, signifying
Thankfulness.

Exh. Let us then come, and rejoice to the Lord; and with a loud and strong
Voice, acknowledge this Benefit: Let us frequent his Holy Table, so mercifully
set before us in the Gospe^, in despite of our Enemies, endeavoring to draw
one another thereto, and to live such a Life, as may even silently call the
very Adversaries of our profession, to the Worship and Service of God: whom
serving cheerfully on Earth, for the abundance of all things, it may be our
portion to enjoy, and to sing aloud and thankfully unto, in the Heavens, with
his Holy Saints, and glorious Angels, and our blessed Lord and Savior, Jesus
Christ.

Fourthly, How undeserved are the Benefits we receive from God, that they may
provoke us to Thankfulness, and how unexpected?

We deserve nothing but Wrath, and the curse of Mount Ebal, Deuteronomy. 27. 13. or of
Cain, Genesis 4. 11. or of our Father Adam, to whom it was said, Cursed is the
Earth for thy sake, in sorrow shall thou eat thereof all the days of thy Life,
Genesis 3. 17. If God should deal with us according to our demerits, our best
performances are but glorious Transgressions, and we are but unprofitable
Servants at the best, as our Lord speaks, Luke 17. 10. Jacob pleads his Merit
toward Laban stoutly, in Genesis 31. from v. 36. to v. 41. And Jacob was wroth,
and chode with Laban; and Jacob answered, and said to Laban, what is my
Transgression, or what is my sin, that thou have so hotly pursued after me? And
he stands upon his guard, and justifies himself, and challenges Laban to lay
to his Charge any unwarrantable Action in his twenty years service, though he
had changed his wages ten times, as the Prodigal's elder Brother said to his
Father, Lo these many years do I serve thee, neither did I at any time
transgress thy Commandment: Luc. 15. 29. But having to deal with God, he sets a
very low esteem of himself, as not deserving the least of God's Mercies; I am
not worthy of the least of all the Mercies, and of all the truth, which thou
have showed unto thy Servant; for with my staff I passed over this Jordan, and
now I am become two bands, Genesis 32. 10.

See also the same dejection, and selfdenial in his Grandfather Abraham:
Behold now, I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord, who am but dust and
ashes, Genesis 18. 23. and of Mephibosheth, when David said unto him, Fear not,
for I will surely show thee kindness, for Jonathan, thy Fathers sake, and will
restore thee all the Land of thy Father Saul, and thou shall eat Bread at my
Table continually: And he bowed himself, and said, What is thy servant, that
thou should look upon such a dead Dog as I am? 2 Samuel 9. 8.

The Mercies and Kindnesses of all Men in the World, compared to God's
undeserved Favors, are but as a drop of a bucket of Water to the great Ocean:
My thoughts are not as your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, says the
Lord: For as the Heavens are higher than the Earth, so are my ways bigher than
your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts, Isa. 55. 8, 9. This
Consideration makes sometimes the faithful so earnest in the affection of joy,
as they seem almost ridiculous in the Eyes of carnal Men, as David to Michal,
when he danced before the Lord, 2 Samuel 6. 21. But their Justification is easy,
it is before the Lord that I did it, to God's Glory, that I might express my
Thankfulness to him, and the joy of my Heart in doing him Service, whom, since
the rest know not, they are not to be respected if they scorn: nor is it to be
wondered, if they be strangely affected with it, as above the compass of their
Conceit.

Fifthly, How without hope of Requital are all, yea, the least of God's
benefits that call for Thankfulness; a cup of cold water only, given to drink
in Christ's name, because ye belong to Christ, shall not lose a just, and
superabundant requital, says our Lord, Mar. 9. 41.

See the full and final requital of all good and charitable Deeds, Matthew. 25.
34, 35, 36. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you
from the beginning of the world: For I was an hungry, and ye gave me meat, I
was thirsty, and ye gave me drink, I was a stranger, and ye took me in, naked,
and ye clothed me, I was sick, and ye visited me, I was in prinson, and ye
came unto me. The Wicked he requites here, sometimes in their own Coin, as
Adoni bezek acknowledges, when his thumbs and great toes were cut off: As I
have done (to threescore and ten Kings) so has the Lord requited me, Judge. 1.
7. We are all ready enough to requite Evil for Evil, to give him ( quid pro
quo) as good as he brings, as the Proverb rimes, as Sampson served the
Philistines: As they have done unto me, so have I done unto them, Jud. 15. 11.
But it being impossible to requite God in any thing, it is a most heinous
Provocation of his justice, to render Evil for Good: Do ye thus provoke the
Lord? O foolish people, and unwise! says Moses, with Astonishment and
Abhorrency, Deuteronomy. 32. 6.

It Is left as a sad blot in Hezekiah's Scutcheon, though otherwise a good Man,
and a good King, by God's own Testimony: He trusted in the Lord God of Israel
so that after him there was none like him among all the Kings of Judah, nor any
that were before him. But Hezekiah rendered not again according to the benefit
done unto him; for his heart was lifted up, therefore there was wroth upon him,
and upon Judah and Jerusalem, 2 Chr. 32. 25. For after the defeat of
Senacherib's Forces, by an Angel of God, that slew in one night an hundred
fourscore and five thousand men of war in the Assyrian Camp; and after the
recovery of his Health, confirmed by a sign from Heaven in the Sun's
Retrogradation by ten degrees, and the addition, by Patent from God, of fifteen
years, to his days, with exceeding much Riches and Honor; yet for all this, he
was not so careful to please God in an humble and thankful Acknowledgment of
such great Favors, as God was to pleasure him in them all.

Sixthly, Consider from what odds the Person giving to our baseness, have been
all his benefits, he being the great Independent Jehovah, greatness is stamped
upon all his Benefits to us, and we a Seed of evil Doers, a people laden with
Iniquity, children that are corrupters; our spot is not the spot of his
Children; we are wretched and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked, and in
want of all things, as our Lord writes to the Church of Laodicea, Rev. 3. v. 17.

Lastly, Consider with what advantage of time and order, in first bestowing,
have his Benefits been to us.

No eye pitied thee to have compassion upon thee; I said unto thee when thou
wast in thy Blood, live, says the Lord Ezekiel. 16. 5, 6. we love him, because he
first loved us, says the Apostle, 1 John 4. 19. His love to us is an
antecedent love, we love him with a consequential love, because he has cast
his love upon us first, and therefore is no way indebted to us for our love:
The Apostle asks this question, Who has first given unto him, and it shall
berecompenced to him again? for of him, and through him, and to him are all
things, to whom be glory for ever, Amen. Romans 11. v. 35, 36.

It is said by some, we can never requite our Parents; by some also, we owe
more to our Masters and Teachers, than to Parents, in as much as one gave
being, the other well being, doubtless in both respects we cannot requite God
and Christ.

First, Our Parents begat our Bodies, he gave us our senses, who is therefore
styled by the Apostle, The Father of our Spirits. Heb. 12. 9.

2. Our Masters and Teachers gave us, with God's Blessing, Knowledge and
Learning, Christ teaches us the way to Heaven, who is the Way, the Truth, and
the Life; Christ gave himself to us, and for us, to wash us from our Sins in
his own Blood, Joh. 14. 6. without which, it had been better for us to have
been any thing, rather than men, yea, at all not to have been,

Let us with the Psalmist again and again say, What shall I render unto the
Lord for all his benefits toward me? Psalm. 116. 12. all his benefits are above
us, even the one also of our former means, to express Gratitude, here fails us;
what can we wish or desire, to the most absolute and perfect Being? Only we may
acknowledge the Benefits, and the Excellency and Liberality of the Giver, which
further may desire, that all others would do the like, this is our utmost;
unless further, to endeavor, not to be disobedient to this Heavenly Author of
much good to us, which yet is our duty otherwise, the less we have means to the
former, the more ought we to be in this, and say with the Man after God's own
Heart, I will sing unto the Lord as long as I live, I will sing praises to my
God, while I have my being, my Meditation of him shall be sweet, I will be glad
in the Lord, Psalm. 103. 33, 34. and in another At Midnight will I rise to give
thanks to thee, because of thy righteous Judgments, Psalm. 119. 62.

Let us beg of him (as another Benefit) that he will give us Grace, and a mind
to do these things, who has given the ground an occasion of them, even the
same our Lord Jesus Christ.

Now because the Apostle Peter says, no Prophecy of Scripture is of any
private interpretation, 2 Pet. 1. 20. so neither are all of sole private
application, but some are of a larger Extent and Compass than others; if I
should have studied long for a fit Text, Psalm. 119. 16. Thy commandment, i^
exceeding broad.
and turned the whole Scripture, I could not have had a fitter passage, or
grea^^ (...), in all the Book of God; he calls more, both for private and
public application, than this, that is in so strange a manner laid open before
us to look into it, and yet no more strange than true (as the truth is in Jesu,
before whom I stand) for this Doctrine of the Peace of God, that ought to rule
in the Hearts of all Believers, gives great help, advantage, and admonition, to
Kings, Lawmakers, Rulers, to the Founders and Conservers of Cities, Countries
and Kingdoms, to the end and purpose of defending and preserving them from
Evils, in a cordial and blessed Submission, to the ever-ruling, and overruling
Peace of God: If the Peace of God did bear rule in the Hearts of all Christians
(which our Apostle requires in these of Colosiae) all the World would become
Christians.

A digression, as if it had been in the presence of his Majesty for exercise
sake. And here let me with all Humility, use the Psalmst David's Expression; I
will speak of thy Testimonies also before Kings, and will not be ashamed, Psalm.
119. 46. and therefore in the first place, methinks this Scripture gives me
just occasion to speak to Their Majesty's in a word or two, that which I am
sure, their noble minds will take more pleasure to hear, than to be profuse in
their praise, which no Man can lightly pass over, if the Peace of God rule in
your Hearts, whom the supreme Ruler of the World has chosen, and sent, to rule
over us, his People. O happy shall ye be, and it shall be well with you, and
happy shall all your Subjects in these three Kingdoms be, that by you are
redeemed from thra^dom, and brought again from the Depths of the Sea of misery,
Psalm. 68. 22. that were sold for naught to the Man of sin, to be destroyed, to
be slain, and to perish, as Que^^ Esther speaks to King Ahasuerus, in a like
case, concerning Hamnus's Plot, Esth. 7. 4.

Sir, You were called many years ago, by God himself, into one Body, conjugal
with your Royal Consort (that is all glorious within and without) and now by
the same God, to the ornamical, and Political, to lead these three Nations; as
also to lead the Military Body of the Confederates of many Nations, as Captain
general of the Lords Hosts, like another Moses, that led the Children of Israel
out of the Land of Egypt, out of the House of Bondage; or another Cyras, that
enlarged God's People out of the Babilonish Captiviry, as it is no small Honor
to be God's King upon so high and honorable Account, as none of your Royal
Predecessors were ever called unto, so it asks no small Duty, Reverence, and
Thankfulness at your hands to himwards*

Sir, Thus it is, you Princes, as well as other Folks be accomptable to God; as
arise your Receipts to a higher proportion, so must your Allowances and
Payments be greater or less. You will find in a greater Arrearage, when it
comes to a reckoning, where much is bestowed, much is called for again.

Consider, if your self advance any Man above others, upon equal, and perhaps
less desert; if you do not think you ought more to repose in the Faithfulness
and Loyalty of such a one, be ye well sure God looks for the like at your Hand:
It behooves you therefore to be mindful of his Honor, which I dare be bold, is
the greatest that you have, that you are God's King, as eminently as he; of
whom the Lord said, yet have I set my King, (or as it is in the Hebr.) anointed
my King, upon Sion, the hill of my holiness, Psalm. 2. 6. that so in the
Regiment of his People, your Subjects; and of your self, you may demean your
self as God's King.

There is no need, that I descend to particulars, in general. I say, that God's
King may not behave himself, as the remnant of Kings do; that are either
Paganish, or Popish, that rule only for their own Pleasures, and Appetites,
without regard of Justice, Peace, or Honesty, that presume to make Religions of
their own, to appoint a God, or any thing, as a service of God, which he has
not commanded, which is to tie God to their baubles, as Jeroboam to the Golden
Calves at Dan and Bethel, 1 Kin. 12. and Nebuchadnezzar to the Golden Image in
the Plain of Dura, Dan. 3. to appoint a service in the Latin, whom the People
understand not, contrary to the rule of Edification set down; 1 Cor. 14. 26.
When Men presume to bind Consciences to their Knees, under pain of sin, and
forbid to reason of their biddings, under severe Penalties; this is a tyranny
against God. True it is, that Penal Laws may be made to bind, in many respects:
But let Men beware, lest they exact with greater severity, obedience to their
own Precepts, than God's; there is but one Lawgiver, that can save and
destroy, says James 4. 12. when they forbid what God commands, and commands
what God forbids; its Tyranny, as did Antiochus, and other Heathen Emperors
forbid to Circumcise, to read the Law, and commanded to offer to Idols, and to
eat Swines Flesh, and all under pain of present Death, 2 Macc. 7.

Rulers must know their places, have moderate, and just, and Godly Government,
not usurp on God's Right, on their Subjects Conscience; and though Faith be the
Gift of God, and cannot be taught, nor forced, nor Conscience be compelled to
assent, yet Men may be obliged to the outward hearing of Gods Word, and
Factious Firebrarnds repressed, and quenched. Sozomen tells us, That
Athanasius, the Patriarch of Alexandria, was upon a time walking in the Streets
in that City, and that a Raven did flee toward him, croaking; which the
Heathen that stood near, observing, began to deride him, and reproach him, as
if he had been a Praestigiator, or Conjurer; and so making toward him, asked
in derision, what the Raven said to him: He modestly smiling, answered in
Latin, Eras; for he dictates unto you, That to morrow will be a most bitter
day: for to morrow you shall receive the Emperor's Edict, that you shall
celebrate no more your Heathenish Solemnities: And acaccordingly it came to
pass; for the next day the Magistrates received orders from the Roman Emperor,
that their Heathen Gods should be no more worshipped, but destroyed utterly,
with all their Idolatry and Superstition, in which they were bred: Which being
abdicated, they immediately embraced the Gospel. Blessed is the people that
know this joyful sound, Psalm. 89. 15. And thanks be to Jesus Christ, in many
things already, you have showed your self God's King, in coming out to help the
Lord against the mighty, Jer. 9. 3. in being valient for his truth, at home and
abroad, in scattering the Proud in the Imagination of their Hearts, and bring
the Wheel upon them, in taking down (...) Partition Wall of Separation, that
your Subjects might not destroy one another for fashions sake; you have put
your Life into your Land, to fight the Lords Battles, that teaches your hands
to war, and your fingers to fight, Psalm. 144. 1. and have wrought with God this
great Salvation in our Israel, as all Israel said of Jonathan, that overthrew
the vastest Army that ever the Philistines had, consisting of thirty thousand
Chariots, six thousand Horses, and people like the sand, which is on the Sea
shore, for Multitude, 1 Samuel 13. 5. In his name, that gives Salvation unto
Kings, and that has delivered your Royal Person from the Sword; like another
David, or Jehoshaphet, you marched out against the Enemies of God and Man (or
else he has none in this World) and he, in whom ye trusted, has made you more
than Conqueror, in pacifying Scotland, subduing Ireland, and preserving the
Peace, and safety of England; and in checking the Pride and Insolency of your
sworn Enemies beyond Sea, and setting a bound to it, that it cannot pass; and
though the Waves thereof toss themselves, yet they cannot prevail, though they
roar, yet can they not pass over it, Jer. 5. 22. as the Prophet speaks of God's
bounding the Sea, when he said, Hitherto shall thou come, and no further, and
here shall thy proud waves stay themselves, Job. 38. 11. Your Majesty's Soul is
bound up in the bundle of Life with the Lord your God (in all your hazardous,
high, and honorable undertakings) and the souls of your Enemies, them shall he
fling out as out of the middle of a sling, as virtuous Abigail speaks to King
David, 1 Samuel 25. 29. For as an Angel of God, so is my Lord the King, to
discern good and bad, therefore the Lord thy God will be with thee, says the
wi^e Woman of Tekoah to the King. 2 Samuel 14. 17.

Therefore says he to the God of this Life, Draw me not away with the wicked,
and with the workers of Iniquity, which speak peace to their Neighbors, but
mischief is in their hearts: For they speak not peace, but devise deceitful
matters against them that are quiet in the Land, Psalm. 28: 3. and 35. 20.

If the Peace of God rule in your Royal Heart, because he has set his love
upon me, therefore will I deliver him, I will set him on high, because he has
known my name, (says God to David) He shall call upon me, and I will answer
him, I will be with him in trouble, I will deliver him, and honor him, with
long life will I satisfy him, and show my salvation. Psalm. 91. 14, 15, 16. (no
richer Promises in all the Book of God, than those that are made to God's King)
and again, I will make thy officers peace, and thine exactors righteousness,
violence shall be no more heard in thy Land, wasting nor destruction within thy
borders; Thy people shall be all righteous, (says the Prophet) Isa. 60. 17,
18, 21.

And the work of righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of righteousness,
quietness and assurance for ever, and my people shall dwell in peaceable
habitations, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet resting places, Isa. 32. 17,
18. Again, Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee,
because he trusts in thee; Isa. 26. 4. For the King trusts in the Lord, and
through the mercy of God he shall not be moved, says King David, Psalm. 21. 7.
and therefore he protests thus, For my brethren and companions sakes, I will
now say, Peace be within thee, Psalm. 122. 8, But who were these Men whom the
King honored thus, to account his Royal Brethren, and worthy Companions? Not
such as the sons of Zeruiah, that were his Cousins, and were too hard for him,
2 Samuel 3. 39. that were bloody Men, and Murdererers of Princes, nor such as
Haman, the Agagite, Companion to King Ahasuerus, that plotted and contrived the
murder of all Gods people in one day, Esth. 3. 8, 9. nor such as Doeg, the
Edomite, that at Readiness Command, butchered the Priests of the Lord, even four
score and five persons that did wear a Linen Ephod. 1 Samuel 22. 18. in his eyes
all such vile persons were contemned, Psalm. 15. 4. as David professes, he
would know no such wicked personss, they should not tarry in his sight, Psalm.
101. 4. 7. But he tells us, I am companion to all them that fear thee, to them
that keep thy precepts, Psalm. 119. 63, 65. to the Saints that are in the earth,
and to the excellent, in whom is all my delight, Psalm. 16. 3. why so? Because
the Law of God is in his Heart; what Law? The Law of Peace. Great peace have
they that love thy Law, and nothing shall offend them, Psalm. 119. 165. Then
there shall be no breaking in (by foreign Invasion) nor going out (by domestic
Insurrection) no complaining in our Streets: Happy is that people, that is in
such a case (the Psalmist corrects himself) yea, happy is that people whose God
is the Lord, Psalm. 144. 15. whose peace rules in their hearts.

My second Address shall be in all due Reverence and Humility, to the Right
Honorable the High Court of Parliament, consisting of Lords and Commons.

I will with Jeremiah the Prophet, get me unto the great Men, and speak unto
them (I hope with better acceptance and Success than he did) for they have
known the way of the Lord, and the judgment of their God, Jer. 5. 5. are better
acquainted with it, having had better breeding, and means of instruction, than
others of meaner Estate: Let the Peace of God rule in your Hearts, unto which
ye are all called in one Body politic: That ye all speak the same thing, that
there be no divisions among you, but that you be perfectly joined together in
the same ^^ind, and in the same judgment, as the Apostle charges the
Corinthians by the name of Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 1. 10. That there be in none of
you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God: Or amongst you
a profane person, as Esau, to sell his bitth right for a Mess of Popery, as he
did for a mess of Pottage, as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 3. 12. and chapter 12. 16.

You are the most solemn Representative of our Church and State; our
Lawmakers, and living Laws, are the most honorable Assembly of Christians
under Heaven at this day, an Assembly of Philosophers and Divines; yea, of
Kings and Priests, unto God the Father, and his Christ, Rev. 1. 6. You are our
first born, that have a double portion of Honor put upon you above your
Brethren, to be our Rulers and Lawgivers, to use the Apostle's words, You are
a chosen Generation, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a peculiar people;
that ye should show forth the praises of him, that has called you out of
darkness unto his mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2. 9. As those that sat there
before you above an Hundred and Twenty Years ago, were like so many Zorobabels
(that led the people of God, from Caldean to Babylon) that laid the foundation
of our Reformation upon Christ, another foundation no man c^n lay, 1 Cor. 3.
11. (says the Apostle) and his truth, and sounded by the Trumpet of the
Gospel, a fair retreat, from Romish Popish Babylon; the mother of Harlots, and
abominations of the earth, Rev. 17. 5. the mistress of Witchcrafts, that
sells nations through her whoredoms, and families through her witchcrafts,
Nah. 3. 4. (as the Prophet speaks) so God has called you together; that your
Hands may finish it, that ye may bring forth the head-stone thereof with
shouting, crying, Grace, grace unto it, as the Angel speaks, Zach. 4. 7. That
she that is your Enemy may see it, and shame may cover her, Mic. 7. 10. That
she may be removed that nothing of her be left amo(...) of her Idolatry and
Superstition. (...) your selves in array against Fren(...) abylon, round about
all ye that tred the bow, shoot at her, spare no Arrows, for she has sinned
against the Lord, says the Prophet, Jer. 50. 14.

Some rubbish that escaped our first Reformers, was left in the fall of so
ancient and great a Building, which remains yet untaken away, but incumbers the
Ground; which in the Prayers that we are commanded to use in our Monthly Fasts,
run thus; namely, in the Prayer for the High Court of Parliament.

That all things may be so ordered, and settled by their endeavors, upon the
best and surest foundations, that Peace and Happiness, Truth and Justice,
Religion and Piety may be established among us from all Generations: Now
another Foundation of Peace and Happiness can no Man lay, than Christ and his
Word. We need not send to Rome, nor any where else, for any thing that concerns
Religion; The word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart, says the
Apostle, Romans 10. 8. and we are built upon the foundation of the Apostles, and
Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone, Ephesians. 2. 20.

In the Prayer for the reformed Churches, Purge all thy Churches from their
Dreggs, and make them meet for a glorious Deliverance, that all the World may
see, that Salvation belongs to our God.

In the last Prayer: Give us Grace Lord, seriously to lay to heart the great
dangers we are in, by our unhappy Divisions, take away all hatred and
prejudice, and whatsoever may hinder us, from Godly Union and Concord; that as
these is but one Body, and one Spirit, and one Hope of our Calling, one Lord,
one Faith, one Baptism, one God, and Father of us all, so we may henceforth be
all of one Heart, and of one Soul, united in one Holy Body of Truth and Peace,
of Faith and Charity, and may with one Mind and one Mouth glorify thee, O God,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

The like Expressions are in the Prayer for the whole State of Christ's Church
Militant here on Earth.

Let us deal plainly with God and our own Consciences, and those to whom these
Prayers are recommended, unless we think to please God, and Men, with a few
fair words of Devotion, when our Heart is far from him, and the performance of
these things we pray for, as the East is from the West; Be not deceived (says
the Apostle) God will not be mocked, Gal. 6. 6. however, we may deceive Men
with words smoother than butter, but war is in the heart, with words softer
than oil, yet are they drawn swords, Psalm. 55. 21. Is not this a casting of
God's words behind us, and taking his name in vain? That lays us open to that
surprising expression of our Lord, ex ore tuo est, have ye not reason to fear
the Lords Censure of the Elders of Israel, that came and sat before Ezekiel in
Babylon, concerning whom, the word of the Lord came unto him, saying, Son of
man, these men have set up their Idols in their hearts, and put the stumbling
block of their iniquity before their face; should I be enquired of at all by
them? Exek. 14. 3. And that of the Prophet Jeremiah, that from the Prophets of
Jerusalem, hypocrisy is gone out into all the land, Jer. 23. 15. If we build
continually by our practice, that which wont seem to destroy so solemnly by our
Prayer, what do we make of our selves in the Eyes of the World, but
Transgressors? Gal. 2. 18. Children, in whom is no faith, Deuteronomy. 32. 20.

What then are these Dreggs we desire God to deliver us from? Are they not the
remainder of our natural Corruption, and the sin which does so easily beset us
within, and of Popery without, that have been a snare to us, and removed our
Souls far from Peace, that we may be delivered from them, as well as other
reformed Churches.

Again, What are these great dangers that we are in by our unhappy Division;
for the laying of which seriously to Heart, we beg God's Grace? Are they about
matters of no value, that in the balance of the Sanctuary have Tekel written
on them, as being altogether higher than Vanity? Are we like the Man lying in a
ditch, praying, Lord have mercy upon me, and yet will not stir Hand nor Foot to
help himself out. If we will not prevent these dangers, when we know what the
late attempt to remove the occasion of them cost these Nations, that were sore
afflicted, and sorely tossed with the tempest of a long bloody War, and not
fully comforted to this day.

Again, Take away all Hatred and Prejudice, and whatsoever else may hinder us
from Godly Union and Concord.

And we will part with nothing by our good Will, that may please many good
people, and can never tend to the real damage of any, but add more fuel still
to the old hatred and prejudice, until that be taken out of the way, by which
the offense comes, that may kindle a fire that will never be quenched, and
feed a worm that shall never die, Mar. 9. 46. from which Judgment the Lord
deliver us.

Lastly, All the terms of Union of Peace, and Love, in Heaven and Earth, are
mustred up together, one Lord, one Faith; one Baptism, one God, etc. many
Vanities; that we may with one Mouth, and one Mind, glorify God, etc.

Here a Man would think, (If there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort
in love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels or mercies, if any
truth in men,) Phil. 2. 1. that we are resolved now to fill the Evangelical
Prophecy of Zephany, to serve the Lord with a pure lip, and with one shoulder,
Zeph. 3. 9. with Uniformity of Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline, that there
may be one Lord, and his name one, according to that of the Prophet, Zach. 14.
9.

Lord, put this heart in those that have commanded us to put up those sweet
words to God, in truth and simplicity of Heart, Amen. That we may not be said
to have a form of godliness, 2 Timothy 3. 5. is an outward delineation of piety,
of peace and unity, denying the power and practice of it, (as the Apostle
speaks) or as Jeremiah, They have healed the hurt of the Daughter of the my
people slighted, saying, peace, peace, when there was no peace, Jer. 6. 14. and
those that are required to make their Addresses to God in these words, say,
Have thou utterly rejected Judah? has thy soul loathed Zion? why have thou
smitten us, and there is no healing for us? we looked for peace, and there is
no good, and for a time of healing, and behold trouble. Jer. 14. 19. Then said
I, ah Lord God, surely thou have greatly deceivid this people, and Jerusalem,
saying, ye shall have peace, whereas the sword reaches unto the soul.

Now, most noble Lords and Commons, Since God has endued many of you with
excellent parts of learning of all sorts, and Wisdom, both Theorical and
Practical, above all the Sanedrims Synods, and Anti Synods, since that of Nice,
in which a plain Countryman, in demonstration of the Spirit and Power,
convinced the Heathenish Philosophers, more than all the three Hundred and
Eighteen Fathers that were there: I hope you will in the fear of God, assert
the everlasting Gospel in the purity and simplicity of it, and all the approved
Teachers of it, in allowing them a just Maintenance for their Supportation,
that they may be encouraged in the Law of the Lord, 2 Chr. 31. 4. (as Hezekiah
is recorded to have done in his Reign) according to that of the Apostle, Let
him that is taught in the word, communicate to him that teaches in all good
things, which I take to be the Patent of the Ministers of the Gospel. The
gleanings of your Grapes are better than the Vintage of some Countries, where
there is a competent Provision for their Ministers, many able Men of yours have
small allowance, even for the meanest Employments, all Tyth being locked up in
the Hands of Impropriators in many places, and nothing left of the spoil, but
the old allowance: The Nethimims that were of two sorts, the Gibeonites, and
the Levites, that were employed to be Hewers of Wood, and Drawers of Water for
the Alter of God, t had a far more plentiful provision for themselves and their
Families, than many of your most painful Ministers have at this day, that
labor in the Word and Doctrine, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Timothy 5. 17. Prove me
now herewith, saich the Lord of hosts; if I will not open you the windows of
Heaven, and pour out a blessing: that there shall not be room enough to receive
it; Mal. 3. 10. That he may cause the blessing to rest in thine House, says
the Prophet Ezekiel, chapter 44. v. 30.

More over most noble Patriots, that are called to sit on Thrones of Judgment
(for such a time as this) where many of your Pregenitors, Parents, Kinsmen,
dear Friends, Fellow Subjects, and Countrymen, did sit above Fifty years ago
that were able Men, fearing God, and honoring the King, that were zealous for
God, and valiant for his truth, as ye are all this day, Act. 22. 3. that
resisted all inevitations on Church and State, even unto Blood, Heb 12. 4. in
themselves, and others, to prevent the setting up the image of Jealousy, that
provokes to Jealousy, Ezekiel. 8. 3. which was like to bring the calamities of
Esau upon them, Jer. 49. 8. and their posterity after them, that they might not
be called the border of iniquity, the people, against whom the Lord has
Indignation for ever, as the Prophet speaks, Let not all the trouble seem
little to you, that has come upon us, our Kings, on our Princes, on our
Priests, and on our Fathers, and on all the people, Neh. 9. 32. since the time
of King Charles the I. whose shield (in that combustion) was vilely cast away,
2 Samuel 1. 21, as if he had not been anointed with Oil, as David laments the
violent Death of Saul, lest these things should be revived, and advanced with a
high Land, that caused such alienation of affection, and bitter destruction of
many Persons and Families, in these three Kingdoms.

You have, like the Nobles of Israel, given their evidence to the contrary;
Thas when Popery was issuing upon us like a mighty Stream, Root, and Branch, in
all the parts and Pendicts of it; Then they had swallowed us up qu^ck, when
their wrath was kindled against us: Then the waters (of Mara, of bitterness)
had overwhelmed us, the stream (of Idolatry and Superstition) had gone over our
Soul, Psalm. 124. 3, 4. Then like so many Moses's you stood in the breach to
resist Satan, and all Iniquity, and to turn away God's wrath from his People,
occasioned by the golden Calf; or as so many resolute, and selfdenying Levi^es,
of whom it is written, That he said to his Father, and to his Mother, I have
not seen them; neither did he acknowledge his Brethren, nor knew his own
Children, when a Proclamation was made by Moses, through all the Camp of
Israel, Who is on the Lords side? let him come unto me, Exodus 32. 26. In all
these things, you have approved your selves, the faithful and true Servants of
God: Be it spoken to the glory of God, and recorded among your Archives for
your honor, and of your posterity for ever; that you did really thus, with all
your high, and low Court-Relations.

Ye have seen also that Prophecy of Isaiah, actually fulfilled in the Royal
Person of our King, when the enemy shall come in like a flood, the Spirit of
the Lord shall lift up a Standard against him, Isa. 59. 19. put him to flight;
by whom? But by our King William, whom God has made to be his Standard Bearer,
against the Man of Sin, and Son of Perdition, in Honor and Obedience to him,
that is styled, The standard bearer among ten thousand, Cant. 5. v. 10.

Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, that has in love to us all, set his own
King over us, to assist you in all things that may do most good: In whatsoever
things are true, in whatsoever things are honest, in whatsoever things are
lovely, in whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue, if
there be any praise, that ye may think on these things, with him, as the
Apostle exhorts, Phil. 4. v. 8.

What God said to David, Psalm. 2. This is my King; generally he says it of all
that be like to David, for he is the same.

The King, whose Heart is upright with God, as was David's, (the temper whereof
you may see, Psalm. 101. and Psalm. 131. as touching the Administration of the
Commonwealth, and his own Person and Family; but more excellently, as in his
duty to God in the whole 119th. Psalm.) Such a King is God's King himself, such
may assure themselves of safety and protection from the treachery and power of
their Advesaries, as Psalm 144. 10. It is he that gives salvation unto such
Kings, that delivered David his servant from the hurtful hurt of Saul, and all
his enemies, as the title of the 18th. Psalm bears.

And without flattery, be it spoken, if God have any such King in the World, it
is our King, as he has well declared, even by that very Argument of
Protection, from such villainous Practices, as were contrived against him, and
such eminent dangers, that he exposed himself unto, both by Sea and Land, to
them, that can, or will mark no other reason.

Certainly, if Sion, if Jerusalem, if Israel were beholding to the Lord for
giving them the honor above all other Nations, to be ruled by this King; we
are in the same debt, to whom the best King in this World has been given by
him, and then given, when we feared the worst of all extremities, that we could
imagine; when there seemed to be but a step between us and ruin, which I write
not, to puff us up with Pride, nor Himself, whose, not the least Praise is,
that he delights not in the hearing of his own Praise, but to make us thankful,
and to stir us up to pray heartily to God for him; that he would keep his Mind
in him for evermore, and confirm his love to him for ever: Bless, Lord, his
substance, and accept the work of his Hands (for thy Church and People) smite
through the Loins of those that rise up against him, and of them that hate him,
that they rise no more, which is Moses's Prayer for Levi. Deuteronomy. 33. 11. See
David's Prayer, 1 Chronicles. 29. 18. O Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel our
Fathers; keep this for ever in the Imagination of the Thoughts of the Heart of
thy People, and prepare their Heart unto thee, that at length our Eyes may
behold that joyful sight: That Mercy and Truth are met together, that
Righteousness and Peace have kissed each other, Psalm. 85. 10. (as the Psalmist
speaks) and the full Accomplishment of that Evangelical Promise, Violence shall
be no more heard in thy Land, Wasting nor Destruction within thy Borders, that
Men may call our Walls Salvation, and our Gates Praise, Isa. 60. 18. that when
he rests from his Labors, his Works may follow him.

My next Address is to you, my Reverend Brethren of the Ministry of the New
Testament, to you in a special manner is the Word of his Salvation sent, Acts
13. 26. (as the Apostle speaks to the Church of Corinth) being by nature as
hateful to God, and hating one another, Tit. 3. 3. as those that are embodied
with you. Let the Peace of God rule in your Hearts, into which ye are called
(not only in one Body Mystical, as all Christians are, but also) into one Body
Ecclesiastical, and be ye thankful, that ye be all of one Mind, 1 Cor. 1. 10.
We are Ambassadors for Christ, the Prince of Peace, the King of Peace, upon
whom, the Chastisement of our Peace was laid, Isa. 53. 5. That came and
preached Peace to you that were afar off, and to them that were near, says the
Apostle, Ephesians. 2. 17. and has left us a Legacy of Peace, and has committed
unto us the Ministry of Reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5. 19. the Gospel of Peace, Romans
10. 15. O that it might be said of us under the New Testament, as he speaks of
Levi in the Old; He walked with me in Peace and Equity, and did turn many from
Iniquity, Mal. 2. 6.

Let us be diligent in our Master's work, like faithful and wise Stewards, whom
our Lord has made Rulers over his Household, to give them their portion of meat
in their due season: Blessed are those Servants, whom our Lord when he comes
shall find so doing; of a Truth I say unto you, that he will make them Rulers
of all that he has, Luke 12. 42, 43, 44. That we may recover poor Sinners out
of the Snare of the Devil, who are taken Captives by him at his Will, 2 Timothy 2.
25. That when the chief Shepherd shall appear, we may be found of him in Peace,
without spot, and blameless, and receive a Crown of Glory, that fades not
away, 1 Pet. 5. 4. 2 Pet. 3. 14. That being Teachers, sent of God, to teach the
way of God in Truth, may shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and by
turning many to Righteousness, as the Stars for ever and ever, as the Prophet
Daniel speaks, Dan. 12. 3.

Now, since God by this Text, as by the tenor of the whole Book of God, calls
us to Peace, how many of our Profession are counted the greatest Enemies to it
in the whole Kingdom? as being neither Peacemakers, nor Peace-keepers with our
Neighbors; but by Austerity and Severity, exacting our dues to the utmost
Farthing, with such rigor, as the Sons of Eli, did use, that were Sons of
Belial, and knew not the Lord, 1 Samuel 2. 12. contrary to that Spirit of the
Gospel, which Christ's own Disciples were ignorant of, when they would have
consumed the Samaritans with Fire from Heaven, as Elijah did the Guards of
Ahaziah, Luke 9. 55. and putting their Parishioners into the Court often, for
very small matters, as if they sought not them, but theirs, so contrary to the
Apostle, as if Destruction and Misery were in their ways, and the way of Peace
they had not known, as the Apostle speaks of the Gentiles, Romans 3. 17. Hence it
is in the first place, that Men prosper not under the means of Grace; as
thinking it impossible, that the same Fountain should at the same place, or
springhead, send forth sweet Water, and bitter, as St. James speaks, Jam. 3.
11.

And that Men abhor the Offerings of the Lord, as if all soughe their own, and
not the things which are Jesus Christ's, Phil. 2. 21. which the Israelites are
recorded to have done of old for the vileness of their Priests, that with Force
and Cruelty ruled over them: and many depart from them, with Indignation, to
more peaceable Assemblies of Christians, without any purpose to return, because
their Shepherds have caused them to go astray, as the Prophet Jeremiah speaks,
chapter 50. 6.

And since our Liturgy that we read daily, is so full of good Prayers,
Collects, and Requests for Peace, that God who is the Author of Peace, and
lover of Concord, would give to all Nations Unity, Peace, and Concord: Let this
Charity begin at home, and let us, with our Apostle, follow after the things
that make (most) for Peace, and the things wherewith we may edify one another,
Romans 14. 17, 19. and ye shall be named the Priests of the Lord, Men shall call
you the Ministers of our God, ye shall eat the Riches of the Gentiles, and in
their Glory shall ye boast your selves, as the Evangelical Prophet speaks, Isa.
61. 6. lest the Lord divide us in Jacob, and scatter us in Israel, as he did
Simeon and Levi, that were Brethren in Evil, (but not in any good) to their
perpetual in famy; remembering always, that he that sows Discord among
Brethren, is one of the seven things that are an Abomination to the Lord, as
Solomon speaks, Prove. 6. 16.

Again, our Brethren, that profess the same Faith of Christ crucified with us,
yet dissent from us in some Externals, and Circumstances about Religion; lay to
our charge, that we hang all our Religion, and Ministration, upon certain
stinted Forms, and Canonical Offices, upon Persons and Places, Times, Canonical
Hours, Vestures, Postures and Gestures, etc. and that under the Fig Leaves of
Formality in the worship of God, we cover all Iniquity, as the Church of Rome
does, whose whole Religion is nothing else, but a Congeries of such insipid
stuff. And that of late, we were ready, upon the advance of Popery, to turn
Papists, rather than part with our Livings, perceiving some to be turned aside
already after Satan, like fallen Stars, and others with Demas, to forsake us,
and embrace this present (Popish) World, 2 Timothy 4. 10. and a great many in
Church and State, ready to swim with the overflowing Tide of Antichrist; the
Apostle tells Timothy, That he knew that all they that are in Asia, had turned
away from him, 2 Timothy 1. 15. and speaking of the Apostasy of the latter days,
he says, They shall turn away their Ears from the Truth, and shall be turned
unto (Popish) Fables, 2 Timothy 4. 4. God be merciful unto us.

I dare not trust my own Heart, when I think of Peter; but I hope there would
be found, even among us, that enviously are styled Conformists (though our Works
are not found perfect before God, Apoc. 3. 2.) as many, and more, that would
have laid down their Lives for the Word of God, and Testimony of Jesus, as laid
down their Livings, to avoid Men's Traditions and Commandments; that they might
not mingle with the Fountain of Israel, to defile the Waters of the Sanctuary.
Such Imputations as these must needs cause the Ambassador of Peace to weep
bitterly, as the Prophet speaks, Isa. 33. 7. But we expect better things of
them, and accompanying, Salvation (that thus censures us) though they differ
from us in the outward mode of Religion, which is various in all Countries, and
speak ill of us, our Mothers Children being angry with us, Cant. 1. 6. They sit
and talk against their Brethren, and slander their own Mothers Sons, Psalm. 50.
20. we know that we are passed from Death to Life, because we love the
Brethren, says St. John, 1 John 3. 14. and with Christ's Brethren, we hope to
go to their Father, and our Father, to their God, and our God, Joh. 20. 17.
with as sincere Affection, and Brotherly Love, Genesis 33. 16. as Joseph showed,
that was separated from his Brethren for a while, that he might enjoy them for
ever, Philem. 15.

But besides all this, they have somewhat else against many of us; that if
thoroughly weighed, and laid in the balance of the Sanctuary, would be heavier
than the Sand of the Sea, as Job's Pathetick Phrase is, Job 6. 2, 3. That we
leave our Flocks, and starve them, being called by God and Man to the Ministry
of the Gospel, to no other end and purpose, but to feed them, to feed the
Church of God, which he has purchased with his own Blood, says the Apostle,
Act. 20. 28. to the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, in his last Visitation at
Miletus. And whereas it appears by the first verse of the second Chapter of
this Epistle, that the Apostle had never been among these of Colossae; that
they had not seen his Face in the Flesh, Col. 2. 1.

It is to be marked how careful Paul was; that being now in Prison at Rome,
under the Bloody Tyrant Nero, when he might well have been excused from writing
to other Churches, which himself had planted, yet takes no liberty to himself
of ease, but writes, even to these that he had never seen, and had not seen his
Face in the Flesh; that if he could not, by reason of his Endurance, speak to
them, yet his Letter might instruct them, and confirm them in them in the truth
of God; and what punishment shall they be worhty of, who being tied to special
Charges, have no regard to any thing, saving to the receiving of their Profits?
As for the instruction of their Flocks; they think it enough to allow one Ten
Pounds a Year, the Tenth part perhaps of the whole Living, to read them
Prayers; and if they once or twice in a year shall come to them, and give them
a Sermon, they think they have discharged their full Duty with advantage. I
wonder how such should not blush, to hear of the Apostle's diligence, who is
thus careful, even in his Prisonhouse, and so far off, for those he never saw:
When they are thus careless for those, whom by all Laws of God and Men, if not
for Conscience, yet for their Friends sake, they ought to regard, and not task
them out to Journey-men and Hirelings, but the Unjust knows no shame, says
the Prophet Zephaniah, Zeph. 3 5. and their own Shepherds pity them not, says
the Prophet Zephaniah, Zach. 11. 5. And to use the Phrase of St. James in
another Case, My Brethren, these things ought not so to be, Jam. 3. 10. and
that of Job also in another Case, This is an heincus crime, yea, it is an
Iniquity to be punished by the Judges, Job 31. 11. and therefore it cries aloud
to King and Parliament for Reformation as much, if not more, than any common
Nuisance whatsoever; yea, to God also (that sees not as Man sees) for Wrath and
Indignation, that by a just resentment of this common Error, practiced
continually by a high Hand, His wrath may turn away from us, 2. Chron. 29. 10.
as King Hezekiah speaks to his Ministers: My Sons, be not negligent, be not now
deceived, for the Lord has chosen you to stand before him, to serve him, and
that you should minister unto him, and offer burnt Incense, and Sacrifice: That
of Ezekiel is very terrible; ye eat the Fat, and cloth you with the Wool; ye
kill them that are fed, but ye feed not the Flock, Ezekiel. 34. 3. The Prophet
goes on to the 11th. verse, with severe Comminations, that concern the
Shepherds under the Gospel (that are such) as well as under the Law, for their
Unfaithfulness to so great a trust; being the greatest under Heaven, even no
less, than the Souls of Men, redeemed with the precious Blood of Christ, as St.
Peter speaks, 1 Pet. 1. 19.

My Ground of this Application is, a Rule and Maxim of Philosophy, and right
Reason. Agente eodem modo existente, and eadem materia idem effectum. God
changes not, Mal. 3. Now as God is the same, and Sin the same, so we must
expect the like effects from the like causes; the Principals of Sciences are
external, and the Rules of guiding Souls to Blessedness, most immutable of all
the rest: As God dealt with Israel, his peculiar People, so will he deal with
us, if we be like them in their Sins; we must thank his Goodness for this much,
we are too impudent, if we desire, or pretend more; therefore, as he punished
them for all their Iniquities, Am. 3. 2. from the Land of Egypt, to this day,
so has he just cause to visit us for our Iniquities, that are swollen to as
great a bulk as they were before the last War: Give me leave to use here the
words of Elihu to Job, At this my Heart trembles, and is removed out of his
place, Job 36. 1.

Let us not flatter our selves upon the gracious Assistance we have hitherto
found in our miraculous Restoration, An. 1660. which we could not have looked
for; no, not in a Dream, to be (after so many signal Defeats) on a sudden, made
more than Conquerors, with all the faults that followed us, even forgetting
that we had twenty Years time for repentance allowed us, to wash us from our
old Sins: Let us not be high-minded (says the Apostle) but fear; indeed, If
God be for us, who can be against us, says the same Apostle, Romans 8. 3.

But how can he be Friends with us, when we walk so cross and perversely with
him? His Name, that ought not to be mentioned without highest Reverence, is
continually Blasphemed, Isa. 52. 5. Nothing hated but Holiness, and the Lovers
of it made the Song of the Drunkards, and Byword of the People; and a desire
to walk with God according to our Christian Profession, Soberly, Righteously,
and Godly, Tit. 2. 12. made a derision all the day, etc. Neither let us think
to appease him, and hold his Friendship with a few Sermons, and Ceremonies of
outward Service; as the tything of Mint, Cummin and Dill, when we neglect
Justice and Fidelity, a Gospel Reformation of our Lives and Conversations, and
the weighty things of the Law and Gospel, as our Lord speaks, Matthew. 23. 23.

See what the Lord speaks by the Prophet Jeremiah: For I spoke not unto your
Fathers, nor commanded them in the day that I brought them out of the Land of
Egypt, concerning Burnt-offrings, and Sacrifices. But this thing commanded I
them; saying, obey my Voice, and I will be your God, and ye shall be my People,
and walk ye in all the ways that I have commanded you, that it may be well unto
you. Jer. 7. 22, 23. When in the mean time we hold his truth in
Unrighteousness, when I know not for what politic respects, we prefer Musical
Delight, Am. 5. 23. and Solemnity in his Service, before the Spirit and
Understanding, 1 Cor. 14. 15. and Justify by our practice, the Idol-Service,
which we accuse in our Books and Preaching. And now, O ye Priests, this
Commandment is for you (says the Prophet Malchi) If ye will not hear, and if
ye will not lay it to heart, to give glory to my Name, says the Lord of Hosts,
I will even send a curse upon you, and will curse your Blessings; yea, I have
cursed them already, because ye do not lay it to Heart, Mal. 2. 1, 2. I will
dash them, a Man against his Brother, the Father and the Son together, (says
the Lord) I will not pity, nor spare, nor have mercy, but destroy them, Jer.
13. 14. and 16. Give Glory to the Lord God before he cause Darkness, and before
your Feet stumble upon the dark Mountains; and while ye look for Light, he turn
it into the shadow of Death, and make it gross Darkness. These things are
written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the World are come, 1 Cor.
10. 11. Excellently does Ezra express the Affection, Resolution, and
Reformation of the Jews, after their Escape and Deliverance from Babylon, and
return to Zion, with these words: And after all this is come upon us for our
evil Deeds, and for our great Transgressions; seeing thou our God have punished
us less than our Iniquities deserve, and have given us such a Deliverance as
this; should we again break thy Commandments, and join in affinity with the
people of these Abominations? Would not thou be angry with us till thou had
consumed us, so that there should be no remnant nor escaping, Ezekiel. 9. 13, 14.
Let us take heed that we fulfill our Ministry (as the Apostle exhorts Timothy)
2 Timothy 4. 5. that we lose not our Church it self, wherein Men glory so much (
your Glorying is not good, says the Apostle) 1 Cor. 5. 6. that it flee not
away like a Bird, as the Glory of Ephraim, from the Birth, and from the Womb,
and from the Conception, as the Prophet Hos^a speaks, and our selves also. The
Dissenters (as we call them) are like to steal it away from us, and leave us
naked and bare, to read Prayers to bare Walls, and empty Pews, as many do
already in City and Country. Behold your house shall be left unto you desolate
(says our Lord to the Jews) What house? The Prophet Isaiah tells us, Our Holy
and Beautiful House, where our Fathers praised thee, is burnt up with Fire, and
all our pleasant things are laid waste; the only Cathedral that God had in all
the World, wherein was the Glorious Symbol of his Presence, and the great
Mystery of Godliness, that praefigured Christ with all his Benefits: This was
done afterward by the Caldeans. He tells them further, Therefore I say unto
you, the Kingdom of Heaven shall be taken from you, and given to a Nation,
bringing forth the Fruits thereof, Matthew. 21. 43. What is meant by this Kingdom
of Heaven? The Church visible; the Phrase often used in the beginning of St.
John's Preaching, and Christ's, Matthew. 3. 2. and 4. 17. and in the Parable of
the Sower: This Phrase is taken from Daniel; And in the days of those Kings
shall the God of Heaven set up a Kingdom, and the Kingdom shall not be left to
another People, but it shall break in pieces, and consume all these Kingdoms,
and it shall stand for ever, Dan. 2. 44. The Church visible is now to be made
up of the Gentiles, as of old of the Jews chiefly, our Lord having taken down
the Wall of Partition that was set up by God himself between them, why may not
Men take down and demolish; even to the Foundation, the Wall of Separation,
dawbed with intempered Mortar of Malice and Envy, set up in their Heart against
their Brethren, unless there be such a great Gulf fixed between them by it; so
that they which would pass from hence cannot, nor can they pass to us, that
would come thence, as Father Abraham speaks to the rich Man in Hell, that would
fain have changed his Quarters and Post for any Ease or mitigation of pain,
Luke 16. 26.

The Evangeilst Matthew tells us, That this saying is commonly reported among
the Jews to this day; Matthew. 28 15. that Christ's Disciples came by Night, and
stole him away while the Watchmen slept. Mary Magdalen, upon a double mistake,
thought that the Gardener had stolen him out of his Grave, Joh. 20. 15. We read
of a great quarrel between the ten Tribes and the Jews, about the stealing away
of King David, in his own Presence. And behold all the Men of Israel came unto
the King, and said unto the King, why have our Brethren the Men of Judah stolen
thee away? 2 Samuel 19. 41. The good and wise King could not decide the
controversy without a Mutiny, and sad Dissension, as follows in the Text;
Moses tells us, that Jacob stole away the Heart of Laban the Syrian, when he
fled from him, Genesis 31. 20. (upon the fall of his Countenance toward him) with
all that he had, and that his Daughter Rachel stole away his Teraphim, his
Gods; there was a Heartless and Godless Man left, and what had he more? Judge.
18. 24. as Micah speaks to the Men of Dan; yet after all his fierce pursuing
after Jacob, with all his forces, and overtaking him, and searching all his
stuff, he found nothing of his to accuse Jacob of, nor to make him ashamed,
that he had parted so suddenly from him without his Knowledge and Consent:
Therefore they entered into Covenant together of perpetual amity, and parted in
Peace and Love, and were never injurious to one another, no more than Esau was
to Jacob, that fled from him, for fear of his Life, yet was at meeting embraced
by him, with high Expressions of Love, and they buried their aged Father Isaac
in Peace, Genesis 35. 29.

Set your Hearts (says Moses) unto all the words which I testify among you
this day; and he gives this reason for it in the words following, For it is not
a vain thing for you, because it is your Life, and through this thing ye shall
prolong your days, Deuteronomy. 32. 46, 47. O that thou had hearkened to my
Commandments, (says the Lord by the Prophet Isaiah) then had thy Peace been as
a River, and thy Righteousness as the Waves of the Sea; thy Seed also had been
as the Sand, and the offspring of thy Bowe^ like the Gravel thereof; his Name
should not have been cut off, nor destroyed from ^^fore me, Isa. 48. 18, 19.
But if we (...) go on, to make the Precepts of God of none effect, by their
unlucky Neighborhood with the Precepts of Men: The Book of God will be
unawares snatched out of your Hands, as the Ark of God was from the Shoulders
of Hophni and Phinehas by the Philistines, 1 Samuel 4. 11. and a black Book put
into our Hands, written within and without, Lamentation, and Mourning, and Woe.
Ezekiel. 2. 10. For thus says the Lord, enter not into the House of Mourning,
neither go to lament, nor bemoan them; for I have taken away my Peace from this
People, says the Lord, even loving kindness and Mercies, Jer. 16. 5. from
which Judgment the Lord deliver us, that we may enter iuto Peace, and rest in
our Beds, every one walking in his Uprightness, Isa. 57. 2.

Now for a particular Application of his Doctrine to all Relations and Orders of
Men, High and Low, Rich and Poor, etc.

1. To Magistrates and Subjects.
IF the Peace of God rule in the Hearts of Rulers, then they will seek the
Glory of God, and the Peace and Good of their Subjects, above all Earthly
things, to the fulfilling of that Evangelical Promise of Isaiah, And Kings
shall be thy Nursing Fathers, and their Queens thy Nursing Mothers, Isa. 49.
23. The God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spoke to me: He that rules over
Men must be just, ruling in the fear of God, is the Instruction that the Man
after God's own Heart received immediately from God, touching his Ruling and
Governing the People of God: And an excellent President we have from Theodosius
Junior, the Emperor, recorded by Socrates, l. 7. 22, who tells us, that when in
a severe Winter that did threaten and portend a great scarcity of Victual the
Year ensuing, it being not very plentiful at that time, he gave way to the
Peoples desire of the usual Games and Shows that were acted in the Circe; which
when it was full of People, and Spectators, there fell suddenly a most vehement
Tempest upon them: Then the Emperor plainly declared (I set it down as Socrates
relates it) how he was affected toward God and his People; for by his Heralds
he made Proclamation among the People, saying. Is it not much better for us to
leave these vain Shows and Sports, and with one Mouth, all of us to pray to
God, to preserve us safe from this horrible Storm that is falling upon us?
Scarely were these words uttered, when all the People, with unanimous Consent
and Alacrity, began to pray to God; then the whole City (says he) in that
respect was turned into a Temple; the Emperor himself walking as a private
Person, began the Psalms of Praise; neither indeed did his Hope fail him (says
Socrates) for immediately there was a great Calm and Screnity, and by the
Bountifulness of God, there was great Plenty of all Provision the next year.

At another time also, as he sat, beholding the Shows, he received a Message,
that one John, that tyrannously had Invaded the Western Empire, was
miraculously overthrown, and slain by his Forces: As soon as he had read the
Letter, he said, go too, if ye please, let us leave these Toys, and go to
Church, and offer Prayers and Thanks to God, who has slain the Tyrant, as it
were, with his own Hand; he and all the People went immediately through the
middle of the Hippodrome, to the Temple of God, and spent the whole day in
Psalms and Praises to God. Socrat. l. 7. 25.

Sozomen tells us, that the Subjects looking upon the good Examples that
Arcadius and Honorius the Emperors, and Sons of Theodosius, set before them,
the Pagans were the more easily Converted to Christianity, and the Hercticks
joined to the Catholic Church; Soz. l. 8. 1. When such Kings come to be sick,
and dye, they may say with Hezekiah, Remember Lord, I beseech thee, how I have
walked before thee in Truth, and with a perfect Heart, and have done that which
was good in thy sight, Isa. 38. 3. and they shall hear, Euge.

2. If the Peace of God rule in the Hearts of the Subjects, they will not curse
the ruler of God's people, Exodus 22. 28: they will not curse the King, no, not
in their Thoughts; for a Bird of the Air will carry the Voice, and that which
has Wings shall utter the Matter, says King Solomon, Eccles. 10. 20. They
will esteem their good King worth Ten Thousand of themselves, as the Israelites
told David their King, when they would not suffer his Royal Person to be
hazarded amongst them in the Battle against Absalom, 2 Samuel 18. 3. They will
esteem it the highest Wickedness, to stretch out their Hand against the Lord's
Anointed, 1 Samuel 26. 9. as David speaks, when he had Saul, his greatest Enemy
at his Mercy; they will account him, The Breath of our Nostrils, Lam. 4. 20.
love, honor, and obey him, in all things just and honest, as the Roman Legions
said to Jovinian, that chose him to succeed Julian the Apostate, in the Empire,
who said unto the Electors; I will not rule over you, for I am a Christian, and
you are Pagans, and Idolaters; (the Apostate had corrupted them) Do thou rule
over us (said they) and we will be all Christians. Regis ad exemplum, is an old
and true saying. There is therefore great necessity to pray for such as be
Rulers, that they may be Subordinate to God, and have Grace to their Power,
Pity to others, that God may cloth their Enemies with shame, but on himself
shall his Crown flourish, as God promised to David, Psalm. 132. 18. that they
may give God a fair Account of their Stewardship at the great Day, in observing
and practicing what he has commanded.

2. To Ministers and People.
IF the Peace of God rule in the Hearts of the Ministers of the Gospel of
Peace, (unless the things that belong to their Peace be hid from their Eyes,
Luke 19. 42.) they will not only follow Peace with one another, but with all
Men (Assenters and Dissenters) as much as in them lies, and Holiness, without
which, no Man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12. 14. That they may see the travel of
their Soul, and be satisfied, that the work of the Lord is carried along
prosperously in their hand: Is. 53. 11. They will be gentle to their People (as
another Paul) we were gentle among you, even as a Nurse cher^sheth her
Children: Ye are Witnesses, and God also; how holily, and justly, and
unblameably we behaved our selves among you that believe: And ye know how we
exhorted, comforted, and charged every one of you, as a Father does his
Children, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11.

Exhorting them as Fathers, Mothers, Children Brethren; 1 Timothy 5. 1, 2. as St.
Paul instructs Timothy; avoiding Non-residence, especially in this State and
Time, when they are making a Captain to return to Egypt, Numb. 14. 4. that it
may not be said of us, That they that lead thy People, caused them to err and
they that are led by them are destroyed, Isa. 3. 12. and they that rule over
them make them to howl, Isa. 52. 5. I doubt not but the Prudence, and
Moderation of the Wise and Learned Men, will silence all Controversies.

Eusebius tells us in the Life of Constantine, that he said in the Synod of
Nice, that the Dissentions of Churchmen, among themselves was an Evil beyond
all Calamities, and any Foreign Wars whatsoever. Surely, they will not shed the
Blood of War in Peace, as Joab did, that put the Blood of War upon the Girdle
that was about his Loins, and upon his Shoes that were upon his Feet; for
which, David left him a Bloody Legacy. Let not his hoary Head go down to the
Grave in Peace, 1 Kin. 1. 5. Under Valens the Emperor (says Socrates l. 4. c.
29.) by occasion of one Godly Man, a grievous and dangerous War, that was
undertaken against the Roman Empire, was extinct: The Saracens had made
defection from Roman Empire, and under the Conduct of their Queen Mavia, began
an Offensive War, and that on a most Advantageous Opportunity, when the Goths
were wasting all Thracia; and therefore all the Roman Provinces toward the
East (they are the words of Socrates) had been overrun, and wasted by the
Saracens: The occasion was this; one Moses, a Saracen by Nation, lived a
Solitary Life in a Desert; who for his eminent Piety, Constancy, Faith and
Miracles was very famous; Mavia, the Queen of the Saracens desires the Romans
to design this Godly Man for their Bishop, and promises to lay down her Arms,
to disband her Forces, and to be at Peace with the Romans: Dictum factum, it is
done immediately; and so by the Peace of God, ruling in the Heart of this Godly
Man, and of his Queen, a great Fire is suddenly quenched.

Sozomon tells us, l. 7. c. 3. That under Theodosius the Great, the People of
Antioch had dejected the Statues of the Emperor and Empress, and most
ignominiously dragged them with a Rope through the Streets of the City, adding
most contumelious, and disgraceful words, no doubt by the instigation of the
Devil. Theodosius hearing of this Affront and Disgrace, was highly displeased,
and resolved to be avenged on them for this Insolency; whereof the People of
Antioch being aware, began to relent, to leave off their Fury, and to repent,
and to beg with Sighs and Groans Favor of God, to turn his Heart, that they
might not be suddenly destroyed. They composed certain mournful Ditties, and
Funeral Songs, which they used in their solemn Prayers at the Throne of Grace;
and they sent their Bishop Flavianus to the Emp^ror to appease his Wrath
toward them; the which that he might effectuate, he persuaded, and prevailed
with the young Men that used to sing at the Emperors Table, to sing those
mournful Songs, by which the Men of Antioch had made their Supplications to
God, in their fear and dangerous Condition, with which the Emperor was so taken
and surprised, that a Flood of Tears gusht from his Eyes immediately, and wet
the Cup that was in his Hand; and understanding the matter, he calls Flavianus,
and laid aside his Anger, and frankly forgave the City. Thus ye see how the
Peace of God ruled in the Heart of this Prudent and Godly Bishop, and his
Emperor Theodosius, to prevent the Ruin of the great City of Antioch, where the
Disciples were called Christians first, Act. 11. 26.

Now, If the Son of Peace be in your Houses, or Parishes, Luke 10. 6. that is,
any Men capable of that Blessing, and disposed to receive the Doctrine of Peace,
which you Preach, your Peace shall rest upon it; then doubtless ye my keep the
Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace, Ephesians. 4. 3. you may follow Peace with
them that call on the Lord out of a pure Heart, 2 Timothy 2. 22. though dissenting
from you in a few small Matters.

Thus shall we procure the love of our Heavenly Father; for if Earthly Parents
take Comfort to see their Children kind, peaceful, and helpful to one another,
it cannot be, but he that has all perfections that are in us in the highest
degree, shall likewise both approve in this World, and reward in that to come,
our love to, and Peace with one another, and say, Euge serve bone etc. P^ssid
in vita August. c. 17. and upon their Deathbed say with Ambrose, non sic vixi
ut me pudeat inter vos vivere; sed non mori timeo, quia bonum dominum habemus:
that I have not so lived, as to be ashamed to live any longer among you; but
neither am I afraid to die, because we have a good Lord; and that of St. Paul,
I have fought a good fight, I have finished my Course, I have kept the Faith;
henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord, the
Righteous Judge shall give me at that day: and not to me only, but to them also
that love his appearing, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8.

2. If the Peace of God rule in the Hearts of our Hearers, they will account
the Elders that rule well, worthy of double honor, especially they that labor
in the Word and Doctrine, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Timothy 5. 17. They will
remember them that has the rule over them, who have spoken unto them the word
of God, whose Faith they follow, considering the end of their Conversation; and
a little after, Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves:
for they watch for your Souls, as they that must give account; that they may do
it with joy, and not with grief; for that is unprofitable for you, says the
same Apostle, Heb. 13. ^7 17.

1. Let them hold such Dear, for their Master's sake: Now then (says the
Apostle) we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us,
we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5. 20. whom we
preach, warning to every Man, and teaching every Man in all wisdom, that we
present every Man perfect in Christ Jesus, Col. 1. 28.

2. And for their Works sake: And we beseech you Brethren to know them which
labor among you: And to esteem them very highly for their works sake, and be
at peace among your selves, says the Apostle to the Thessalonians, 1 These. 5.
12, 13. upon which account, the Apostle says to the Galatians, They received
him as an Angel of God, even as Christ Jesus, and he bears them Record, that if
it had been possible, they would have plucked out their Eyes, and have given
them to him, Gal. 4. 14, 15.

3. And for their own sake, These Men are the Servants of the most high God,
which show unto us the way of Salvation, says the Pithoness, by divine
Inspiration, Act. 16. 17. They must not hate them, and persecute them for
speaking the truth of God unto them: Am I therefore become your Enemy (says
the Apostle) because I tell you the truth? Gal. 4. 16. As Ahab to his shame
professes, concerning Micaiah; by whom we enquire of the Lord; but I hate him,
for he does not Prophecy good concerning me, but evil; 1 Kin. 22. 8. he
received the just reward of his hatred by a shot at RamoahGilead; the Jews
hated Jeremiah the Prophet, but to their Destruction, Jer. 38. 4. And thus they
dealt with our Lord, that spoke as never Man spoke unto them, and did what
never Man did among them, both him and his Followers to their dispersion, as at
this day; for the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost, 1 Thessalonians 2. 16.

He that seeks my Life seeks thy Life (says David to Abiathar, that fled
from Readiness Massacre of the Priests of the Lord, and their Town of Nob) but
with me thou shall be in safety, 1 Samuel 22. 23.

Good Obadiah hid an Hundred Prophets of the Lord, by fifty in a Cave, and fed
them with Bread and Water, 1 Kin. 18. 13. from Jez^bel's Cruelty, as Rabab the
Cauponess (as the Caldee Paraphrase styles her) hid the Spies from the King of
Jerico' s rage.

When the Minister shall say at the great day to the Judge of the Quick and
Dead, Lo, I and the Children that God has gave me, Heb. 2. 13. And the words
which thou gave me, I have given unto them, and they have received them:
Those that thou gave me I have ^ept, and none of them is lost, says our
Savior, Joh. 17. 8, 12. The Apostle tells the Thessalonians, For what is our
Hope, or Joy, or Crown of Rejoicing; Are not even ye, in the Presence of our
Lord Jesus Christ at his coming, 1 These. 2. 19, 20.

3. To Husband and Wife.
IF the Peace of God rule in the Heart of Husband and Wife, which is the first
and dearest Relation in the World, and the root of all others, unto which they
are called in one Body, that they should no more be two, but one Flesh, Genesis 2.
24. Then the Husband will not deal treacherously against the Wife of his youth,
Mal. 2. 15. that is his Companion, and Wife of his Covenant, that is Bone of
his Bones, and Flesh of his Flesh (as the first Man speaks) but nourish and
cherish it, as the Lord the Church, Ephesians. 5. 29. as the Apostle speaks of the
second Man, that is the Lord from Heaven.

Comfort her as Elkanah did Hannah, in her Affliction: Hannah, why weepest
thou? and why eatest thou not? Am not I better to thee than ten Sons. 1 Samuel 1.
8. Not give an occasion of Speech against her, to bring up an evil Name upon
her that she deserves not, Deuteronomy. 22. 14. He will rejoice with the Wife of his
youth; she shall be to him as a loving H^nd, and as a pleasant Roe; her Breasts
will satisfy him at all times, he will be always ravished with her love, Prove.
5. 18, 19. and never be bitter against her, Col. 3. 19. but dwell with her
according to knowledge, giving Honor to the Wife as the weaker Vessel, and as
being Heirs together of the Grace of Life, that their Prayers be not hindered, 1
Pet. 3. 7. He will observe (with Joseph) the Embrace of a strange Woman, whose
Mouth is smoother thdn Oil, but the end more bitter than Wormwood, sharper than
a two-edged Sword; her Feet go down to Death, her steps take hold on Hell,
Prove. 5. 3, 4, 5. Her House (says he) is the way to Hell, going down to the
Chambers of Death, Pro. 7. 27, who so pleases God shall escape from her, but
the Sinner shall be taken by her, Eccles. 7. 26. Live joyfully with the Wife,
(says he again, or enjoy Life) whom thou love all the days of thy Life of
thy Vanity, which he has given thee under the Sun, for that is thy Portion in
this Life, and in thy Labor, which thou take under the Sun, says Solomon,
that injoyneth Cohabitation, Eccles. 9. 9.

2. If the Peace of God rule in the Heart of the Wife, that was taken out of
the Side of her Husband, Genesis 2. 21. then she will be as careful to preserve
his Life, as Michal was; that when her Father Saul sent to kill him, Lo Michal
let David down through a Window, and he went, and fled, and escaped, 1 Samuel 19.
11, (...). and she laid a Teraphim in his Be^. She will never forsake the guide
of her y^uth nor forget the Covenant of her God, Prove. 2. 17. that she solemnly
entered into in the day of his Espousals, in the day of the Gladness of his
Heart: She will prove another Lucretia, so famous among the Romans for Virtue,
and Hatred of Baseness; that when she suffered Violence, that she could not
resist, stabbed her self to the Heart, which indignity occasioned a great
change in their Government: or rather like the virtuous Woman, whose Price is
far above Rubies, the Heart of her Husband does safely trust in her, Prove. 31.
10, 11. because she has set him as a Seal upon her Heart, as a Seal upon her
Arm; her love to him being as strong as Death, Cant. 8. 6. which she will more
readily choose to undergo, than go aside to Uncleanness with any instead of her
Husband: upon whom the Spirit of Jealousy shall never come, which is cruel as
the Grave, the Coals thereof are Coals of Fire, which has a most vehement
flame, the Trial and Punishment whereof, whether just, or unjust, is most
severe, as of any Sin whatsoever, Numb. 5. 21, 22. Jealousy (says Solomon) is
the rage of a Man, therefore he will not spare in the day of Vengeanc^; he will
not regard any Ransom, neither will he rest content; though thou give many
gifts, the Husband will accept of no Ransom to save the Adulterer, Prove. 6. 34,
35. Her Husband is known in the Gates, (not by base Scoffs, and Nicknames)
when he sits among the Elders of the Land, Prove. 31. 23. but by his Wives
Godliness and Virtue, she will do him Good, and not Evil, all the days of his
Life. As Sozomen reports, l. 7. 6. That Theodosius the Great, was preserved
from the Contagious Pestilence of Arianism, that had overrun all the East, by
Placilla, the Empress, who kept him in sanctirate and ti. mere domini, in
Holiness and Fear of the Lord: And Theodoret tells us, l. 5. 18. That his Wife
never gave over calling to his Mind the Laws of God, that she was well
acquainted with, and among other things she said unto him; My Husband, you must
remember, what you formerly were, and what you now ar^; if you perpetually
think upon that, you will never be ungrateful to your Benefactor, but you will
justly administer the Empire that you have received from him; and upon that
account, still worship him that has raised you to that Dignity. With such
gracious Speeches as these (says Theod.) she watered her Husband's Mind
continually, beholding her chaste Conversatition coupled with Fear, as the
Apostle speaks, 1 Pet. 3. 2.

Socrates reports, l. 9. 26. that Valentinian Major, made a wicked Law to his
perpeutal infamy, That a Man should have two Wives, contrary to the Law of God,
true Piety, and Christian honesty; whereupon Salvian was not afraid to say,
That the Boars that abhorred that Law lived better than the Nobles that kept
it; though Baronius in his Annals denies this of him, upon small Ground, yet it
was too true: Bloody Lamech was the first Bigamist, Genesis 4. 19, 23.

But to the Man that fears God, in whose Heart is his Law that made one for
one, yet had he the residue of the Spirit, and wherefore one? Mal. 2. 14. That
he might seek a Seed of God, he says. Thy Wise shall be a fruitful Vine by the
sides of thy House; thy Children like Olive Plants round about thy Table.
Behold, that thus shall the Man be blessed that fears the Lord. Yea, thou
shall see thy Childrens Children, and Peace upon Israel, Psalm. 128. 3, 4, 6.

4. Parents and Children.
1. IF the Peace of God rule in the Heart of the Parents, (which is the second
Relation in the World) into which they are called by Nature in one Body,
Parental and Oeconomical; then their desire will be, That he would circumcise
their Hearts, and the Heart of their Seed, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. that he that made them
Creatures, may also make them new Creatures, according to that Speech of St.
Paul, My little Children, of whom I travel in Birth again until Christ be
formed in you, Gal. 4. 19. They will Consecrate them to the Lord in their
Conception, and solemnly in their Birth and Baptism: They will be careful, that
as new born Babes, they may desire the sincere Milk of the word, that they may
grow thereby: And that all their Children may he taught of God, the ways of
Cod, that great may be the Peace of their Children, Isa. 54. 13. according to
the Evangelical Promise in Isaiah, Then shall they not be ashamed when they
speak with the Enemy in the Gate, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 127. 5.

Parents ought to bring up their Children for God, that their Children may be
the Children of God, that God may be a Father unto them; and they shall be my
Sons and Daughters, says the Lord God Almighty, 2 Cor. 6. 18. They ought not
to provoke their Children to wrath, lest they be discouraged, (says the
Apostle) but bring them up in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord, as God
testifies of Abraham: For I know him, that he will command his Children, and
his Household after him, that they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do Justice
and Judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he has spoken of
him, Genesis 18. 19. They ought to say with Joshuah, As for me, I and my House
will serve the Lord, Josh. 24. 15. and with Holy Job, Offer Burnt-Offerings to
God, according to the number of them, Job 1. 5. making mention of them in our
Prayers, as occasion is offered, still going before them in good examples, as
in holy Instruction, they being more apt to do as we do, than as we say, and do
not. Not stroking their Heads as Eli did to H^phni and Phineas, that were Sons
of Belial; they knew not the Lord; upon whom God did threaten to bring a
dreadful Judgment, 1 Samuel 2. 12. at which, both the Ears of every one that
hears it shall tingle, because his Sons made themselves vile, and he
restrained them not, 1 Samuel 3. 11, 13.

Theodoret relates a famous History of a noble Man of Beroa, l. 3. 18. who was
the chief Man in that Republic, whose eldest Son had polluted himself with
Paganish Impiety, and forsook the true God, and turned Apostate with Julian the
Emperor; this Father, for that cause, expelled him out of his House, and did
Abdicate him from his Inheritance, as Adam was driven out of Paradise, for
eating the forbidden Fruit, as a just Punishment of his Apostasy from God. The
Son went immediately to Julian, who at that time was not very far from the
City, and told him how his Father had served him for renouncing the Christian
Religion, and embracing his, and that he had Disinherited him: Julian bids the
young Man be of good Cheer and Courage, and promises to reconcile him to his
Father; when the Emperor Julian was come into the City, he invited the
principal Men therein to a solemn Feast, and among the rest, the Father of this
young Man, both whom he commanded to sit at his own Table, and in the midst of
the Feast he spoke thus to the Father of the young Apostate.

SIR, I Esteem it altogether Unjust, that any Man should offer Violence to the
Conscience of him that has turned aside to another Religion, and would force
him against his Will to a contrary Opinion; compel not your Son therefore to
adhere to your Religion, though I could easily constrain you to embrace it: But
the Father sharpning his Mind, by Faith in God, thus said, O Emperor, Do you
speak of this Knave, of this wiched Villain, who is hateful to God, and has
preferred Falsehood to the Truth of God? Then Julian putting on the Person of
Mansuetude (for such he would seem to be) Come, (says he) give over to revile;
and turning himself to the young Man, he said, I will take care of you, seeing
I cannot obtain this of your Father. But The Tyrant was false, (as all
Apostates are) for not long after he fell in Persia, with all the Threatenings
that he had not obscurely thundered out against the good Father of this vile
young Man, that had forsaken the living God, That he might say to a Stock, thou
art my Father, and to a Stone, thou host brought me forth, as the Prophet
Jeremiah speaks, Jer. 2. 7. So that great Man shines as a singular Example of
Zeal in the Church of God, which all Parents ought to look upon, who desire to
preserve the true Religion in their Family, that they may give a comfortable
Account of all those committed to their Trust at the great Day.

2. If the Peace of God rule in the Heart of the Children, into which they are
called in one Parental and Domestic Body; then they will be always ready, and
careful, to honor their Father and Mother, according to the tenor of the Fifth
Commandment, which the Ap^st^e calls, the first Commandment with promise, Ephesians.
6. 2 which some expound of the second Table. Others take it, that that has a
special promise: It is absolutely the first has a Promise; for that,
concerning God's showing Mercy to Th^usands of them that fear him, and keep his
Commandments, is not a promise, but a part of the Desc^iption of God's Nature
and Inclination, as Exodus 34. 6, 7.

They will show love to their Parents, and love to one another, by which all
Men may know that they are Christ's Disciples. as our Lord speaks, Joh. 13. 35.
The Apostle tells us, we had Fathers of our Flesh, which corrected us, and we
gave them Reverence, Heb. 12. 9. that is, their due, with Obedience and
Thankfulness, in nourishing, and maintaining them, as Joseph did his Father,
and all his Family in Egypt seventeen Years, Genesis 47. 12. David was careful of
his aged Parents, when he knew not how to secure himself from the Violence of
Saul, 1 Samuel 22. 3. Children must beg their Parents Blessing at all times, as
Jacob and Esau, Joseph's and Jacob's Children, Genesis 27. 4. especially at their
departing this Life.

Children must not be Stubborn and Rebellious, or Incorrigible, in taking ill
Courses; there is a very severe punishment appointed for this horrible Sin: And
they shall say unto the Elders of this City, this our Son is Stubborn and
Rebellious, he will not obey our Voice, he is a Glutton and a Drunkard, and all
the Men of the City shall stone him with stones, that he dye; so shall thou put
evil away from among you, and all Israel shall hear and fear. Deuteronomy. 21. 20, 21.
They must nor do as the Prodigal Son, that wasted his Substance with riotous
Living, Luke 15. 13. and brought himself to want all things. They must not hate
one another in their Heart, Lev. 19. 17. as wicked Cain did his Righteous
Brother Abel, that never did him wrong, Genesis 27. 41. as Esau did his Brother
Jacob, that resolved to kill him after his Father's Death, Genesis 37. 4. or as
the Patriarchs did Joseph, who moved with Envy sold him into Egypt, (says St.
Stephen) Act. 7. 9. They improve their Union in the Flesh, to their Communion
in Grace and Glory, as Children of their Heavenly Father, as the Seed that the
Lord has blessed.

5. Masters and Servants.
IF the Peace of God rule in the Hearts of Master and Servant; into which they
are called in Body Domestic and despotical, to live under one Roof, and eat of
the same Family Provision, then both Master and Mistress, Manservant and
Maidservant, will carry themselves toward one another in this Relation, as
the Servants of Jesus Christ: For (says the Apostle) He that is called in the
Lord, being a Servant, is the Lord's freeman; likewise, also he that is
called, being free, is the Lord's Servant, 1 Cor. 7. 22. Then Masters will give
unto their Servants that which is just and equal, as the Apostle exhorts, Col.
4. 1. paying their wages when it is due. The keeping the Wages of the Hireling
is a crying Sin, Jam. 5. 4. The wages of him that is hired shall not abide with
thee all Night, until the Morning, says Moses, Lev. 19. 13. At his day thou
shall give him his hire: neither shall the Sun go down upon it; for he is poor,
and sets his Heart upon it, (lifts his Soul unto it) lest he cry against
thee unto the Lord, and it be Sin unto thee, Deuteronomy. 24. 15.

Not turning them out of Doors, when they are sick, without any further regard
of them, which is a hiding our Eyes from our own Flesh, Isa. 58. 7. The
Centurion did not so, that came to our Lord Jesus Christ, the great Physician,
for cure for his sick Servant that lay at home, Matthew. 8. 6. Masters must not
be extreme in the Government and Usage of their Servants, knowing that ye also
have a Masten in Heaven, Col. 4. 1. says the Apostle. The Egyptians were ill
Masters, that made the Israelites serve with Rigor and Blows, when they were
Pharoah's Bondmen, Exodus 1. 13, 14. in so much, that when Moses and Aaron were
sent unto them, to comfort and support them, and to preach the Gospel, the glad
Tidings of their Deliverance from their sad Condition; but they hearkened not
unto Moses for Anguish of Spirit (for straitness or shortness of Breath) and
for cruel Bondage, Exodus 6. 9.

Even Mother Sarah is recorded to have dealt hardly with her Handmaid Hagar,
when she had laid in her Husband's Bosom, so as to make her flee from her Face,
Genesis 16. 6. that was ready to flee in her Face, with Threats and Frowardness;
Correction given in Anger has usually more of Rigor, than of Right.

Nabal's Servants complain to their Mistress Abigail of their Master's
Untowardness and Crossness toward them, and of his Incivility toward David's
Servants, that had been very civil and peaceful toward him. That their Master
was such a Son of Belial, that a Man cannot speak to him, 1 Samuel 25. 17. And ye
Masters (says St. Paul) do the same thing unto them (that ye would have done
to you if ye were in their stead) forbearing Threatenings, knowing that your
Master also is in Heaven, neither is there respect of persons with him. Masters
are required to deal bountifully with suchas serve them well and long. And when
thou sendest him out free from thee, thou shall not let him go away empty; --
of that, wherewith the Lord thy God has blessed thee, thou shall give unto
him, Deuteronomy. 15. 13, 14.

2. If the Peace of God rule in the Hearts of Servants, into which they are
called into one Family, or private Corporation; Then they will be subject to
their ow Masters without fear, not only to the good and gentle, but also to the
froward, as St. Peter exhorts, 1 Pet. 2. 18. And St. Paul also, Servants, obey
in all things your Masters according to the Flesh; not with eye-service, as
Men-pleasers, but in singleness of Heart fearing God: And whatsoever ye do, do
it heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto Men; knowing that of the Lord ye
shall receive the Inheritance; for ye serve the Lord Jesus Christ, Col. 3. 22,
23, 24. To the same effect does the Apostle direct his Speech to Servants, in
the sixth Chapter of the Epistle to the Ephesians, almost the same, verbatim,
v. 6, 7, 8.

They must not obey unlawful Commands from whatsoever Master: Saul gave a
bloody Command to his Life-Gua^l that stood about him: Turn, and slay the
Priests of the Lord; but the Servants of the King would not put forth their
Hand to fall upon the Priests of the Lord, 1 Samuel 22. 17. But (as our Proverb
says, If one will not, another will.) Doeg, the Edomite, did readily obey the
word of Command, and made no Bones of it, to butcher Fourscore and five persons
that did wear a Lin^^ Ephod; and this Obedience tended to the eternal
Destruction of the wicked Commander, and cursed Obeyer, and for shedding so
much innocent Blood in the Massacre of their City Nob. They murdered themselves
in the overthrow at Mount Gilboa, 1 Samuel 31. 4, 5.

Servants must not run away at every word, as Hagar, who tells the truth to the
Angel that called to her in her flight, slayed her course, and sent her back
again. Hagar, Sarah's Maid, whence come thou, and whether go thou? And she
said, I flee from the Face of my Mistress Sarah; and the Angel of the Lord said
unto her, Return unto thy Mistress, and submit thy self unto her; and she did
so, and tarried with her till she was brought to Bed of her Son Ishmael and
many years afterward; for her Son was thirteen Years old when he was
Circumcised, and Isaac but eight Days. Genesis 17. 24.

Servants must not answer again with lying, and swearing, as too many do.
Gehezi sheltered his base Covetous Mind with Lies to his Master Elisha, to
enrich himself by the Bounty of Naaman, the Syrian; but it brought a plague of
Leprosy upon him and his Seed for ever; and he went out of his Masters
presence a Leper, as white as Snow, 2 Kin. 5. 27. but came in no more to serve
him. They must not despise their Masters, but count their own Masters worthy of
all Honor, that the Name of God and his Doctrine be not blasphemed, as the
Apostle speaks to Timothy, 1 Timothy 6. 1, 2. They must not speak evil of them, as
wicked Ziba did of his Master Mephibosheth, whom he had falsely accused of High
Treason to the King: For he said, to day shall the House of Israel restore me
to the Kingdom of my Father, 2 Samuel 16. 3. Upon which false Accusation, the
King does rashly bestow all his Estate upon his Treacherous accuser; but the
Holy Ghost testified his Loyalty to the King, who rode out to meet the King at
his return; and having made the whole time of the the King's absence, as it
were a day of Humiliation, and had neither washsed his Feet, nor trimmed his
Beard, nor washed his Clothes, from the day the King departed, until the day he
came in Peace, 2 Samuel 19. 24. and cleared himself to the King, in showing the
baseness of his Servants; My Lord, O King, my Servant deceived me, 2 Samuel 19.
26. (else I had gone along with Your Majesty for all my Lameness) and he also
has slandered thy Servant unto my Lord the King: -- And the King mends the
matter well, I have said, thou and Ziba divide the Land: And Mephibosheth said
unto the King, yea, let him take all, forasmuch as my Lord the King is come
again in peace into his own House. A most noble Expression of a Loyal Subject,
concerning one that had betraved his Master, and looked for the forfeiture of
his Estate, that had justly deserved a shameful Death.

Servants must not discover Family Secrets, unless in such a case, as Jonathan
discovered to his Friend David, his Fathers Indignation, and bloody design
against him. Nor purloin their Goods, as the Steward of a certain rich Man did
that was accused unto him, that he had wasted his Goods, Luke 16. from the
first verse to the ninth. His Master commends his Policy, but not his Honesty,
that cheated his Master for his future Accommodation: But, and if that Servant
say in his Heart my Master delays his coming, and shall begin to beat the
Menservants, and Maidens, and to eat and drink, and to be drunken, the Lord of
that Servant will come in a day that he looks not for him, and at an hour
when he is not aware, and cut him in sunder, and will appoint him his portion,
with Hypocrites and Unbelievers, Luke 12. 45, 56. says our Lord.

How faithful was Moses in all God's House as a Servant! Heb. 3. 5. and Daniel
in Darius's House; Dan. 6. 3. Joseph in Pharoah's House, Mordecay in
Ahashuerus's House, that discovered the bloody Plot of Treason against his
Life, Est. 2. 21, 22. How famous is the History of Eliezer, Abraham's Servant,
that was sent Ambassador to Mesopotamia, to the City of Nahor, to take a Wife
for Isaac? How scrupulous is he, to undertake so great, and so honorable an
Embasey? How zealous in Prayer to God for his Direction and Blessing? How
thankful for the return of his Prayer, according to his Faith, and earnest
Desire? How Courteous to the Lady that was given in to his Prayer of Faith? How
careful not to eat nor drink till he had discharged his trust, and told his
Errand? Last of all, How resolute to return immediately after he had obtained
what he went for. His Commission being out, he will not stay one day longer,
but make haste home to his Master that sent him for a Blessing to his Son
Isaac; all this is very remarkable and imitable by all Servants that fear God,
and honor their Masters, Genesis 24. throughout.

Gracious and Godly Servants have been, and may be Instruments of much good in
their Masters House, as that little Girl, that was taken Prisoner out of the
Land of Israel, by the Syrians, was the occasion of her healing of her foul
Leprous Master Naaman, the Syrian, and of his Conversion also from Idolatry, to
serve the Lord God of Israel. And consequently of his Salvation; all she said
unto her Mistress was this: Would God my Lord were with the Prophet that is in
Samaria, for he would recover him of his Leprosy: He went to him, and was
healed, and converted, and made a solemn Protestation, that he would cleave to
the God of Israel, as is recorded by the Holy Ghost, 2 Kin. 3, 4, 5.

Sozomen tells us, ( l 2. 6.) a like History of the Conversion of the Queen of
Iberia, by a Captive Christian Maid in the days of Constantine the Great, and
of the Conversion of the King and Kingdom from Paganism, by the same Maid
afterward. The History is well worth Translating, which is thus:

The Queen being taken with an incurable Disease, and miraculously restored to
perfect Health at the Invocation of the name of Christ, by this Christian
Woman, devoted her self for ever to Christ, her Deliverer: The King admiring at
the Queen's so sudden Recovery, commands to reward this Captive Damsel with
rich Gifts. The Queen told him, (I relate the words of Sozomen) that though
these things be of great value, she regards them no^; she cares not for such
things; the only thing she values is the Worship of her God: If therefore we
mind to grat^fie her afterward, and live peaceably and happily.

Let us also worship that powerful God and Savior, for he it is, (if he
please) that can make Kings enjoy that degree of Honor, in which they are, and
can easily cast down great Men from their Dignities, and of base, make
illustrious and deliver them that are in distress; which Discourse the Queen
using often to the King, he was distracted with doubtful Cogitations, nor could
be altogether persuaded; because this thing, for the novelty of it was
suspected, and he did reverence the Religion of his Ancestors. Not long after
this he went a Hunting in a Wood with his Servants; on a sudden there fell such
a Cloud of thick Darkness upon the Wood, that deprived him of the sight of
Heaven, and of the Sun, as if it had been Night; here ev^ry one began to fear,
and were all dispersed, the King wandering alone (as it happens to Men, whose
Minds are perplexed with difficult Matters) began to think of Christ, and in
his Heart to esteem him God, and vowed he would hereafter worship him as God,
if he escape out of this danger, in which now he was. While he was thinking on
these things with himself, the darkness suddenly fled away, and the Air
returned to its Serenity, and the Rays of the Sun being scattered through the
Wood, he returned in safety: And having Communicated with the Queen that which
had happened to him, and calling for the Captive Damsel, he desired to be
instructed by her, how Christ ought to be worshipped; and assembling his
Subjects together, he declares to them openly, the Divine Benefits that befell
him and his Wife; and although he was scarce initiated into the Christian
Religion, yet he commands all his Subjects to embrace the Christian Doctrine,
and persuades them all to worship Christ: He prevails with the Men, and the
Queen and the Captive Christian Maid with the Women: Thus in a mavelous
manner, by God's Blessing, and the Queen's Exhortation, the King and the Nation
of the Iberians was brought over from Paganism, to the Faith of Christ. Thus
far are the words of Sozomen, where we may also read of a great Miracle, that
happened at the building of a Church, at the Prayers of this Captive, by which
the Faith of the Iberians was much more confirmed, than by the foregoing
Miracles.

Lastly, If the Peace of God rule in our Hearts, into which we are called in
one Body by Christ, whom God has given to be head over all things to the
Church, which is his Body, the fullness of him that fills all in all, (as the
Apostle speaks) Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. Then we must abhor all Idolatry and
Superstition, and every false way. But the wicked (says the Prophet) are like
the troubled Sea, when it cannot rest, whose Waves cast up Mire and Dirt. There
is no Peace, says my God to the wicked, Isa. 57. 20, 21. because they have no
Grace. He that desires the Peace of God to rule in our Hearts in this Text,
has wished Grace and Peace to us from God our Father, and from our Lord Jesus
Christ, in the second Verse of the first Chapter: These two God has joined
together, its Grace, that ushers in Peace into our Hearts, even the Grace of
Love, the Ground and Continuance of Peace: The Peace of God is inconsistent
with idolatry, because it is inconsistent with Grace even the Grace of God that
brings Salvation, Tit. 2. 11. whereas Idolatry brings nothing but Heathenish
Superstition and Damnation. I sent unto you all my Servants the Prophets,
rising early, and sending them, saying, O do not this abominable thing that I
hate, Jer. 44. 4. Says the Lord by the Mouth of his Serva^^ Jeremiah, What
Peace (says John to Joram) so long as the Whoredoms of thy Mother Jezebel, and
her Witchcrafts are so many? 2 Kin. 9. 22.

Theodoret sets before us a noble Example of Valentinian's Abhorrency of
Idolatry, l. 3. 15. before his Advancement to the Imperial Dignity; for (says
he) when that mad Tyrant, Julian, the Apostate, was to enter into the Temple of
Fortune, and the Idolatrous Priests stood on each side of the Door, that they
might expiate with Holy Water, Aqua lustra^i, as they thought, all those that
entered in; Valent^ian going before him, seeing a drop of that Water fall upon
his Clo^k, with his Fist he struck down the Pr^e^^, adding this memorable
Saying, whereby he esteemed the Christian Religion, defiled by that Heathenish
Ceremony, saying, He was Polluted and Defiled, not expiated or cleansed; which
thing that execrable Tyrant beholding, he banished him into the Desert; but
after one year, and a few Days, for a reward of his Confession, he received the
Roman Empire, says Theodoroet

But how different was his Son Valentinian Minor from his Father, the same
Theodoret tells us, that being bred up by his Mother, was seduced by her to
embrace the Arian Impiety, and persecuted the Oxthodox; but being overthrown by
Maximus, the Tyrant, (that under pretense of Religion undertook the Defense of
the distressed) as it often falls out; He fled into Illiricum, says Theodoret,
being taught by experience, what Profit his Mothers Council brought him.
Theodosius the Eastern Emperor, being Fifty Years old, thought himself obliged
to do somewhat for his Colleague in the Empire, out of Piety and pity, and to
reduce him to the true Religion, before he would promise him any Relief in this
Calamity; therefore he wrote unto him, that he would not wonder, that Fear and
Flight should accompany him being a lawful Emperor, but Courage and Victory
should attend him, that was an Usurping Tyrant; for you did oppose the true
Religion, and he, though a Tyrant, did defend it; hence it is, that you having
cast away the true Religion, have disarmed it your self, and are fled stripped;
and Maximus, being armed with it, has overthrown naked Valentinian: for God is
a favourer of true Religion, being the Author of it: Theodosius was not content
to have written thus, when Valentinian that had lost his own Dominion, was
entered into his; before all things he applies necessary Physic, by wholesome
words unto his Soul, and drives out the disease of Heresy, that had seized
upon him, and brings him back again to his Father's Religion; and having so
done, bids him be of good cheer, and marches immediately against the prevailing
Tyrant with his Armies, and without shedding a drop of Blood, restores the
Empire of the of the West, to the young Valentinian, and him to it, and bilks
the Tyrant.

For Conclusion.
If the Peace of God rule in our Hearts as it ought, God will guide our Feet in
the way of Peace for ever, Luk, 1. 79. as Zacharias concludes his Benedictus:
He will take the stick of Joseph, which is in the Hand of Ephraim, and the
Tribes of Israel his Fellows, and will put them with him, even with the stick
of Judah, and make them one stick, and they shall be one in mine Hand, says
the Lord by the Prophet Ezekiel. 37. 19. It shall be no more, Ephraim against
Manasseh, and Manasseh against Ephraim, and they both together against Judah,
Isa. 9. 21. Assenter against Dissenter, and Dissenter against Assenter, and
both against his Peace of God, that ought to rule in our Hearts; but he will
teach us his ways, and we shall walk in his paths, Isa. 2. 3. that our Church
may be Holiness to the Lord, the first fruits of his increase, Jer. 2. 3. There
are some that take the Feet for the Affections of the Soul, but there is no
necessity to take the word so; for, the Feet, and way, may be better referred
to all the Actions of Men, inward and outward. And the intent is rather to show
that Christ is come, not only to give knowledge, but to reform our Life and
Practice, and to conduct us by virtuous and Peaceful Courses to Happiness: And
the way of Peace, Romans 3. 17. howsoever it may seem to be meant of all that is
peaceful to others, as Isa. 59. 7, 8. yet perhaps even there too, it may refer
to that which is peaceful to our selves, whether that which brings Peace to the
Conscience, or generally, all Peace, that is, Prosperity, as the word signifies
every where in the Hebrew Tongue. God does by the coming of Christ, guide our
Feet into the way of Peace by these Six Steps, which are as the Six Branches of
the Golden Candlestick, Exodus 37. 18. standing before the Lord of the whole
Earth, to enlighten our Darkness, and direct our way toward him, who is the
way, the Truth, and the Life, Joh. 14. 6.

And this Text goes as it were before the Face of the Lord, to keep our Feet in
them.

First, By bringing us to Reconciliation, and Peace with God, as Eliphaz
councels Job; Acquaint now thy self, with him, and be at Peace, thereby good
shall come unto thee, Job 22. 21. of which, Romans 5. 1. Therefore, being
justified by Faith, we have Peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Secondly, Then, by that we have Peace with all the Creatures of God, which
before were at enmity with us, not only the blessed Angels, but all the rest;
the stones of Field and Beasts: At Destruction and Famine thou shall laugh,
neither shall thou be afraid of the Beasts of the Earth; for thou shall be in
League with the stones of the Field, and the Beasts of the Field shall be at
Peace with thee; and thou shall know that thy Tabernacle shall be in Peace, Job
5. 22, 23, 24.

Thirdly, Next we have Peace and Tranquillity of Mind, that is, the Heart is not
filled with fear, suspect if but a Thief stir; but contrary ways: The Godly Man
shallnot be afraid of evil Tidings; for his Heart is fixed, and he believes in
the Lord, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 112. 7. see Isa. 57. 20.

Fourthly, Further, We have Peace with Men; we strive as much as may be to have
it so; and for our parts are not only Peace-keepers, but Peacemakers, to have
the Blessing pronounced to such, for they shall be called the Children of God,
says our Savior, Matthew. 5. 9.

Fifthly, We endeavor to keep Innocence and a good Conscience in whatsoever
Condition or Station we are in this World, which will bring Peace at last. Mark
the perfect Man, and behold the Upright; for the end of that Man is Peace,
says holy David, Psalm. 37. 37.

Sixthly, Lastly, in Peace we depart out of this Life, with old Simeon, and
enter into the Land of Peace, and Eternal rest. O blessed State, even here, how
much more there?

And all this, beloved Brethren, let us the more enfore upon our selves,
because we do see the times are such, wherein many fall away to Popery, and
other damnable Heresies: And many shall follow their pernicious ways, by reason
of whom, the way of Truth shall be evil spoken of, 2 Pet. 2. 2. (and
consequently the way of Peace) says the Apostle. Let us fasten our Footsteps
the surelier, and the more warily, because we see, their sad overthrow before
us as a warning of our own Weakness, and evermore hold us by the God of Peace,
and with the Psalmist, desiring him to establish our Footsteps in his ways,
that we fall not from him. Hold up thy Goings in thy Paths, that thy Footsteps
slip not: And again, Order my Steps in thy word, and let not any Iniquity have
Dominion over me, Psalm. 17. 5. and 119. 33.

And contrariways (because Contraries belong the same Science) how miserable is
the State of the wicked, that have God their Enemy, and the Creatures of God,
divided in themselves, contentious Men, and delighting in War and Strife, as if
they had been mounted upon the Red Horse with him, to whom power was given to
take Peace from the Earth, and that they should kill one another, as you read
at the opening of the second Seal, Rev. 6. 4. The way of Peace they have not
known, says the Apostle, For there is no fear of God before their Eyes, that
is the true Reason of it, Romans 3. 17, 18. always overthrowing their own
strengths, plucked away from this Life unwillingly; that have their portion in
this Life, and cast for ever into restless and endless Torments. Let us see
their end, yea, their State, and fear it, and pray the God of Peace, who has
sent his only Son, the Prince of Peace, to guide Men into that other way, both
to set us in that, and keep us in that to the end.

Amen.
FINIS.

