A WORD TO THE UPRIGHT For Help and Preservation in these ERRING DAYS: By
Errors detected, in a BOOK, Called, A TESTIMONY FOR THE TRUTH, CHRIST and his
LIGHT; By some that go by the Name of QUAKERS, wherein they manifest their
Foundation for Salvation, which they call, The CHRIST of GOD.

By him who seeks the welfare of all men, ROBERT COBBET.

London, Printed in the Year, 1668

A Word to the Upright for help and preservation in these Erring Days.
A Pamphlet that Entitles it self, wrote by some people called Quakers, coming
to my hands, which may blind the eyes of some, from having their persons and
principles in admiration, from a knowledge by experiencing of some things by
them taught, am willing for your sakes, that desire you may know the truth, to
the acknowledging of the truth, to set the truth before you, that you may
escape the errors of perdition; and in that it says, He that denies me before
men, him will I deny before my Father that is in Heaven; put my Pen once more
to paper to the clearing up the truth, the cause the Pamphlet, from its
Allegorizing the Scriptures of truth, and its Erroneous Assertions against the
truth, that does so deface the beautiful face of the truth declared by Law,
Psalms and Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, that their requirings of men to
the obedience of faith to Christ the Savior of men, who bought us by his
blood, is in danger I fear to be had in scorn and contempt with many, and
Atheism start up, and overspread by the corrupting the young sprouts of the
Nation, to an Opinion of late broach't in this Nation; the Opinion asserted,
is, That the Light in Conscience, whereof every man that comes into the world
is enlightened; is Christ, Redeemer, Advocate, Mediator and Savior; which I
suppose if you will bear with me to say, is a Doctrine and Gospel, that has no
footing in Scriptures, nor in any foundation at any time amongst the Sons of
men, till it took rise in fifty two, by the hands of George Fox, which Doctrine
of the light in Conscience, had it been kept in its Office, as a Schoolmaster
to bring unto Christ, had been a Doctrine of good Morality; but putting it up
for Christ the Advocate, Mediator, Redeemer and Savior, stands in my spirit as
a high mistake, for that to me it does utterly deny the Son of God, and makes
null the blood of the Covenant: and that it does so appear to be the intent of
the Writers of the paper is manifest by what is said in the paper of all Pro^
(...) having Faith on the Lord Jesus, the Son of God, for their Savior, and
the sufferings of his person for their salvation, in dirision called it
Professors stuff, querying whether it is good Doctrine to preach him in his
person for Savior, and his death and sufferings, the cause of salvation,
affirming that his sufferings are not everlasting; and that the person Christ
is not the Savior of men; but that, that was Savior, something that was in
that Christ, to wit, the Light in the Conscience, positively declaring in a
certain place, that the blood of Christ was not that that did atone with God
for man, for the transgression of men. But my business being to dissect the
paper, that if it may be to strengthen your Faith on the foundation the
Prophets and Apostles have laid, come to inspect the paper, which paper, page
the 3. for what reason I know not, unless this, that the two first pages being
to fence against the Scriptures, that did at large confirm the truth, being too
plain a discovery of their bottom, durst not stand to the judgment of men; but
say you contend not with me about the coming of the Lord in the flesh, nor his
death, sufferings, resurrection and ascension; but if true, that you said, your
paper had kept in, we must entreat your patience to step along with us a
little, before you come to meet with an unfolding this mystery; for truly I
must tell you, that my friends are in a cloud, but by what above said you may
have a guess of what they mean by their dark sayings; but in that we shall meet
with these particulars in the paper, we pass to Page the 4. Where they tell you
that Christ was truly a Light before; and when he took upon him the form of a
Servant, both before he appeared in a bodily similitude in the likeness of
sinful flesh, and then also, and is Gods salvation to the ends of the Earth,
which extends farther then his personal presence did, though therein he did
bear witness to the truth, to his inward and spiritual manifestation, to the
new and living way. Friends, pray be not offended with me; to tell you the
Serpent twinds about the Tree, to catch you in his deep deceit; for having told
you that his appearing in flesh, was to bear witness to his inward and
spiritual appearing, which they that know him so, that know no man after the
flesh, that though so had known him, yet so know him no more, to make you
believe they are some excellent things, fly aloft by telling you the real end
of his coming in flesh is known and reserved in the spirit, which say you, he
directed his unto, and in a caper, cry that his name was from everlasting, and
is to everlasting; the Lord is one, and his name one, receive it who can.
Friends, I pray be not big worded out of the truth, I deny not but the ends of
the coming of the Lord into the world, was to beget his Children into
fellowship by communion with his Father and Himself, by giving to them his
Life, which is man's Light, which my Brethren, being our Salvation, we have it
by him who is our Savior Christ Jesus, who has bought us to God by the price
of his blood; and for the big words, the Lord is one, and his name one, receive
it who can: we own it for ever, that our God is only one God; but this is as he
is unmanifested; but as God is manifested, he is Father, Word, and Spirit; and
although God is one, of whom are all things, yet there is the Lord Jesus Christ
by whom are all things, who is Mediator betwixt God and man; and Christ, by
whom is all things, being the word that was made flesh, for redemption of man,
did the Fathers will in that body of flesh, through the offering it up to the
death of the Cross by the Eternal Spirit, according as he said, I will give my
flesh for the Life of the world, who giving it up unto death, reconciled us
unto God by the body of his flesh that tasted death, as says the Scriptures;
and although he is Everlasting as he is the Word, yet as he was the man Christ,
he was of time, according to the saying, Thou art my Son, this day have I
begotten thee; which you find was when the Holy Ghost over-shaddowed Mary,
which was says Paul, When the fullness of time was come; and then made under
the Law, made of a woman, for the end that we by him might be made the Adoption
of Sons; wherefore ye children of men know, that the Scriptures declares not to
any other for Christ, then to him the man Christ Jesus our Lord, in whom the
fullness of the Godhead dwelt bodily, which Godhead is the Divine Nature;
therefore your Opinion of his appearing for a manifestation to his inward and
spiritual appearance, and not for a Savior for lost man, is a mistake of a
dangerous concernment; and having so fraudulently corrupted the truth, by a
question, that if Christ consists of Body, Soul and Spirit, what consisted his
Soul and Spirit of? Was that his body he recommended up unto his Fathers hand?
Art thou a Preacher, and to seek what is Spirit, and what is soul; and what is
Body, and yet wilt be a Preacher of immortal things? knows thou not how God
has tempered the Creature together, and how that man consists, by make from
nature, of eternity, and of time: from the eternal nature his Spirit and Soul,
and from the temporary nature his body: do not presume, for you have not the
knowledge of the truth. But do thou ask if the Lords spirit was his body
which he recommended into his Fathers hands: Friends, had your Preachers not
been in confusion, they had without doubt not writ so confusedly, and
manifested themselves so weak to ask so ignorant a question; but for the truth
sake I shall explain; the soul of man is a spark of Gods Eternal Nature,
coagulated into a Spiritual substance, for a center of his insensitive life,
and as thus compacted, is a Creature of an Eternal being, of an own
self-subsisting consistency, and having its abode in the life of time, is
capable to be corrupted by infection from the life of time; but the Soul having
the noble understanding in it, which men call reason, may by its spirit, that
is, its will and understanding reject the infection of time, by repelling it
from penetrating it, as it stands resigned unto the life of the Divine Nature,
which at first God breathed into it, by which it became a living soul, which
being by it lost by letting into it self the Serpents poison, from the assault
of the devil, fell from the Divine Nature into corruptible time, and
consequently into death; but God purposing to renew man unto the life of light,
promises the Seed of the Woman for a breaker of the Serpents head, saying by
the Prophet, that he would not for ever contend with man, for that his spirit
would fail before him, and the soul that he had made. And do not we poor empty
creatures find in our own souls, the anguish of darkness when we are distressed,
for want of the shining face of God, to beam upon our souls; and when his
glances inspires us by penetrating through our souls, how full of joy is our
hearts; I need not write to the experienced, but will appeal unto thee that
has been afflicted and tossed and made drunk with the cup of trembling from
the Lord, who walked in darkness, and saw no light, in the day of thy
spiritual distress, whether the light that was in thy conscience gave thee thy
assurance of thy salvation, or the breaking forth of his most mavelous light,
that apprehended thee ere thou was aware? and did not the light in thy
conscience, before this day of God broke forth in thy soul, condemn thee in all
that ever thou did, whoever thou art that have known the pangs of the new
birth, and the adoption to the eternal life: I know thou must bear witness for
me that I write the truth; for I ask thee, was it not the complaint of the
Children of God from old, thou hidst thy face and I was troubled, and prayed,
Lord, show us the light of thy countenance, for thou by it shall make us more
glad, then they that by Oil and Wine great increase have had; and was it not,
and is it not so with thee at this present day? I say, if it be not, look to
thy self, for thou art fallen asleep, and have lost thy first Love; wherefore
it says, tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that has sinned, and
the soul that sins shall dye, which puts it out of doubt of the creaturality
of the Soul; for the life of God could never dye; but the soul of man died from
it, as it is said, You are dead in your sins and trespasses, for Gods life is
the unchangeable life, and does endure for ever; which life was in Christ, and
to whom Christ gives it unto, it is in them, and is the light of man, which
light of life the world receives not, for that this life that gives man to see
into the deeps of God, is revealed unto man by inspiration of Gods Spirit, as
said the spirit, searches all things, yea the deep things of God, which the
world cannot receive, because they believe not on him whom God has sent for a
Savior of the world, and for that cause they are carnal; which life of God is
not, nor cannot be comprehended by any thing, nor in any thing; for although it
be in the Lord, yet, is it one with it self as it is out of the Lord; and as it
is one with it self out of the Lord, so is it one with it self in the Lord, for
that it is his spirit, and the fullness that fills all in all; but man's spirit
being a comprehensible Creature, is not infinite, but finite; and that is not
it that searches the deep things of God as it is a created spirit, but in that
it is created for an instrument in the hand of God, as God uses it in the hand
of his spirit, it does search the inmost parts of his belly, as it is written,
We are co-workers with Christ. And for the soul of Christ, that God would not
leave in Hell, that was, of and from the soul-like properties of man's nature;
as Christ consists personally from his Mother Mary: and had it not been in kind
of the nature of man's soul, it had little availed man what Christ had done by
offering his soul an offering for sin: Thus have you it explained to you, what
is man's soul, as also, that it is a creature in being, of and from Gods Eternal
Nature, which nature being superior to the elementary sense, has that potent
understanding in it self, which men calls reason, which understanding has,
having in it an eye to discern into man's deeps, is the spirit of man that God
put into man in the day of his Creation, which being of the principle of light is
a creatural spirit from the principle of light, as a spark of that nature; and
as it is a spark, it is a formed spirit into a creature, and thence is
comprehended as a creature, which having lost its life by the transgression of
the man, as to God is dead, and not capable to break the bands of the soul
without a helper which is Christ, in whom the Covenant of Grace that God has
made to man by Christ's blood being incorporated, God has promised to send it
forth as the prisoner of hope; that is in the deep pit in which there is no
waters. Behold, I show you a mystery, ye men in the Clouds, Christ whom God
has sealed by the anointing for a Savior, being the product of the Holy
Ghost, to a coagelated substance from the properties of man in Mary, is that
holy thing the anointed in the womb that was born free, whom 'twas not possible
for death to withold, who being without sin had not that body of death, that
could be withheld by death; but because the Children had the body of death, he
that was the Lord from Heaven, having flesh of life, laid down his life, to wit
his body into our dead bodies, that we that were dead might live, as said, thy
dead men shall rise with my dead body. But this Lord Jesus through the guile of
most of your Leaders is denied; and Jesus being thus the Creation of God, is
the only begotten of the Father, whom the Disciples saw and bore record unto,
who being the Fathers delight, whom he foresaw from Everlasting, that he would
send, when the fullness of time was come, promises to him that the spirit
should rest upon him, to make him of a quick understanding, the spirit of
wisdom and counsel, of might and knowledge, and the fear of the Lord, who being
endued with the virtue of God, by which he poured out his soul unto God, in
which travel knew of his justifying of many touching the body of our Lord this
is the matter; you know he says, that he proceeded from Heaven, and that his
flesh was meat indeed, and his blood was drink indeed, and that he would give
his flesh for the life of the world, and he that eats his flesh, and drinks
his blood has Eternal Life; which body of our Lord being of the Heavenly
substance, as it was circumscribed, was the body of his personality, that he
gave for an offering for the Ransom of the world, which body being of and from
the nature of Heaven, he gave it, that we by it may have an interest through
that body, into the Heavens, the Kingdom the Father has prepared for them
that love him, and do believe on him whom God has sent. Thus have I given you
an account of Jesus, as to his Body, Soul and Spirit, who as he thus consisted
was that form of God, and express Image of his Fathers Substance, whose day the
Patriarchs and Prophets saw in the Spirit and rejoiced to see, with whom the
Apostles being conversers with, bore witness to him who is the truth, and to
such a one confession was made in all ages by the believers, till the coming of
George Fox and his Disciples; and being found in form and fashion as a man,
gave up his life into the grave of death, by which he broke open the grave of
eternal death, by which he overcame him that had the power of death, that is,
the Devil, and delivered his Children from out of the Eternal Death, by which
they was held in bondage all their life long; whence is that saying, O Death,
where is thy Grave? O Sin, where is thy Sting? O Hell, where is thy Victory?
For know, that the death of the Lord was a Revolution, a passing out or through
the principle of this visible world, into the principle of the invisible world,
where says Paul, He now is an Advocate for man with God, and being gone out of
the visible into the invisible; as he was in the visible I know him so no more;
but as man is brought into the invisible where he is, there I have seen him,
and so did John, Paul and Stephen: Now God being in this man Christ as
declared, Christ is that God-man in his own person that has brought again the
dead to life.

Page the fifth, Querie about Christ being Formity; as if King was his humane
body equal with God, when in that body said, My Father is greater then I:
Brethren, we have proved before, the personality of Christ, and that he was the
express Image of God in his person, and since that you know that it is written,
that God at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke to the Fathers and
Prophets; but now says, he speaks to us by his Son, on whose shoulders the
Government for our peace should lie, whom God has made heir of all things, who
when he had by himself purged away our sins, for that he was made a little
lower then the Angels for the suffering of death, that by his tasting of death
for every man he might bring many Sons unto Glory, for that it became him for
whom are all things, and by whom are all things, to make the Captain of our
Salvation perfect by sufferings: by which dispute, it is out of doubt 'twas
Christ he spoke of, as he was in that form wherein he suffered death, and not
the light that is a principle of a diffusive property, for the light is not his
equal, that he says is his fellow, to whom he said, Sit thee at my right hand,
till I make thy enemies thy footstool; but of him he says, Thy Throne O God
is from Everlasting to everlasting, the Scepter of thy Kingdom is a Scepter of
Righteousness, and of thy Rule there shall be no end, and for his equallity
with his Father, it must be allowed, for that it says, That having fulfilled
the work that his Father gave him to do, which was the finishing of man's
Salvation, ascended up unto the Throne of his Glory, that God promised to him
as his reward for the Redemption of man, according to that that was the will of
God: But in that he said, My Father is greater then I, He speaks there as he
was in his Servants state, who while there stood, differed nothing from a
Servant, though Lord of All, for then he had not accomplished man's redemption,
which was the end for which he was sent into the world, but having done the
will by finishing man's Redemption, takes the Throne of the Everlasting Kingdom
that to him was promised, and sits him down at the right hand of God in the
Majesty on high, where he is Gods fellow. Now then is the confusion on my part
who write to you the truth, or on yours, that deny the truth? but if you will
blindfold your own understandings, and trample the Pearl under your feet, and
turn again and rend me, you shall be rebuked of God. Now having cleared my self
to you before God, and my Lord and Master Jesus Christ, if you will not receive
it your destruction is of your selves.

Page the sixth, Charge me with contradiction, in saying, Christ has begotten
us Children to God by his spirit, and that by it he has put us into a capacity
to take of the waters of life, and to drink freely, in that I say, that as to
our Redemption it is alone by purchase made from his sufferings and death:
Friends, to you I appeal, is this a contradiction to declare, that Christ is
the Author of our Salvation, for that he has Redeemed us to it by the
sufferings of his body, and the dispenser of it by his spirit, according to
promise: Friends, your selves be my Judge. But these envious men to drown the
truth, would ^ast me to deceive you, that you may not see the truth; but for me
it matters not what they say of me, but for you, that you are not bewitched from
obeying the faith; for if the spirit of Christ in the believers heart is not
Christ, much less the light in conscience, That every man is enlightened
withal that comes into the world is Christ: And for your information, view the
Apostles strait, which was, whether to go out of the body, or to stay in the
body; who resolves it, that for his own behalf 'twas better for him that he
went out of the body, but for them that he staid here, and his reason, that
while he was in the body, he was absent from the Lord, but when out of the body
he should be present with the Lord; which if the light be Christ, he had the
light while in the body, for the Life and Power of Christ was his Arm and
Strength by which he preached the Gospel of man's peace to Jew and Greek;
wherefore it is evident that the light is not Christ, by what he says, while
in the body I am absent from the Lord, and for that cause longed to be
dissolved to be present with the Lord; which proves to you, that where the
Scriptures speaks of Christ within us the hope of Glory, they speak but of the
Sovereignty of Christ in the gift of his spirit, which Paul to the Galatians at
large does prove; for says he, My little Children, for whom I travel in birth
till Christ again be formed in you; which words he refers to the receiving of
the spirit, upon the hearing of the word preached of faith, and asks them
whether they received the spirit by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of
faith, which faith they being fallen from, by corrupting preaching, travels to
bring them back again to it by their obedience in their duty of faith; which
is, that he says, My little Children for whom I travel in birth till Christ
again be formed in you; Go to, be not deceived, God cannot be mocked, but obey
from the heart the word of faith, to the saving of your souls, and come down
from your exalted Mountains, who say, you are beyond faith, and be not of them
that draw back to perdition, departing from the faith of him that has called
you; for the mystery, Brethren, that was hid from Ages and Generations which
God has made known unto his Saints, is God manifested in flesh, seen of
Angels, believed on in the world, caught up unto Glory; therefore thou, who
ever thou art that knows the truth, and art a Child of the truth; whether the
Authors of the paper called, An Answer to R. C. his paper, does know the
truth, or have the spirit of truth, since that no man that has the spirit of
Christ calls Jesus accursed; therefore the assertion that tells you, you are
to wait upon the light within you for the Christ, and the power of it for your
Savior, is asserting of another Christ then what the Scriptures have declared
to be Christ, and asserting of another Gospel, then what the Scriptures have
taught to be the Gospel, both to Jew and Gentile, for according to what they
declared to be Christ, is him that was born of the Virgin Mary, begotten by the
Holy Ghost, suffered by Pontius Pilate, and the Gospel, that he died for our
sins, and was buried, and rose again the third day for our justification;
therefore that although Christ manifests his love in our hearts, yet the
manifestation is not the Author of the Salvation, for that it is not the price,
but the Gospel what declared, to wit, his sufferings and death; and to that the
Apostles preached, and not to the light within, as you falsely assert, and direct
the people to believe, the Scriptures in this matter is our judge; and let me
tell you, that if the fixity of man's salvation, stands not in the purpose of
God, by what Christ did for the world by his body of flesh, man is at this day
in a miserable state; and if the feeling the motions of power is my
justification and salvation, then no longer then I feel the motions of life am
I justified or have salvation; and if so, then this ^our saved and the next
damned, which Doctrine centers not man upon Christ, but upon works, and makes
faith of none effect, and nulls the Gospel of our peace.

Page the seventh, Querie, if the mind ought not to be drawn from waiting
within it self for the manifestation of God in it self, say you, what must it
wait in, must it not wait in the light Christ within, wherewith every man is
enlightened that comes into the world? First, let me tell you, your Question is
ill grounded; its foundation being but your own Opinion, and not the Scriptures
bottom, nor it according to experience of faith; for as I have told you, the
light the world is enlightened with, is not the light that the believers possess
by gift of Christ from faith on his Redemption, but a light of reason man has,
as man is a rational Creature, from which his light has knowledge of good or
bad; as also knowledge from his light to eschew evil, and to do good, in the
doing either of which stands his woe or peace; but the light that is of grace is
the receiving of the spirit of Christ, that does give power to become the Sons
of God, which the world he said could not receive, the reason, because that
they believed not on me; therefore the world not having the spirit cannot wait
in the spirit, and indeed how should they wait in that they never had?
therefore the light in man being but the light of man, as man is a rational
Creture, sinking into it for the manifestation of the salvation that comes from
grace by Covenant from God by Jesus Christ, is a Doctrine that turns away the
Creature from Christ the Redeemer ^o a property of nature, wherein can be no
saving health, and against the commandment that says, Thou shall not make to
thy self the likeness of any thing in the Heavens above, nor in the Earth
beneath; and the irrationalness of this Doctrine is apparent, for that the
principle of light being that that God has formd is not God, nor has it the
power to give the spirit to make the comers thereunto perfect, for the light in
conscience being a property of man, as man is a creture, is not more in its
innate quality then that light God has formed, as he is the Word and Creator,
and its office in man's soul is not appointed for to give salvation, but for a
director unto him whom God has sent into the world for salvation, who when he
was in the world preached not obedience to the light of conscience, but to
himself as Savior from that that he redeemed them, and that by his own blood,
and they having their consciences convinc'. that he was the Messiah, but
wilfully opposed him that was and is the truth, who cried, O Jerusalem, how
often would I have gathered thee as a hen gathers her chickens under her
wings, but thou would not? therefore thy destruction is of thy self; and
some of them whose hearts had been touched to confess him to be the Lord and
Christ, turned away from him by reason of Moses his Law; so it is plain, that
the office of the light in conscience, is but as Paul speaks of the Law, a
Schoolmaster to bring man unto Christ, for says he, If the Light in you be
darkness, how great is that darkness; Now if the light in conscience was
Christ, as you falsely so say, then must it follow that the light in man being
Christ, Christ may be darkness: therefore I conclude him to be Christ whom the
Apostles saw and bore record unto, who saw him ascend up into his Glory into
the Majesty at the right hand of God, from whence he gives gifts to men, as
being exalted far above all Heavens, and all Principalities, that he may fill
all things; and thence if the Heavens themselves are filled from his fullness
that fills all things, your Opinion of the light in conscience being Christ
is out of door, and for the creture to look into the creture for Christ; being
risen and ascended far above all Heavens, you direct your Disciples wrong in
directing to his measure in your hearts; but this I say it is written, My Son,
give me thy heart, therefore man is to wait in heart for the fulfilling of the
promise that God has made to man by Covenant in Christ, to renew the heart,
that so in heart he may obey the Doctrine of faith, that by it the heart may be
filled with his spirit, which the heart having received, inlightens the heart
to the believing on him by whom he is sent; therefore your directing the mind
to the light in conscience which serves but to condemn for unbelief, or to
justify the creture in his obedience of the faith, misplaceth the mind from
the right object, and places it upon a wrong; for Christ being the end of the
Law for Righteousness to them that believe, to direct unto the Law, the light
in conscience, is to bring the Creture man again into bondage, when the Lord of
Life has set them free. But my Brethren, you are bought with a price, not of
blood of Bulls and Goats, nor Heifers of a year old, but by the blood of God;
for you know, that it is written, that faith comes by hearing, and hearing of
the word of God; but how says he, shall they hear without a Preacher, and how
shall they preach without they be sent? Now Brethren, if the light within you
be Christ, it is but looking into your hearts, turning your eye inwards, and
you are in your way, you need no preacher sent to you, for your director to
lead you to Christ by faith to wait for the promise, the receiving of the
spirit; but you being ignorant of the new Covenant, that says, I will write my
Law in your hearts, and put my fear into your inward parts, and will pour out
my spirit upon you, who shall be in you, that you shall not depart from me the
Lord; which Covenant of Grace standing not upon works, you make void by your
centring upon works, to the denying the Lord that has bought you, and from the
Covenant of works, of which in show you are zealous of, though I know you what
you are, and that in most things to it are contrary, yet in opinion being
zealous of it, set up by opinion, your own righteousness, by which you fall
short of the righteousness of God, and do not only fall short of it, but also
do deny it, stumbling at the Covenant of promise; and you being become the
preachers up of works to the light of nature, are become so naturalized to your
Opinions, that Christ the Author of Redemption by his blood, do not only deny,
but also reject in downright terms, testifying that by it man is not atoned
for with God. Now would I know of thee, whether the Law given by Moses did
determine Israel in it self, that by it they might have life, or whether it did
not direct Israel to Christ to come in flesh, verily to Christ who was to come
in flesh, as Moses their Lawgiver has wrote, who said to them, The Lord your
God shall raise up to you from amongst your Brethren, a Prophet-like unto me,
him shall you hear in all things; and that soul that will not hear that
Prophet, shall be cut off from amongst the people. And ye blind guides, was not
the sacrifices, that God appointed to the people, to offer up to him, types to
Christ, that offering of acceptable price, in that he did the Fathers will,
which was the redemption of man, which the sacrifices that typified unto him
could not do, for that they were not of force to take away sin; wherefore God
had no pleasure in them, but prepared a body for him, by which he would do his
will, which body was Christ, who having done the will of God, by the body of
his flesh, in reconciling us to God by that body of his flesh, in that day he
offered it up by the Eternal Spirit to the death of the Cross, to the pouring
out of his soul to death; by which blood he sanctified the true things of the
Heaven, as the blood of the Oblations sanctified the patterns of the true,
which puts it out of doubt, that God gave not the Law to Israel for
justification; but as the Apostle says, it came in because of transgression,
that sin might appear more sinful: but when the deliverer of Sion came in form
and fashion of a man, they despised him the Lord of Glory, and put him to open
shame, Crying, His blood be upon us, and upon our Children, which is upon them
unto this day, and you from your unbelief and impenitensie of your hearts; do
with the unbelieving Jews put away from you the just one, Crucifying the Lord
afresh, in your spiritual City, as you call it, which is spiritually Sodom and
Egypt; but in that it is certain, that that that with God for man made peace,
was the blood of Christ, in which is the Covenant of reconciliation, that is
the Author of Eternal Salvation unto all them that obey him, according to Gods
requiring of faith, who being that sacrifice that at once for ever offered up
himself for the sins of the world, needed not daily, as the Priests of the Law,
first, for their own sins, and then for the people; for this he did once when
he offered up himself, by which offering broke down the middle wall of
partition that stood against us, and the handwriting of Ordinances, nailing
our sins upon the Cross, by which he made of that that was twain one, having by
death made peace; which blood being the blood of his Humanity, as he was
creture, was that that did with God expiate for sin: Wherefore I ask thee, Was
it the Godhead that was in Christ that dyed for the sins of the world, or was
it the Man-head that the Godhead assumed to himself from the Lines of Adam
that had fallen from bliss for whom an Offering must be made with blood? I
ask, was it the Godhead in Christ upon whom the Cross lay, by reason that man
had sinned? or was it the soul of Christ, as Christ was man, upon whom the
Cross lay, that offered himself up an Offering for sin, in that it is written,
The Soul that sins shall dye? I ask, was it the Godhead in Christ that was
the Offering that satisfied by death for sin, or was it Christ in his person
that bore our grief, and carried our sorrows? I ask, was it the Godhead in
Christ that was smitten by the appointment of Pilate when Christ stood before
his judgment seat, or was it the man Christ in his person? I ask, was the blood
and the water that ran out of the side of the Lord, which the Soldier pierced
the God-heads blood, or the blood of Jesus, as he was man in his person? I
ask, was the body that was nailed upon the Cross which bore away our sins, the
Godhead, or was it the cretural body of our Lord? I ask, was the spirit of
our Lord which groaned to God for Lazarus to rise from death the Deity, or his
own spirit, as he was cretural, since he said, Father, into thy hand I commit
my spirit? I ask, was the soul of the Lord Jesus, which his Father would not
leave in Hell the Godhead, or was it the Man-head, since he said, My soul is
heavy unto death, and prayed, that if it was possible the Cup might pass from
him? I ask, was the Sacrifice that was so sweet a savor in the nostrils of
God the Godhead that was put to death, or was it the Humanity of the Lord that
became the Atoner for the world, since not possible for the Godhead to dye? I
ask, did the Sacrifices of the Law type to the Godhead of Christ, as that by
death he should satisfy for the sins of the world, or did they type to Christ
in his person to be the sacrifice, since that God is neither Nature nor
Creture? I ask, did the Godhead cry, My God, my God, when Christ was on the
Cross, why have thou forsaken me? or did the man Christ cry, My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me, since the Godhead cannot forsake it self? I ask,
was the light Christ, you say, that was in that body Christ, that body that God
prepared to do his will, or that body Christ with Soul and Spirit, since the
light is not no compaction consisting in a personal attraction, that it should
have flesh and blood for a body to suffer death, since it is written only of
Christ, that God dwelt bodily in Christ in the fullness of his Godhead, and
that it does not any where speak of the light Christ in that person Christ,
unless it be in your own Books, whereof indeed your Books are full; therefore I
conclude, that the Christ that did lay down his life for a Savior for man, was
not the light in conscience, but Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews: Now what
shall I say, but that the man Christ Jesus our Lord, is both Lord and Christ,
and him has God sealed for Christ and Savior, as he was in his person born of
Mary, which Simeon took up in his arms, blessing God for performing to him his
word, that to him he had spoken.

Page the eighth, ask, that if the Light, Prophets and Patriarks had, they was
not to trust in it for salvation, perfection and justification, how did it lead
them to fear God, when in all Nations he that feared God and wrought
righteousness is accepted, and not the hearers of the Law, but the doers of the
Law shall be justified? Why are you Preachers since you know not the truth, for
know not you that it is said, If there had been a Law given that could have
gave life, then righteousness had been by that Law; but says it not, the Law
has concluded all under sin; therefore the words asserted by you are not
rightly applied, for that they relate not but to the Covenant of works, as man
stood related to God by nature; but man not capable to keep the Law by reason
of his sinfulness of flesh, the Covenant of Grace came in, that required faith
on him that fulfilled the Law for man, taking upon him the Curse, that to us
was due for sin, the just died for the unjust, who fulfilling the Law is the
end of the Law to every one for righteousness that on him does believe, and
that since by the Law man could not have life, for that all had sinned, and
come short of the Glory, the Covenant of Grace by faith o^ Christ, has offered
it self to bring m^n into the Glory; for the Law says, Cursed be he that
continues not to do all things contained in the Law; and he that does the Law,
shall be justified by the Law; and he that breaks the Law, shall be condemned
by the Law, and the Law wrote in man's heart, being the same Law that was wrote
on Tables of stone; so many as have sinned in the Law, shall perish by the Law,
and so many as have sinned without Law, shall perish without Law, for says he,
that when the Gentiles which have not the Law, do by nature the things
contained in the Law, these having not the Law, are a Law unto themselves:
which show the work of the Law wrote in their hearts, their consciences bearing
witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing, or else excusing one
another: wherefore he says, by works no man shall be justified in Gods sight.
Now then, if our justification be not by the Law, nor by works done by the Law:
How say you, that the light in Patriarks and Prophets was that that justified
them, and made them perfect? and faith it not, that by faith Abraham was
justified, and his faith was accounted to him for Righteousness, who seeing the
day of Christ rejoiced: but since it is for a certain, that that that did for
man make peace with God was the blood of Jesus which God made Covenant with,
that by it he would send forth the prisoner out of the pit wherein there is no
waters; wherefore it is written, He that believes shall be saved, but he that
believes not shall be damned. And is not the saying of Simeon come upon you,
that the child Jesus should be set for the falling and the rising again of many
in Israel, and for a sign to be spoken against; and is not this Child the Babe
born of Mary, which says Luke, grew and waxed strong in spirit, filled with
wisdom, and the Grace of God was upon him. Blush you Atheistical and notional
men, that for a covering to your errors, for that the Scriptures of truth
rebukes you to shame, for to hide your selves in your fallaciousness, say that
Christ was him that was in the person Jesus; but at length, through the Grace
of God for the sake of his Son who is the truth, you have unmasked your selves,
for a gloss tell us Israel drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them,
which Rock was Christ, not distinguishing him as he was the word that made the
all things, from his capacity as he became flesh for Redemption of all things,
and thence being deceived deceive; but we tell you, that the Word who would
become man in Christ, became the arm and strength to Moses, who he chose to be
the Angel of his presence that saved them, saved them by the hand of Moses from
destruction, from Pharaoh and his Host, by which bringing to them deliverance
from the waves of the Sea, and showing them his power, by destroying the
Egyptian force, obliged them to the obedience to Moses that God had made the
Captain of their Host, who being saved by his so wonderful power, rejoiced in
their salvation, and sang the Song of Moses, the Angel of Gods presence, unto
the Glory of God, who was their Rock of power in his invisible strength, being
their salvation, they drank of its salvation, which obliged them to Moses; and
this is the meaning of the Apostle in his directing his Discourse to the
Church, which word of God being become our Redeemer in Christ, as he saved
Israel by the Angel of his presence from destruction of the waves and Pharoah's
wrath, to the intent they might possess the Land that he to Abraham had
promised, who being by what he appeared to Moses without the Creture, type to
himself what he would be in Christ within the Creture; that as he led Israel by
the hand of Moses into the Canaan Land to possess the fruits of this life,
figured to himself what he would bring his children unto by Christ, in the City
of God, which was typ't by Isreal's Canaan of Rest. But what shall be said to
the scoffing Saducse, more then that the stone that the builders refuse is
become the chief corner stone, and the head of the building? But what makes
this for your Opinion, that the light in the conscience is Christ, the light in
their conscience saved them not, neither is it said, that they drank of the
light Christ in conscience, but of the rock that followed them, which rock was
Christ; and if that the light in conscience could either have saved them out of
the destruction of Pharaoh and his Host, they needed not the Angel of Gods
presence Moses, and the rock that followed them for their help; likewise if the
light in the conscience could have saved the world from sin, there had been no
need for God to have sent his Son, the love of his bosom, to dye for the world,
that they might be saved, who being the promised one, that God to Adam made,
when he said, The Seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents head; Is He the
Lord and Savior, and not another? but in that I am not ignorant of the strange
conceptions that you have of the Seed, and as monstrously speak of it, am
willing to present you with the truth: you know that it is written, That the
Seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents head; and the Scriptures declare,
that that Seed is Christ, to whom the Covenant was made by God, as written, My
Covenant shall be unto thee, and unto thy Seed, and to thy Seeds Seed, so long
as Sun and Moon shall endure; who being the Seed promised, it says, That if
the Lord had not left us a Seed, we had been as Sodom and Gomorrah, who being
him that was promised to Abraham, that should come of his flesh, came of his
flesh, from his Liniage of the Lines of Mary, who being that holy thing that
was begotten by the Holy Ghost of his Mother Mary for the Savior, saves man
from their sins through his sufferings and death, to whom the Law, Psalms,
Prophets and Apostles declares unto, as their writings at large does show, who
being him that God promised for the Messiah that should save his people Israel
from the hands of all their Enemies, that they being delivered from fear might
serve him all the days of their life; and Christ being him to whom the
promised are made, in him they are Yea and Amen; and Christ being the Seed God
promised to Adam, for his Salvation and his Seed, the Word incorporates himself
with and in that Christ, that by that Christ, salvation may be brought to
light, who being his power by which Christ repelled the tempter with his
temptation when tempted by him, when led for that end into the wilderness, and
was his strength to undergo the wrath of God when he drank the Cup of his
wrath, and sustained him upon the Cross, by whom he offered up his body unto
death upon the Cross for reconciliation, by whom he, the word that reconciled
the world unto himself by himself, as it is written, God was in Christ
reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing to them their sins: and Christ
the Serpent breakers head, God makes a promise unto, that his children that he
should beget by his power unto God should be concerned in the Covenant of life
and peace, in the Kingdom that he prepared for him, who knowing who they were
that believed on him, prays his Father, that he would keep them by his own
name, saying, that while he was with them he had kept them, but going to the
Father from his children, says, Father, I pray not for the world, but for
those that thou have gave me out of the world, for they have loved me, and have
kept my word, and believe that I came down from thee, and that thou have sent
me and not for these alone, but for those also that shall believe on me through
their word; which the parable he speaks does clear, for says he, the Seed of
the Kingdom sown in the heart, is the word, and he that sows it is the Son of
man, and the children begotten by the word are the Seed of the Kingdom; can
thou believe, that thy eye may be enlightened to see the truth; if so it be thy
portion, thou will see I have told thee the truth, for it is written, Thou art
my Son; This day have I begotten thee, that thou should be the light of the
Gentiles, and the glory of the people Israel; who being begotten by the Holy
Ghost of the Virgin his Mother Mary, is and was that Seed of the Woman, the
breaker of the Serpents head; So my conclusion is, that the Seed Christ that is
the Savior, is Christ in person, and not the light in conscience, my reason
is, that if he had not been as he was, creture of Soul and spirit, as I am, as
I am nature, what he had done as another Seed, it had been of little avail for
me; so that the Seed that broke the Serpents head is not some strange thing
that I am not of, as I am creture, by abstract from nature consisting of soul
and spirit, but of kind and substance as am I, which he being made of from the
nature of Mary, by which she became creture; as the offspring of Adam does
consist of soul and spirit, as do I, in which soul he broke the Serpents head,
by drinking up the Cup of the Wine Press of God alone, having none to help him,
who knowing the bitterness of the Cup, prays, that if it was possible the Cup
might pass from him, but knowing that it was not possible, in that there was no
other means by which the Serpents head could be broke, and the Fathers justice
satisfied in man's soul, for that he had sinned, says, But not my will be done,
but thy will be done, Holy Father, for this hour came I into the world; and if
his soul was not of man, that he satisfied the justice of God with, that stuck
in it for its transgression, man at this day is in a miserable state; but being
out of doubt, that the soul of Christ was in properties of and from nature and
creture, made by Generation from the properties of Mary, is that Seed God did
promise to send to break the Serpents head, by treading the Wine Press of wrath
alone, putting his soul in our souls stead, the just ^d for the unjust, the
Lord laid upon him the iniquity of us all, says the Scriptures: Thus he is the
Captain of our salvation, and our High Priest for ever, who as he is the Word,
Wisdom, Power, Life, Light and Love of God, has no beginning of days, nor
end of life, but as he was made flesh, in that capacity has beginning of days,
and end of this temporal life, as it is to you before declared, who is the
wonder of Eternity, that the word, the maker of all things, and the filler of
all things should become personally flesh in a body in time, to transinute time
into Eternity, by bringing of Eternity into time, which indeed is according to
promise, where it is said, The Ea^ shall hear the Heavens, and great shall be
the increase thereof. And this is the wonder spoken of by God, where it is said,
Behold I will do a wonder in the Earth, a Virgin shall conceive and bring forth
a man-child, without a man, and he being dead and buried, but raised from the
dead, is he that has the power over Hell and Death, to give life and
immortality to whomsoever he will, according to Scripture, that says, as the
Father has power to give life to whom he will. So has the Son power to give
life to whomsoever he will; therefore it is said, that thy dead body shall arise
with my dead body, which came to pass in that day the Lord arose from the dead,
as says the Scriptures, The Graves were opened, and many bodies of Saints
which slept arose, and came out of the Graves after his Resurrection, and went
into the Holy City, and appeared to many; so that he that is dead is alive, and
lives for evermore to intercede for us to God, as that our High Priest and
great Bishop of our souls, that does enlighten the world as he is maker of the
world with the light of the world, from the principle of light that he has
formed, and determining to give some more better thing unto his Saints, from
that he is the Lord the Redeemer, as the man Christ Jesus my Lord, gives to
them his spirit, according to promise, who is to them their life of light, and
that the world might know and believe to the receiving the promise, sent forth
his Apostles to preach the minifestation of life, for the obedience of faith,
for the receiving the promise; but asking what that he was so often spoken of
that took flesh and blood the children had, and took on him the Seed of
Abraham, what says R. C. to this was it Christ yea or nay, R. C. says, that
that he you Query of is God, that was in Christ the Babe born of Mary to
reconcile by Christ the world unto himself, that they might not perish in their
sins. And this Christ being born of Mary, who was of the Liniage of Abraham,
from whom came David, according to the Line of the Covenant, Christ coming from
Mary, proceeded from David after the flesh; and God forming himself with and in
that body Christ for its Savior to man, was the power to Christ, by which
Christ brought forth man's salvation; But what shall I say unto you, do you
sport with God, has it not been his pleasure to become one with man in that
person Christ for us, salvation to bring to pass; you know it says, God was in
Christ, reconciling the world unto himself; but could he, or did he without the
body of Christ reconcile, and is it not the body of Christ by which we are
reconciled unto God yes verily, for so says the Scriptures; and the
condemnation in the creture being a consuming fire, must be quenched with that
that is of force to take away the cause, or else it cannot be, but 'twill
consume, and nothing can change its force, but the virtue of his blood, which
being the Sacrifice that makes the peace that he offered up unto God, him to
atone for sinful man, and if that it could not have been that the soul of
Christ could not have overcome the wrath of God that stuck in man's nature for
his sins by his obedience in drinking up the Cup, by which he trod the
Wine Press of his Fathers wrath alone, it could not have been that the soul of
man could ever possibly have broke through the Angels sword set by God to keep
the way of the Tree of Life, from sinful man to take of its fruit, that he
might live; but God knowing it not possible for poor man to overcome the
Eternal Death, chose the Seed of Abraham which was Christ to become one with
him, that by him Christ might overcome him that had the power of death, that is
the Devil, by what for us he has done and suffered; but if you will not take
salvation from God, by Christ who is the way, the means, the truth, and the
life; Let your power you say you feel be what it will, it matters nothing to
me, you shall die in your sins, for that he is as himself has said, the door,
and he that enters in by him shall find pastor, but he that climbeth up some
other way, he is a thief and a robber, and breaks in but to steal.

Page the Twelfth, Accuse me of wronging you and your principles, in saying you
center in Nature instead of Grace; to so speak, is it a wrong done to you, when
you say that the light in conscience that every man is enlightened with that
comes into the world, is Savior, Advocate, Redeemer, Mediator and Christ, as
your Book wrote to Priests and Professors, as you term them to scorn, called
The Great Mystery of the Great Whore, does frequently declare; this being your
assertion, and that we have no Redemption by what done for man by Christ, and
that he died not for a Savior, but for an Example, by what he did in doing the
requirings of the Law; that as he did by himself fulfill all righteousness
according to the requirings of the Law, so was he only our example; and that if
we for our selves fulfill not the law, we have no salvation by him by what he
has done and suffered; these being your principles your own confessions shall
be my justifier, that I have not wronged you in saying you center in Nature
instead of Grace; but in that the Covenant of Grace that God has made for man
in Christ, which God calls his new Covenant, stands upon the blessing of
blessedness, God not imputing to men their sin, being that foundation for
salvation, to which the will of God is our obedience of faith, as said Christ
to his Disciples, that this is the will of God that you believe on him whom God
has sent; the conclusion is, that he that believes shall be saved, but he
that believes not is condemned already. Now then Christ as he is the word and
maker of all things, is not the light in conscience, but the word that was God,
and with God, without whom nothing was made that was made, in him was life, and
the life was the light of men, and he it is that enlightens every man that
comes into the world; now mark, here is the word in whom is the life, which
life is the light of men; and this word is God that enlighteneth every man that
comes into the world, which word being the womb that the life is in: the word
is one thing, and the light another, which light of men being but an efflux of
the life in the word, is not the word, nor is it God, for that it is but a
property sent forth from him the word, who being goodness it self, sends forth
his love into the heart, to wit his life, which shed in the heart, is to the
heart a light, and this he calls his spirit, of which he gives his Children to
partake at times for relief in their pilgrimage state, which light is not
Christ, though of his Nature, no more then the light of the Sun, is the Sun it
self: And if the light in conscience, as you say it is, be Christ, then so many
men as are in the world, so many Christ's.

For that that is in conscience is circumscribed by conscience; and if
circumscribed a distinct part from the whole, as a tree whose womb is the Earth
out of which it comes forth a tree, as a tree, a distinct particular from the
earth in its own particular root, from whence it has its growth; so that the
light in conscience is not Christ, no more then the beam of the Sun that
incorporates with the radical moisture of the earth is the Sun; but I am not
ignorant whereto this opinion tends. Now then, Christ as he is the word and
maker of all things, is called God, but in that he has the power to give out
of himself life that is in himself, promises to give forth out of himself his
life, which is his spirit, to them that do believe on him, which life, as
before told you, is the light of men; which life when beamed into man's heart,
no more abides to the satisfying of the heart, then while it is a living
motion, which when the word withholds his breathing, as to the cretures sense
is dead: as you have an instance in fire, which you see lies in the wood, but
till the wood be set on fire, the fire does not appear, and thence the wood
gives no warmth, and when the wood is kindled that the fire flames forth, you
see it does no longer abide then it has matter, for when the wood is burnt the
fire goes out: and who of you that have experience that knows not the thing
I speak; therefore the light in conscience, not Christ, though a measure of his
nature, for as the fire lies occult in the wood, and is not manifest; so is it
with the light in conscience, which lies in conscience as dead, till quickened
by Christ from motion by his spirit; and hence my conclusion is, that the
spirit of man being his internal light, has no more power to give salvation to
the soul, then the soul has to save it self; but in that it being a sparkling
glimps in the soul, does convince the soul of what is good, and what is done
amiss, which discerned by the soul, serves for a director to the soul, to go to
Christ where only lies its help; which spirit of man, says the Scriptures, is
the candle of the Lord, by which he searches the inmost parts of his belly,
which spirit or light in man coming down with every man from Adam by
Generation, is the instinct in Nature, that does incline the creture naturally
to call on God, the instance hereof we have in Babes, that when themselves can
express in their mouths, is found the Name of God; which being but the light of
nature in that man's spirit, is a being from nature, and not the light of life
that Christ gives to his Saints through their believing on his name; and if so,
it had been that the light in conscience had been Christ that could have saved
them, and given to them the power to become the Sons of God, it had been little
to us the promise of God to send his spirit to us for another comforter. Be not
deceived, this light of conscience cannot lead the follower of its dictates
farther then unto its own center, which is the center of Nature, and its power
felt; but the power of the center of nature, and if you was not so highly
exalted from your own conceits, you might come to a understanding of your
spirits, and the center of your life being from the property of fire; thence
it is you cast forth flames from out of your mouths to devour all that does
oppose you in your errors. And for your attributing to the light in every man's
conscience the power to give wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and
redemption; let me tell you, is a doctrine not what declared by Scriptures, nor
known by the experimental traveller that waits for the salvation of God, and
your assertion that by believing in it the power known, and the feeling it the
witnessing the breaking of the Serpents head, is a Doctrine that nulls the
purpose of God, in sending Christ the woman's seed, who was the breaker of the
Serpents head, who had he not broke it when he was in this world in a body of
flesh, could not have been broken by all what that man could do; and if your
doctrine be true, the Scriptures false, and God made by Christ's Apostles liars,
and Christ suffered for man in vain; but God is just, his Scriptures true, his
Apostles justified in his sight; but it being a so heterogene doctrine, that
all men in whom there is the faith will see through it, I leave it to the
condemnation of the Truth.

Page the Thirteenth, Ask, was his sufferings and death everlasting, and say,
is the asserting of this good doctrine? but say I, is not your denying it for
good doctrine damnable, in that by them it is by which we can be saved, they
being the Gospel and the power for our salvation, as Paul unto the Corinthians
at large does preach; which Gospel is that that is called the everlasting
Gospel, that the Revelations speaks shall be preached again after many days to
Kindred, Tongues, People and Nations, which Gospel abides for ever, which being
the death of Christ for our sins, and resurrection from the dead for our
justification abides for ever, though he suffered not always.

Page the Seventeenth, stumble you at what declared of Christ's being personal
in a body, proposing if Christ be not the light in every man's conscience, how
said he to his Disciples, He that is with you shall be in you, I in them, and
they in me, that they may be one as thee and I am one, Holy Father; but say I,
why will you preach false doctrine, not discerning the truth, for is it not
written, that he says, That he that believes on me, out of his belly shall
flow forth living waters; but says John, This he spoke of his Spirit, which as
yet they had not received; and the reason, Christ was not as it ascended, and
that to them he might perform his promise, says, that it is necessary for you
that I go away, for that unless I do the Comforter cannot come, but if I go
away I will send him, and he shall be with you and in you, and lead you into
all truth, and shall take of mine, and show it unto you, and testify of me,
which the world cannot receive, because said he, they believe not on me; it is
plain, he spoke of the spirit, who was with them, but not in them till his
Ascension; and when he was ascended up into his Glory, having received all
power in Heaven and in Earth, according for what him was promised, sends the
spirit as he had promised, who when he came sat upon them with cloven tongues,
and testified by the Apostles, by Signs and Miracles, showing wonders in their
testifying to Christ the Savior of men, who filling their hearts with joy and
gladness, gave them to partake of the Union with God and Christ, by which
Communing they was one in the Union of the glorious Joyful life of God and
Christ. And this is the clear truth, which if it be not hid from your eyes,
believe, and fall down, and worship the ancient of days, and the Lamb upon his
Throne, who was dead and is alive, and lives for evermore; and if it should be
otherwise interpreted, according to what your inference of it would make, it
must follow, that being one as God and Christ is one, we are Gods as God is
God, and Christ as Christ is Christ, and from what urged by the Scripture where
Christ says, I am the light of the world, the Scripture speaks the truth: and
can you rehearse the Scriptures and not believe the Truth? for you may see, if
that you would not shut your eyes, that Christ spoke not of the light in the
Jews Consciences, but of himself, as he was with them in person, for where he
says, I am the Light of the World, he says, not as I am Light in your
Consciences, by what follows, but you will not come to me that you may have
life; and that this is his meaning, is certain by what follows, While I am in
the world, I am the light of the world, and while you have the light walk in
the light; but the Prince of this world comes, but in me he has nothing; and
says Christ, He that believes on me shall not enter into judgment, but I will
raise him up at the last day, which he speaks not of any thing in himself, that
is distinct and apart from himself, making his person not Christ, but something
that was in his person, to wit the light; to convince you of your mistake, I
present you with his own words wrote down by Luke, That being arisen from the
dead for their confirmation that he was Christ, shows them his hands and his
feet, wherein was the print of the nails that nailed him unto the Cross,
saying, handle me, and see that it is I my self, for a spirit has not flesh
and bones as you see me to have; and to put them out of doubt, calls to them
for meat, who gave him broyled fish, and a honey comb, and he took it and did
eat before them, which having done, says, All must be fulfilled that was
written of me in the Law of Moses, Psalms and Prophets, for said the Lord, thus
it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to die, and to rise from the dead the
third day, that Repentance and Remission of Sins should be preached in his name
amongst all Nations; and ye are witnesses of these things; but Thomas being not
there when the Lord showed himself, says, that except I see him, and put my
hands in his side, and my finger into the print of his nails, I will not
believe: the Lord appearing another time when Thomas was by, calls to him, and
bids him put his hand in his side, and his fingers into the print of the nails,
and be not faithless; which Thomas having done, cries out, My Lord, and my God;
but said the Lord to Thomas, Thou have seen and felt, and have believed, but
blessed are they that have not felt nor seen, and yet do believe; and having
promised to them to send his Spirit to endue them with power, leads them to
Betheny, and blessed them, which while he was doing, was taken up into Heaven
in their sight; by which discourse it does appear, that Christ was not the
light in his person, but Christ as he was personally in his body of flesh, to
whom John bore witness, as the Lamb of God that took away the sins of the
World: by which it does appear that this fiction that says, the light in
Christ is Christ, and not Christ the Christ in his person, is a denying Christ
come in flesh, and to be feared that Antichrist foretold by John, that was to
come, and the affirming the blood of Christ not that that did Atone with God
for sinful man, the trampling under foot the blood of the Covenant, making it
an unholy thing, doing despite to the spirit of Grace, by which we are
sanctified. But this being so ridiculous a fiction is condemned of old by the
Scriptures; and this so great an error has risen amongst us by changing the
name, by which we only can be saved, to the changeing the truth; but in that
it does appear that Christ is Christ, as he was in the form of our persons, a
Savior, and by that form Salvation for man has wrought your principles, that
the light in Conscience every man born into the world has is Christ, is out of
Truth, and that it is that convinces him of sin does manifest you deny the
Christ of God; but says the Lord, I go away, and will send the spirit, and he
that shall convince the world of Sin, of Righteousness, and of Judgment; of
Sin, because they believe not on me; of Righteousness, because I am gone to the
Father; of Judgment, because the Prince of this World is cast out. Now if the
Light in Conscience be the Spirit, then must every man have Christ's Spirit,
that comes into the world; And whether Christ that says, his Spirit the world
cannot receive, because they believe not on me, or you, are to be believed in
this point, I commit to be considered of by men, and say this, that the
attending upon the light in Conscience, for the Christ leads not to Christ,
neither is it his Spirit, for the Spirits work in man is to lead man out of
himself, and all depending on himself to Christ, and to a depending on Christ,
that by him the wounded soul may obtain peace in God our Father, in and by our
Lord Jesus Christ, who is the propitiation for our sins, according unto the
Holy good pleasure of our Righteous God, who gives his Spirit to them that ask
him by Faith on his beloved Son. Now that Christ himself and his Spirit is not
one, you see by his words, that speaks of himself, as one, and of the Spirit as
another; I go away, but I will not leave you comfortless alone; I will send you
another Comforter, the spirit of Truth, and he shall take of mine, and give it
unto you; and why says Christ, I say of mine, it is because the Father has
given to me all that he has; Mark, here is the Father that gives all to the
Son, and here is the spirit that takes from the Son, and gives to Christ's
believers; here is three, the Father, Son and Spirit, the Father the Giver, the
Son the Receiver, the Spirit the Dispenser, to men, the Father the good will,
the Son the doer of his good will, the Spirit the Reward to them that set their
Seal that God is true, who has sent his Son into the World, from the love he
bore the world, that they might not perish, but have everlasting life; and unto
Christ, says the beloved John, there are three that bare Record in Heaven,
Father, Word and Spirit, and these three are one, both in respect of consent in
their testimonies; as also in respect of their eternity of being, who being a
substance of so transcendent a clarity of spiritual subsistencie, which neither
eye has seen nor ear has heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man
to know, but as to him its given by the Son who reveals him, who determining
with himself to manifest himself, he the all-nothingness becomes the
al-somethingness to his own manifestation, who having wil'd a being to bring to
pass that that he had wil'd, attracts in his will a desire for a center of the
all-things, that he the will, in his all-seeingness did foresee from Eternity,
and having by his desire astringe the matter for a corporal form into a nature
for production of cretures, speaks forth the model by his word, who effects by
power, to wit, his Spirit, the Universe with cretures in their diversities and
variety of colors and shapes, which being the truth, that thousands of the
Quakers that are so called, I hope do believe, do hope the wisdom of the
Powers, and all good and religious men, will keep up a charity, to the good,
not imputing to them the errors of the wicked, for that you know that in the
soundest bodies, often it happens, there breaks forth a Boil: But to my
Discourse, whose business is to clear the point, that Christ without us is
Savior, and not the light in conscience, that you say is Christ; to that end,
turn to the Question the Lord puts to Peter, who says Peter, whom say the
people I am? his Reply to his Lord, Some says thou art Elias, some Jeremiah,
or some of the Prophets; but says the Lord unto Peter, whom say thou that I
am? Peter makes Answer, Thou art Christ the Son of the Living God. The Lord
replies to Peter, and declared him blessed, for that flesh and blood had not
revealed it unto him, but my Father that is in Heaven: See, 'twas Christ that
spoke to Peter, as in person without him, and not the Light Christ that spoke
to Peter from within him, and that that revealed Christ to Peter, that Christ
was the Son of God, not his light in his Conscience, but the Father that is in
Heaven, it is time you wake from sleep, and come to the acknowledging of the
truth, for unto us there is left no excuse; take heed, stumble not, least you
fall backward: Surely my Friends, from the beginning of Genesis to the end of
the Revelations the Scriptures concern themselves to bear witness to him who is
the Truth, the man Christ Jesus, and our Lord the Lords Christ, and our
Savior, and unto him confess; I, to the Glory of God our Father, and our Lord
Jesus Christ. But my Friends, from of old God complains, the Leaders of my
people cause them to err.

From Page the seventeenth to the nineteeth, charge not my Pen to return to
what there wrote, for that I will not be provoked, but refer the Reader to the
paper, which examining, will find the Truth against your Opposition to its
Position, That the Christ of God that Redeemed man was him that was born of the
Virgin Mary, and personally came into the world in flesh, and not the light of
Creation in the Conscience, which you say is Savior, Redeemer, Advocate, and
the Christ; but if my former paper wanted explaining, I hope that this will
clear the point; but what is asserted of mine that you bring against me for to
justify you in your invictiveness, in that I have declared the Truth, satisfy
my self in Gods reward, being contented to be reviled, without reviling again,
knowing that if they called the Master of the House Beelzebub, you will call
his Disciples Devils; but while you stigmatize others, take heed you brand not
your selves, and for your contempt, saying, I use your words, I think there is
amongst you that can witness, that many years since I judged much of your
language a Cant; therefore I assure you, you take too much upon you you Sons of
Levy, or that I use any other man's words or matter, to glister with their
covering, saving the Scriptures of Truth; my conscience bears me witness, I use
none; but if I should, if they are useful to help for the clearing of the
Truth, am I thence to be condemned; since you make use of your Head-Leaders
words and principles, to fight against the Truth. Brethren, I will ask your
selves, if that it was not at all times my manner of Discourse, when at any
time, as occasion offered, that I did not as well acknowledge the Sovereignty
of the Lord, in the new re-generation, as I did the sufferings of the Lord for
our Salvation; and should I have denied the one, by only crying up the other; I
should have been reproved by my Maker, but in this I rejoice, that God has
pleased of his Grace, to give to me of all men most unworthy to understand the
whole Truth, to which I bore Testimony in the paper; For that if it be as you
say, that the light whereof every man that comes into the world be Christ and
Savior, and not Christ that was born of the Virgin Mary, as he was in person,
then the Scriptures Testimony of him are not true, and his Apostles are found
Liars before God, in that they are they that testify to him; see Luke the
first and second Chapters; Paul in all his Epistles, as also all the Apostles
in their Acts Recorded, Isaiah the 7 th, the 14 th verse: Isa. the 9 th, and
verse 6. To us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given, and the Government
shall be upon his shoulders, and his Name shall be called wonderful
Counselor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of peace; is
not this he that came from Bosrah, whose garment was died red; and is not this
Christ whose Garments was stained with his blood, when pierced with Longinos
his sword, if so, not the light in conscience, but the babe born; you say, that
the Gospel by which we are saved, is the power you feel; the Scriptures say,
the sufferings of Christ is the Gospel, and the power of God by which we are
saved, Corinthians the first Epistle, the fifteenth Chapter, and first, second,
and third verses; if so, not the light in conscience, you say, not Christ the
Savior as he was man, consisting of Body, Soul and Spirit, but the light in
that body, the Scriptures say, that that man born of Mary, that suffered by
Pilate was the Christ and Savior, Luke the 24 and the 39. A Spirit has not
flesh, and bones as I have, and verse 46. speaking of his sufferings in his
person, says, That thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise the third day
from the dead, that Repentance and Forgiveness of sins should be preached in
his Name to all Natiions, this being truth, not the light in conscience, for
that the light in conscience is a diffused principle, and Christ was a
compacted body; you say, that Christ's sufferings was temporary, and not
Eternal, but the power you feel eternal; therefore not his sufferings the
Gospel; but the power, the Scriptures say, that at once by himself he offered
up an offering once for all them that shall be made Heirs of eternal salvation,
Hebrews the tenth; if so, not the light in conscience, in that it was not the
offering, but the person, who by the offering up of his body once for all, you
say that Patriarks and Prophets giving heed unto the light in them, it was
sufficient to them for their salvation; but the Scriptures say, if the blood of
Bulls and Goats, serve for the sanctifying of the flesh; how much more shall
the blood of Christ, who through the eternal spirit offered himself without
spot to God, Purge your Consciences from dead works to serve the Living God;
and for this cause he became the Mediator of the New Covenant, and that by
means of his death for the Redemption of the Transgressors that were under the
first Testament, that they that are called may receive the promise of eternal
inheritance; and since the offerings by the Law must be purged with blood, or
else there was no remission, it was says he necessary, that since the patterns
of the true, to wit, the things in the Heavens should be purified with these,
that the Heavenly things themselves should with better sacrifice then these;
not that he should offer himself often, as the Highpriests that entered into
the Holy place every year, with blood of others; but now in the end of the
world has he appeared to put away sin, by the sacrifice of himself; and as it
is appointed to men once to dye, but after death to come to Judgment: So Christ
was once offered to bear the sins of many, and unto them that look for him,
shall he appear the second time without sin unto salvation, Hebrews the 9 th,
the latter end of the Chapter; If so the Scriptures True, your Doctrine is out
of Truth, That says, Patriarks and Prophets had Salvation by the Light in
their Consciences, since that was but the hand that guided them to him that was
to come, that purified all by blood, without which no remission; therefore not
the light in conscience the Christ and Savior, but he that offered up himself
a living Sacrifice for the putting away sin; you say that you are beyond Faith;
but say I, was you ever in it? if you had, and received the Promise upon your
believing, sure you would have held out unto the end, that you might have been
saved; but you turning away to another Christ, and another Gospel, then the
sufferings of Christ shows you, either never had the Faith of the Lord Jesus,
or that you are Apostatized from it, for the Scriptures say, that we are kept
by Faith through the Mighty Power of God unto Salvation. The Galathians
Witchcraft, that having received the Spirit, by the hearing of Faith, the
Concition bewitched them to another Gospel, Obedience to the Law; you say, that
the Soul of man is no creture; the Scriptures says, What will it profit thee
to gain the whole World, and lose thy own soul, and thou fool, This night
shall thy soul be taken from thee; and says God, I will not for ever contend
with man, nor be wroth, for the spirit would fail before me, and the soul that
I have made; so that say I unto you, O you children of men, is it I that deny
the Christ of God, or is it you that say, he the Word that was made flesh, is
not Christ and Savior? but that is he that was in that Christ's person, which
you call Light, saying, that a measure of it is in the Conscience of every man
that comes into the world, and thence affirm, that he was but a manifestation
for our Example, as says Solomon Eccl. and J. P. in their papers. Now we know
this, that it is written, that that tha^ was in Christ was God, who being in
Christ, did by Christ reconcile the world unto himself, not imputing to them
their sins, who having by Christ reconciled the world unto himself, requires
all men to believe on him, that by him they may have Everlasting Life, which
the Scriptures concludes, that whosoever believes on him shall be saved, and he
that believes not shall be damned; for Christ being come a light into the
world, men will not come unto him that they may have life; for which they shall
dye in their sins, for this is the will of God unto men, that they believe on
him whom God has sent; and Christ who is the enlightner of those that come to
him by faith, he gives to them his spirit, by which they become the Sons of
God, who will raise them up at the last day; from whence I conclude, that you
are they that deny Christ the Son of God who is the enlightner of men, and the
Savior of his people Israel. And Brethren, am I become your Enemy, because
that I tell you the Truth? well, although by you condemned, by God justified;
and thence pray that your sins be not laid to your charge, giving you to know
that I go not from the Truth, because I declare to the Truth, that does
convince of your mistake, owning that in you that is to be owned, in those
things that is true, and trust so shall be kept unto the end: but if you will
have it, that I am no Quaker, thinking thereby to expose me to outward
troubles, know that I fear none of these things, for I have not so learned
Christ, that I should stand in fear of you, or any man that shall gainsay the
Truth; your accusing me of coming amongst you for to shelter under your Cloak,
does manifest you what you are; but wickedness comes from the hands of the
wicked, as for me my hand shall not be upon you, and do rejoice, since that to
be a Quaker is to deny my Lord and Master, that you, though from Envy, do
declare me to be none, and to help forward your desires in this matter do say,
that I am and ever was far from your opinion touching Christ the Lord; and in
this matter do say, I am no Quaker; and ^aving much to say of the cause of my
leaving you from prin^iples and practices, I forbear till a further time,
supposing by ^ou, thereunto shall be provoked; but if it might be the will ^f
my God, do much rather desire your Repentance, to the blot^g out for ever your
reproach, and shall not forget to make (...) Supplication to God for you, to
vouchsafe to you his Grace, (...) that it be his Heavenly will, and if that I
must be judged ^r Enemy; because I tell you the Truth; he who showed me by his
Visions on my bed in the days of my youth thi^ that I see now are brought to
pass; who has preserved me (...) to this day, in that he is my rock, will keep
me I trust in (...) fear, for that he is my God.

Peace and good will to all men from God our Father, and from our Lord Jesus
Christ, who has loved us and washed us in his own blood, for that he dyed for
us, to purchase us to God, even Jesus, the Mediator of the Covenant of Grace,
by the good will of God, and our Father, sanctify all men, to the Resurrection
from the dead, by the putting on the New Man hidden in the heart, the birth of
God by Jesus Christ through the ^bounding of his love by his own spirit; Is the
prayer of (...) that desires the welfare of all men, and known by the N^ of

ROBERT COBBET.

FINIS.

