An Account of The Nature, Causes, Symptoms and Cure OF THE DISTEMPERS That are
incident to Seafaring People. WITH Observations on the Diet of the Seamen IN
HIS Majesty's Navy. Illustrated with some Remarkable Instances of the
Sicknesses of the Fleet during the last Summer, historically related.

Libera per vacuum posui vestigia princeps,
Non aliena meo pressi pede.
Horat. epist. xix. lib. 1. By W. C. of the College of Physicians, London: And
Physician to the Blue Squadron of his Majesty's Fleet.

LONDON, Printed for Hugh Newman at the Grasshopper in the Poultry. 1696.

TO THE Right Honorable THE Lords Commissioners For executing The Office of
Lord High Admiral of England, Ireland, etc.
My Lords,
YOUR Lordships having been pleased to appoint me One of the Physicians of the
Fleet, I thought my self obliged, to use my utmost endeavors for discharging
the Trust you committed to me: and therefore I, not only, kept a Journal of the
Men's Names, and a History of their Sickness; but of the Medicines I gave them,
with the Success they had. And when I had considered the way of their living,
and other circumstances, there appeared to me a very reasonable View of the
Diseases at Sea, which I first committed to Paper for my own Assistance in the
Service; but am now persuaded to submit those Thoughts to the Censure of the
World. Yet, in This I shall run no great Risque, under your Lordships
Protection, which, I hope, you will not deny me; since it is your Lordships gave
Them, first, Life, and They have grown up under your Favor to what They are:
so that if They obtain the End, I designed Them for, the public Good; It Is the
Public must thank you for Them. I am, with great Respect,

My Lords, Your Lordships Most Humble and Faithful Servant, W. Cockburn.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Usefulness of this Work page 1 A prospect of it 3 What the Sea Victuals
are 5 The consequence of this Victualling 8 Is first the Scurvey 9 Its
description ibid. How these symptoms are produced 10 How that extraordinary
weakness 13 And unequal Pulse 15 How the Inflammation of the Gums 16 Their
Rottenness and Itching ibid. How the Scurvy and Melancholia Hypochondriaca are
distinguished 17 What may follow upon the use of their Bread 21 What from their
Burgoo 24 And Pease 25 What the Inconveniences from their Lodging 26 As
catching Cold 27 And a Fever 28 Its description 29 An hypothesis for helping us
to account for its symptoms ibid. How the weight and heaviness is produced 31
How the lesser activity 32 And lesser weakness ibid. How the Coldness over the
whole body 33 How the Coldness in the extremities 34 And not in the Brain 35
How the pain is produced 36 And such an One as when one is beat 37 Why the
Pulse is weak 38 Rare ibid. And depressed 39 How a want of Appetite 40 And
Costiveness 41 How the sleepiness ibid. How the warmth begins 44 The Pulse
becomes great and strong ibid. They are restless 45 And very dry ibid. How the
roughness of the tongue 46 And its Blackness ibid. Why they are hard of
Breathing ibid. How their breath is like fire 47 Why they are light headed
ibid. Fevers end in death 48. Or by Sweating, a Looseness, etc. 49 The former
supposition is not a mere Hypothesis ibid. This interrupted perspiration makes
Diarrheas 51* And Agues 53 An enumeration of their symptoms ibid. The symptoms
accounted for, and first the Coldness after dinner 55 The Paleness of their
Lips 56 Their Trembling ibid. Their weak Pulse 57 Why they are insensible,
while their external senses are right ibid. How their Bodies like a Corpse 59
And a great drought ibid. Yet in the place of Death comes Warmth and Heat 60
Which ends in sweating 61 Their Pulse stronger and more frequent ib. And a
beating in their Head ib. A great drought 62 The Pulse natural for some time 63
Why it recurs every day, every third, or fourth 65 How it ends sometimes in
death, and that in the return 70 The Seamens life, as to what concerns their
temperance, etc. ibid. A hint at the diseases got nearer or under the line 73
Why I have neglected the common stories of Poison, etc. 74 Why Poison ibid. Why
the Chemical Principles 77 Why Acid and Alkali 82
The Contents of the Second Part.
THE Way of relating these Observations 89 First Observation of a Fever 90
General hints for its Cure ibid. Why the Practice is unsuccessful 91 What my
thoughts are about these general hints 93 What of Blee^ding, Sweating, etc. 94
A remarkable history of a Patient of Dr. Willis's 96 The particular Cure 99
Observation 2d of a Fever 101 Observation 3d 102 A Remark 104 Observation 4th
105 Observation 5th 106 Observation 6th 108 Observation 7th 110 Observation 8th
of an Ague 112 The General Cure ibid. An Account of the Jesuits Bark 116 A
necessary Corollary deduced from this account 119 The Chemists have given no
account of its way of working 121 Its astringent power is unaccountable 123 Why
the Bark has sometimes so pernicious effects 125 The particular Cure 126
Observation 9th 128 Observation 10th 131 An Examination of Helvetius's
Bark-Clyster practice 135 Citations from his Book ibid. The answer 141
Observation 11th of the Scurvy 150 Observation 12th 152 A particular Remark 153
Observation 13th of a Diarrhea or Looseness 154 Observation 14th 155 A remark
of a particular Medicin 156 Observation 15th 157 Observation 16th 159
Observation 17th of a Decay 161 Observation 18th of a Clap 164 A singular way
of curing it ibid. Observation 19th of a Quinsey 168 Two Remarks 169
PART I. An account of those Sicknesses that are incident to Seafaring People.
The usefulness of this Undertaking.
THere are none who have used the Sea for any time, especially in the Royal
Navy, but must be highly sensible how useful an undertaking of this nature is;
and how assisting to most of the Surgeons, who pursue their employments at Sea,
and particularly in the Meridian for which this is calculated; and yet 'twas
never attempted by any, of what Nation soever, as far as I can learn, either by
reading or conversation. Officers and Sailers must needs have their courage
(which is naturally great, besides its being supported by the Applauses and
Rewards of Honor) much augmented, by the security they may have in the
suitable provision that is made for their health; and the Surgeons themselves,
having a full view of all the maladies they are to encounter upon that Element,
will surely be better provided than when their expectations are more general.

Its use, I think, by these small hints, is put beyond all exception; and I do
heartily wish I could have as good help to my practicing in Medicin in our
world, the warry Element; but since I can have none, I doubt not but the
ingenious will very easily pardon a Treatise of this kind; and almost any
mistakes, I can fall under, since the paths of former Curers are as little
perceptible, as the furrows made upon the face of the angry Abyss, by our lofty
floating Forts, can prove guides to the Seamen that steer the same course but
next hour: for my own part, I should have no more ventured upon it, than I
should have been the first that put to Sea, were it not that the station
Providence has placed me in, might seem to demand some testimony of my
diligence in the same; which, I must confess, is not so great as the Service
requires. This I was, once, resolved to perform by the way of a Journal of
those Sicknesses, that happen*d since my concern in the Fleet; but thinking,
again, that this should be more complete, if I should consider in general, by
their way of living, the Sicknesses they might be most subject to, and then
year after year, so long as I am to continue with them, to give the particular
History of the Sicknesses of that year, with an exact account of the success in
the same; which will be so many confirmations of my general Theory, and evince
how well or ill it is established. And therefore I shall first endeavor, to
Its order.
discover such sicknesses as may be peculiar to people that use our narrow
Seas; to distinguish them from those that may be got nearer, or under, the
line; from those that may be common upon the land, to what we have sometimes at
Sea; and lastly, in the history of this year, to denote, in some measure, the
Indications for, and the Method of Cure.

But that all these may be pursued with the greatest exactness imaginable, it
will be highly necessary, first to describe the particular way of their living;
that from this we may see and deduce as naturally, as is possible, those
infirmities, that most especially follow thereupon; and this we shall do, first
by considering their victuals allowed them for their daily sustenance; their
way of living; and lastly their life, as to their temperance or debauches. I am
not ignorant how useful, yea necessary* it had been, to have had some respect
to, and consideration of the temper and constitution of the air, they live in,
and how satisfying it would have proved to such as are curious and ingenious,
to have made some Remarks upon the differences of that at sea and land: but all
I can say upon that head being so general and precarious, and of so little real
use in my design, that I have rather chosen to pass it by in perfect silence,
and not to offer that to the world, of which I have so little satisfaction my
self: yet, this I did not leave quite unattempted, but did carry a very good
Baryscope on board with me, and did hang it as conveniently as I could
contrive; yet in the calmest weather, and at anchor, the heaving motion of the
Ship did so much disturb my Mercury, that I did conclude it of no use, and
perfectly unpracticable, when under sail with the easiest gale of wind; And
therefore to say no more of this, I do betake my self to the considerations I
have just now proposed.

Their Victuals.
And first, the victual, allowed them for their daily sustenance, are Pork and
Pease On Sundays and Thursdays; on Mondays Oatmel (Burgoo) Butter and Cheese;
on Tuesdays and Saturdays Beef and Pudding, or all Beef, which they please; on
Wednesdays and Fridays But^er and Cheese, or Oatmeal and Pease, and with all
these abundance of Bread. Now all these victuals are so sound, and the meat so
well salted* that not only there can be no better found any where, but it is
generally believed, that the Sea-Pork, especially, is the best in England; and
they have a greater allowance of all these in their proper turns, than is
sufficient to satisfy an ordinary Eater. So that whatever a Sailer may complain
of in the Royal Navy, his victuals are a great deal better, and his allowance
larger, than in any Navy or Merchantships in the world. Their drink is as good
Table beer as any Family in England can drink; and the quantum is what they
will. So that, in the general, if we consider the number of men, the length of
the Voyages, in Convoys and Cruisers, the Grand Fleet in the Channel, and their
Work; their Diet will be found, in all these circumstances, to be almost as
well provided and adapted, even for the preservation of health, as it can
possibly be.

It Is true, salt victuals have been found, by experience, the worst of all
other to digest; and Sanctorius, in his book of Statical Medicin, has declared,
that they are the victuals by which we perspire least; and still less by Pork
than the rest* and so, by the laws of Perspiration, it must be concluded to
contain the grossest juices and the worst nourishment: but all this will be
more plain and evident, than I could here, without a needless digression,
demonstrate, if we consider the requisits for digestion and nutrition, which I
have laid down very plainly, and in few words, when I purposely treated of that
subject, in the beginning of my Aeconomy of the h^man body, printed last year,
to which I refer you for a further information. Yet, after all, the bodies of
such working people, not only make the best of such solid food; but this, even,
seems necessary for those who are obliged to undergo so great labor; for tho
the stomachs of sedentary people, and of those who use little exercise, are not
able to reduce such parched and solid food into Chyle, in twelve or fifteen
hours time; and when that is done, this Chyle is so thick, that it is scarcely
able to perform its first voyage through the lacteal vessels, but stops and makes
obstructions in those passages, and disposes such people to Dropsies, the
Jaundice, and other Cachectical diseases. And even tho it should escape these
obstacles, brought its full length, the contraction of the Heart in those, and
the force of their Lungs in the exspiration are so faint, and most of their
other Muscles being seldom acted, the Chyle, as it is carried along their
blood vessels, is not sufficiently pressed, or broken into small enough
particles, that it may become homogeneous, at least to our senses, with the
blood; and so is apt to produce all those inconveniences, grosser blood or
bodies greater than the blood carried about in it, are said to do: yet things
being quite otherwise with our Sailers, and in one part of their business or
another, scarce one muscle of the whole body being left unimploy'd, their
digestion and nutrition not only go as well on with them in this diet, as the
most delicate food with Ladies; but this sort of victuals is, even, necessary
for their toil and labor, and that which is finer and more easily digested,
would not prove of long enough continuance for their work.

The consequence of this victualling.
From what has been said, it is evident, that the greater the work and labor
is, in this way of living, the digestion and nutrition will be the better
performed; the motion of the blood will be more exact, and the health of the
Sailers will be more firm; and, upon the other side, the less their work is,
the hardness of the food, and its saltness, will proportionably have their
effects, and the indigestion that follows upon the one, and the fiery heat that
attends the other, will be the more sensible and considerable; and so, all this
will fall more severely upon the Seamen of the Royal Navy, than upon those in
the Merchant Service; because their labor and work is abundantly greater than
that of the Men of War: tho there is a sort of remedy against that, in their
other victualling, as we shall see hereafter; and in effect, none find the
smart of this so much as the Boatswains Favorites; for the most of them,
especially of the pressed Landmen, are very fit Theaters for this Tragedy,
which is acted, indeed, to the life; and their case is just the same with that
of the Ape's Puppies in the Fable; that which she hates comes to be a lusty
strong Monkey, while she overlays the other through her fondness; the Seamen, whom
the Boatswain turns out to their watch, and who have the fatigue of the Ship,
are in perfect health, while his Favorites are overrun with the Scurvy; which
Is first th^^ Scurvy.
appears first in red spots, which afterward become blue, and then black, upon
the legs and other parts, with an extraordinary weakness, and besides attended
with a redness, itching, and rottenness of the gums, and a looseness of the
teeth; their pulse all this while being very unequal, i. e. sometimes weak, and
sometimes very great: and all these accompanied with a great many more severe
symptoms singled out, and described by* Riverius, and our learned Doctor
Willis; which, therefore, I shall forbear to enumerate, but especially since
it is none of my design to write a Treatise of the Scurvey, but only to give
such illustrations, as may be useful for understanding our Sea Sicknesses, and
helping us in their Cure.

It Is very evident from the heating properties of Salt, and especially of its
corrosive bittern, that it is that only, which can produce such an extraordinary
sense of heat, as we find after a meal of such victuals; and because that heat
cannot be produced, without a greater degree of velocity of the blood, and a
greater secretion of animal spirits, which contract the heart, and produce this
velocity; and they cannot be separated without a greater attrition of the
blood: therefore, since this heat is felt, it is this bittern of the S^lt that
makes this attrition* and produces this heat: now in this production, both the
parts of the bittern, that divide and break the particles of the blood, and the
parts of the blood thus broken and divided, possess a greater space than when
they were compact, and before there were other bodies added. So that, in this
greater possession of space, rarefaction, and artificial moles, as we may say,
the thinner, and more capillary vessels have not cohesion enough to resist this
new bulk; but the blood breaks over its banks, and in as great a quantity as
the force of the motion of the rarified blood, the greatness of the emissary,
and the resistance of the place, into which it breaks, will allow; so that if
this be superficial, if any great quantity is separated, and the blood's motion
so weak, that there is not matter enough perspired, which both by its quantity
and force may keep it fluxile, and carry off some of the smaller parts of the
blood, thus let out by its ow^ common motion; then, the blood, now fallen out,
will corrupt after the same manner, we see it, when out of the body; having,
always, respect to the quantity separated, and the place where it is lodged, i.
e. the blood being thus separated, is in a state of quiet and corrupts; and, in
the different degrees and transitions in this corruption is blue, black, etc.
as we see in this, and cases of the like nature; only, it is longer a
corrupting, because of its small quantity, the fluxility of the perspiring
steams, and the temper of the place; as we might particularly demonstrate if it
would not prove too long. And these mechaical intimations will take off the
necessity of absorbing that is so much talked of in this case. Besides, this way
of the blood's possessing greater space, may still be augmented, if we
consider, that their victuals, we have just now spoke of, must needs breed very
thick blood; which is not so easily broken in pieces, but ra^ifying in bulk, is
more apt to stop, and by its stoppage to make a greater pressure in its
channels, and to produce the abovementioned effects. And since the
extraordinary space is possessed by this viscid and rarified blood, the blood
vessels that are so filled, compress those parts that are contiguous to them,
and have less power to resist, than their sides have to go outward; and
therefore, in this stuffing of the Arteries in the soft brain, their sides,
thus bending outward, will especially press such vessels, that are touched by
'em, whether they are veins, arteries, or nerves; if their resistance be less
than the force that thrusts 'em out, and so the liquors stagnating in all
those, must press the neighboring vessels, and hinder the transmission of
their liquors, in proportion to those powers by which they are pressed. Thus a
smaller quantity will be carried along their cavity; and by reason of this
compression, the quantity of animal spirits that glides into the cavity of the
nerves with an extraordinary weakness is diminisht, because their coats are
deprest, and their channels straightened; so that since by their influx into the
nerves, and derivation into the muscles, their contraction is performed, and
upon this the strength of the whole body depends; then, in this small
distribution of the animal spirits, which is less than what is natural, the
contraction of the muscles is not so powerful as naturally it ought With an
extraordinary weakness.
to be, and the weakness of the body extraordinary. Moreover, since the heart
has the same properties, and is subject to the same laws, with the other
muscles; and they being more weakly contracted, because of a lesser quantity of
animal spirits, that are derived into them; so must the heart be more faintly
contracted too; and since, by the consent of Physicians, and the evidence of
reason, the motion of the blood depends upon the strength of the hearts
contraction; the contraction of the heart being weaker, it is plain, that this
confused mixture of viscid and rarified blood, will have but a very weak
motion; which is continued in the blood, till its return to the heart, bating
what it has communicated, in its circulation, to the arteries and blood to be
propelled; but since it is still losing part of its motion, the further it goes
from the heart; the blood will be, on all occasions, apt to stagnate in the
smaller and remoter vessels; and so produce those red, blue, etc. spots, we
have spoken of. Besides, since the Pulse is only occasioned, by the greater
quantity of blood propell'd into the narrower sections of the arteries; and
this impulsion depends upon the contraction of the heart, as we have said;
therefore because, in this heated and rarified blood, there is sometimes a
greater, and sometimes a less quantity of animal spirits separated; and since
the contraction of the heart depends on their separation and influx, that will
be sometimes greater, and sometimes weaker, and so the protrusion of the blood
being sometimes performed in a shorter time, and sometimes in a longer, and in
a greater or smaller quantity; consequently, And an unequal Pulse.
the Pulse will be quicker and slower, greater and weaker, as we find by
experience. Because the blood is thus viscid and rarified, and apt to stagnate
in the capillary vessels, especially in the remotest parts; and while it is thus
stopped by a greater power of obstruction, than the following blood has power to
drive it forwards, the succeeding blood coming to the place, and not being able
to propel the sticking blood, nor to recoil, because of the Impetus of the
blood that succeeds it; it stagnates too, and increasing in quantity, distends
the sides of the vessels, in which it stopped, to their utmost extent. If those
vessels are superficial and visible to the eye, the blood will shine through in
its ow^ Their Gums inflamed,
color; and because the Gums are such, when they are thus stuffed, they appear
swelled and red. And since the liquors that are thus slowly propell'd, and
subsist, and are wholly obstructed in some parts, the parts, Rotten and
stinking,
where this total obstruction happens, are ulcerated and stink; for the
stagnating liquors are entirely corrupted, and become too sharp and weighty for
their channels, and so break through, as inulcers. But if, before this total
stoppage and obstruction, the parts of the blood now greater than ordinary, can
be carried through those parts by way of perspiration; yet in their passage they
effect the pores, rub upon them, and produce that sense of And Itching.
itching, which sometimes provokes us to scratch those parts; and, by the
bleeding that follows upon that, we frequently prevent a more sudden
obstruction. Yet, in all this misfortune, the Teeth losing their security, must
needs become loose, and fall out. It Is from this viscid and weakened state of
the blood, that we see such swellings of the legs, in chronical diseases,
especially in the evening, after it is somewhat weakened, by the little exercise
our bodies have in the day; while it cannot climb up, in its return to the
^eart, the steep precipices of our legs, out stops and begets that swelling we
feel in the evening; till by the adventitious warmth of the bed, and the direct
posture of our legs, it goes off again against morning. After the same manner,
by considering the condition of our other liquors, and their motion, I could
demonstrate their depravation, and explain, (tho at too great a length for this
place) the other symptoms that appear. But seeing they may be brought from
these fountains, which I have sufficiently dwelt upon; I think, I have said
enough to explain the way, how this sickness is produced with us, and to show
that it is a necessary consequence of an idle life, and of feeding on Salt Beef
and Pork; and therefore I shall proceed to the next proposition, I laid down.
Only, I must put you in mind, The Scurvy and Melanchol. Hypochon. are not the
same.
that I am not for confounding this distemper with the Melancholia
Hypochondriaca, as Riverius, and some other Authors do; which makes us call
every sickness a Scurvy or Scorbutical; because there are some symptoms common
to both: For if this principle were allowed, we could have no distinct notions
of diseases, but they would all be involved in one confused and inextricable
Chaos. Thus, for example, we frequently see vomiting in Fevers, Scurvys, the
Iliac Passion, the Stone in the Kidneys or Vreters, a Fall, and many more; yet
would it not be thought ridiculous to say, that a Fever is an Iliac Passion,
the Stone, a Fall, etc. tho they are both attended with vomiting. And (which is
worse) this would prove very fatal in the curing of diseases: and therefore it
were to be wished, that all diseases were exactly described, brought under
certain Classes, and confined to their respective Families and Tribes. I cannot
upon this occasion omit, what the most expert Physician Dr. Sydenham says on
that subject, in the 307 page of his Practice of Physic, printed at London, in
the year 1685, in the 5th Chapter of that Book* of the Rheumatism. Hic enim
(says he) obiter, sed and libere tamen dicam, quod licet nullus dubitemquin
Scorbutus in his Plagis Borealibus revera inveniatur, tamen eum morbum non tam
frequentem, quam vulgi fert opinio, occurrere persuasum mihi habeo; multos
autem ex iis affectibus (ne plurimos dicam) quorum nomine Scorbutum incusamus,
vel morborum fientium nondum vero factorum, quique nullum adhuc certum
induerunt typum, effe^tae esse; vel etiam infelices, reliquias morbi alicujus
nondum penitus devicti, a quibus sanguis, caeterique humores contaminantur, v.
gr. etc. By the way I must observe, that tho I doubt not but the Scurvy is
really to be found in these Northern Countries; yet, I am persuaded it is not
so very frequent, as it is commonly imagined; but that many of those distempers
(if not the most) we ascribe to the Scurvy, are either the effects of
approaching ills, not yet formed into diseases, or the unhappy relicts of some
unconquered sickness, which still pollutes the blood and other humors, v. gr.
etc. It Is true, the learned Dr. Willis has spoke a little more distinctly, when
he calls the one a cold, and the other a hot Scurvy: but in this, he has too
much sacrificed to the humor of the Ancients, since the last only deserves
that name, and the other does not, really, differ from the Melanoholia
Hypochondriaca* Of all Men, I have the least inclination to dispute about
words; but if things were better settled by proper definitions and names, we
should not fall into so many mistakes; and there is nothing more common, than to
see people catching hold of some words, that are apt to mislead them in their
practice; for instance, besides the Banter of Openers, Malignant, and the like,
who does not, but at the name of Scurvy, immediately fly to Scurvy Grass,
Water^resses, and Horse-radishes; but to what advantage, may be easily
understood by our foregoing Theory, and is fatally felt by such as are truly
Scorbutical; But I Am afraid I have wandered already too far from my subject.
And I shall proceed to the next thing to be considered in order, which may be
sufficiently and easily understood, from what I have said of the preceding two.

Their Bread.
The next thing I shall consider is their bread, of which every man is allowed
one pound a day. Moderate eating of bread has, in all ages, been esteemed to
contribute very much to the preservation of our health, tho none have approved
of quantities. Omnis Repletio mala, panis pessima; a surfeit of any thing is
bad, but one of bread is the worst: its substance is tough and tenacious; and
therefore is not so easily broken and divided by the stomach, and if eaten at
any time in a greater quantity, than is sufficient to give a body to the Chyle,
it is very apt to make way for obstructions, and to breed very thick and gross
humors. But an entire abstinence from bread deprives the Chyle of that due and
necessary body, that is requisite to make its passage slow enough through the
Guts, that it may be the better thrust into the indiscernible doors of the
lacteal vessels: and therefore, in such a famine and scarcity of bread, the
body is deprived of those juices that are made of our victuals, besides
gripings, most troublesome loosenesses, and such other sicknesses as attend
them. Having spoken thus much of bread, in the general, I shall neither pretend
to determine the sufficient quantities of bread that are to be eaten, nor
enquire, whether the crumb of crust of bread are the most wholesome. For these
questions are not proper for this place; since all that concerns us, is the
consideration of the effects our Sea-bisket may have upon their bodies, who are
obliged to make it a part of their daily food.

First then, a pound of bread so dry and solid as that must be, that it may be
the fitter for keeping, if it were brought to the consistence of common bread,
would at least be thrice as big as it is, while in Biscuit; which, I Am apt to
believe, is a little too much for men generally to eat. Besides, after it is
ground by the teeth, and sent into the stomach, it is extremely hard to be
digested, if it be not very fine; and if fine, it so imbibes the small quantity
of Chyle, that is made of the other victuals, that the mass of blood receives a
very small quantity of it; and that mash which passes the guts, where the
lacteal vessels are inserted, is so hardened and compact, that people upon that
diet but seldom trouble the Stool; which every one knows to be of very ill
consequence, and especially at Sea. From what has been said, it is not only
evident, that the abovementioned victuals, are not fine enough to produce those
subtle animal spirits, that make people so easily advert to, and apprehend at
sight, whatever is proposed; and so, not fit to make Wits: but by the grossness
of their humors, the Seamen are disposed to most Chronical Diseases, so soon
as they are in the least overcome with idleness and laziness: tho, otherwise,
all the inconveniences that happen, are excessive costiveness, that troublesome
attendant of our sicknesses. So that we may say, that a little too much eating
of such bread, not only thickens the humors too much, and so disposes our men
to other sicknesses; but immediately produces that dangerous costiveness, which
is apt to produce so many other Maladies, and always obstructs the cure of
Fevers. For when our Intestins are stuffed with a great many days victuals,
they are so distended, and the blood vessels in them so pressed or straightened,
that the circulation through them is very much interrupted, and not only the
blood that used to flow that way, but even that of the neighboring parts is
forced from its channels, and equally filling the channels of the rest of the
parts of the body, that have less resistance, in some degree press the Origin
of the Nerves in the Brain, and blood vessels of the eyes; and so produce that
Stupor and Thickness of Sight, people frequently feel in that case. Besides the
Chyle must needs be very much interrupted, and kept from being conveyed in a
sufficient quantity for recruiting the mass of blood, by the pressure of the
lacteal vessels, which are interwoven with the guts: for the Chyle is forced
along the whole length of the guts, with the grosser mash; and so, the body is
not only deprived of its necessary nourishment, but there is an eminent hazard
of obstructions in the lacteal vessels, which very often produces those
dangerous Ascites's that are so seldom cured.

Their Burgoo.
Touching their Oatmeal victuals (or Burgoo) which of it self is very fit to
correct that thickness of the humors and costiveness, that are the unavoidable
consequences of the abovementioned diet joined with the least idleness: for
Oats being of a thin substance, and of all the grains we use for victuals, that
out of which the greatest quantity of oil may be drawn, they not only preserve
that motion, that is requisite to make a due perspiration, by adding spirits to
the blood, but preserve it in a convenient degree of fluxility; and by their
cleansing power and virtue to keep the belly open, this Burgoo victualling is
highly necessary for our seafaring people. Yet, it is the least liked of all
their victuals because of the small quantity of Butter, they pretend is allowed
them to sauce i^: and therefore perhaps 'twere worthy the consideration of
those, to whom it belongs to order this supply, and who are every way so
careful of the Seamen, to see whether an addition in their Butter might be
allowed; for I am sure, that if that part of the victualling were made more
grateful and agreeable to the Sailers, 'twould infinitely contribute to the
preservation of their health. What I have said on this subject, is in a great
measure applicable to their Pease, which in their own nature are Their Pease.
more temperate than Oatmeal, since they are esteemed by Physicians, and the
learned Galen, I De Aliment. Facultat. Cap. 21. A sort of medium between things
of good and bad nourishment. And therefore I shall proceed to the next
consideration I proposed, which was concerning their Lodging.

Their Lodging.
This is as convenient, warm and easy, as may be at Sea, and for such a number
of men; yet what by the pilfering of Hammocks one from another, their lying on
Deck* or betwixt Decks, when they are pretty warm after a Can of Flip; and the
pressed Men's real want of Clothes, they sensibly contract a cold, which is the
beginning of most of their miseries. It Is not necessary, I should demonstrate
here, the way how that is caught; since it is evidently so by that heaviness
they complain of, pain of their breast, soreness in their bones, and such other
symptoms, Physicians have determined to be the constant attendants of a Cold.
But since I shall have occasion afterward to treat more particularly of this
subject, I shall at present content my self with putting you in mind, that I
have already demonstrated in another place, and have put it beyond exception,
in the judgment of very many, that there is no power in the Air, different from
its weight or gravity, able to produce those symptoms, that are said to follow
upon obstruction, or shutting up of the pores, when we catch cold, and so may
disturb and interrupt perspiration, and breed so many fatal distempers, which
'twould be needless to insist upon in this place, since the thing is generally
agreed upon; yet I cannot forbear observing, that an untimely use of Sweating
Medicines in some, and thickning Lozenges in others, is more frequently the
productive cause of Fevers, Phthisicks, etc. and of more fatal consequence than
a Cold could have been, if left to the strength of the blood and abstinence,
without employing any other Auxiliaries; but more for the confirmation of this,
may be easily collected from what follows in this Discourse. I say, then, since
so far is already clear; and because too, the force of the perspiration is only
kept up, by a certain impetus and degree of the velocity of the blood, and that
is only interrupted by the falling or diminution of this, 'twould be an easy
task to give a more genuine and conceivable account of catching cold, than is
generally assigned to be done by (I don't know what) nitrosity or nitrous power
in the Air; which, upon various occasions, Authors make use of for making the
blood fluxile and tenacious, two very different effects; tho it is fit for
neither, as I have already proved in its proper place. But I shall content my
self at present with enumerating those symptoms, that constitute the essence of
a cold, and then proceed to consider the effects of this, by the different
symptoms that naturally attend it.

Since then, I find it is agreed on by all Physicians, that perspiration in a
caught cold, is not so free as in a natural state, but is interrupted; and a
great deal of that substance, that is usually sep^rated that way, is detain d
in the mass of blood! That which is so detained, will proportionably increase
its bulk, and fill the vessels; and so becomes the source of all those symptoms
that are observed to attend a caught Cold, by a necessary consequence I shall
afterward have occasion to demonstrate: The Symptoms that usually appear in
this case are these, and in this order. First, a weight or The Symptoms of our
Fevers.
heaviness, a pain in the breast, a less activity over all the body, sudden
weakness, a coldness in all the extremities except the Brain, Costiveness, such
a pain in the bones, as when one is beat, a weak, sunk, and depressed Pulse,
sometimes accompanied with a great inclination to sleep; in a day or two the
Pulse is great and strong, they become very warm, restless, and thirsty; the
tongue is dry, black, and rough, the breathing difficult, the breath striking
those that stand near the sick person like Fire; they are delirious, cannot
sleep, and their sickness is terminated in Death, by Sweating, Hemorrhagie,
Looseness, etc.

Having thus enumerated these symptoms, that appear constantly in our Fevers,
and in the same order in which I have ranked them: I shall An Hypothesis.
now endeavor to evince the necessity of their attending an interruption of
perspiration, as I intimated before; and hereafter I shall endeavor to
demonstrate, that that fullness, which gives rise to all these appearances, is
more especially to be attributed to an interruption of perspiration than any
other cause; and so the Hypothesis, tho owned by every one, will be more than
one that is merely such.

First then, an interruption of perspiration will increase the Moles or bulk of
the Fluids, proportionably to what is left unexpell'd, of the quantity which
usually passes through the pores; and because Sanctorius in his Statical Medicin,
has taught us that we perspire, according to the different constitutions of our
bodies, about forty, fifty, or sixty ounces in 24 hours; therefore if but a
sixth part of this be detained, as I could prove it to be; it must needs
produce a very great Plethora in a day or two, in such that were in perfect
health before, besides the addition may be supposed to be made by our daily
food, and, perhaps, rarifying liquors. The blood upon this consideration
admitting of a vast augmentation, distends the sides of its Channels, is more
unfit for motion, and presses the neighboring parts, and so may easily
produce the sense we have, and very often complain of an unnatural weight: for
in this weight or heaviness we have the same sensation, as when loaded under a
great burden, and therefore in this, the parts are the same way affected, as
when a weight presses our body; but by this weight, the Membranes, Nerves and
Muscles are so pressed, and the Bones so forced into their Joinings, that they
could not subsist, if it were not for the violent Nisus of the Muscles; neither
could those Muscles be contracted, but by a more abundant influx of the animal
spirits overcoming this pressure; nor could they be propell'd through the
compressed Nerves, unless they were pusht on by a greater force; and by this
greater force is known that by which is meant to press; and therefore it is
evident, that the blood thus filling its vessels, may easily produce that sense
of Weight, as The weight or heaviness.
was said. The blood, while in this fullness, because of its bulk and the
viscidity it contracts, by this stagnating fullness, both in its own nature, and
by reason of the diminution of its motion, is not so capable to separate its
subtle parts or animal spirits, because it is not so well divided or broken
into such small particles. Now since the abundance and separation of the
spirits in the brain, are necessary for the motion of the muscles, upon the
contraction of which the strength and activity of the whole body depends; it is
plain that in such a case, where the motion of the blood is so languid, and the
secretion of the animal spirits so small; there will be a Less Activity.
laziness and a diminution of activity over all the body. And because this
artificial Plethora, that lessens the activity is very sudden, i. e. in two or
three days, this less activity will be sudden Sudden Weakness.
too, or a sudden weakness will happen; which was to be shown. When the blood
is thus stopped, and become very viscid, it is evident that the body must
proportionably want of its warmth; since that is only an effect of the greater
liberty the small parts of the blood, that make the heat, have, to disperse
themselves over the body; and this liberty is procured by the parts of the
blood in their motion, justling and breaking each other into smaller parts. But
the blood being viscid or tough, is not so easily, in its nature, broken and
dissolved; and therefore the warmth is still more violently locked up and
confined. Moreover, while the blood is so viscid, its motion is even slower
than naturally it should be; and consequently the heat is lessened, and the
blood not so well divided, because the breaking of it into smaller parts
depends upon its motion. So that according as the motion is diminished, and the
force of the viscidity greater, the coldness is proportionably greater over the
whole Coldness over the whole body.
body: and because the blood has its motion from the heart, and in its whole
journey round the body, is still losing part of that motion, (for the reasons
assigned before) more or less in respect of the wideness of the vessels through
which it is propell'd, and their distance from the heart; therefore it is
evident, that that Coldness will not be so sensible in the parts that are
nearer the heart, or about the heart it self and the Thorax, as in the parts
that are more remote or the extremities of the body; for, not only for the
reasons we have just named, this Coldness is first felt in the parts that are
furthest from the heart, but the motion of the muscles in the extremities is
not so strong; and therefore they do not so powerfully press the blood that
glides through those veins and arteries, that go to the composing of these
muscles, as in the other muscles, whose contraction is performed with greater
force and energy; And consequently the blood too, will be more apt to stagnate
in those remote parts than in the other; A Coldness in all the extremities*
so that this coldness will be more sensible in them, as was asserted.
Moreover, the vessels in those remote parts, growing always smaller and
smaller, the further they go; this thick blood will be propell'd with the
greater difficulty through these vessels, than if they were wider; besides, that
by reason of the Glewiness of this ^ough and thick blood, it is more apt to
stick to the coats of the vessels; and so more ready to subsist and to produce
the abovementioned coldness; but tho this coldness is more apt to begin in the
extremities, than in any other parts, and tho there are a great many small
arteries in the Brain, as well as in the other parts; yet this coldness will
not be felt in it so soon as in them, because the arteries are but short, and
soon discharge themselves into the wide Sinus's; so that, tho the blood is very
apt to stagnate, and produce that coldness in the extremities; yet that happens
not so soon in the Brain. Now, the real Except the Brain*
continuation of this coldness over the whole body, may be very well conceived,
if we consider, that while the blood is thus stopped in the capillary arteries,
we can assign no time in the whole circulation, in which a lesser quantity of
blood flows not from the arteries into the veins, than would have flown in a
natural state; and therefore a lesser quantity of blood flowing more slowly, in
the ordinary time of the circulation than is naturally usual, there will a
lesser than a natural quantity come into the heart in every contraction; and
this small quantity will not fill the arteries in that proportion, that is
necessary to force it forward, so as to break and divide it, and to display its
heat. Besides the blood being in this tough and viscid condition, there will
even be fewer of its fine and subtle parts separated in the Brain, and
disposed of into the muscles of the whole body* and the heart in course will
have a fainter contraction, and a weaker power to propel the blood, which
consequently will not be so well divlded, nor the heat so well diffused. Now
supposing that this Lentor or Toughness could consist with the natural motion
of the blood, and that the viscidity could not be broken or dissolved by the
natural motion, it cannot be expected it ever should by a degree of motion,
much below that which is natural; and therefore this sense of cold must be felt
in the other parts, and over the whole body. Pain is nothing else but a
solution or disjoyning of continuous parts, and while the blood stagnates, and
its quantity is constantly augmented, it must needs distend the sides of its
channels, where it stops, and *stretch the arteries beyond their ordinary
pitch. And therefore those vessels, that have not a natural or an adventitious
resistance to oppose this forcing outward of the blood, will have their parts
disunited, ^^ Pain.
i. e. this sense of pain will be produced in them. Now, the bones in
themselves are not affected with pain, neither is there any such sensation
produced in them, but by the membrane, that surrounds and invests them* called
the Periostium: it is evident, that because this may be affected with any sort
of pain, the bones are said to be thus affected; and in beating there are great
contusions, i. e. the vessels have their sides so pressed, by the weight and
motion of the instrument, by which these contusions are made, that the blood
either circulates very slowly, or not at all in those sections of the vessels
so comprest. And the Periostium is either so pressed by the contus'd muscles,
that this feeling is produced in it; or, having its vessels a little comprest,
the subsisting liquors in the comprest part do stop the succeeding liquors in
the same channel, that they actually protrude the sides of their vessels, and
make this sensation of pain: And since the blood in this accidental fullness and
viscidity may affect the vessels after the same manner, it is but natural to
conclude, that such a pain, as when one is beaten, may be produced in this
state of the mass As when one is beat.
of the blood. The blood in this state of viscidity, is less capable of
separating its fine and subtle parts, as has been said; and there being a less
quantity of them, the contraction of the whole muscles will be so much the
weaker; and consequently, since the heart gives the greatest force to the
blood's motion, and its contraction being weaker, the blood will be squeezed
out of the left ventricle into the Aorta, and through the whole series of the
Arteries, with less velocity; and therefore cannot distend the sides of the
Arteries, with that force that is usual, but affects our touch more A weak
Pulse.
weakly; so that the Pulse is weak in this state of the blood: for the same
reason those spirits being produced in a less quantity, and longer in falling
into the muscles, and their contraction not being so frequent: Now the motion
of the heart and arteries being synchronical, i. e. the contraction of the
first, and the filling of the second, being performed at the same time, since
the contraction of the Heart is not so frequent, the sides of the Arteries are
not so frequently forced outward, and seldomer affect our touch, i. e. the
pulse will be that A Pulse that is rare
which we call a Rare Pulse. The blood too, in this its thick and viscid state,
is less attrited and less fluxil, as has been said; but its parts being thus
penned up and compact, cannot possess that space it did, when its parts rolled
more freely one upon another, and were kept at a greater distance, by the
impulse of its subtle parts; and therefore it has not force enough, to sustain
the weight of the sides of its Channels, and they falling closer one upon
another, diminish, as to their bigness, sensibly, and even to our sight; so
that they being thus contracted, shrunk, and as 'twere withdrawn from our
touch; and the pulse being thus removed, is said to be depressed, sunk, etc.
While the And depressed.
blood is so viscid, and the contraction of the muscles so weak, so few animal
spirits separated, and all the secretions almost stopped; the musculous Coat of
the Stomach will lose a great deal of its force, and the liquor of the Stomach
will be separated in a less quantity; the contraction of the Ventricle is not
only weaker, but our victuals that are lodged there, are not dissolved,
attrited and turned to Chyle; but putrify and remain undigested; and therefore
the Stomach being constantly full, there can be no A Want of Appetite,
sense of hunger, as our experience tells us. The same Unactivity and want of
contraction, we find in the muscles of the stomach, are felt, for the same
reasons, in the muscles of the intestines; so that their vermicular contraction
being much abated; whatever is contained in their cavity, will not be
sufficiently comprest, that it may be protruded through the whole process of the
guts; besides their incapacity in respect of the excrements, that are contained
in them; for these excrements being in a very small quantity, both because of
the small supply that is sent from the stomach, and yet smaller from the blood,
by the known passages; they want of that weight, that is necessary to overcome
the constriction of the muscles of the Anus; and little or no secretion being
made into the guts from the blood, there is somewhat wanting of that due
fluxility for their easier propulsion through the intestines, besides what
excrements so fluxil may be supposed to do by way of Stimulus; so that upon all
these accounts, especially by the help of our Biscuit, as has been said, there
will be a vast disposition to costiveness. Lastly, if And Costiveness.
at any time the blood is so viscid, that it is even interrupted, or has a
great deal slower motion in the brain than is usual, and keeps the coats of the
arteries bent outward; then, both because of the small secretion of spirits
there, and the arteries compressing the origin of the nerves, there cannot be a
sufficient quantity of spirits derived through these nerves; and consequently is
produced that Stupor or Sometime^ a Sleepiness.
Sleepiness we sometimes observe. Now since the warm parts of the blood are
confined and penned up in its viscid parts, and if they be so pressed, that the
force of this pression (together with the natural force, that the small, hot,
and fiery particles have to extricate themselves) be greater than the power
that confines them; these hot particles will at last break out, and running
along by the sensible parts, excite the sense of heat; and seeing this viscid
blood stagnates and stops in the small arteries, they are so stuffed up with
that constant supply, that is made in the parts where it thus stagnates, that
this compression will be very considerable, by the blood that is constantly
added, and by the power of contraction in the arteries, that hinder this
stuffing and bending outward of their sides; so that this compression being
continually augmented, at length its power will become greater than the power
of cohesion betwixt the viscid and small parts of the blood; and so the heat
will be extricated, and give its sense to the nerves: and after that some part
of it is set at liberty, and moves to and fro with all freedom, it must
mightily facilitate the setting at liberty of the other small parts from the
viscid parts of the blood, by wedging themselves into them, and breaking their
continuity; and making the viscid parts themselves more fluxil. Now since the
hot and warm parts of the blood are delivered from their confining viscid
parts; because the power of compression is greater than the power of cohesion,
which proceeds from that viscidity; and since the power of compression is
proportionable to the velocity of the blood, and its velocity is greatest in
these arteries that are next the heart; the power then of compression in those
arteries, that are next the heart, will be greater than in these that are more
remote, i. e. the heat will be felt in the parts that are more remote from the
heart, or the extremities, a great while after it is felt in the parts that are
nearer the heart, and they have been warm; and the coldness in the remote
limbs, after the rest of the body has been warm, may last even till the power
of compression in their arteries be augmented by the continual afflux of blood,
and is able to subdue *the force of the viscid and intangling parts; and since
these two powers are uncertain and undetermined, there can be no time assigned,
wherein this coldness may last in the remote limbs, after the rest of the body
has been hot; only we may assert, that the coldness will last the longer in the
extremities, the more viscid the blood is, and the more firmly and closely it
envelopes and confines the heat. Thus a great deal of heat being set at
liberty, it is derived with the other parts, that can easily be dissolved and
are more fluxile, into the veins; and therefore this heat being more free,
rarifies and warms the blood it meets with in the They are very warm.
veins, and excites a great sense and feeling of heat over all the body. The
heat then proceeding thus, the blood is more free, moveable, warm and rarefied;
and consequently the arteries are fuller, and distend their sides further, and
so seem to rise up out of the flesh, and to come nearer the skin: and the
vessels being fuller, the pulse will also feel greater; and because the blood
is now more than naturally warm, more perfectly dissolved, and carried in a
greater quantity to the Brain, there is also a more plentiful secretion of
animal spirits, which coming into the heart in a greater quantity and degree of
determination, make its contraction the stronger, and consequently propel the
blood through the vessels with more force, and distend more strongly the sides of
the arteries, and produce that sort of Their Pulse great and strong.
Pulse we call strong: so that tho the Pulse in the cold fit was not to be
felt, either because the blood was not propell'd through these parts, where we
observe the Pulse, or propell'd with lesser velocity than was necessary to
affect our Touch: yet the velocity being recovered, the blood circulates through
these parts again, affects our Touch, and makes the Pulse great and strong, as
has been said: If we consider in the next place, the extraordinary warmth of
which our Patients complain, we shall not need to have recourse to any
unnatural contraction of the muscles to account for their Restlessness, and
continual tossing about the Bed; but if we remember either what incites our
selves to it, or what our Patients tell us induces them, we may very fairly
account for that symptom; and this is nothing but a constant desire to remove
into those places we had not lain in before, for a relief to our scorching
heat; and so as we warm in one place, we cast about and tumble into another,
which is truly that Restlessness we may observe. Moreover, They are restless,
in this extraordinary heat there is a less secretion of spittle, and that
which is separated is immediately exhaled by this unnatural heat; and therefore
the tongue and all that neighborhood being very dry, the sense And very dry.
of thirst is felt; but because of this dryness, and the particular contexture
of the tongue, which has its fibers running across in its composition; Their
Tongue is rough
These fibers rise, stare, are stiff and rough, and appear to our touch as if
we run our fingers over a grater, so soon as it is deprived of its humidity;
and while the fibers and blood vessels stare thus, they cannot be easily
contracted, and so the parts of the blood that are drier, cannot move, but
stagnate under the surface of the tongue, while its more fluid parts are
pressed forward; and the parts of the blood, that are thus stopped, being of a
high red color, appear very easily And black.
to be black and a little inflamed. And if this heat increases naturally or by
Art, it is evident, that the blood will be mightily rarified, and flowing through
the lungs in this great and rarified quantity, 'twill press them violently on
all sides; so that they will not be so easily expanded, and therefore the The
Respiration difficult.
Respiration will be also difficult, and the small quantity of Air, that is
received into the unexpanded lungs, being warmed with the hot blood which then
circulates through that part affects us so, when expired, as the Air of a Chamber
that is agitated, by the small parts of our fires, that move among it, and this
affects us with heat; so the breath of those sick, strikes those that stand
near like fire. Seeing he blood is driven about Their Breath's like fire.
in such a hu^^y* the animal spirits separated i^ so great abundance, the blood
so very fluxile, and these spirits running through a great many different Tracts
in the Brain, present to us so many different Ideas, according to which we
express our selves; and they being different, and of several sorts, our
thoughts are found very incoherent and unconnected, which is to Rave, or to be
Delirious. That watchfulness They are delirious, and cannot sleep.
too we daily observe, proceeds from these live representations, and velocity
of the blood and spirits. And since in all the stages of this Illness, there
either may be too great a distension of the blood vessels in the Brain, and so
no spirits derived into the Nerves, which will entirely destroy the contraction
of the Heart, and bring Death; or the blood may be in such a condition, that it
can give no supply of such spirits; and upon this account too, there can be no
contraction of the heart, no motion of the blood, which is the want of life it
self: and in both these respects They end in Death.
it is evident, how Death may be the fatal consequence of this sickness; for in
the first, the blood being either very viscid in the cold fit, or extremely
rarified in the hot (by the patients own constitution, the heat of the place
where he lives, or warming Medicines) is so interrupted in the Arteries of the
Brain, and being augmented by the succeeding blood, it may distend the sides of
the Arteries, and produce the named effect; or if the blood in the cold fit is
so viscid, and confines the spirits, that they cannot be separated, or there be
a real want of spirits in the blood, which turn to the same account; there can
be no secretion of spirits, where there are none; and therefore there will none
be derived into the Nerves, for the motion of the muscles, and contraction of
the heart. By the by, it is no less evident, that when the blood is thus
infinitely comminuted, and still broken down into parts lesser and lesser, by
an indiscreet management, and want of drinking of something, that may be a body
to the spirits; the blood is not only deprived of that Serum, that should have
preserved its fluxility, and been that Body, but of its spirits too, and so
must needs produce the foregoing effect, and make this melancholy tragedy end
at last in Death. Lastly, since the sick must continue in this condition, so
long as the state of the blood is in this way, and seeing those parts, which
are thus broken in this motion, may be carried off by the Glandules of the
Skin, breaking open of the pipes, by the Intestins, etc. and by these means the
blood may be Or the sickness cured by Sweating, Hemor. Looseness.
rendered more compact, and equal in its motion* therefore it is plain, that
this Sickness may be judged by Sweating, Hemorrhages, Looseness, etc.

Thus having demonstrated the necessity of these Symptoms, from the supposition
of an Interruption of Perspiration, The Vindication of the Hypothesis.
I would proceed to considerations of the like nature, if I were not first
obliged to vindicate this Hypothesis from one that is merely such, as I but
lately promised: If therefore any one will take one, more, or all of these
Symptoms, and let him have no respect to any hypothesis, but read them
backward, according to the known and familiar rules of Nature, he shall find
them necessarily proceeding from a real or factitious Fullness, which are the
same as to their effects* and since we come by this fullness in our ordinary way
of living, it is plain, that it is not that that is its cause: but there is no way
else we can acquire it, except by retaining somewhat for some time we usually
lose; and since it is not the first, the last is either by the suppression of
the secretions made by Stool, by Urine, in the Respiration, or by the Skin, or
Perspiration; now, we see the foregoing symptoms rendezvous'd into a great
number, while neither the Evacuations by Stool, Urine, or Respiration (the
others I name not, they being very inconsiderable) seem to be much altered from
what we see them in a natural state; and therefore it is Perspiration only, that
is able to produce these effects and this Fullness, as I justly supposed.
Moreover, Sanctorius has taught us, by making out the proportions of secretions
in the 5, 6, 21, 59, 60th Aphorisms of the first sect of his Statical Medicin,
that secretion by Perspiration, is at least double of all the other secretions;
and therefore, when that is interrupted, it can produce that fullness in as
short a time as all the secretions together could, and since they, or the most
of them are good, while the named symptoms have grown into a great number;
therefore this fullness has its rise from an Interrupted Perspiration, and so
the supposition was just, and a great deal more than a mere Hypothesis, as I
was obliged to prove.

The Perspiration thus interrupted in hotter constitutious, hot Countries, or a
warmer season, these Fevers do not begin with so long a continued coldness, but
the heat succeeds a great deal sooner, as may be collected from what I Am to say
hereafter, when I give some intimations of the sickness of hotter Countries.
Yet, the blood having sometimes that velocity, we assigned it to have, in
another place, when it is most apt to make secretions by the Stomach,
Intestines and Pancrea's; which secretions being sent into the guts, in a
greater or less quantity, and finding them less constricted, and the humor
thus separated not so viscid as to subsist, it must needs get out the natural
way and produce a Diarrhea's may be.
Looseness: and tho the guts were very firmly shut, yet if there be such a
quantity, that the power of its Moles is greater, than the force whereby they
are constracted, it will make way to it self by the intestines, as before. But
supposing the guts thus shut up, and the quantity so small, that it cannot make
its way by the intestines, because of its moles, yet if it is very thin, sharp,
and forced forward, either by its own motion, or the compression of the
neighboring parts, or both; so that it can dilate the guts, there will be a
Looseness, as is evident. But since in our way of living, and in the Channel,
where the Air is seldom very sultrie, it is but rare for our blood to be in
these circumstances here required; and almost never but in scorbutical cases;
therefore we shall trouble you no further about this affair, but mind you, we
are to account our Diarrhea's amongst our accidental sicknesses, and to be
treated as such in these observations that make the second part of this.

Since we have seen, very plainly, these two different ways of the bloods being
affected in an interrupted Perspiration, or a caught Cold; there is a third,
that in a colder season, with the blood a little weakened; wherein not only the
blood, but the rest of the humors, contract such a lentor and viscidity, as we
spoke of just now; yet, when it is comminuted, and has past the several stages,
as before, returns again by a fresh supply of such matter, that is able to
produce the same, or like effects; and in the discovering of this, I shall use
the same method, I did in the former, i. e. I shall endeavor to give a plain
and genuine History of the symptoms or appearances in that order they affect;
and I shall unfold them, in a natural, familiar, and conceivable way; that we
may be the better able to make such inferences, that may be useful in our
Practice. First then, they feel a coldness after Dinner, their lips are pale,
they tremble, their Pulse is weak; while they are thus affected they have an
insensibleness, and trouble of mind, while all the external senses are right,
and sometimes the external senses are faulty, when the mind is serene and
thinks very clearly, their whole body like a dead Corpse, and have a great
drought; yet instead of death comes warmth and heat, which lasts for some time
and ends in sweating; at this time the Pulse is strong, and more frequent than
is usual, they have a beating in their head, a great drought, and after the
sweating the Pulse becomes sometimes natural; It recurrs every day, every third
or fourth day inclusive, and acts over the same Tragedy, it ends sometimes in
death, and that in the return.

We have seen very clearly in the foregoing part of this discourse, that this
viscidity of the blood, that confines the hot and small parts, and makes it so
apt to stagnate in the extremities, and afterward in the other parts, is the
true and genuine cause of that coldness we observe; but the blood thus
disposed, and not actually stagnating, and producing this coldness, is reduced
to act by any thing that has greater parts than the parts of the blood; so that
they cannot be intimately mixed with the blood, and become one homogeneous
body; and since the chyle is of such a substance as is here requisite, as I
have plainly shown in another place; therefore this viscidity will have its
power to make the blood stagnate, after the chyle has entered the blood, and
not thoroughly comminuted by the lungs, so that the parts of the chyle may glide
along equally with the parts of the blood. And since the chyle is separated
from the other mass into the lacteal vessels in an hour and an half, They feel
a Coldness after Dinner.
or two hours after dinner; therefore in an hour and a half, or two hours after
dinner, this coldness is felt. Now in this viscid state of the blood, it is
more compact, and distends not its channels sufficiently, and they, as 'twere,
withdraw and disappear; and because the vessels of the lips are more
superficial, and are only covered with a very thin skin, so that the blood in a
natural state, may almost, be seen running in these vessels, and give that fine
red we daily see; yet when the vessels thus subside, and withdraw, the blood is
thicker and more compact, and nothing remains to be seen but the genuine color
of the membranes and fibers, that compose these muscles, and they being of a
pale and Clay*like color, the Lips will be pale, Their Lips are pale.
as was said. The blood then being so viscid, weak, and having the spirits so
confined, must needs separate very few animal spirits for the reasons often
assigned; and so the Nerves will be but not perfectly empty; now the motion of
the spirits I have already proved to be alternate, and the continual efflux to
proceed only from the abundance of these spirits in the Nerves; and therefore,
when at this time there are so few spirits separated, this fullness of the
Nerves ceases, and so must the continual efflux too; and their alternate influx
must be more sensible, i. e. because their motion is alternate, the motion of
their propelling power being alternate, they flow alternately into the muscles,
these weights which they are to sustain; and because of that alternate influx,
they are contracted alternately, and this alternate contraction of the
Antagonistial They ^emble.
Muscles being that which Physicians call trembling; it is plain that there must
be a trembling in this want of animal spirits; tho Physicians have thought fit
to express it quite another way. Now, supposing that this viscidity was so
great, that it could even fill up the vessels in the brain, and therefore the
viscid blood thus filling those vessels, being not so fit to separate animal
spirits, and in this distention of the full vessels they do so compress the
origin of the Nerves, that those spirits are not derived into the Nerves, and
propell'd in that quantity into the heart, that is fit to make its contraction
able to force out the blood into the Arteries, that they may affect our touch
as usually; and their sides neither being distended so much, as in a natural
state, nor with so great a force, make that sort of Pulse which is called a
Their Pulse is weak.
weak Pulse. In the midst of all this viscidity, the spirits are both in a
lesser quantity and more confined; therefore in this real want of spirits, the
mind They may be insens^ble, the external senses being right.
cannot execute its office, they being necessary for the functions of the soul.
Thus the Patient is insensible, while all the external senses may be in a good
state; tho the converse of this may be true, that, viz. any one, or all the
external senses may be faulty, when the mind is in a thinking condition;
supposing that this viscid stuff is huddled up by chance in a greater quantity
about any Artery or plexus of Arteries, and if these Arteries involve or go
round the Nerve, that serves for Hearing, Seeing, Tasting, etc. These Arteries
then being stuffed up, and filled by the continual afflux of new blood, their
sides will be more distended and bent outward; so that the Nerve that touches
with them shall be comprest; till at length by this continual stuffing, the
Nerve is so totally comprest, that it hinders the motion of the animal spirits,
or at least interrupts their motion, tho the sides of the Nerve are not quite
squeez*d together; and therefore it may very well happen, that one may be thick
of hearing, or perfectly deaf, may not see, taste, etc. and yet recover of a
sudden, the coldness being over, and this lentor protruded into the veins. And
if this stoppage of the blood in the brain be so great, and its cohesion so
firm, that it cannot be dissolved by a thousand justlings in the plexus of the
Pia Matter; so that almost no animal spirits flow through the Nerves, either
because there can be no spirits made out of this viscid blood, or that those
few that are made, cannot be derived in the Nerves, that are shut up by the
force of this stagnating blood; then those spirits equally distributed into the
muscles, keep them equally poised, and in this equilibration and viscidity
there will be a want of motion and sense with an intense coldness, and these
being the conditions of a dead body or Corpse, it is evident Their Body like a
Corpse.
at this time our bodies will be like a Corpse. This lentor being so great over
all the body, it is so too in the Arteries that furnish matter, for the Spittle
that is separated in the Glands about the mouth and throat, and no Spittle can
be separated from the Arteries in these Glands; so that in this lesser
secretion there can be no afflux of that moisture to these parts, and the want
of that occasioning a dryness and drought, therefore this stoppage is attended
with a A great Drought.
drought. Yet tho there is but a small quantity of animal spirits separated in
the brain, and they derived into the comprest nerves and muscles very sparingly
and disorderly; so that the actions of the body seem at an end, and the muscles
in equilibrio, the heart which has no antagonistical muscle shall have its
contraction continued; and if that motion thus continued can dissolve and
attrite this blood not quite stagnating, the body In place of Death comes
warmth and heat,
that seemed dead and a Corpse shall become warm as before, and have its life
prolonged. So the blood being once more free and fluxil, and the body hot, in
the way we demonstrated before; the attrition and comminution, that produce
this heat, depending very much upon the velocity of the blood, so that the
greater it is, the greater is the solution of heat, and the greater the
solution of heat is, the velocity is the greater too; because there is a greater
quantity of animal spirits separated by this solution of heat; and so
successively, til^ the viscid blood thus subsisting is so comminuted and
attrited, and acquires that degree of velocity, we determined it to have when
fit for perspiring; and in that the small parts of the blood will be propell'd
through the neighboring pores in a great quantity, and produce that appearance
And ends in sweating.
we call Sweat, so that this warmth is continued and ends in Sweat, as we shall
see more clearly in the sequel. Yet before this sweating, while the blood is
thus commiuuted, there is both a greater quantity of animal spirits, and this
quantity is faster conveyed to the heart, and the heart The Pulse stronger and
more frequent.
is oftener contracted, and that with greater force, and therefore the Pulse
will be stronger and more frequent, than in a natural state. And because of the
great rarifaction and comminution of the blood, and its rapid motion, the sides
of the Arteries are distended to a greater pitch and very strongly; therefore
the more superficial Arteries going outward with a great deal of force, affect
the parts that are touched by them, and produce that feeling and noise, that is
conveyed to us, upon the beating of one body upon They have beating in their
head.
another. While the blood is thus hurried about in this rapid and impetuous
motion, and no great secretions of any sort; there is a great dryness in our
mouth, because of the small quantity of Spittle that is separated, and that
little is so divided into insinite parts by the force and warmth of the
circulating blood, that these parts are left perfectly dry, and they dispoil'd
A great Drought.
of their moisture, produce that insatiable drought. And since this lentor is
at length entirely carried out of the Arteries, they will be of their natural
wideness, after it is carried out, and so the blood may be propell'd through them,
without its being more attrited, comminuted or dissolved, or the heat of the
blood will not increase in its progress through the vessels: and since the blood
thus dissolved, perspires very easily; this heat shall not only not increase,
but be diminisht, the Perspiration lessening its quantity. Moreover, the heat
thus dissolved partly perspires, as was said; and is partly mixed with the rest
of the blood, and is not comminuted, the slowness in which the blood moves through
the veins giving sufficient time for this mixture; and the heat may easily
insinuate it self into the grosser parts, and they may somewhat confine this
heat, and restrain its force by opposing this Penetration. Besides, since
there is an abundance of time betwixt both Excursus, the blood must frequently
flow through the Lungs; and so be frequently dissolved, and have its hot parts
conveniently mixed with the other parts, and for this reason The Pulse natural
for some time.
will be more natural; from which every thing that is natural will come; and
therefore the body will be in perfect health, at least for some time. Tho then
the paroxism is thus judged by the assigned perspiration; yet if that viscidity
that produced the first, is not consumed, but returns in a certain time: or if
that is consumed and purged off by some of the known ways of Excretion, or so
comminuted, that it is changed into the nature of sincere blood; yet the cause
that produced the first viscidity, produces its like that can last out the same
time, affect with the like symptoms, and be reduced to sincere blood like it;
and so there are two ways of making these returns, as we see. Let us suppose
then, that there are two returns every day, and at the same hour (there may be
assigned the same reason for the rest, that recurr in the same difference of
time) and the first is produced by a lentor that lasts for one day, and
threafter is either purged out of the body, or changed into sincere blood and
the second, by a piece of viscidity of the same quantity and quality with that
which occasioned the first then, I say, that either of these lentors, or any
other that can invade a^ the same hour, and takes up a whole day before it is
consumed, may successively and by degrees be stored up in the blood vessels, so
that it either flows thither insensibly, or constantly in the smallest
particles, or be bre^ within the same; till it can produce ^ sense of cold, and
the other symptom that attend that. And because, before that this cold and its
attendan^ can seize us, it is necessary that thi^ lentor subsist in the
capillary Arteries which cannot be, unless its quantity i^ so great, that it
cannot be mixed with the blood, so that it may flow freely through the Arteries.
Therefore, either this great quantity of lentor is bred a^ once in the blood
vessels, which i^ possible; or is at once derived into them from somewhere
else, which i^ not unconceiveable: but even this i^ evident, that this very
quantity man flow into the vessels by degrees, or b^bre^ by degrees in the
same; and therefore it is possible, that in the space of one day, either some
lentor, or something that may breed this lentor may get into the vessels; yet
in so small a quantity, that only after one day there be such a quantity
collected, that is able to produce that coldness with its attendants. And
therefore, in the end of the day this coldness will begin again, and will make
a new return by this lentor, that was stored up in the space of a whole day;
which lentor if consumed in the space of the next day; and, in the mean while,
an It recurrs every day, every third, or fourth, etc.
equal quantity of another lentor be stored up in the blood, 'twill make a
third return, and so it may be said of the rest, not made by the same lentor
returning oftener, tho slowly, but made by a new one, the former being quite
consumed: but this consumption may be sooner or later, in the same day,
according to the different nature of that lentor, the bodies that are mixed with
it, and their dissolution in the increase and height of the disease. It can be
no objection that this lentor or viscidity of the blood is collected gradually,
and therefore may be exterminated or comminuted, as soo^ as it can be
collected, since it circulates through the lungs and other part^ some thousands of
times in one day but this will seem not so difficult o^ hard to be granted, if
we conside^ some examples of as great difficulty and yet most certain: for
there is non^ that can be ignorant, how Nurse^ Milk and our Urine retain, more
than one day, the ^ color an^ smell of Asparagus, Onions, Ca^sia, Rhubarb,
Turpentine, etc. ^ certain argument that there are some what of these bodies
carried into the breasts and kidneys, without ever losing of its nature; tho it
has bee^ carried often, and even some thousands of times through the lungs; so
that i^ may be highly probable, that this visci^ stuff may be very often
carried roun^ the body, without any considerable alteration. What is better
known* than that the poison of a mad do^ shows not itself before the thirtieth
o^ fortieth day, and sometimes longer so that before its appearing in these
forty days, it has circulated some thousands of times through the lungs, without
suffering any diminution of its ^trength; and therefore if some such thing be
supposed of this viscidity, that is mixed with the blood, there will be no place
left for our further doubting. Now, this lentor may be ^upplied by every thing
that gives us ^ourishment, passions, etc. which are ^oo remote, to be of any
great use to us in knowing them: and therefore I shall confine my self to
consider this ^entor, either coming from the primae viae in our Chyle or
otherwise, or else being supplied by such viscera that are said to contain
liquors: and first, if the Chyle or any other humor to be mixed with the blood,
should be generated according to nature in the unnatural state of the blood
(which is hard to be supposed) yet this natural humor mixing with the blood
would be changed into its nature; and consequently become viscid, that is, a
liquor fit to produce that lentor, which if mixed with the blood confusedly and
without order, the returns too can have no order; but if it be carried into the
blood in an exact order, the returns will be very exact and orderly: for if the
blood have still that unnatural power, and the humor brought into it still
retain its natural power, there will be always the sam^ time required, to
change that natural humor into that which is not natural; and this time may be
one, two or three days; but if any one or all o^ them are of a different
nature, the proportion of time will be chang'^ and the Returns disorderly; but
^^ this natural humor is derived at different times, from the same or differen^
parts, and immediately, or in the same distance and interval of time, acquires
an unnatural power from the unnatural blood; there may be abundauce of Returns
orderly and disor^ly, as the Derivations are orderly o^ confused: and if those
humors are o^ different natures, consisting of par^^ of different sorts, every
one of the^ requiring a different interval of time before they can degenerate
into the kind of lentor; the variety of Return will be altogether uncertain,
and kee^ no order. Next, let us suppose that i^ the Viscera, that are said to
have considerable secretions made in them, the liquors being viscid are
returned b^ their veins into the Cava, and in the order of the former viscid
parts circulate with the blood through the whole ^ody, till they acquire such a
thick^ess or quantity of viscidity, that may make them fit to stagnate in the
small ^apillary Arteries, and to produce that Coldness and other Symptoms, ^s
before: it is evident, not to resume our former reasoning, that their Returns
will happen in certain intervals of time, orderly and disorderly, according as
the supply is made from all those Viscera, or from any one of them, and as that
is mixed in a greater or less quantity, orderly or confusedly. But if there is
so great a quantity of this lentor mixed with the blood, that it cannot be
propell'd from the small Arteries into the Veins; or tho the quantity be less,
yet if its adhesion to the vessels be stronger than can be broken off, so that
it cannot be carried through them: then the blood cannot be propell'd, and in a
short time the body will be cold, there will be no blood derived into the
Muscles, it either comes not to, or totally stagnates in the Brain, so that
there can be no animal spirits separated in the nerves, and consequently there
will be an irrecoverable deprivation of sense and motion, or (which is the same
thing) there can nothing happen but Death since that lentor is supposed to be
so great, that it cannot be protruded It ends sometimes in death and that in
the Return.
and carried through the Arteries: and all this happens while this lentor stops in
the Arteries, and this stoppage being in the Return, it is evident, that Death
will also happen in the Return.

I have been longer upon this consideration than any of the rest, because the
difficulties of Fevers and Agues are the greatest; tho now, I presume, they are
clearly demonstrated from the interruption of perspiration, that great and most
considerable inconvenience of their Lodging: and now I shall proceed, and
reflect upon the other propositions, in that order they Their Life, as to what
concerns their temper. etc.
come to hand; and therefore the next thing comes to be considered, is their
life, in respect of their temperance and debauches. As to the first of these,
it is certain, as there is nothing more valuable than a temperate life, so that
is never more valuable than at Sea; and if we look a little back, and remember
their salt Victuals, Cheese and Biscuit, there will be no great Rhetoric
required to defend their innocent Saturday night's Cabals, in drinking the
Wives; for without the temperate use of spiritous liquors, their victualling,
with all their fatigue, will be little enough to afford necessary Chyle, gross
enough to make their thick blood, that cannot be so easily sent round their
bodies, without the help of a Bowl of Punch or a Can of Flip: So that, in
short, they are so far from being dissuaded from such moderate drinking, that
it is to be enjoined for health's sake; and I doubt not but this way of drinking
will not only prevent, in a great measure, the sicknesses we have named, but
even keep them from falling into the Dropsy, Jaundice, and Melancholia
Hypochondriaca. Yet to speak truth for the honest Sailors, they seldom fail in
this point, so long as they can have an occasion to exchange the base Metal for
the noble Spirit of Wine: but are oftener very ill husbands, exchanging all at
once, and destroying the whole purchase at a down-sitting; so that being got
drunk, and not being able to crawl into their Hammocks, they spend the night
fast asleep upon the cold Deck, and contract those sicknesses, that attend an
interruption of Perspiration: Only their blood being full of the Spirits of
this liquor, they do not lie so long under the Coldness that begins all Fevers,
as in Fevers otherwise gotten; for the small parts of the liquor soone^ break
and divide the viscid parts o^ blood, than when it is without them and because
of the comminution o^ this lentor, the small parts of the blood are set at
liberty, and the hea^ felt over all the body: therefore when the perspiration
is interrupted, an^ the blood full of these Spirits, the attrition and
comminution will be sooner performed, i. e. the Coldness will be sooner at an
end, and so the Feverish heat begin a great deal the sooner, which, according
to the constitution and age of the patient, the time of the year, and way of
Cure will make the disease of greater di^ficulty.

Thus having ended the discover of these Diseases, that are peculia^ to people,
that use our narrow Seas which is the first part of my promise I proceed to
give an account of thos^ that may be got nearer or under the line; which it
will be sufficient to hint at in short, and leave that to be finished by
others, whose peculiar province it may be; and it is enough at this time, to
have given such necessary views, that may help our curing in the Channel; tho,
in my opinion, the reasoning will hold somewhere else; but to speak no more of
this, I say, that since the Diet and Victualling here and in other places is
much after the same way, whatever proceeds from that may reasonably be supposed
to hold, since that is only to be thought a cause, which, when it is supposed,
the effect necessarily follows: so that the only difference will be in the Air;
which we know is more se^ene and warm in those places: and therefore, because
of its gravity, (which is always greatest in a serene Air) the blood and all
that is carried along in it, are more minutely broken and divided in the lungs,
as I have The diseases got nearer, or, etc.
demonstrated in another place at great ^ength; and therefore is more apt to
separate its small and fine parts, and so to have a greater motion and all the
consequences that follow upon that: besides, the Air too being very warm, the
parts of the blood are extremely rarified, take up an infinite space, and
distend the sides of their channels to a great wideness, compress the
neighboring parts, induce weakness, and even break through the smallest and
thinnest of their channels, overflow their banks, and produce all the
inconveniences, that might be made out according to the abovementioned
principles, if it was proper in this place.

But as for those sicknesses that are not peculiar to the Sea, but are also
common to the Land, I shall consider them as interloping diseases in the second
part of this Treatise; where I am to lay down the Indications for, and Method
of Cure: but before I leave this part, I shall give a short Why I have
neglected the common stories of Poison, etc. Why Poison.
account why, in this explication, I have not used the accustomed story of
Poison, the Chemical Principles, and of Acid and Alkali; and then proceed to
the observations themselves, which make up the second Part.

And first, as to that poison, which some assert to be in the spirits, fit to
produce these Fevers, it is altogether unexplain'd by its Patrons, and is very
unintelligible as yet; neither is it allowable for us to run straight to the
animal spirits for the solution of every Phenomenon, and to neglect the blood
it self, of which they are made, and which must be always supposed in
demonstrating their nature; and truly there can be nothing found in the most
malignant Fevers, that does really distinguish them from any other continued
Fever, for the whole difference that can be alleged, is ad majus and minus,
and I doubt not but that they may be naturally accounted for, by a greater or
lesser quantity of this lentor, its greater or lesser cohesion, and its
different solution. It Is better then to give laws to that boundless and
unaccountable poison, so much spoken of by some Authors, tho seldom more than
by the name, without so much as its counterpoyson for a Cure, which would been
very necessary, considering how great differences there are betwixt poisons
themselves. But what seems the strangest and most surprising to me is, that if
in a Family of ten or a dozen people, there is one whom we should determine to
have the best blood, to be of the most athletick and robust habit of body,
before the invasion of this Malignant Fever; yet this one shall catch it the
soonest, and run the greatest Risque in his Life; while the more sickly, aged,
etc. shall never feel it, or if he does, recover without any great care or
pains. But, in short, those Fevers that are commonly reckoned malignant, are
not really different from the containing Fevers; and that they have their
beginning from the same lentor that causes other Fevers, may be evident from
this; that the most of those malignant Fevers succeed these very Fevers, both
quotidian and tertian, in which there are greater quantities of heat and
humidity, that dissolve this lentor; tho they come not so frequently after
quartans, in which the viscidity is greater, and the warm parts more confined:
so a single intermitting Fever easily degenerates into two intermitting Fevers,
coming in the same time that the former did; they into two containing Fevers
per subintrantiam, and they into one, which is quickly called malignant. And
since all these changes are only certain degrees of this lentor, as it is more
or less tenacious, and sticking to the vessels; it is evident, that no more can
be said, but that the last of all these Fevers suceeeding in that order, or the
formidable malignant Fever, is of the very same stock with the rest: and since
they proceed gradually, from the smaller to the greater degrees of this lentor,
this can only be said to have its time in a greater degree of the lentor, as I
intimated before.

Why the Chemical Principles.
As for the Chemical principles, they are so far from being simple, and having
the requisite properties of principles, as one of the learned Chemists has
demonstrated, that it is strange any man should advise us to assume propositions
so unknown, in order to the explaining of Sciences, that have so useful and
necessary a practice; they think indeed, if they can tell us a story of the
dissolution of some bodies, and give but a gross guess at the strength of their
different menstrua, they may very well undertake the explication of all the
phenomena in nature, by their different solutions and coagulations, before they
have found out their universal dissolvent, which might prove of very great use:
but they must commit infinite mistakes even in this, since they are entirely
ignorant of those powers, that give fluxility, solidity, motion and rest to any
Body, tho their fermentations, solutions and coagulations depend upon them, as
their frequent disappointments in their repeated practices must convince them,
if the impudence, as well as ignorance, of the common Chemists were not
incorrigible: and we shall find as little truth or solidity in their way of
arguing concerning the strength of their Menstrua, if we pursue their ordinary
way of reasoning; so little do they know of their own famed and beloved
Menstrua. For when they assert that such a Menstruum is corrosive, and produces
such effects by this power, it is evident, that corrosiveness being the
productive cause of those effects, then by adding somewhat else that is
corrosive, it should produce them better; whereas the contrary is so well
known, that I should not allege any proof or instance, if I were not convinced
they will deny what they daily see. Let us then take Aqua fortis, which, they
say, is able to corrode Silver, and dissolve it into the most minute atoms, by
its corroding power it has from the Vitriol and Allom, of which it is made;
then, by adding another thing to the composition, that is equally sharp and
corrosive, if not more, the Menstruum should in all reason act the more
powerfully; and therefore by adding Sal Ammoniac, which is a great deal more
corrosive than Allom or Vitriol, it should still corrode the Silver more, which
is so far from being true, that it is not able to make the least impression
upon it, unless the plate be extremely thin, and red hot, and not much then.
And that Nitre and Sulphur, which is so much inflamed in the blood, when we
have a Fever; mixed together and burnt, make up the Sal prunellae, so much used
in curing Inflammations and Fevers; but of this more hereafter: and I shall only
add, that if the Chemical principles were allowed to have half the certainty
their Authors pretend to, yet they never made them of use enough to us, since
they were never able to give such laws, by which we may have any certainty of
the degrees and application of Motion in their fermentation and Menstrua: and
since it is motion in its different velocities, contacts and occurrencies, with
other bodies in a different state, and in their several parts, that constitutes
all the variety in the known world; our work should be to enquire into that,
and so we should be better able to judge firmly of things, tho we must not
debar our selves of any help, that may assist us in this disquisition. And
truly, when a Chemist stumbles upon two or more liquors, that make a curious
color when mixed, he can say just as much of it, as of a white, red, or yellow
Ribband and no more; he can, perhaps, tell you how he made his Liquors, but how
by their combination they came to give this color, he can give no better
account than the Dyer of his Ribbands; so that while we advance no further, we
are like to make a wonderful progress in the knowledge of things. Now because
the Chemists tell us, that a Fever is nothing but too great a quantity of
sulphur in the blood, or that too much exalted; let us enquire into its power of
doing this and producing that effect. And that we may proceed with more order
and exactness, let us suppose this Rule, which is admitted by all the
Philosophers, as most agreeable to the dictates of nature; namely, If any thing
be supposed as a cause, and the effect always follows without the help of any
thing else; we may, without doubting, assert and believe, that to be the
productive cause of this effect: and on the contrary, if the pretended cause be
there, and the effect follows not upon it; or if that which is said to be the
effect, be present without the cause, then that cause never produces that
effect. And therefore since adding of sulphurous Medicines to the blood, will
not only heighten the power of the sulphur in the blood, but produce more; it is
plain that upon that addition we must always have a Fever; yet after the
drinking salt and sulphurous Bath*waters, which are intimately mixed with the
blood, and disposed over all the body, we see no such feverish fits produced.
Yea in a Suppression of Urine in the Stone, the sharp and pungent ammoniacal
salts of the Urine, should infect the mass of the blood, and produce those
feverish effects, which nevertheless are never observed to happen. Besides, we
know that we can pour a dram or two of Oil of Sulphur immediately into the
blood of a live Dog by his blood vessels; and after the vessel, into which it
is injected, is bound up with a moan or two, and the Dog set at liberty; he is
so free and safe from any Fever, that he skips about full of health, and eats
up whatever comes in his way for his purpose: and therefore if the blood, when
altered with so great a quantity of Salt and Oil of Sulphur, is not in the
least feverish; we must acknowledge that an alteration made in the blood by
saline and sulphurous juices and spirits, is not the productive cause of a
Fever.

Why Acid and Alkali.
And lastly, to discredit the principle of Acid and Alkali, it would be
sufficient to observe, that they who set up for it have not let us know what it
is, when they tell us, that an Acid is that which can ferment with an Alkali;
and we know, that some Medicines both simple and compounded, ferment with such
as are declared Acids, and then with others that are determined to be Alkalies;
and it might seem very needless to allege their ridiculous evasion, but that
they will mumble it over at the reading of the objection; and it is this, that
that Medicin contains some Acid and some Alkali in its parts, by which, in
these two respects, it may ferment with both; and so by this settlement they
make neither Acid nor Alkali, because the bodies are mixed, and all mixed bodies
partake and share of all the principles, whatever they be, according to the
Philosophers, and are said to be of this or that nature, Acid or Alkali, which
ever predominates, and bears the greatest share in the composition; and if they
be supposed equal, our noble principles must scuffle for the Mastery. And even
tho this were partly allowed, we might sufficiently disprove this Hypothesis,
by considering any one disease, where we may find a vast number of not only
antecedent causes, but other symptoms enumerated by Medicinal Writers, that can
never be accounted for, either by an Acid or Alkali. Yea so much are its
Patrons in the dark about their principle, that we find them daily betrayed
into the greatest absurdities. For instance, its great stickler Dr. Blankard,
who is followed by all the rest, has expressly declared, in a whole system of
practice he composed according to those principles, that all Diseases proceed
from the faultiness of the Acid only, which is the most ridiculous thing can be
said in a few words: for supposing, that Acids and Alkalies are the true
Ingredients or Components of bodies, and that they concur as principles in
their action, and bear contre-parts in this action; then, because the influence
of either upon the other, may be augmented, diminished or lost, and this is to
be faulty or vicious; therefore it is evident, that either of 'em may have its
defects, and consequently that the blame should not be entirely laid upon one.

I hope, by this time, no reasonable person will censure me, for not speaking a
language, which neither I nor its Admirers can understand, when I declare my
thoughts about our Sea-sicknesses; which I have endeavored to dispatch with
all the shortness, plainness, and accuracy, I am capable of.

The End of the First Part.
The Second Part. CONTAINING Some Historical Observations OF THE Diseases in
the FLEET During the last Summer. With the Method that was observed in their
Cure.
PART II. Historical Observations of the Sicknesses of the Fleet the Last Year,
IF, in relating our Observations, I should oblige my self to give but the
names of those I have visited, since my concern in the Fleet, they would make
up a Book as large as these observations ought to be: and truly, considering
the uncertainty of the Event, either through the negligence of some Surgeons in
pursuing directions, or sometimes the same Medicines not being given according
to order; it would prove of no use to any body to be informed of such a
practice; and therefore I shall confine my self to such Observations, I made on
board the same Ship, I was in my self, or in the Hospital, by the help of Mr.
M'kie, and Mr. Connel, two careful and ingenious Surgeons on board these Ships.

Observation I.
Observe. I.
Isaac Pett was taken ill, on board his Majesty's Ship the Elizabeth, with a
heaviness in his head, pain in his bones and thorax, want of appetite, and a
sudden weakness; his Pulse was depressed, and slower by 8 or 10 strokes in a
minute; about 30 hours after, his Pulse was more free and quick, he had a great
drought, and his tongue was very rough.

Hints for Curing Fevers.
In the Cure of Fevers, we see, that those people, that are left to themselves,
and take no Medicines, shake off their Fever by Sweating, Looseness, a
Hemorrhagy, Diabetes, etc. which gave the first intimation to practitioners to
provoke Sweat (some with internal Medicines, others in Baths, and the Irish of
old by lapping themselves up in Blankets, thoroughly wet in cold water) to give
Clysters (for farther their Hellebor, Aloes and Scammony would not allow them
to go) to open a Vein or an Artery with Lancets, or by Cupping with Glasses or
Horns (which some use to this day) to give Medicines that provoke Urine, etc.
But even all these have been disproved in part, in some one place of the world
or another; by observing, viz. in Bleeding, that, because it is more frequently
used in France and Spain than in Italy, they conclude, that if Bleeding
contributed notably to promote the Cure of Fevers; then, where that is
practiced, more would recover, than where it is neglected; and consequently,
that if they did recover their Patients in Italy with as great success as in
France or Spain, Bleeding may be reckoned indifferent: And in Turkey, where
they cure their violent containing Fevers (as Physicians call them) with
Abstinence and Sherbett, they condemn us for our frequent use of Diaphoreticks
and Sudorificks; and we return the charge upon them, without any further
consideration. The reason of unsuccessful practice.
But, which is yet worse, men are apt to give up their reason, to such a degree,
that they obstinately retain that sort of practice, in which they were bred,
where ever they come, and will stiffly and positively maintain that to be the
only safe method, and all others fatal and pernicious. But those Countries too,
that are settled to one sort of practice, so soon as by some alteration in the
Season, (perhaps to the better) and other circumstances of Curing, they find
their way not to answer, and to be more uncertain (if any thing can be more so
than a set practice); then the Disease is malignant, quite new, mankind
changed, etc. which would make people believe, that, whatever certainty there
may be in Medicin, yet there is little or none in the cure of Fevers. But
besides all these mistakes, there is still another more considerable one, of
which very many are guilty; and that is, because we see, that all these
different ways of practice, are and have been successful in different Ages and
Countries; therefore we may use them promiscuously, and all at once; whereas we
should also consider the conveniences for putting them in practice, and the
way how we expect they are to produce their effects; and, because in the
abovemention*d methods, the way of performing the one is quite opposite to the
other, we shall seldom, if ever, succeed by doing all at once; and we are to
bear with, any method already begun, and endeavor to make the best of it, even
tho it is not the most genuine, natural, and convenient; and must never venture
upon any other in acute diseases, of which we speak, if it has been continued
for some time.

But to return to our subject; if we What our thoughts are about the former
intimations.
reflect upon the Theory demonstrated in the first part of this, 'twill be
evident, that because this disease proceeds always, with us at least, from an
interruption of perspiration, and because the mass of blood is corrupted and
vitiated, by the quantity of the steams thus detained, that the genuin and
natural way of curing this, is by evacuation, either according to the quantity
of the detained moles; or at least in such a proportion, as may set the parts
of the blood at greater liberty; and so, because the different secretions
depend upon the different degrees of the bloods velocity, when the blood
acquires a velocity, like that which is natural, it will also have natural
secretions, and in this manner be reduced to its natural Contact and Cohesion,
i. e. it will be propell'd in its ordinary and natural way, and the Patient
will recover his health; since health is nothing else but the most natural
circulation of the blood. Now since Evacuation thus performed answers our
Designs in Curing Fevers, both by lessening the quantity and altering the mass,
it is certain, that all the consequences drawn from the former intimations are
just, and may be put in practice upon reasonable occasions. The next question
may be, which of all the mentioned ways may be the most natural and convenient
for a general Practice: and since Blooding, Sweating, and Purging, are most
commonly received among us, I shall enquire which of these we may most
generally depend upon.

What of Bleeding, Sweating and Purging.
And first, since both they that allow of Sweating, and they who recommend
Purging for the most general Practice, affirm that Blooding is agreeable for
both their designs, there is no occasion left for disputing about the Necessity
or Usefulness of that Operation, if the necessary cautions be observed with
regard to the quantity of blood that ought to be taken away, so that the
controversy lies entirely betwixt Sweating and Purging, which I shall endeavor
to determine with all the impartiality imaginable, and that by enumerating the
advantages and inconveniences of both. And first, because the secretion by the
pores, is double of all the other secretions in the rest of the body; it is
plain, where this secretion can be performed, that there may be a greater
quantity separated from the blood, in a certain time, than may be by all the
other ways together in the same space of time; so that for that reason it may
seem the most convenient and agreeable; yet since it must be excited by
Medicines, that supply the blood with spirits, and consequently unlock the
spirits of the blood, that are confined by its viscidity; if those Medicines be
given to sick people, that are young, have an abundance of blood, and that very
rich, it is plain that they must so break and divide the parts of the blood, and
excite such a velocity, by which few or no secretions of any sort are made, as
we see but too often in our daily practice; and therefore this practice can
only agree with those that are older, and have not so rich blood. I need not
give my judgment about the other two ways of provoking Sweat, since they are
not in use with us; yet I think it will not be far from the purpose, to
remember you of a story Dr. Willis tells us, in his Book of Fevers, of a young
woman that lay ill, and was his Patient, and for whom he had prescribed a great
many Medicines, that might judge her Fever by Sweating, but all to no purpose;
and at last, I think, he gave her two Drachms of the Spirit of Hartshorn, but
nothing like Sweating appeared: on the contrary, her Pulse was higher, she was
very hot and delirious; and among the rest of her idle talk, being doubtless
incited by an extraordinary drought, she desired to go a swimming, and up she
got for her Journey; but was kept in, till her friends resolving to humor her,
concluded to carry her to the water; and accordingly, they not living far from
the River, carried her down (whether with the Doctors consent I remember not)
and when they had secured her from sinking, or going too far out of their
reach, at length threw her into the water; and, after she was brought out
again, was put to bed, where she sweat off her Fever. Some such like cases
happen very often to our Sailers, who, in the time they are delirious or have
Calentures (this word our Surgeons use for violent Fevers, yet it is only a
general word in Spain for a Fever) when lying in their Hammocks in a calm
Summers day, they see the Sea through the Gun-Ports very plain and smooth, and
imagining it to be a green Meadow, get up a walking, and fall into the Sea, if
they are not stopped in their way; but if they get at last into the Sea, and are
taken up and laid into their Hammocks, they sweat very plentifully, and shake
off their Fever. I do not take notice of these instances, with a design to
persuade people to such a practice, while we can perform the Cure a great deal
better; but only to be an example in practice for the proposition I have
established in a Theory of the velocity of the blood somewhere else, and named
just now. And I think that proposition is very well confirmed by these
instances: since we see, that this rapid motion of the blood in this dilirious
and mad state is checked by the coldness of the water; and being thus checked
sends out abundance of its parts by sweating, as I alleged.

Upon the other hand, if purging Medicines can evacuate as much out of the
blood, as the moles that is detained amounts to, without heightening, or at
least not considerably, the motion of the blood; then that will be a more
certain practice, and no less reasonable than the other. Now, I could make it
plain, by a great many experiments, that the detained steems, that produce
these symptoms, we find in Fevers, do not exceed three or four lib. and since
it is agreeable with our daily observation, that we can give Medicines that
evacuate by Stool, a greater quantity without heating the body: Therefore it is
very evident that the administering of Medicines that evacuate by Stool, will be
a more certain and safe way of curing Fevers. But whatever may be said on this
subject, I admire how that practice can be thought agreeable at Sea, where
there is so piercing and sharp an Air for, at least, eight months of the year,
that none that is overheated by any violent exercise, would think it convenient
to go into, and far less to take a sweating Medicin in it. This matter then
being clear, I proceed to the way of curing our Patient; and because bleeding
not only brings down the moles to a natural quantity, but sets at liberty the
spirits thus huddled up; and his Pulse beating but about ten strokes less than
naturally, I ordered twelve ounces of blood to be taken away, and prescribed
him six grains of Tartarum Emeticum next morning; that there might be no
conveyance of any thing from the stomach, that might confirm the cohesion of
the stagnating parts, but might even break and divide those that were already
in a stagnating condition; for the reasons to be mentioned hereafter. Having
thus been let blood in one day about ten a clock in the morning, and next day
his Vomit working very well; about four a clock in the afternoon of that next
day, his Pulse was at least ten or twelve strokes higher than naturally, and
therefore he took a dose of the following Powder, to restrain that growing
motion about the evening.

ocul. canc. ppt iij. sal. prunel. ss. crem. Tart. j M. ac Divid* in IX part*
^eq* Capiat unam ter in die.

All the while he drunk as much Barley water, sharpened with Vinegar, as he
pleased, in pursuance of this design; and after three days when his Powders
were done, I prescribed him that which follows to be taken next morning.

Pulver. Cornach. ss Tart. vitriolat. gr. v. M. ac Ca^piat cum debito regimine.

It purged him some eight or ten times very gently; he slept very well that
night, and got rid of his Fever: but that he might recover his strength the
better, he eat nothing for three days but Burgoo, Watergruel, and the like, and
drunk six ounces of the Deco^tum amarum alterans every morning for that time;
all which he did with the desired success.

Observation II.
Observe. 2.
Shelborow Roydon, in the same Ship, a Man of about thirty years of age, and of
such a constitution that has a Pulse of sixty strokes, or thereabouts, in a
minute, was taken ill with a pain in his head, a want of appetite, a sudden
weakness, a costiveness, a depressed Pulse, which grew more frequent the second
day, and then he was very hot, restless, and his tongue dry. I ordered him to
be let blood, for the reasons I intimated before; and because he had not gone
to Stool for two or three days, I desired he might have a Clyster in the
evening, that might purge him once or twice, and next morning six grains of
Tartarum Emeticum, with which he vomited five times and purged twice; he was
very easy after his vomi^ing, his pains began to go off* and his Pulse to beat
a great deal quicker; on the third morning he took the first dose of the
following Powder.

ocul. cancr. ppt. vel pulver. testar* ovor* non calcinat. ij Sal prunell. jss.
Sal Tart. ss aut ij. M. ac divid. in IX part. aequal. ut capiat unam ter in die.

Next morning after the taking all the doses of this Powder, he was purged with
that which follows.

Pulver. radic. Jalapp. ss. Resin. Jalap. gr. iij. Crem. Tart. j. M. ac capiat
hora septima matutina.

During the whole progress of his sickness I allowed him the Barley Decoction
acidulated, as before: and while he took the Powders, he had one or two Stools
a day; and after his Purging Powder the Fever was perfectly vanquished: but,
that he might recover his strength the sooner, I ordered him twenty drops of
Elixir Proprietatis in Barley-water for three or four days; and to begin to
take them a day or two after his Fever was perfectly over.

Observation III.
Observe. 3.
Walter Griffin, a man of five and twenty or six and twenty years, and of a
bilious Constitution, was taken on the fifteenth of June last with a Shivering
and Coldness, that lasted ten hours, his pulse was depressed, and he was
troubled with pains over all his body: the same evening he began to be hot; his
pulse beat 90 times in a minute, and he had an insatiable drought; about the
time his Pulse began to rise, and his heat to increase, he had a very large
sweating, but without any benefit.

He was let xii ounces of blood that morning; on the 16th he took iv grains of
the vomiting Tartar, by which he vomited six or seven times, and went thrice to
Stool; and was a great deal easier the greatest part of that day; on the 17th
he begun to take a dose of the Testaceous Powders I prescribed, and continued
till he had taken nine doses: but on the 18th his Pulse was very high, and beat
more than a hundred in one minute, and he inclined to be delirious. And
therefore I ordered him to be let sixteen ounces of blood more, and to continue
the use of the Powders: only he took in the evening two grains of Camphire in
that Dose, and had a very good night; on the 19th he took his Powder without
any addition, and the following Purgative on the 20th.

Decoct. Tamarind. amar. purgant. an iij. Sir. de Rhamno i. M.

This purged him twelve times very easily, and so he got rid of his Fever: I
ordered him all the time of his sickness to drink as much of the following
^ec^ction as he pleased; and he drank at least three quarts in some days.

radic. oxylappath. acetos an ii hord. mund. M. j. Coq. l. a. in S. q. aq.
font. ad lb ij. circa finem addendo passul. Maj. integr. iij. Colatur. clarae
affund. acet. a^errimi q. s. ad gratam aciditatem pro potu ordinario.

Now, tho by this method our Patients are speedily recovered, and are never, or
very little delirious; yet all the Winter, and in the beginning of the Spring,
(as I observed in visiting the Fleet at Black-stakes) the coldness lasts four
or five days, tho not such a coldness as we feel in Agues; and therefore there
must be a great deal more circumspection used in Bleeding, sometimes in a
lesser, and sometimes, tho not so frequently, in a greater quantity; but this
must be done with respect to the Patient's constitution and circumstances,
provided always, that the powers of the faculties be not lessened; at this time
too, it is sometimes necessary to repeat the Powders and Purgatives a second
time, and sometimes to take the following Powder, when the pains are more
obstinate and hard to be removed.

Ocul. cancr. pat ss. Antimon. diaphoret. sal. Absynth. an. j. M. ac Divid. in
3 part. aeq. quas consumat partitis vicibus eodem die.

Observation IV.
Observe. 4.
William Richards, on board the Elizabeth, being about 30 years of age, whose
natural Pulse strikes 60 in a minute, was taken on the fifth of July last with
a shivering, sudden weakness, a want of appetite, and pains in his bones; then
he grew hot, restless, had a great drought, and could not sleep. He was let 12
ounces of blood on the 6th, by which his Pulse was sensibly raised while he was
a bleeding. he took vii grains of Emetick Tartar, and being well plv'd with
thin Water Gruel, after his Vomit began to work, he vomited five or six times,
and went thrice to stool, and was very quiet all that day: I gave him no
Paregorick in the evening, as I do in some other cases, because I constantly
observe, that all Opiat Medicines heighten the Fever extremely, and make the
Patient sooner delirious; and therefore he took nothing else that day: but on
the 8th in the morning he began the restaceous Powders, of which I ordered nine
doses to be prepared and taken as before. In the latter part of the tenth day
he had a great blooding at the Nose, and lost about twenty ounces that way, tho
we had let him blood and vomited him before; and he had a Stool or two every
day while he took his Powders; yet with his blooding his Fever went off. He
continued the Barley-decoction sharpened with Vinegar for his ordinary Drink,
and took the following Purge on the 14th in the morning.

Decoct. amar. purgant. iv. Sir. de Rhamn. ij. aq. Theriacal. ss. M.

This purged him five or six times very gently, and he recovered daily. Note,
that his Pulse was very high, and his face of a red and fiery color before the
Hemorrhagie; which we did not very much endeavor to stop, tho he bled a Pint.

Observation V.
Observe. 5*
About the same time, when we had some very sultry days, John Wheeler, in the
same Ship, about 38 years of age, was taken with a coldness, loss of strength,
a want of appetite, and a nauseating of his victuals; his Pulse was depressed,
and he had a pain in his breast: about 12 or 14 hours after came a violent
heat, which made him very restless and dry.

I ordered him to be let nine ounces of blood on the 9th of July, and that
evening he took a Bolus of the Conserve of Wood Sorrel and Sal Prunellae; next
morning six grains of Tartarum Emeticum, which began to work half an hour after
he had taken it, and he drunk a large draught of thin Water gruel after every
vomiting: he vomited six times, had two Stools, slept four hours after, and was
much easier. On the 11th he begun the testaceous Powder, of which he had nine
doses for three days, three to be taken every day, all that time he went to
stool once a day, and pist a great deal; on the 14th he took nothing but the
Decoction, I had ordered him for his ordinary Drink, and on the 15th he took
the following Purge.

Pulv. radic. Jalapp. ss. resin. Jalapp. gr. iij* Crem. Tartar. i. M.

This Purgative gave him eight Stools, and had done working by 12 a clock,
after which he found himself a great deal better, his drought abating, and his
Pulse more natural, he called for victuals, and eat a little Water Gruel; and
that evening he lost six or seven ounces of blood at his Nose, and recovered
daily.

Observation VI.
I ^^^erv. 6.
one John Wallin on board the Hospital Ship, who was put on board her that day;
he seemed to have been a man of a very good habit of body; but his Blood
running about like Lightning; his Pulse beat 132 in a minute, he was very dry
and delirious: he took that night Conserve Lujul. ss. Sal. prunell. i. in a
Bolus with v. grains of Camphire. I ordered a large blistering Plaster to be
laid to the Nape of his Neck, and one behind each Ear; they rose very well, and
were removed next morning, and the parts dressed with the Empl. de Melil. simpl.
and so he was freed from his Delirium: he rested indifferently well that night,
and next day took this Powder.

Occul. cancr. ppt. j Sal. prunel. ij. Pulver. serpentar. virginian. gr. xv. M.
ac divid. in vi p. ae. ac Capiat unam ter in die.

Next day in the afternoon, a Clyster was injected, which purg*d him thrice*
and made him very easy and sensible; he drunk what he would of the following
Decoction, and recovered on board.

Radio. Oxylapat. ij. aoetos. i Scorzoner. ss. Hord. mundat. M. j. Coq. in s.
q. aq. font. ad Hordei crepituram, circa finem addendo Passul. Maj. integr.
iij. Colaturae, per subsidentiam, clarificatae, add aceti acerrimi q. s. ad
gratam aciditatem.

These, by the bye, are the fatal, but almost perpetual, consequences of a
diaphoretical practice in Fevers; especially on young people, in a hot season
of the year, or a warm climate: for when they are put into a Sweat, they catch
cold in the end, relapse, take new doses of Diascordium, and Venice Treacle,
which (especially when they are not allowed to drink liberally) dissipate and
destroy the spirits and serum of the blood, that it cannot be kept fluxil, but
by the hot parts of those Medicines, which break down the almost solid blood,
and supply animal spirits to the last drop of blood, and so dye unexpectedly as
in Hectic Fevers; only their Fate is harder, and their Exit not so deliberate,
for they are kept mad and delirious all the while, whereas the other dye in
their senses.

Observation VII.
Observe. 7.
At the same time I saw another who was put on board there, on the 16th day of
his Fever; his Pulse did not beat above 37 strokes in a minute, he could not
speak, but star'd, and made signs for drink. That night he had had three such
Plasters, as I mentioned in the former case, applied to his Neck and behind
his Ears. He took now and then two or three spoonfuls of a Julep made of vi. of
Barley* decoction, ss of a Cordial Tincture, and i of Syrup of
Clove-Gillo-flowers. This Cordial Tincture Mr. M*kie told me, he had made of
the rad. serpentor. virginian. Cochinel. and Spirit of Wine; and, when by the
use of these Medicines he had recovered his senses, he began to use this Powder.

Ocul. Cancr. ppt. sal. prunell. an l pulver. radic. serpentar. virginian. ss.
M. ac Divid. in vi. p. ae. Capiat unam bis in die. He recovered apace while in
the Ship; but she being ordered for England, our Patient in a day or two was
sent ashore at Portsmouth, to the care of Dr. Smith, and my most ingenious
Friend Mr. Heart.

'Twould be an easy task to produce many other instances of this kind, but
these which are faithfully related, may suffice to convince us, that this
Method is surer than the Diaphoretical Practice. And therefore I shall proceed,
first to give an account of our other constant sicknesses, and then of our
interloping distempers.

Observation VIII.
Observe. 8.
Mr. Nobs, Purser to the Elizabeth, was taken after Dinner with a coldness and
trembling, which lasted six hours; his Pulse was all the while extremely
depressed, and beat not above 40 strokes in a minute; then came the warmth,
which first begun about the trunk of his body, and was afterward diffused over
all. As it increased, he grew very restless, and his Pulse became very quick
and strong; till at last he began to sweat, and his heat abated proportionably
as the sweating increased. He was well for the rest of that day and all the
next, but was troubled with a looseness; and the third day he was taken ill
again, and suffered over all the former symptoms.

It Is very plain from what I said in The General Cure.
the first part of this Book, that that viscid and slimy Lentor, which first
stagnates in the capillary Arteries, and then in these larger Vessels, must be
broken and divided, that it may be made a substance capable of being carried
round the body without stopping or stagnating. And because this Lentor has its
supply from the primae viae, the Liver or other viscera that are said to
separate liquors, by some or all of these liquors being viscid; we must
endeavor to cut off and intercept that supply, and to break and render fluxil
the liquors that are thus tough and viscid. Now from which of all these this
lentor proceeds and is supplied, is not always very evident, tho sometimes it
may happen to be so. Let us first suppose then, that this supply comes wholly
from the primae viae; and upon this supposition we may conclude, that those
things which empty the stomach and intestines of those impurities will do the
business effectually. And because a Vomit performs that work with the greatest
certainty, then a Vomit would be all that is requisite to complete that Cure, and
the more gentle it is, 'twould be more for the ease of the Patient and
satisfaction of the Physician. But I have proved before, that the other viscera
may discharge some of their vitiated liquors into the blood, which not being
changed into the perfect nature of the blood, they stagnate in the Capillary
Arteries in that quantity and way, that are fit to produce the foregoing
Phenomenon. And they being in such circumstances, as make them fit to affect
the blood, it is evident that those faulty and vicious humors must be broken
and divided, that they may be fitted to circulate with the blood without
stagnating; and that the blood, which is thus affected, must be reduced to a
state of greater fluxility. If they had their viscidity from the primae viae,
that work could be done very easily; but it is certain that the blood may be
infinitely changed, without any fault in these first passages; and the viscera,
that are now affected, must have their juices altered, or else they will still
be in a condition to give a continual supply, supposing the blood to be
otherwise in a good condition. Now the only way that liquors, which stagnate in
their channels, can be propell'd and made fluxil is, by some power that may
compress, break and divide the liquors thus stagnating; and because this
breaking and dividing must be performed by somewhat, that contracts or
violently compresses the obstructed parts, and breaks the stagnating juices;
and this can only be performed by the contraction of the muscles, and their
compressing the viscera, that are near them; therefore the moderate exercise of
those Muscles will be very agreeable: but in our natural or voluntary
contractions, they have not that violence, that is necessary to make a
sufficient compression fit to break and divide this lentor. And since there are
a great many Muscles, that are obstructed, and could have sufficiently broken
the stagnating liquors in the neighboring viscera, that cannot be moved and
contracted by the power of our Will; some way must be contrived to make such a
violent contraction of those Muscles especially, that are able to compress the
neighboring viscera; and if we examine all the consequences that attend the
giving of any Medicin, we shall find none that exercises more Muscles, and that
with greater violence than vomiting; for not only the Muscles of the Thorax and
Abdomen are contracted with a prodigious force, and are able, by their
contraction, to compress the Lungs, Stomach, Liver, Spleen, or any thing that
may be contained in them, and in all their capacity, but even the whole Muscles
of the Body are affected; and therefore it is vomiting only that can produce the
required effect. Thus we have demonstrated the way of cutting off the supply of
this lentor, that is made by the primae viae and the viscera, that are said to
contain liquors; so that if there were not such a season of the year, in which
the viscidity of the blood is much promoted and augmented, the blood extremely
weakened and dispirited with repeated paroxysms or otherwise, this disease might
be conquered by these very means. But when the Air is foggy, moist and cold,
and the blood weak, we must have respect to that, if we will cure our Patient;
and such things must be given, that may make the blood richer and maintain its
fluxility.

We have an infinite number of Medicines, that are said to produce such effects;
but the long, tedious and unsuccessful practice of former ages convinces us of
the contrary. We heard indeed a great deal of specific Medicines of opposite
powers; but never saw any thing, that deserved that name before the Indian
B^rk. We had diapho^etical and warming Medicines, that broke and divided the
blood, and made it more fluxil for some time, but were so far from being able
to keep it so, that on the contrary having destroyed the native spirits and
serum of the blood, they rendered it more apt to stagnate and to be obstructed.
The Indian Bark then, or Jesuits Powder, being by daily experience that
Specific we desired, we ought not to neglect it, tho it was not found in a
Matras. But not to insist upon experience in a thing, where we have so many
reasonable proofs, tho that, of its self, is a sufficient proof: for we see how
the sinking and languishing Pulse is raised by the taking of it, and that
without any burning and extraordinary warmth; i. e. we find it has such a power
as is able to introduce a freer motion, which cannot be done but by freeing the
confined spirits, that they may be separated in due time and proper place. And
since this ^^^^ing the spirits at liberty can only be ^^rformed by breaking the
viscid blood, and this attrition is the thing required; therefore the Jesuits
Powder, Quinquina, etc. answers our desire, and gives us what we require. Now,
tho it is plain that the Jesuits Powder produces this effect, it is not the
Jesuits Powder, as such, or its name alone, that is able to charm and lull
asleep this intermitting Fever; but since we see plainly that it can do so, we
should give it in a sufficient quantity to produce that effect; and when we
give it, to be sure it may be carried into the blood: For if this be not done,
it is quite as good, if not better, to keep it in the Paper and look upon it,
and from that to expect your Cure, than to take it into a foul stomach, full of
thick impurities, there to be clogged up in impure matter, and perhaps to be
carried out of the body with the excrements, or else to be carried in this
condition into the mass of blood to the misfortune of the Patient: or, if
neither of these happen, given in the time of a Looseness, to be immediately
carried off by Stool, and never reaching the blood to communicate its efficacy
and virtue. As to the way how its effect is produced, I know not, nor ever
shall, without a revelation from that Being, who knows the determined motion,
size of the parts, and the different cohesion of matter, that produce the
modified bodies we see; and yet, I think, there may be sufficient certainty to
assist us pretty exactly in doing such things, as the support of our infirm
nature may require. For, considering the nature of intermitting Fevers, of
which we are as certain as of any thing in Physics, and that we have a
Medicin, that alters the condition of the blood and makes it more fluxil; and
this fluxility being acquired in a certain way, therefore the China China is
endu'd with a like power to that which makes the blood fluxil. This knowledge*
we have of the Barks efficacy, without the knowledge of its constituent parts
is so sure, that we can deduce very certain and almost infallible Corollaries
from it, and this one for instance; If this Powder be able to break, divide,
and make fluxil our viscid blood, then in a state where the blood is faulty
through its fluxility, richness; and extraordinary motion, this Powder is never to
be given; so that in a containing Fever, where the blood is such, the Jesuits
Powder must be very noxious; and it is very obvious to every man's Observation,
that the more the blood is in these circumstances, the consequence is always
the more fatal. I cannot omit what that candid Relater of Medicinal cases Dr.
Sydenham says, in the 36 p. of of his Letters, as they are printed in the
Edition of his book in 1685, at London: At in Peste atque Epidemicis continuis,
quae eandem ordine excipient, debellandis, non alios effectus ex ejus usu
expectare licet, quam eos, quos hodie in Pleuritide, Peripneumonia, Anguina, ac
id genus Febribus inflammatoriis videmus, quibus non tantum non prodest, sed
and plane obest. But in curing the Plague and continual Epidemicks, which will
orderly follow these, no other effects are to be expected from it, than these
we now find it produces in a Pleurisy, Peripneumonia, Quinsey, and such other
inflammatory Fevers, in which case it is not only useless, but evidently
hurtful. But whatever may be thought of my pretended certainty; it is at least
as well grounded as a great many maxims in the Hydrostaticks, etc. which no
Ship-Carpenter or Man of sense doubts of; but on the contrary, finds all his
calculations and inferences orderly made, to* answer his expectation in his
practice.

The Chemists at present are engaged in an extraordinary bustle and smoke with
their fire and menstrua, to resolve by their Instruments which they do not
understand, the constituent parts of this Specific; and at last tell us that
it is a Rosin, and that its power in curing Agues is lodged in its Rosin, which
is as much in plain English as the first question; and we understand just as
much, when they tell us of its virtue being in its Rosin, as if they had told
us, that it is in the Bark. We know indeed that its tincture, made with any
spirituous liquor, is the strongest, and that because it is the property of
Rosins to be best dissolved in Spirits; it is plain that this Bark contains a
great deal of Rosin, which is all that can be concluded from this experiment.
But to proceed, let us suppose, that all the virtue is extracted in this Rosin,
which cannot be pretended (because of a like experiment of its yielding its
sanative power in common water) yet we shall still be as much puzzled about the
way of this Rosins working, as the working of the Bark in Powder, before it was
a Rosin* And if they think they have answered the question, by telling us that
it produces these effects, as it is a Rosin, then all other Rosins will do the
same; and therefore, they may trust to the Rosin of Jalap, or any other they are
obliged to by their principles; and we shall have an opportunity to observe the
conclusion.

The other way, that has been taken, to account for the virtue of the Bark, is
by imagining it to be astringent; a power quite destructive of the requisits,
we have clearly laid down for curing an Ague; and no less repugnant to common
observation, as I shall demonstrate. What has been the foundation of this
assertion, I could no where find out so clearly, as in a Discourse written by
one of the Members of the Royal Society, I think in the year 1678; where
consuting the power of the Bark in curing Agues, he says, that if the Patient
be troubled with a looseness while he is taking the Jesuits Powder, it can have
no success; therefore, says he, the Bark has its power in a contrary way, and
is astringent; then he subsumes for his own purpose, that, because it is
astringent* it must be very hurtful in a disease that must be cured by
evacuation. To pass by at this time, our Author's neglecting to prove that this
disease must be cured ^y evacuation* which I very much doubt for the reasons
intimated before; I have said enough already to evince the weakness of his
Observation. It Is strange, that one should expect, that any kind of Medicines,
which produce not their effect in a minute, but require some hours, at least,
to affect the blood; should exert their virtue, when they never come thither;
and this being the case of the Jesuits Powder in a Looseness, we may easily
conclude, that the Quinquina will not cure an Ague in that case, whether it be
astringent or not. By the bye, since I have had occasion to examine this
argument against the Barks power of curing Agues, I cannot forbear taking
notice of another very good argument this Author brings for the poisonous
qualities of the Bark, and that is an experiment from its hindering the
fermentation of Yest and Wort; that, because if a due quantity of the Jesuits
Powder be cast into Wort, before the Yest is added, the Wort never ferments,
and therefore this Powder is poisonous. I confess, I know not how to answer an
argument which I do not comprehend; but if every thing that hinders the
fermentation of Yest and Wort be poisonous; what must become of us poor Mortals
in the poisonous times either of a frosty or very hot season, for the Brewers
find their Ale and Beer ferment but very ill in such seasons: and besides,
Sugar, Spirit of Hearts* horn, etc. poured into Wort in a due quantity hinder
its fermentation; yet they were never reckoned among the number of Poisons:
But, on the contrary, if I thought the Hypothesis of Acid and Alkali tolerable,
I should like the Bark the better for the experiment this Author has helped me
to: for in that way, the blood in an Ague is viscid, by the power of the
coagulating Acid, which can only be destroyed by a powerful Alkali, such as
this experiment proves the Bark to be.

Now as for the astringent power asserted, because it is so, and for no reason
yet assigned, is very ridiculous: and if it cured Agues as it is astringent,
then as strong, or more powerful astringents would have the same effect, which
is contrary to any trial or observation can be made: on the contrary, we know
it is used every day with the best success in Hysterical Fits, and the
Suppression of Women's Monthly Courses, where no body ever advised so powerful
an astringing Medicin, as they would have the Bark to be.

It Is true, we have seen some ill symptoms appearing after the giving the
Powder; but the Question is, whether these symptoms are the Disease's, the
Bark's, or the Physitian's; and this I shall endeavor to resolve, by following
out Helvetius, a Physician in France, who has lately writ a Book, he dedicates
to the French King, and allows a great many of them to be owing to the Powders
being given by the Mouth, and contrives a new way of giving it, and that by
Clysters. I shall first then enquire, how far his allowance is good, and to be
followed, and what is to be thought of his new practice; which, I think, will be
very obliging. But before I do this, 'twill be necessary to show, that I have
not forgot my Observation; and therefore when I have related one or two more I
shall come to those Reflections.

And first, because Mr. Nobs was troubled with a Looseness; and that it might
not hinder the Operation of the Vomit, I intended to give him for the preceding
reasons, the night before I prescribed him the following Bolus to be taken
going to bed.

Conserv. Ros. rub. ss. Sanguin. Dracon. i. Laudan. Opiat. gr. jss. Sir. de
Mecon. Parum ut f. Bolus.

Next day, being to have the Fit about two a clock in the afternoon, I ordered
him, upon the former design, vi grains of Tartarum Emeticum to be taken about
noon; he vomited five times, and drunk not so much after every Vomiting, as I
allowed my Patients in Fevers; that the compression by the contraction of the
Muscles might be the greater, he went once to Stool, and about the and of the
working his coldness began, and lasted only two hours; then succeeded a very
sharp heat, which went off sooner than before, by sweating, which was very
plentifully: for I had desired him to bear with the hot Fit, and lie very
close, that he might sweat, else I would give him no Medicin till the next Fit;
which he did: and being temperate, the blood being now comminuted, and
sufficiently fluxil for its motion, I ordered him to begin the Powder I had
caused to be made up, into an Electuary, that it might be conveyed into the
blood in its healthy state; that it might too, comminute more easily any viscid
matter that would be conveyed to the blood by any of its ways of supply; and in
that quantity I thought reasonably could destroy the viscidity of one paroxism,
and this he took in as great quantities, as he could easily digest before he
took more.

. Pulv. Chin. Chin. subtiliss. pulverat j Conserv. Ros. rub. ss. Sir. e Chalyb.
q. s. ut f. Electuar. Cujus capiat quantitatem Nucis Myristicae majoris, tertia
quaque hora, superbibendo Vin. Hisp. Cochl. ij.

In the Dose he took before Bedtime, I ordered him j. grain of London Laudanum.
He missed of his Fit, and dined at five a clock in the afternoon upon a
Chicken, and drunk a Glass or two of red Wine at Dinner. Next morning he began
an Infusion I had ready for him to take of, till his blood was strong and
should recover its strength, and 'twas this,

. Rad. Gentain. ij. Scorzoner. j. Serpentar. Virginian. ss. Summit at Centaur.
Min. M. ij. Fl. Chamom. M. j. Cortic. Aurant. ss. Winter an ij. M. ae
infundant. per Biduum in Vini Xeresens. generosiss. lb ij. Dein capiat Cochl.
v. bis in die.

By the use of these Medicines he recovered his Health, without the least
suspicion of a Relapse.

Observation IX.
observe. 9.
Mr. -- Lient, of the --, was taken ill after Dinner with a Coldness, which
lasted an hour and a quarter; his Pulse was depressed, and beat about 50 in a
minute; for he being of a thin habit of body, his blood very warm, it beats
about 80 in that time: he had a pain in his head, then came the heat, which
began about the Trunk of the Body, and was sensibly diffused over the rest; it
lasted three hours, after which he began to sweat and judged his Fit; it
recurr'd the third day inclusive, and had his cold Fit not above half an hour,
but the hot Fit lasted some seven or eight hours before he began to sweat; next
day I wa^ sent for, and ordered him iij grains of Tartarum Emeticum to be taken
an hour and a half at least, before we expected the Fit: he vomited some six or
seven times, and went twice to Stool; I ordered him to drink largely between
his endeavors to vomit: when the Medicin was almost done working, the Fit
began to seize him and the cold Fit lasted little more than a quarter of an
hour, and as it was a going off, I ordered him to take the following Powder.

. Pulver. Gasconic. i Laudan. opia^. gr. ss. M.

After he had taken it about twelve minutes he fell asleep, and slept almost
two hours; but before he was awake he was in an excellent Sweat, so he lay
still till the end of the Sweating, and thereafter begun this Electuary.

. Pulver. Quinquin. subtiliss. j. Conserv. Acetosel. vi. Sir. e Succ. Citr. q.
s. ^t f. Electuar. Molle. Quod capiat ad magnitudinem Avellanae tertia quaque
hor a superbibendo Vini rubri Gallici Cochl. ij. vel tria.

By the use of this Electuary he missed his Fit; and began next morning to this
Infusion, I ordered for the strengthening his blood,

. Rad. Gentian. j. Scorzoner. Helen. ^n ss. fl. Chamom. M. ij. Summitat. Cent.
min. M. j. Baccar. Juniper. ij. Cort. Aureant. ss. Tart. alb. crud. ij, pp^i^
so a. affund. Vin. rubelli lb ij. Stent per biduum in Infusione, dein capiat
colat^r. clarae Cochl. iv. bis in die. Repetatur Infusio super eadem
Medicamenta ad alteram vicem.

He continued in the use of these Medicines, and drunk both the Infusions
without any thing of a Relapse. All the time I allowed him to eat any kind of
meat that was easily digested and drink a glass of Wine or two in a day.

Observation X.
Obser. 10^.
Since the last two histories are two different cases, and we see required a
different way of giving the Cortex, that it might not overheat the last: now,
that I may keep up the variety, which is always delightful, tho perhaps 'twere
necessary to have two or three of one sort, which is too long at this time, and
it may be I may have another opportunity for this: I must ask the liberty not
only to go into another Ship, but even go back one year to give you an
Observation of a poor Man, that was miserably afflicted with an Ague for
eighteen months.

This was one Mr. Humble in the Grafton, to whom I was called May 1694, at
Spithead, by Mr. Leckie, who was then Surgeon to that Ship. He was first taken
with a Tertian Ague, for which he was put ashore; and after he had staid out
his time, he came back with it upon him, for he was some Officer or another,
and so would not leave the Service; and expecting his Cure aboard, he was
taking something all that time, but to no advantage. So, when I was called he
had a Quartan, and his cold Fit used to last him some four or five hours, his
hot or Fever Fit one hour, or an hour and a half, and then sweat: he was
brought very low. I asked him when he expected the next Fit, and he told me to
morrow about eight in the morning; for it shifted forward and backward, from
Tertian to Quotidian, from Quotidian to Tertian, from a Quartan to a
Hemitritaea, and from that to a Quartan again. I ordered him to take iv grains
of Emetic Tartar that morning, about 6 a clock; which had just done working as
his Fit begun to come upon him; his cold Fit after his Vomit lasted two hours,
his hot Fit two hours, and so went off by the Sweating. I had been speaking to
the Surgeon about the giving him the Jesuits Powder; but he told me he had been
so often let blood, purged, and taken so much of the Powder ashore and aboard,
that he could not take more; and therefore I was resolved to try the Powder, my
learned Colleague Dr. Morton recommends in his Book of Fevers.

. Pulver. fl. Chamom. j. Sal. Absynth. Antimon. Diaphoret. an ss. ac capiat ss.
tertia quaque hora, superbibendo Vini cujusvis generosi Cochl. iij.

He took his Powders very orderly, till he had spent that vast quantity, but
without the parting of his eighteen months Companion. He did no more till the
next return, but drunk of the following Infusion.

. Rad. Gentian. Raphan. Armorac. an ij. Zedoar. Serpentar. Virginian. an ij.
Summitat. Centaur. min. Card. Benedict. an M. j. ss. fl. Chamom. M. j. Cortic.
aurant. ss. Winteran ij. Limatur. Mart. j. Tart. alb. crud. ss. M. s. a. ac
infund. in Vin. Hispan. generosis. lb iij. Stent per hor as vi. in Baln. aren.
ac bibat Cochl. v. ter in die.

And that morning he expected his Fit, he took the preceding Vomit, which
wrought very well, and his cold Fit lasted not above an hour, and his hot an
hour and a half, and judged the Fit by Sweating. Things succeeded so well, I
desired he would try the Jesuits Powder once more, and if it had no success, he
should be at his choice; he was persuaded, and had it made up in this form.

. Pulver. Patrum iss. Conserv: Ros. rub. j. Theriac. Andromach. ij. Extract.
Gentian. j. Sal Absynth. ij. Sir. e Chal. q. s. ut f. Elect. molle: cujus
capiat quantitatem Nucis Moschatae maj. tertia quaque hora, superbib. Vin.
Canarin. coch. iv.

And if he escaped his Fit, to continue with the former Tincture till he
recovered his strength; but the next day, after I left that Ship, I was taken
with a violent containing Fever, which lasted five days with the practice
before; and e're I was fit to go abroad, our Fleet was divided, and that Ship
went to the Streights in company of the rest, that have made England the
Admiration of all Europe, under the command of the Right Honorable Admiral
Russel, who must needs make a great figure in the History of afterages.

I enquired, tho, of one of the Surgeon's Mates, after this Humble, who, he
tells me, is now in good health; and recovered, he thinks, before he left the
English Air. And thus having ended the Observations, I trouble you with, of
Agues, I proceed to the Considerations about Helveti^s's Bark-Clyster Practice.

Places marked from this Author's Book, p. 4.
The Reasons, he says, in the 4th page, made him look out for another way of
giving the Bark than by the Mouth, are the complaints some make, of an
unsupportable weight and a violent pain in their Stomach: others finding their
Thorax changed very much, from what it uses to be in a natural state, and such
an extraordinary heat in their Breast as it were dried up: and lastly, because
there is an abundance of people, that make resolutions every day never to take
it more, tho they have been cured in this way. Passing the known
inconveniences begin its use a second time upon the occasion of a Relapse. And
therefore 'twas, that thinking upon the train of disagreeable circumstances,
that attend this Remedy, I have discovered this more convenient way of giving
it, whereby we may enjoy all its good effects, and evite all that is troublesome
in it. And this way is no other than by giving it in Clysters.



In Intermitting Fevers this Clyster must be given in the end of the paroxysm,
and must be repeated thrice every day, till the Patient is perfectly cured,
which is not long ^'re it is done; for it is very extraordinary to see another
Fit, very rarely two, and I, almost never, see a third. After he is long as is
possible; and there be some people that can keep them but a very little time,
we must add for those, half an ounce of the Syrup of White Poppies to the
Powder of Quinquina, which will mightily conduce to the keeping the Remedy
without any trouble.

We must observe, that those that

There Is nothing amongst all the it is not beside the purpose to take notice at
this time, that those Clysters not having a purgative faculty, and not being
given for that end, the sick people need not be disquieted or concerned, if
they see not an Evacuation of Bile and other Humors; as in our ordinary
Clysters.



A l'egard, says he, de la Chaleur, il est certain, que les parties grossieres
du Quinquina, qui en sont la seule Cause, ne sejournant plus dans le corpse qu'
autant de temps qu' il en faut a la Chaleur naturelle pour le digerer and en
tirer ce qu' il a de volatile and de salutaire, le marc qui en rest etant
rejette aussi-tot, sans etre oblige passer par toutes les voies qu' il parcourt
quand il est pris par la bouche, le corpse ne peut que profiter de tout ce qu'
il y a ^aisse d'utile, sans jamais etre incommode de tout ce qu' il pourroit
avoir de pesant, d'embarassant and de nuisible, qui est ce qui cause le Chaleur
don't on se plaint tant.

Touching this heat, says he, it is certain that the gross parts of the Powder,
which are its cause, staying no longer in the body than is necessary for the
natural heat to digest it, and to extract its parts that are volatile and
wholesome; and the Mash that remains, being cast out of the body, without being
obliged to pass all those ways it goes along, when taken in by the Mouth: the
body cannot but reap a vast advantage from all the useful parts that are left,
without being, in the least, hurt by any thing of it that is heavy, embarrassing
and injurious, which are the things, that make all those heats they complain
of. He adds in the next paragraph, that the people that have the Piles, are the
only to whom he gives not these Powder-Clysters; either not in so great a
quantity, because the rough Powder, rubbing up the vessels in the passing, is
apt to provoke the Piles, or else he gives a strong decoction of it, which does
almost as well, and entirely prevents this inconvenience,



Thus having picked out almost all this Author says, either to the disadvantage
of the Q^inquina's being taken in at the mouth; the benefit of his own way of
giving it, and the consequences of that: I must confess the World is obliged to
any one that endeavors to better any Science by useful and well established
Theories, or Intimations to perfect its Practice, by discovering such
instruments and helps, that can make it more sure: yet, I think, a man that
communicates any thing, may claim and arrogate a little too much to himself;
except the practice or opinion he advances be, without controversy, better than
those that were established and thought of before: and therefore to speak my
mind freely, without a Navy Physitian's declaring war against a French Doctor,
I think that this Trial may stand us in very good stead, upon the pinch of
saving the life of one, who rather chooses to die than taste this Medicin; and
of these there are very few: but I should judge that man very rash, that would
recede from the known way of giving the Jesuits Powder he has found so safe,
that nothing can be more; and would go to a practice so very doubtful, and
hardly pressed with the same difficulties, can be brought against the taking it
by the Mouth, upon any lesser consideration; as we shall see immediately by the
answering his Arguments, which I shall do with as great brevity and clearness
as I can.

As to the weight and pain some feel in their Stomachs, after having taken the
Jesuits Powder, it is certainly a very great inconvenience; but shall be judged
by all the world, if that swelling they feel in their Bellies be not quite as
ill, and can sooner breed a Dropsy, Jaundice, etc. than any disease that can be
so soon brought on by it: besides, if we will be at the trouble to look back to
what I have said, in the first part of this Book, about that symptom of an
Ague, the weight in the Stomach; he shall see it clearly made out, that this
weight is nothing but a heap of undigested and slimy stuff that is lodged there;
and therefore of it self is apt to make the necessary supply, to keep up the
force of the Ague; and intercept too, any Medicines that are given in by the
Mouth for its Cure, as I have said since I begun to speak of Agues. And if he
would persuade us to the using his Clysters in these circumstances, we shall
never be able to cure this Ague, tho they were supposed to have a hundred times
the force he pretends to: whereas if we give a Vomit to make a clear passage,
we shall fell no such inconvenience, but especially if the Fit were well judged
before we began our Medicin; and so this complaint comes more from the neglect
of something that should been done, than from any defect in the Bark; unless,
perhaps, it may add its own quantity to this nasty mass, and rarify that too by
its subtle parts. And so the Argument will go no further than this. Opium,
Steel, Antimony, etc. have been given in very ill times, and too great
quantities, and no doubt there is been abundance killed so; but for all that,
should we leave off the use of these Medicines? no surely; and they will prove
useful and noble Medicines in good hands. But why may not our Author try, what a
decoction of the Powder he uses for Clysters upon certain occasions, can do, to
shun this inconvenience of the Powder; especially since our learned Colleague
Dr. Morton, had published, some two years before this Author wrote his Book,
such a decoction for this very end; which would have prevented most misfortunes
from that hand, when we know not this fit time to give a Vomit.

Then for the second inconvenience, it is much of the same kind; and if any one
will consider the proof I brought for the way how the Bark had its effect, and
the Corollary I deduced from it, shall not be very much puzzled to find out,
that it is only those that are of thin habits of body, and whose blood is thin,
easily rarified, and incline to be hectical, that find this burning Heat our
Author assigns, and after they have taken the pure powder; and I dare appeal to
himself, or any man of practice, if ever they found this accident but in these
circumstances; and a wise Physician can easily provide against that, as I have
endeavored in part, by giving the Cortex as in my 9th Observation. but to see
what a miserable shift he takes to weather this difficulty is wonderful, from
what he says in the 32 page; and if he had done any thing he should first told
us, what the ferment of the Fever is he talks of in the 39 page; how the parts,
and what parts are fittest to bring it under; and lastly, what vessels these
are that have their mouths open into the Intestins; none of these things he has
told us any thing of, yet they were necessary to be known* and of all things in
the world I doubt most of his certainty in the citation from the 32 page; and
would have thought the gross parts of any body the least capable to produce
heat; and to guide all this right, he tells us, that Nature keeps it just so
long, and not one half second longer, than was necessary to separate those
sanative parts from its grosser hot parts; this is indeed wonderful, but she
that can do all this, why did she put him to the trouble of contriving Syrup of
White Poppies, to cause some to keep their Clysters longer, and purging
Clysters to help others off with theirs; I Will help him out for once, and
remember him that Nature's of the she-kind, and he is an old man. But of this
Banter too much. The rest of his Citations are about the way of giving it,
which I have nothing to do with here; tho I thought fit to show them, if any
one be for them; and all the rest may be comprehended in this, that they may be
better given his way, because, as he says, the Bark is given in substance, and
in a greater quantity. And first, I believe all the Physicians in France, at
least all or most here, give it in substance, and have done these thirty y^^^s,
as well as Helvetius; and in a way too, that our six Drachms must turn to a
greater account than his three ounces, and allow him ten more; and this we
shall make very plain, by considering that betwixt the lower end of the
Duodenum to the end of the Ileon, there are infinite numbers of Lacteal Vessels
to be seen, whereby this Powder, its Tincture made in the Stomach, and other
parts, may be very easily carried into the blood, and by which is carried of
one substance and another, at least, 3, 4, 5 pounds in a day, and so may be a
very good way for 3 drachms, ss, vi, or j, of this Powder, however digested and
prepared in a clean Stomach; whereas in his way, all the Lacteals that are said
to be there, are supposed upon ill made experiments, and not one to be seen;
and so, I think, our six drachms can produce more powerful effects than his
thirteen ounces, we have allowed him; but suppose all the Colon were as full of
Milky-Vessels, as the Milky-way is full of Stars (which we see he ^ust not
pretend to) yet I Am in the opinion he could not much better himself; for his
Clysters could get no great length; which will be very evident to any one, that
will bring into his thoughts, or lay before his eyes the Guts in their natural
posture, and any one with a Clyster-Syringe impelling the Liquor; I say, if he
considers this, he shall have no great difficulty to agree to my assertion: for
first, if they were supposed full, then it is evident the resistance of the
Excrements were to be accounted for; and perhaps this would do the business:
but now, we'll suppose them perfectly empty, and their sides flaccid, as we see
them at that time; then, upon the one hand let us remember, that the motion
they have is from the Stomach downward, and that they are ten^ile; then next,
that the Colon, where it joins the Straight Gut, lies not rectum with the
cavity of the Straight Gut, but cuts it at oblique angles; and upon the other
hand all the force this impelled liquor has, is only by the compressing the
sides of a Bladder, or a more valid propulsion by the Syringe; and therefore
passing the small resistance from the motion of the Guts, there is first so much
motion lost by raising the sides of the Straight Gut, whereinto it may be
propell'd without any other; but so soon as it comes to the joining of the
Colon, it must reflect at every section of this Gut, and the reflection too, is
to be made upon a soft, tensil body, which is more than enough to overcome a
ten times greater force, than can be conceived to be given to this liquor by
the propulsion by the Syringe. And therefore, since the Straight Gut has no
lacteals, and the Colon were supposed to have; yet his Clysters not going any
length there, could turn to no great account; at least, not the twentieth part,
very modestly speaking, as the other way.

But next, for the convenience of this Practice, I think it is the most
inconvenient could have been contrived; for who can bear fifteen Clystering
days, and to take about twenty four Clysters in that time; and then as many in
case of a Relapse* this is not only one of the most troublesome Practices, but
the most expensive that can be by the Jesuits Powder; for supposing an
Apothecary should let us have them at Crowns apiece, this is no less than 12 l.
for these 48 Clysters, besides other Medicines, which is a great deal too much
for the most that grudge 4ss. and a Crown for an ounce of the Powder, which
always cures them with the help of such a tincture I have spoke of in my
Observations: and therefore by this time it is plain, that Helvetius's Practice
is neither so reasonable, nor so convenient, as the giving the Powder by the
Mouth; and the misfortunes complained of are truly the Physician's, and none of
the Bark's: but we must allow him that the taste will not be so ungrateful, as
when taken our way; tho in so many Clysters it will be felt, as I have found in
curing of some very tender People of Claps by Clysters, which in three or four
days became almost as nauseous, as if they had taken Medicines by their Mouth;
yet at best this is but an inconvenience to a few, for a settled inconvenient,
expensive, and unreasonable Practice.

Observation XI.
Obser. 11. The Scurvy.
George Manning, aged 27 years, of a bilious Constitution, and a thin habit of
body, was taken, on board the Elizabeth, with an out-breaking of abundance of
red spots upon his Legs and Arms; a great many of those upon his Legs became of
an olive color, yellow, blue, and black.

It Is evident from what I said before of the Scurvy, and as that is really
distinguished from the Melancholia Hypocondriaca; that the ^retty, rarified,
and disunited parts are to be made closer, and of a stricter cohe^ion: and thus
the small parts of the blood, not being separated in so great a quantity, in
the brain, by the perspiration, into the Intestines, etc. there can be no such
feverish affections, faintings, quick and slow pulses eruption upon the skin,
etc. as we see every day. Now this compactness and stricter cohesion, can only
be acquired by such Medicines, that, by their quantity, or of their own nature,
can give body to the blood, or make that more compact; which must be in a
natural state, and produce every thing that is natural, so soon as it acquires
this natural cohesion. Now, ashore, we have really great numbers of Medicines,
that answer this design, which can produce wonderful effects, when given in
time, and in a way that this view shows us. Those are all the Medicines, we call
temperate, besides those that are Analeptical, and mostly prescribed in Hectic
Fevers, into which this disease naturally runs, tho sooner when helped on by the
use of the common Antiscorbuticks.

But at Sea, where all the victuals, that are for their nourishment, encourage
this sickness so much, and increase it: and all the provisions of Medicines,
that is made for our Seasicknesses, have no respect to that: I think it not
unreasonable to acknowledge that disease not to be cured at Sea.

Yet I was willing to make the best I could of our Patients in Scurvies; and
therefore, that the Medicines we have might have the better effect, and the
Chyle, that is very often the best alterative, might be conveyed in its full
force; I ordered him a Vomit of ss Sal vitriol. in iij of Oxymel of Squils, to
be encouraged with large draughts of thin Water Gruel; he vomited three times,
and an abundance of nasty stuff: then I ordered him to take as little of his
Beef or Pork, for his Meal, as possible; and rather to live upon Burgoo, or
Watergruel; his ordinary Drink was Barley Decoction, to every quart whereof I
ordered ij of Sir. de Alth. to be added; and for Medicines, I prescribed him the
following Electuary to be taken of thrice a day.

. Pulp. Passul. maj. iij. Cons. fl. Cynosbat ij. fl. Lujul. iss. ^c. 69 ppt.
iij. Sir. e Suc. Limon. q. s. ut f. Elect.

After these Medicines were taken for three weeks, which time he was very exact
in following directions, he recovered apace, and came to his perfect health.

Observation XII.
Obser. 12.
Thomas Leonard, in the same Ship, and much of the same habit of body, and
constitution with the former, was troubled with red, blue, and black spots,
which run into one, swelled and became a stinking fetid Ulcer.

His Ulcers were dressed, and he had the same Diet, and Medicines, with what else
the place would afford, to that design: he was a little better, but having no
prospect of a perfect Cure was sent ashore, where he recovered his former
health.

These being all that had a true Scurvy, in the whole Summer I was in that
Ship, I very willingly leave off this melancholy Practice of a disease, that is
put out of our power to be cured at Sea* and at Land too, is one of the most
troublesome, as every one, that knows its practice, unanimously acknowledges.
But, before we leave this subject, I Am obliged to remember my Brethren of the
Navy, that of all the sicknesses in Medicines, Evacuation is to be done here
with the greatest discretion. There is no sickness where blooding can do more
harm, and is of greater advantage; vomiting and purging Medicines work more
violently, and in lesser doses; and every purgative that has Aloes or Scammony,
for their ingredients, in any quantity, are intolerable; and heighten the
disease beyond what we can think. And all other ways of evacuating are not so
much as to be dreamt of.

Observation XIII.
Obser. 13.
T -- B -- was troubled with a Looseness, that he went to ftool some 15 times a
day, for two days. On the third I saw him, and ordered him next morning the
following Medicines.

. Rha. b. el subtle. pulv. cina^n. an. i. M. ac capiat mane cum regimine.

This Powder seemed not to make him go more frequently to stool than he had
formerly, and rather not so often, for he had only eight Stools by it* yet, in
the evening, I prescribed him the following Julep.

. Aq. Plantag. lact. alexiter. an ii. cinam. hordeat. i. Sir. Myrtil ss. Diasc.
Fracaster. i. Confect. de Hyacinth. ss. M. ac capiat Cochl. 3 vel 4. singulis
horis.

He slept very well that night, and had but two Stools all the next 24 hours,
and thereafter continued in a natural way, without any further help.

It Is true those kinds of Medicines serve our purpose pretty well, when the
cause of Diarrhea's is confined to the first passages, yet when they are
produced in hot Countries, in people of a thin habit of body, and that very
hot, etc. they are not quite so certain, but we must depend upon Medicines of
greater force, and blooding to the strength of the Patient. 'Twere a work of
Supererogation to unfold the nature, and different states of this sickness,
after the way of the former, since it is not, so much, our constant Companion;
and therefore, it should be a little from the purpose: yet, in short, I must
advertise my brethren (contrary to the most of practice) that the most powerful
Medicines given in a liquid form, and in any quantity, cannot prove half so
successful, as Medicines of half the force in the contrary circumstances.

Observation XIV.
Obser. 14. 4.
George Gardner, was taken ill with a Looseness, for ten days, by which he went
above thirty times a day, for all that time. When I saw him his Pulse was weak
and frequent, his tongue full of deep chinks, he had a great drought, and was a
very Skeleton.

I ordered him a dram of a Powder, I give in such cases, made into Pills with
a little old Conserve of Red Roses; which he took about bed time, and drunk
none for two hours after; tho I allowed him as much of the Decoctum album as he
pleased to drink, when that time was over; he slept indifferently that night,
and had not a Stool all next day, but recovered daily; tho 'twas at least ten
days before he recovered his flesh or color.

I conceal this Medicin, because I think it better than the Fr. Ipicochoana it
self, by which Helvetius has made so plentiful a fortune; for I dare affirm
with all modesty, that I have tried it with above 200, when I thought a
Diarrhea was to be stopped, without ever missing of the success, and that without
any vomiting or violent consequences that attend the other, and a great deal
more certain. Yea I have given it with Bals. capoiv. Opobals. Bals. Peruvian.
and the like, with wonderful success, in Dysenteries themselves, and but seldom
was obliged to give a second dose. But its further confirmation, I leave to
experience, and the trial of others. I tried it for stopping Gonorrheas, in
their proper time, but it did not answer expectation.

Observation XV.
Obser. 15.
James Graham, of a thin habit of body, and very hot blooded, fell into a most
violent Looseness, such as Physicians commonly call a Colliquative Diarrhea, he
went some eight or ten times to stool every day.

Having no symptom, that could signify to me any thing of an indigestion, or of
those impurities in the Guts, that are said to, and may maintain, and produce a
Looseness, and his blood being of that nature, and velocity to make
considerable secretions that way; my design was to alter that cohesion and
velocity by letting him blood: and therefore I ordered him to be let eight
ounces of blood, which was all I judged he could spare for that end, and that
the powers of the faculties might not be lessened; accordingly all that day he
had no Stool, and was very regular* that way thereafter; but the Rectum and
Anus being very much excoriated by the sharpness of the humor, which he
complained of, as a violent heat in that part, three days after; and therefore
to prevent any Inflammations and their Attendants, as a Sphacelus and Gangrene,
I thought it most reasonable to prescribe him the following Clyster.

. Aq. font. moderat. tepidae x. Sir. de Alth. Fernel. iij. M. f. enema.

He kept this Clyster two hours, and then rendered it, and was very easy and
well. Now, when I relate this, it brings into my memory a pretty singular sort
of a case that happened last year, when I was on board the Vanguard; and
because 'twill not want its use, I shall presume to go back so far to relate it.

Observation XVI.
Obser. 16.
Mr. Moxum, a very brave and good Officer, then a Lieutenant in the Vanguard,
had a Looseness for a day or two, about the time the Fleet was at Diep; it went
off, but he was troubled with a most violent Tenesmus, or a desire to go to
stool. At that time I had been aboard the Royal William, attending the Marquis
of Carmarthen in a Fever, and was commanded for England, at his desire, to
perfect that Cure; so I knew nothing of that Gentleman's illness at home, till
about eight days after the Fleet came to Spithead; and then I admired what a
change was upon him, in ten days or a fortnight since I had seen him: he was a
perfect Skeleton, he could not rest a nights, and his Tenesmus coutinued; I
advised him to go ashore for his Recovery, which he did; but the Fleet sailing
six days after to the Downs, he followed the Fleet in the Ship's Pinnace, which
happened to be ashore when the Fleet sailed, and came to us six or seven hours
after we came to an anchor in the Downs; he was then worse, and complained of
an inflammatory sort of a pain in his Intestines, which was very troublesome,
when he grew warm in bed. He told me he could but die, and that he would do
aboard, under my care, if I would not order him Medicines ashore; so he went
ashore by Capt. Fairborn's leave, and before he was four days in Deal, he was a
great way in his Recovery, by the use of the following Medicines.

Decoct. fortior. brassic. and fl. Melilot. in aq. commun. x. Sir. de Alth. ij.
Terebinth. Venet. Vitel. ovi solut. ii Sal prunel. j. M. f. enema, quod
injiciatur quoque mane hora nona, ac hora quinta pomeridiana.

At bed times he took this Bolus.

Bals. Lucatel. ss. nitr. corollat. j. Laudan. opiat. gr. j. Sir. de ros. sicc.
q. s. ut f. Bolus.

His ordinary Drink was a small Decoction of Sarsa and new Milk, and his Diet,
Bread and Milk, or Bread and Whey; but after 4 or 5 days I allowed him Chicken,
and such Victuals as are easily digested; and about eight days after, he came
aboard in perfect health, and only took those Medicines for six or seven days
more.

Observation XVII.
Obser. 17.
-- Follen, a Servant of Capt. Greenaway's, in the Elizabeth, was ill of a
spitting and vomiting of blood a whole year, by which he was brought very low
and weak; the night before I saw him he had vomited up a great deal, and was a
spitting of blood that day.

When I saw him I intended to make a Revulsion, and preserve the full force and
determination of the blood into some other part by letting him blood, yet in
such a quantity that he should not be further weakened; and therefore he was
let seven ounces of blood in his right Arm, with the Orifice of the Wound wide
enough to allow the blood a quick and free passage; all which succeeded so very
well, that he declared he was a great deal lighter; and easier while a doing,
and spit nor vomited any more all that day: yet to make the blood thicker for
some time, that the broken capillaries might the better unite, I prescribed him
the following Electuary*

Conserv. ros. rub. antiquar. j. acetos. germin. querc. an ss. sang. Dracon.
ij. Lapid. haematit. ppt. j. sir. de ros. sicc. q. s. ut f. Electuar. De quo
capiat quantitatem nuc. myristic. major bis in die.

He consumed this Medicin in ten days; in all which time he had nothing of his
vomiting or spitting of blood.

The next thing to be done, was to repair this Skeleton, whose Pulse was very
frequent, and in every seven strokes intermitted the time of two* and this I
endeavored by the following method. I first ordered him this P^isan for his
ordinary drink.

Rad. Sars. ii. Symphit. j. chin. ss. lign. Sassaf. ii. Coq. l. a. in s. q. aq.
font. ad lb ij. circa finem addendo passul. maj. integr. iv. Colatura clara
reponatur in lagaena vitrea pro usu.

He took this Electuary for six weeks.

Pulp. passul. major conserv. flor. cynosbat an ij. radic. helen. condit.
cortic. aurant condit. an ss. Theriac. Andromach. ij. nitr. corollat. j. sir.
alth. q. s. ut f. Electuar. mollior consistent. Capiat quantitatem nuc.
avellan. bis in die, superbibendo vini Canarini cochlearia d^o.

'Twas surprising to see the change was made on him in a ^^rtnight or three
weeks; he recovered his flesh, strength and color, till in the latter end of
the year he got the Kentish Disease in the Downs, and was put sick ashore at
Deal. Then I ordered him first to be vomited, next to take the Jesuits Powder,
as I have prescribed it in the 9th Observation; and then to begin the use of
his former Medicines, so soon as his Ague was removed, but to take the following
Infusion, after his Electuary, in place of the Canary.

Radic. Gentian. ss. fl. Chamomil. summitat menth. an M. ij. cortic. aurant
peruvian. an ss. pptis s. a. affund. Vini rubelli lb ij. Stent per biduum in
infusione; dein capiat cochl. 3 vel 4 tempore dicto.

He missed of his Ague by these Medicines; but I can say no further about his
Recovery, the Ship I was on board of being ordered to the Buoy of the Nore.

Observation XVIII.
Obser. 18.
K -- B -- of the -- was troubled with a pain in his Yard, after an impure
copulation; which very soon appeared in a running, and that but very small, at
first; but increased daily, and was of a green color, he had an Chaude Piss,
une chorde, and the erection was very painful.

He complained of it to me when at Sea, and I cured him of the Gonorrhaea, and
its Appendices, in a fortnight, without taking one grain of Mercury, Mercurial
Preparations, Turpentine, Decoctions of Woods, Injections, and other Medicines,
that are generally prescribed with all the uncertainty imaginable. I could very
willingly communicate this way of curing for public use, if I might in honor;
being no longer at my own liberty to dispose of it, since I have communicated
this method to a learned Member of our College, in lieu of a practice he values
very much. Yet without any breach of Faith, I assert, that the tedious,
uncertain, and dangerous practices in this disease, have proceeded from the
misunderstanding Physicians are in about it; whereas if its place, force, and
way of communication were more sensible and obvious, we might soon discover
more certain, genuine, and more natural ways of curing* and those be, even,
improved, beyond what any Man has hitherto thought of. But it not being
convenient, upon this occasion, to evince those mistakes too particularly, for
this place; I will content my self to prove, that the cause of this Disease is
not entertained in the Prostatae, vesiculae seminales, or any ways further than
the Yard it self; without going too deep into the argument, or answering the
Objections may be reasonably made against its being there, thinking it the
first part of knowledge not to be imposed upon, and the second the putting
things to rights; and tho we are not able to do this, and are sure of the
first, yet ought we fairly to confess our ignorance, that very substantial
piece of Humanity, rather than to speak things of which we have no thought, and
a great deal less, to build our other reasonings and practice upon so sandy
foundations: Now that we may do the first, and discharge our thoughts of such a
cheat, let us call into our memory the Hypersarcoses we daily see, and let us
but compare this spungy flesh, that thus fills up the passage of the Urine,
with any thing else we find upon other occasions; and I Am sure a Man that sees
like another, and has the sense to compare, can find it not much different (but
especially in its growing) from the like Excrescencies that happen, in curing
wounds, ulcers, etc. a certain Argument that there is a solution of unity in
the part, where those Mushrooms sprout, which cannot be kept down and checked
like other fungous flesh, and is seldom to be prevented in the healthiest
people by a disorderly practice. I know it may be said, that there may be
little ulcers bred in the Urethra, by the sharpness of the matter that flows
that way, from the affected parts, and they may make this false flesh, tho
these ulcers can never supply this running: but to drive this argument no great
length, and not to outshut a common sight, I shall demonstrate very plainly,
that these ulcers are begun only in the Yard, and afford this running from it;
and at some other time make it plain, that this running comes not from above
three inches within the Yard, and how that is done. For the present purpose let
us remember, that our Anatomy teaches us, that there is a valve placed at that
end of the Penis that is next the belly, that hinders the Regurgitation of the
the Urine; and in the second place that Runnings can be stopped by Injections,
tho very often to the misfortune of the Patient. Now these Injections, at best,
are as solid, if I may so say, as our Urine, and this valve hindering the
repassing of the Urine, we may conclude, that it hinders the passage of a body
not more fluxil than the Urine: but since these Injections stop a plentiful
running, and yet not going out of the Yard, we may conclude, that it is in the
Penis they have their effects; and if so, then it is from the Penis this supply
is made, which was to be demonstrated, against the common Hypothesis; and
therefore it is no wonder, that Men are not able to better the Practice, from
so unthinking Theories.

I foresee distinctly, the inconveniences can be alleged against what I hint
at, yet I should think it an unpardonable digression to obviate them in this
place, and do promise to demonstrate, even to a certainty, the seat and nature
of this Disease, about which Physicians are as much in the dark, if not more,
as about the time it was first known in the world.

Observation XIX.
Obser. 19.
Captain Poulten, then commanding the Charles Galley, was taken with a violent
Quinsey, on our Voyage to St. Malo; for which his Surgeon gave him some things;
but that day being in very hot service, and being obliged to speak very much,
in giving his necessary orders, the pain and inflammation were very great, and
he could not sleep all that night: next day, being Saturday, he sent for me in
the morning; and finding that he was sick three days before, my business was to
discover the state of the Disease, and to what height it was come, that
accordingly as the symptoms of suppuration appeared, o^ not, I might proceed in
the Cure. Finding, then, no intimations of the suppuration, and a sufficient
revulsion being made, by the blood his Surgeon let him but two days before;
considering too the violence of the other symptoms.

I ordered him to be let ten ounces of blood out of the Jugular Vein of the
most inflamed side; which being done, I troubled him not with Gargarisms, which
are not always so safe, even when they can reach the part affected; but ordered
him to keep the part warm, to eat only Watergruel, and to use the following
decoction for his ordinary Drink.

Rad. Bardan. iij. acetos. j hord. mundat. M. j. Coq. s. a. in aq. font. q. s.
ad crepituram horde^. Colatur. per subsidentiam depurat lb ij. add. mel. opt.
q. s. ad gratiam.

And next day he took this purging Potion.

Fol. Sen. sine stipitib. ss Rad. Rhabarb. el. and incis. ss cinnamom. acerrim.
i. Infund. per noctem in decocti passularum majorum vi* Colaturae per
expressionem factae add. Sir. de Spin. Cerv. iij. M. ac bibat h^ra septima cum
regimine.

It purged him ten times very easily, and he was mightily relieved; he could
swallow any thing down, and talked with any body if convenient. The
Inflammation being thus vanquished, I begun the use of such Powders that
promote the fluxility of the blood, but wrapped them up in a convenient Syrup,
left they should offend the parts, in the passing, by their roughness.

Ocul. cancr. ppt. coral. rub. ppti, an ss antimon. Diaphoretic. gr. xv sir.
alth. ij. M. ac Capiat tribus vicibus, superbibendo cochlear. julapij
sequentis, quod

Aq. Spermat. ranar. fl. chamomil. (seu eorundem decoct.) an ij. aq. cinnamom.
hordeat ss sal. prunell. ss sir. capil. vener. i. M. f. julap.

He continued the use of the Ptisan prescribed for his ordinary drink, and on
the Tuesday took his purging potion as before, and was perfectly well
thereafter.

There are two things I would have observed in this disease; first, that the
Medicines upon the past design be never given till we be convinced that the
obstruction in the capillary arteries, of the part thus affected, is not so
powerful; for when they are given before that time, as a great many Authors
persuade us, they only squeeze out the thinner part of the blood, and leave the
rest despoiled of a vehicle fit to maintain its fluxility, and so very
convenient to heighten the obstruction, which causes this inflammation and its
consequences: and therefore he must be sure to blood plentifully, and the right
way, before we think of giving internal Medicines.

The other is, that we busy not, nor amuse our selves with the idle, and not
only idle, but useless, and impracticable distinction the Authors make in this
disease; when they tell us, that since it is an inflammation about the Throat,
if that be of the internal muscles of the Larynx it must be called a Cynanche;
but if of the external muscles, a Paracynanche: and if on the internal muscles
of the Pharynx, a Cynanche; if on the external muscles of that part a
Paracynanche. And that this distinction is impracticable, is evident to any one
that knows the Anatomy of these parts; how small the proper muscles of the
Larynx are, and how near the internal and external muscles are one to another;
and they only divided and parted by a thin membrane, which cannot only not
hinder the inflamed muscles of the one sort to press hard upon the other, but
is even itself affected with this Inflammation. But they should have told us
too, the symptoms of This part's being affected, and such signs whereby we may
distinguish the Inflammation of the one sort of these muscles from That of the
other: but of this too much.

Thus I have run over, with an indifferent exactness, my Disquisition into the
marine diseases, and the History of those in the Fleet last Summer; which, I
presume, may correct a great many errors and mistakes in that affair, and
highly contribute to an amendment of others, of the same nature: and cannot
doubt, but that the Candor of the ingenious will very easily cover any pieces
of Frailty I may have committed in this first Essay; and for that favor, I
shall endeavor to better it, if I find encouragement suitable to the
Undertaking. Yet, all these things will better appear, in the Histories of the
next years service, that are to be continued with this.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for Hugh Newman, at the Grasshopper in the Poultry.
OEconomia Corporis Animalis. Autore Gulielmo Cockburn, Collegii Medic. Land.
Perm. Ac Classis Sereniss. Regis Magnae Britanniae Medicorum Altero. Octavo,
price 1 s. 6 d.

Chirurgorum Comes: Or, the whole practice of Surgery. Begun by the Learned
Dr. Read; continued and completed by a Member of the College of Physicians in
London. To which is to be added, by way of Appendix, two Treatises, one of the
Venereal Disease, the other concerning Embalming, Octavo, price 6 s.

Dr. Sydenham's Complete Method of Curing almost all Diseases, and description
of their Symptoms. To which are now added, five discourses of the same Author,
concerning the Pleurisy, Gout, Hysterical Passion, Dropsy and Rheumatism.
Abridg'd and faithfully Translated out of the Original Latin. With short and
useful notes in the former part, written by a late Learned Physician, and never
printed before, Twelves, 1 s. 6 d.

Advice to a Physician: Containing particular directions relating to the Cure
of most Diseases: With reflections on the Nature and Uses of the most
Celebrated Remedies. By way of Aphorisms. Done from the Latin.

Musaeum Regalis Societatis. Or a Catalogue and Description of the Natural and
Artificial Rarities belonging to the Royal Society, and preserved at Gresham
College. Made by Nehemiah Grew, M. D. Fellow of the Royal Society, and of the
College of Physicians. Whereunto is subjoyned the Comparative Anatomy of
Stomachs and Guts, by the same Author. Illustrated with a great number of Cuts
curiously Engraven on Copper Plates. Folio, price 12 s.

A Treatise of the Gout. Written Originally in the French Tongue, by Theodor.
Turquet de Mayerne, Knight. Baron of Aubonne, Councellor and Chief Physician to the
late King and Queen of England; whereunto is added, advi^e about Hypocondriacal
Fits, by the same Author.

Philosophical Dialogues, concerning the principles of Natural Bodies: Wherein
the principles of the old and new Philosophy are stated, and the new
demonstrated more agreeable to Reason, from Mechanical Experiments, and its
usefulness to the benefit of Mankind. Twelves, price 1 s. 6 d.

Medela Medicorum: Or, an enquiry into the Reasons and Grounds of the Contempt
of Physicians, and their noble Art; with proposals to reduce them to theit
wonted Repute; maintaining the joint Interest of Doctors, Surgeons, and
Apothecaries, against all Intruders. Twelves, price 1 s.

Medecina Magnetica: Or, the rare and wonderful Art of Curing by Sympathy: Laid
open in Aphorisms; proved in Conclusions, and digested into an easy method
drawn from both: Wherein the connection of the Causes, and effects of these
strange Operations, are more fully discovered than heretofore. All cleared and
confirmed by pithy reasons, true experiments, and pleasant relations* Preserved
and published as a Master piece in this Skill. Octavo, price 1 s. 6 d.

Every Man his own Gauger: wherein not only the Artist is shown a more ready
and exact Method of Gauging than any hitherto extant. But the most Ignorant,
who can but read English, and tell twenty in Figures, is taught to find the
Content of any sort of Cask or Vessel, either full or in part full; and to know
if they be right sized. Also What a Pipe, Hogshead, etc. amounts to at the
common rate and measure they buy or fell at. With several useful Tables to know
the Content of any Vessel by. Likewise a Table showing the Price of any
Commodity, from one pound to an hundred weight, and the contrary. To which is
added, the true Art of Brewing Beer, Ale, Mum, of Fining, Preserving and
Bottling Brewed Liquors, of making the most common Physical Ales now in use, of
making several fine English Wines The Vintners Art of Fining, Curing,
Preserving all sorts of Wines, of making Artificial Wines. Distilling of Brandy
and Spirits from Malt, Malasses, etc. Together with the complete Coffee-Man,
teaching how to make Coffee, Tea, Chocolate, Content, and the Richest, Finest
Cordials, etc. Of great use for common Brewers, Victuallers, Vintners,
Wine-Coopers, Distillers, Strong watermen, Coffeemen and all other Traders.
Twelves, price 1 s.

P. Ovidij Nasonis Metamorphosem Libri XV. Interpretatione and notis
Illustravit Daniel Crispinus, Helvetius, ad usum Serenissimi Delphini Recensuit
Joh. Friend Aedis Christi Alumn. 80.

Romae Antiquae Notitiae: Or, the Antiquities of Rome, in 2 parts. 1. A short
History of the Rise, Progress and Decay of the Commonwealth. 2. A description
of the City, an account of the Religion, Civil Government, and Art of War, with
the remarkable Customs and Ceremonies, public and private, with Copper Cuts of
the principal Buildings, etc. To which are perfix'd two Essays: Concerning the
Roman Learning, and the Roman Education. By Basil Kennett of C. C. C. Oxon,
Dedicated to his Highness the Duke of Gloucester. 80.

FINIS.
Tractatum hunc cui Titulus [An Account of the Nature, Causes, Symptoms and
Cure of those Distempers that are incident to Sea^aring People, etc.] dignum
judicamus qui imprimatur.

Samuel Collins, Praeses. Tho. Burwell, Rich. Torlesse, Gul. Dawes, Tho. Gill,
Censores.

Datum in Comitiis Censoriis ex Aedibus Collegii, Febr. 21. 1695.

