JACOB's VOW, OR,

MAN's FELICITY AND DUTY.

In Two PARTS.

By JOHN COCKBURN, D. D.

EDINBURGH,

Printed for Alexander Ogston; and are to be Sold by William Keblewhite, at the
Swan in St. Paul's Churchyard, London, MDCXCVI.

IMPRIMATUR.
EDINBURGH, 12th. February, 1686.
I have considered this Book (entitled JACOB'S Vow,) and find nothing therein
repugnant to the Protestant Religion, or contrary to the Government of the
Church or State of this Kingdom; And therefore allows the same to be Printed,

Io. Edinburgh.

THE PREFACE.
THE Scope of the Following Treatise may be read in the Tittle. The true Design
hereof is to direct to True Felicity, to show wherein it consists, and what is
our Duty, that is, what are the necessary Means we should use in order to the
obtaining it. And as their is little said, but what is subservient to the Main
Design; so the Treatise being chiefly intended for Common use, therefore 'twas
Judged fit to study Plainness and Perspicuity, rather then fine Language, or
quaint Expressions; and therefore also the Proofs and Evidences of what was
necessary to be said on this Matter, are drawn from obvious things, which are
neither so abstract from common observance as to be gainsaid, nor yet so
abstruse and perplexed, as to need much Learning, and more then Ordinary
Capacity to understand them. Nothing is delivered but what may be easily
understood; and if the least serious Attention be given in reading the same; I
am confident they will go away fully convinced of the Truth thereof.

It is true, no new discovery is pretended here, all which is here said of Man's
Felicity and Duty, are Old and known Truths: But however, People have need to
be taught them, to be put in mind of them, and to be stirred up to a due
Observance of them; and that not only because thy are Necessary and Important
things, but also because they are very ready to forget them, and meet with many
things Daily which divert the sense and Practice of what thus evidently belongs
to their Felicity. Folly and Error, Atheisime and ungodliness, take Men off
the way of Happiness, and they are daily abounding, and many Pamphlets and
Discourses spread which help forward their growth: Common Charity therefore
obliges every one to do what he can to stay and extirpate these, to discover
the Mischief of them, and to contribute such Help as he is able to the
maintenance of Truth, Virtue and Piety which are the foundations of our Present
Peace, and Future bliss. Out of this respect to the Common Good of Mankind, I
have been induced to publish this Discourse such as it is, and I Heartily Pray
GOD, to carry home the Convictions of what is here handled upon the Reader,
that he may be as Dutiful as is here Directed, and by being so, arrive at all
the Felicity here mentioned, which certainly is all that is necessary, and even
as much as heart can wish.

THE CONTENTS Of the First Part.
CHAP. I. The Occasion of this Vow. Of Vows in general, their use* what should
be the matter of them, and how necessary it is to keep them. page 1. CHAP. II.
Of JACOB'S requests. Men's Wisdom discern* able by the matter of their desires.
GOD denies no requests but what are unreasonable and improper. All that is
necessary to complete ones happiness, is contained in the Particulars which
JACOB here asks. Of the First, viz: The Divine Presence, what it is, and how
excellent a blessing, with an exhortation to seek after it. p. 27 CHAP III. Why
JACOB mentioned other particulars, seeing the First request did comprehend them
and all things else he could ask. The Second request treated of, the reasons
of JACOB'S ^ear, and the lyableness of all Men Generally to Dangers; no true
Security but in the Divine Protection, an Application of all. p. 58 CHAP. IV.
JACOBS third request considered in respect of himself. Though the generality of
men ask more, yet all wise Heathens and Jews have preferred this Portion to all
other. The confining our desires to this is showed by several instances to be
Wise and Reasonable, and that therefore every one ought to content himself,
with his Competency. All Men's competency is not the same, what is the duty of
him who has got his competency, what of him who has less, and what his who
has more. CHAP. V. Of the end which Jacob proposed to himself in these
Requests his Condition here a fit Emblem to represent the present State of
Mankind, All Men considered as Pilgrims and Sojourners both in a Litteral and
Moral Sense. The Patriarchs lived in expectation of a future State held forth,
and some account thereof given. The Conclusion of this first Part. p. 101
The CONTENTS of the Second PART.
CHAP. I. A Short reveiw of the first Part, the Case proposed, how far it is
lawful to eye the reward in our Resolutions of Obedience. The Resolution given
in five Particulars, with an Application of all to Jacob here. p. 139 CHAP. II.
Showing the Importance of the Words. The Lord shall be my GOD. p. 163 Sect. 1.
The true sense of the Words is given, and a proposal of the Particulars to be
treated on under this head. Ibid. Sect. 2. Of the Reasonableness and necessity
of Worshipping GOD. p. 167 Sect. 3. What care should be had to direct our
Worship to the true GOD. Rules how to do it. Where also the dolatry of the
Romish Church is considered. p. 173 Sect. 4. Showing what Worship and Service
is due to GOD, and how we may come to know the same. p. 248 Sect. 5. Of the
Fear of GOD. p. 266. Sect. 5. Of Walking With GOD. p. 284. viz.
Of regarding GODs presence. p. 286. Of Observing GODS ways and actions. p.
291. Of Consulting GOD. p. 311. Of following GOD. p. 324.

CHAP III. Of these words And the stone which I have set for a pillar shall be
God's house. The reason and meaning of them. p. 331. Sect. 1. Of Churches or
places Consecrate to GOD, the Origin and Necessity thereof, what regard and
reverence should be paid them. p. 333. Sect. 2. Of Prayer. p. 359 Sect. 3. Of
public Worship. p. 376.
CHAP. IV. Of the last words of JACOB'S Vow. The question about the Church's
right to Tithes waved, but the taking them away is showed to be Sacrilege.
Every Patricular Person owes to GOD a part of his estate, the Proportion
considered* and some motives pressing Charity, and Almsgiving are proposed. p.
419 The Conclusion after p. 468.
JACOB'S VOW OR MAN'S FELICITY, AND DUTY.
PART I.
Genesis chap. 28. verse 20. And Jacob vowed a vow, saying, if GOD will be with
me, and will keep me in this way that I go, and will give me bread to eat, and
raiment to put on,
21. So that I come again to my fathers house in peace; then shall the LORD be
my GOD.
22. And this stone which I have set for a pillar, shall be GOD'S House; and of
all that thou shall give me, I surely will give the tenth unto Thee.
CHAPTER I. The occasion of this Vow, of Vows in general, their Use, what
should be the Matter of them, and how necessary it is to keep them.
THE Occasion of Jacob's making this Vow, was this, his Parents had sent him
away to Padan-aram for fear of his being corrupted by the Inhabitants of
Canaan, where they lived, and enticed to take one of their daughters to wife,
like as his Brother Esau had done: Now as he was on his journey he happened
upon a certain place (afterward called Bethel) where he tarried all night, the
Sun having set upon him before he came thither, and the Canaanites not being so
courteous as to invite him into their houses, he was necessitate to lodge in
the open field: but though men denied him entertainment, yet he found what was
much better and more comfortable, that he was highly favored of GOD, for there
He appeared to him in a dream, and made him the promise of large and great
blessings; as you may see in the 13, 14, 15, Verses. Upon which, when Jacob
awakened and considered it, the fear and dread of GOD fell upon him, and to
testify his gratitude and thankfulness to GOD, who had thus graciously
appeared unto him, he spoke these words, and vowed this Vow, by which he bound
and oblidged himself to serve, honor and worship GOD, if so be that he did
these things which were promised.

This vow was not made rashly and inconsideratly, but upon serious and mature
deliberation, nor is the matter thereof light and trivial, but weighty and
important. It is certainly worthy our consideration, and hereby we may be
instructed in very matterial points, viz. Wherein our felicity consists, what
is the thing we should aim at while in this world, and what is our duty toward
GOD: What Jacob asked, teaches the one; and what he promised, shows the
other, as will appear afterward. But first we will take occasion to treat of
Vows in general, as to their matter, use, and observance, and thereafter we
shall handle this vow of Jacob's in particular.

First then in general, a Vow is an holy and religious promise made to GOD,
either for some mercy and favor, or upon the desire of some blessing, as here:
And there be many instances in Scripture, of Prayers put up to GOD, by way of
Vows, when our Prayers are accompanied with Vows, it does be-speak a belief of
power, and good will, and particular knowledge on GOD'S part; and earnestness,
importunity, and a grateful Disposition on ours* which are things GOD very
much delights in. And this may be the reason why they are ordinarily so
effectual and so succesfull; For it is observable that such Prayers prevail
very much with GOD, and do almost always obtain not only a Blessing, but even
the very same thing prayed for. Thus Jacob obtained his whole desire. Thus
Iephthah however rash in the matter of his Vow, yet out of a Devout
Acknowledgement, having vowed to the LORD, got a Victory over the Ammonites; So
likewise Hannah received a Child of the LORD, after that She had made a Vow.
And thus we have read and heard of many, who upon their Vows have been
delivered from great Straits and Difficulties, recovered of sore and Dangerous
Sicknesses, and been Blessed with signal Mercies and Favors. All which
teaches us, that in cases of great need, or the threatening of Dangers, upon
the various and great changes of our Life, in all great and weighty
enterprises, whose success does very much concern us, and in all our most
solemn Approaches to GOD, I say, that in these, or the like cases, it may not
be amiss, but good and proper to back and strengthen our Prayers by some Pious
and Religious Vow: For hereby we testify, that we believe GOD able to grant
what we ask, and that we our selves will retain a grateful sense of His
Kindness, if so be he do it; and besides, this will awaken our minds to a due
and serious attention, and add Fervor and Earnestness to our Devotions, which
endeareth both us and them to GOD, and so probably will wrest a Blessing from
Him. We should never offer to ask any thing of GOD without resolving to serve
him better, or glorify Him more upon the granting our Desires and Requests; as
we would wish him to do us good, so we should lay obligations upon our selves
to do him all Acceptable Service; and it is but impudence and mockery to
endeavor to get God to befriend us, without thinking to become thereby the
more dutiful to him. Wherefore every one of our Prayers and Addresses to GOD do
contain vows implicity, although we make no express mention of them, for they
imply always a promise and resolution to endeavor to please God, without
which they were but mere abominations unto him.

But as it is good sometimes to make particular Vows, when we pray for any
special blessing, and always necessary upon all our Addresses to GOD, to
resolve in the general to serve him and to do His will; so it is not good to be
rash and inconsiderat in making of Vows: There is nothing about which we should
deliberat more, and therefore it is that young Persons, and such as are not
come to maturity of age, or understanding, are discharged by all Casuists from
the making of vows, because their ignorance and want of knowledge may make them
readily err in this matter, and Vow what is not lawful or convenient to be
vowed. Good Religious and lawful vows do honor GOD, and are very acceptable
to him: But if they be rash, inconsiderat, and in matters either not lawful,
or not fit, and proper, they do but displease him. If we be to Vow, then we
must both use all Caution and Prudence in the making of them, and likewise see
carefully to the observing of them, otherwise we had better not Vow at all.

First in the making of Vows, we should shun all rashness and inconsideration,
and ought to take heed, that both the thing we promise to GOD, and that which
we make the Condition of it be Lawful, and Agreeable to his will, for if this
be wanting, we offer but the Sacrifice of Fools, and both our Prayers and Vows
become an abomination unto GOD. What we ask, must either be something he has
commanded, or Allowed us to seek; It must neither thwart his Will, nor be
unworthy of Him to grant; and how earnest soever we be, yet our desires must
always be attended with a Submission to his Holy Will and Pleasure, for it is
then only that we are to be confident GOD will hear us, when we ask according
to his Will. And as we must thus use Modesty and Caution in our Prayers, taking
heed that what we pray for, be not offensive to GOD, so we ought to show great
Prudence and Discretion in these Vows and Promises we make to God upon the
granting our Prayers: we must see that the thing promised be both Warrantable
in it self, and convenient for us in particular. Many have brought themselves
with Iephthah into great snares and temptations by their Vows, because they did
not consider the matter of them before hand.

This we should chiefly look to, and therefore that we may not make our Vows a
lasting snare to our selves, we shall do well either to keep within some branch
of our Duty, as the doing such and such a thing which we are already obliged
to, either by our general Callings as Christians, or by our particular Calling
as being in such a place or station; the doing of some such thing, I say, in a
more excellent manner, with a greater inclination of the Will, with a more
fervent repetition of the Act, with some more noble Circumstance, with a fuller
assent of the Understanding, or such like thing; for by this Vow of Jacobs, it
is clear that it is neither improper nor impertinent to pitch upon what we are
already tied to by prior obligations: Or if we have a mind to tie our selves to
any thing uncommanded, or to which we are not necessarily oblidged, as it is
proper and requisite to do in our more Solemn and Special Vows; then let us
make choice of something useful and Serious, Grave and Weighty, something that
tends to the Glory of GOD, the Benefit of others, or the bettering of our own
Souls; at least, let it have an indirect subserviency to some of these ends, by
putting us in greater capacity to advance them, otherwise our Vows degenerat
into abominable superstition. As for example, It is but superstition, and does
not at all please GOD, if we tie our selves to forbear such a kind of Meat or
Drink, unless it be because we have found our selves provoked to lust upon the
use thereof, or that we do fear this effect of it. And it avails very little to
vow the fasting or not working such or such a day, unless we employ that time
we thus redeem from Meat and Labor, in the exercises of Piety and Devotion,
and the improvement of our selves in Christian Wisdom and Virtue. Bodily
exercises profits nothing, as says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 4. 8. Corporal
Austerities are not acceptable to GOD in themselves, and he must have mean
thoughts of him who thinks it: but only in so far as they serve and are
instrumental to mortify the flesh, with the lusts thereof, such as Pride, Vain
Glory, Uncleanness, Effininacy, Wrath, Anger, and the rest. It is the end and
effect of these and the like observations which make them either acceptable or
unacceptable to GOD, if they prove to His Glory, or render us more capable to
advance it, if they promote the works of Religion in us, and further us in
doing good to others, GOD is well pleased: But if the fruits of them appear
little this way, He does little regard them.

And hence it does appear; how little true Piety there is in many of these Vows
which are usually allowed and enjoined in the Romish Church; For first, the
matter of some of them is so mean, and trivial, that it is a Scandal upon
Religion to make Religion of them, as the vowing a Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, to
visit such a Chapel, or such an Image there, not to eat of the head of any
Animal in honor of John the Baptist, or broiled Fish in respect to St
Laurence, or to give some wax Candles, Silver Puppets, or the like Childish
conceits to be kept, or hung up in some Church or Chapel; when people are
taught and suffered to place Devotion in such small things, it cannot but
lessen their esteem of GOD, and contribute to make them think meanly of him,
even as we of Europe look with disdain upon the Kings and Princes of the late
discovered World, when we read how brass pins, and glass beads, and such like
silly toys please them, and gain their favor. Solemn presents to Kings ought
to answer their dignity, otherwise they are dishonored, and so God is
dishonored when the matter of our Vows is a mere trifle, or some naughty
thing, which was the reason why under the Law, He discharged to bring the hire
of a Whore, or the price of a dog, into the house of the Lord thy God for any
Vow, Deuteronomy. 23. 18. But secondly, there be other Vows of the Romish Church whose
matter indeed is grave enough, which yet must be reckoned among unlawful Vows*
because of their pernicious consequence: And these are their Monastical Vows,
of Celibacy, Implicit and absolute Obediences, and external poverty; or rather
the abandoning all honest and civil employments used to gain a livelihood in
the World. They place Religion so much in these Vows, that the name of Religion
is appropriat to them, and they only among them are called Religious who have
taken on them such Vows: When yet it is certain that these things are not
absolutely good in themselves, or pleasing to GOD; And seeing they who marry,
and follow secular Employments, not only do not sin, but also thereby observe
the Ordinances of GOD and his Providence; I cannot see a Reason why the title
of Religious should be denied them, and not thought as much due to them, if so
be other things requisite concur to make them deserve it. And it cannot be
denied, but that Persons may serve GOD the one way, as well as the other, for
these examples which the Scripture sets before us, are drawn not from Monkish
or Cloistered Persons, but from such as were Married, and did commonly
Traffic and entertain Commerce with the World; Which, however are more useful
for teaching solid Virtue and Piety, than the lives of their Saint Francis,
Saint Laurence, Saint Teresa, or any other Ancient or Modern, which they can
produce from their Monastries. But that we may take a particular view of these
Vows severally, That of blind and absolute Obedience cannot be lawfully
promised to any Creature: GOD ought to be obeyed without any reservation, the
plain intimation of his Will oblidgeth to Obedience, though the Reason thereof
be not apparent, because we owe our selves and all we have to him: But as this
is due to GOD, so to none else, because none other has Absolute Dominion over
us. Therefore to obey any blindly without considering whether it be good or
evil, which they enjoyne, is to pay Divine Honor to Man. Our subjection to
others should be always with a subordination to GOD, and with a respect to his
Glory; and seeing no man is so infallibly wise, but he may mistake evil for
good, nor so certainly good, but that he may enjoine evil though he know it,
therefore we ought not to do every thing another bids us, until we have
examined the same, and found it no wise offenssive to GOD, by being contrary to
his Will. And even to make a Religion of obeying another in things not evil,
but as to their nature indifferent, is to destroy our Christian liberty, and to
cast our selves again into an useless bondage; As to the vow of external
poverty which proves to be either the renouncing of secular employments, and
these Arts and Trades whereby men ordinarily are necessitat to seek their
living, this can be no acceptable service to God, seeing it runs counter to his
express ordinance, in the sweat of thy brows thou shall eat thy bread, if men
can free themselves of the necessity of eating and drinking, they may cast off
all honest care and endeavors for these supplies, otherwise they ought not,
for St. Paul commands, that if any would not work, neither should he eat, and
such as work not at all, he says, that they walk disorderly, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10.
Sick and Malmed persons who cannot work for their own Maintenance, should be
supplied by others Charity, but not these who are Able and Healthy, but
resolved to live idly and uselessly to the Commonwealth. And herein the present
Monks of the Romish Church differs much from those of the Primitive times, for
the Ancient Monks did not eat their breadin idleness, but did labor, that they
might help others to live, every one should study to be poor in Spirit, and
mortified in his affections to the World, but these may be done in outward
possessions. Finaly, as to the Vows of Celibacy and a total retirement, they
are too important things to be undertaken by any rashly; and they are such as
young Persons should not be suffered at all to engage in: for they cannot well
know either the Temper of their Spirit, or the Constitution of their Body, how
they will agree therewith. If their disposition be contrary, then they involve
themselves into a sad inconveniency, and almost insuperable difficulties of
pleasing GOD; which might be easily avoided by taking a course more suitable to
their natural disposition. Not to speak of Celibacy, every ones humor even
will not suit with that Solitude and retirement, which by the Laws of
Monastries they are oblidged to: who are naturally Studious, thoughtful, and a
little Melancholy, may like it well enough, and also fall upon methods for
improving it to their grouth in Virtue and Piety. But such as are active and
sprightly weary, of it and count it a burden; And as their nature inclines them
to action* so when they are any considerable time without business, their fancy
runs out upon vain projects and airy contrivances, neither profitable to
themselves, nor others; and which prove an Impediment to Spiritual devotion as
much, yea more, then outward innocent actions. He who in his retirements
bethinks with himself how he would rule the world, if he had place and power,
and what he would do or have done in such and such cases, spends his time more
idly, then if he were actually versant in Wordly affairs; And there be few
active Spirits, but have their retirements (if long) Spoiled with such devices
and imaginations. The Church of Rome seems to have foreseen the inconvenencie
of Monastical Vows, and to guard against them, in that a year of probation is
allowed: But it is evident from experience, and many instances, that a year is
not proof sufficient, especially when arts and tricks are used to delude
Novices, and to wheedle them into a belief that things are otherwise then what
afterward they find them. If Vows were not imposed, and that a free exit were
allowed to such as pleased, and found a change convenient; I verily believe
Monastries might be very useful both for Church and State, both for the civil
good of the Nation, and the Spiritual good of men's Souls. All men are oblidged
to be chaste, but chastity may be preserved in a married State, as well as in a
single life, and every ones constitution does not suit therewith. It would be
good and proper for every man, though never so much engaged in worldly affairs,
to retire himself frequently for the exercise of Religion, and the considering
the state of his soul: Buthardly any can stay their minds altogether* upon
these exercises for whole years, much less all there lifetime, nor is their any
necessity thereof, seeing men may go about the affairs of the world without
crossing these of Religion, and ply the things of this life without prejudice
to the other.

GOD is not pleased with our vows, when they have not a tendency to his Glory,
our Neighbors good, and our own Spiritual Advantage: and he cannot be but
highly displeased, when by our vows we tie our selves to do something which is
unlawful in it self, or which may be the occasion of some sin to our selves or
others; Or to forbear another thing which is good or useful, and which is or
may become our duty;

What is sinful or evil, can never honor GOD, but does dishonor him, and it
does bewray a gross ignorance to seek the pleasing of God by doing* contrary
to His will: Unlawful Vows should not be made, and if made, they ought not to
be kept, it is a sin to make them, but a greater to observe them, such Vows lay
no obligation upon us, except to repentance, and mourning for our rashness and
folly. Herod was no ways tied to cut off the head of John the Baptist because
of his vow, for that would never excuse the murder of that innocent man:
neither was the plot against Paul's life any whit extenuated because the forty
men had bound themselves thereto under a curse. It is a very bad reason for one
not to come to Church and to refuse to hear such a Minister, because he has
sworn it. There is no perjury in breaking of these Vows, the Perjury is in the
first making of them, because they are contrary to those other general vows of
Baptism, etc. Whereby we are tied not to do any thing that is evil, but what
ever is good and praise worthy. Wherefore I wonder much how ever it could have
slipped from the Author of that excellent Book, entitled, The whole Duty of Man,
to say, That he who rashly swears to kill another, if he do it, he is guilty of
murder, and if he do it not, of perjury, and so is under a necessity of sining.
If this be true, it might prove a shrewd tentation to the keeping of unlawful
Vows; For where one of two evils is necessary or unavoidable, men are at
liberty to choose which they will, or what they think least: And there be some
who have perjury in greater abhorrencie then anyother wicked act, and therefore
if such have once sworn a thing though never so evil, they will do it, for fear
of drawing on them the guilt of perjury. This Doctrine therefore may be of very
bad consequence; but however such a necessity of sinning cannot be admitted,
unless we make the nature of sin alterable, and that a sinful Act may
sometimes cease to be sinful. One cannot be oblidged by any Law to
impossibilities, and therefore not to contrary Acts, as to do, and not to do
the same thing, at one and the same time, for to observe both is impossible.
Wherefore if the doing a thing be sin, there is only an Obligation upon us not
to do it; and if the not doing thereof be a sin, then the Obligation is only
to do it; We cannot be oblidged to both, and so both cannot be sins. If it be
objected, that though one and the same obligation cannot bind to contrary
things, yet we may be bound thereto by different Obligations as in the present
case: But to this I answer, That we are not under any Obligation, but what the
Law of GOD lays upon us* or does allow; and seeing the Law of GOD requires
us always to do good, and forbids to do any evil, therefore a Man can never
be said to sin, by the doing of a good Action, or the forbearance of what is
evil, though he has never so preremptorly Vowed the one, and sworn against the
other: For his Vows and Resolutions cannot take away his Obligation to obey
GOD, and his Law. I have insisted the longer on this head, because some are so
tenacious of their rash and unlawful Oaths, and think it excuse enough for
their continuance in a wicked course, that they have sworn and resolved it.

Religion certainly will never hallow an wicked or ungodly act, and it is an
abomination to God to offer to worship and honor him by any thing sinful or
unlawful: neither out of pretense of Vows, must we withdraw our selves from the
duty and obedience we owe to others; for no Vow can take away that obligation
which is upon Wife's to obey their Husbands, Children their Parents, Servants
their Masters, Subjects their Prince; and which is upon one man to do good, and
to show acts of kindness and charity to another. Our Savior taxed the Scribes
and Pharisees for breaking the fifth Commandment, in not relieving their
Parents when in want, upon the pretense that their goods were Corban, that is,
they had Vowed and Devoted all they could spare, to the Temple, or other Pious
uses, Mark 7. 7, 11. What we Vow and Devot to GOD must be our own, absolutely
at our disposal, and no ways tending to the detriment, or prejudice of others;
else we cannot expect that it should be acceptable. Thus therefore it is not
lawful for a Servant while he is a Servant to devote, and set apart whole days
for private Prayer, Meditation, or other exercises of Religion, unless his
Master concede and yield thereto: He may indeed if he please allow some portion
of his meat to the poor, or some part of the time he should eat or sleep for
Spiritual exercises, for that is his own; but as for days or half days or any
considerable quantity of time, belongs to his Master, and it would be a
defrauding of him to take the same away without his consent and approbation.
That which falls under another jurisdiction, must not be disposed off without
their leave, for that were down right usurpation and robbery, wherefore GOD
Number: 30. Gives the Husband power to dissolve the Wife's Vow, and the Father the
Child's, And for the same reason the same Liberty must be assigned to other
Superiors, whether Masters or Magistrates. And hence does appear the
unlawfulness of that Oath which has so much troubled this Nation; viz. The
Solemn League and Covenant. For besides what may be said to the Matter thereof,
it was an incroachment upon the Magistrates right, and did engage private Persons
to that which was not within their Sphere, but did properly belong to the
Supreme Magistrate, and the other Governors of the Church. When Inferiors make
Vows to the prejudice of their Superiors, and in the particulars wherein they
are subjected unto them, the Vows are ipso facto null and void; and the
Superiors has full power and authority to annull and dispense with them.

The sum of what has been said, is, that we must use consideration in the
making of our Vows, and must look that the condition required be lawful and
agreeable to GOD'S Word, and also the thing promised on our part not sinful and
unlawful, a thing improper* and unbecoming us, which dishonours GOD, prejudges
others, and wrongs our own Souls, but that it be a thing lawful and allowable
in it self, within our power and at our disposal, and designed and used by us
for GOD'S Glory, our Neighbor's advantage, and our own Spiritual good
especially. And finally, we ought to weigh well our strength and ability, and
to have some ground to hope, that through GOD'S Grace it will match and master
all the difficulties, we may encounter in observing such a particular as thus
we tie our selves to. If we observe these directions and be thus circumspect in
making of Vows, we do a thing well pleasing to GOD, but if we proceed not with
this caution and discretion, they lose both of their Worth and Efficacy.

But Secondly, as we must use caution in making of Vows, so we must show care
to keep them in every particular, when they are made; Our care of the one must
be as great as the other, otherwise we had rather a thousand times not make any
at all. You may see how straightly both Moses and Solomon enjoined the
punctual observing of such Vows as are made to GOD, the one Deuteronomy: 23. 21. The
other Eccl: 4: 5: When we break our Vows, or swerve in any point from them, we
draw upon us the guilt both of Perjury and Ingratitude, the most abominable of
all sins, which have been ever most odious both to GOD and man, and which
seldom pass unpunished, even in this life. All know what a dreadful Judgment
befell Ananias and his Wife Saphira, it was only because they lied unto GOD,
and kept back from him what they had sworn to give. Nay, it is even observable
of this same Jacob, who, for as dear as he was unto GOD, was yet afflicted with
several sad disasters in his Family, because of his delaying the performance of
this Vow: After his return to Canaan he did not presently (as he promised here)
worship GOD in this place, but took up his residence elsewhere; and then fell
out the Ravishment of his Daughter, Dinah, and the slaughter of the Sichemites
by his two Sons Simeon and Levi; and that it was his not keeping of his Vow
which occasioned GOD thus to punish him, may appear from this, that GOD
immediately enjoined him the going up to Bethel as a redress of these troubles,
as you may see Genesis 35. 1. There are many more sad instances almost in every
History, how GOD had plagued those who Vowed to him in their troubles, but
forgot him when he had delivered them out of their distresses; and though God
may spare his rode a while in this life, yet they shall not escape altogether
unpunished, especially in the life to come.

Wherefore that we may draw to a conclusion of this point, I would seriously
beseech every one to consider and call to mind what Vows they have at any time
made unto GOD, when they were seeking any thing of importance from him, or when
the fears of Death, or some other Danger were upon them, or when they were
sitting at his Table and receiving pledges of his Love* In such and the like
cases and circumstances, We are all ready enough to make Vows and Promises; I
know not if we be all as ready to perform and accomplish them. It Is to be
feared, that too many are like bad Debitors, who either altother refuse the
payment of their debt, or else shift it off from day to day, and thereby do
declare their folly and disingenuity, and monstrous ingratitude. If GOD has
been so gracious as to hear us, should not we also be faithful in keeping the
Promises we made to Him; following David's practice, Psalm 66. 13. where he
says, I will go into thy house with burnt offerings, I will pay Thee my Vows
which my lips have uttered, and my mouth has spoken when I was in trouble; And
again, Psalm 116. 12. having asked himself, What shall I render unto the LORD,
for all His benefits toward me? His answer and resolution was, I will take the
Cup of Salvation, and call upon the Name of the LORD, I will pay my Vows unto
the LORD, in the presence of all His People. See and consider then I pray you,
what have been your particular Vows and Promises at any time, and labor now to
keep them faithfully; Did you promise to be more Holy? to have a greater Love
and Zeal for GOD? Did you Vow to be more studious to advance his Glory? to be
more Just and Honest in your Dealings, more kind to your Neighbors, and more
Charitable to the Poor? Did you at any time pass your word that you would Pray
oftener, and more fervently in private by your selves, and take a care that the
Worship of GOD be observed in your Family? That you would forbear Swearing and
Drinking, loose and profane company? did you promise greater Sobriety and
temperance? Did you engage to bridle your passion? To be watchful against
Anger and Wrath, and to study Calmness and Peace? Did you engage to be more
contented with your Allowances, and more thankful for them? Did you vow to
keep the Church better? To be a more Devout and attentive Hearer of GOD'S Word,
and of the Instructions of his Servants? Have ye devoted any particular time
for private retirements and Converse with GOD, or any particular Moity of your
Estates for Pious uses; Whether these, or whatever else have been the matter of
your Vows, see that ye both Remember them, and also give diligence to observe
them, neither mince thy Vows, nor defer the paying of them. Let it not be said
that thou art liberal in thy promises, but sparing in thy performances: Like
him, who when he was in Hazard of perishing at Sea, promised a rich offering,
but when he came to land, put it off with a penny matter. Keep thy Word to GOD,
and do it cheerfully without grudging; Let not our present Ease and Prosperity
blot out the Sense and Memory of his past Loving Kindness, neither let us
account any thing too good for God, or too much to be given him: We can give
him nothing but what is his own, for all that we have, we received from him,
and we can do nothing to him, but what is our bounden duty. And withal let us
Remember, that we may have yet need of his Kindness: We may yet fall into
straits and trouble, be seized with Sickness and in fear of Death, and then how
much will it concern us to have him our friend? but how, and with what
confidence, can we cry unto him? if we now deal deceitfully with God, and break
the word which we have uttered. That therefore we may avoid the Divine
Vengeance and Displeasure, and also have GOD to be our refuge, and a present
help in the time of trouble, let us Vow and pay our Vows unto the LORD, and
keep every thing which has gone out of our lips.

Thus we have spoken of Vows in General, have showed the Nature of them, what
Obligation there is on us to make them, what Caution should be used in the
making of them, and what care to keep them when they are made.

CHAP. II. Of Jacob's Requests, Men's Wisdom discernable by the matter of their
Desires; GOD deny's no Requests, but what are unreasonable and improper, all
that is necessary to complete ones Happiness is contained in the particulars
which Jacob here asks of the first, viz. the Divine Presence, what it is, and
how excellent a Blessing, with an Exhortation to seek after it.
HAving taken occasion in the former Chapter upon Jacobs Vowing, to speak of
Vows in general; we come next to treat of this Vow in particular, in which we
have to consider these two things, viz. What he promised unto GOD, and what he
craves of him as the condition of the Performance of that Promise. This last
stands first in the Text, and therefore we shall handle it first.

Now Jacob craves here three things of GOD, first, that GOD would be with him,
that is his Presence; Secondly, that he would keep him in his way, which is his
Protection; Thirdly, that he would afford him his necessary maintenance of Food
and Raiment; these are his desires; And in the fourth place, you have the end
for which he asks these things, and it is that he may be brought back to his
Fathers house in peace.

Jacob may seem at first to ask no great matter, his requests look not very
big; and it is true they are modest and reasonable: But yet if they be duly
considered and seriously canvass'd, they will be found to comprehend all that
is necessary to complete ones Happiness. There is nothing that discovers men
more than their Requests and Petitions, for they do certainly speak out the
sentiments of their mind, and what it is their Hearts set most value upon. It
was once wittily said to a young man, speak that I may see thee, thereby
signifying, that we know Men better by their Words than by their Faces: But
this especially holds true, when their Words express their Desires. A Fool may
be known by his desires, and a Wise man by his; For by these we may perceive
easily what Knowledge and Understanding one has, and what Inclinations and
Dispositions, whether they have taken up right Measures of things, and do judge
according to their true Nature, or only according to their outward appearance.
Fools look only to the outward appearance, and if a thing glister, or make any
big or splendid show, they covet it, whatever it be in it self; But Wise men
pierce through into the inward nature of things, and seek only what is Solid
and Substantial, Good and Useful, like as the Patriarch did here. For in that
he sought these and no other things from GOD, it shows him to have been Wise
and Understanding, that he had e're this time weighed and pondered all things
as they relate to Man, and found out what was Good, Proper and necessary for
him.

And truly, would we restrain our Desires to these things Jacob here mentions,
if we would make these all we aim at in reference to this Life, we should both
Act more wisely than ordinarily we do, and should also find it much better with
us; If we would put up such Requests as these unto GOD, he would certainly
grant them, and in granting them we should find all that Comfort and Good which
our Hearts can wish. It is not for want of Will or Power in GOD that our
Petitions and Requests are not granted, for he is both able and willing to do
us good beyond the largest of our desires: But it is because they deserve not
to be granted, they are neither reasonable in themselves, nor put up for Good
ends and Purposes, and so do carry a reason of their refusal in their very
bosom. A Parent denies his Child what he cries for, not for want of Love, but
out of the Tender regard he has to him, because he knows it would hurt him;
and a Physician does not allow his Patient the Meat and Drink which he asks,
not because he does not desire his Health and Recovery: But because he
perceives his Appetite vitiat, and disordered; and knows that the thing
required would hinder his Health, and increase his Distemper. It is even so
with GOD, the Reason why he hears not our Prayers, is because they are not
Reasonable, and that we do not wisely consider what we speak: Ye ask, and
receive not, (says St. James) Because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it
upon your lusts, Iam. 4. 3. GOD cannot hear these Prayers which are prompted by
Lust, Sensuality, Pride, Ambition, Vain glory, covetousness, and the other
disorders of our Corrupt Nature, which should rather be starved and stifled,
than fostered and encouraged; and we may be sure GOD will never furnish us with
Weapons to rebel against himself. But as GOD designs the good and Happiness of
his Creatures, so if we intend no more than that, he will not deny us; if we
seek really that which is good for us, and which may help forward the happiness
we were Created for, He will freely bestow it: for he only rejects and upbraids
these Prayers which respect not the Right end, neither observe the right means
or measures, otherwise he gives to all men liberally and willingly. The advice
therefore of the Poet is good,

Quod justum est petito, vel quod videatur honestum:
Nam stultum est petere id, quod possit jure negari.
Englished thus,
Who would not have his Suite in vain,
on what is Honest set his eye;
He is a Fool, who thinks t'obtain,
what Reason justly may deny.
What the Heathen Satyrist also writes on this head, is not unworthy of a
Christian, and deserves to be considered,

Nil ergo optabunt homines? si consilium vis,
Permittes ipsis expendere Numinibus, quid Iuvena s^t. X.

Conveniat nobis, rebusque sit utile nostris.
Nam pro jucundis aptissima quaeque dabunt Dii.
Carior est illis homo, quam sibi. Nos animorum
Impulsu, and caeca, mag naque eupidine ducti,
Conjugium perimus, partumque uxoris: at illis
Notum, qui pueri, qualisque futura sit uxor.
Englished thus,
Shall man then pray for nothing? if I may
Advise thee, let the Gods thy wishes weigh,
Unto their Providence thy Will submit,
And for what is sweet, they will give thee what is fit.
And that which thy condition most behooves,
The Gods love man more then Stapl.
himself he loves.
Transported with a blind-self-love we crave,
That all of us may Wives and Childen have,
But to the Omniscient Deity, alone,
What Wives, what Children we shall have, is known.
Now there is no more necessary to complete our Happiness then what Jacob
craves here, all things else are superfluous, this alone is sufficient to
afford us all the comfort and satisfaction we would be at, in these things lie
that good which men so much desires, but know not how to find, as we may
discern by taking a particular view of them.

And first of the Divine Presence, which the Patriarch here requires to
accompany him. A Staff and a Companion are very necessary in a Journey; It is a
comfortless thing to travel without something to aid and support us, and
without a friend with whom we may advise and consult, and in whose society
and Fellowship, we may Refresh and Solace our selves upon all Occasions. This
Jacob perceived, and therefore he desired not to Travel alone, but entreated
that GOD might accompany him. All company is not good, better want altogether
than have some; And therefore Wise men use to make choice, and to look well
whom they admit into Familiarity or an intimat Friendship; The better our
Companions be, their company is still the more profitable, and we have the
greater comfort in it; And if we would know where, and how to make choice of a
True, Good, and Useful Friend, always to go along with us, we may receive
Direction from Jacob here; For he indeed has pitched upon him. And this does
sufficiently Evince, what Wisdom and Knowledge this man had even at this time,
when in the first place, and before all things he prayed that God might he with
him.

But here some may ask and say, what needed Jacob ask the Divine Presence as a
Singular and Peculiar Favor? Seeing that GOD is every where present, even with
all Creatures. Did he think GOD, a local God, tied or confined to any place, or
who being in one place, cannot be in another? No certainly, this Holy Man had
no such mean and low thoughts of GOD; He was better instructed than to be so
Ignorant of his Infinitness and Immensity, he understood well enough that the
Heaven of Heavens could not contain Him, and that His Presence, Power and
Glory filled both Heaven, and Earth, he was a better Philosopher than not to
know that His Presence and the actual Concurrence of His Power was requisite to
the Preservation of all and every one of his Creatures, and that nothing could
subsist without him. But it was not this general presence, which every
Creature enjoyes that Jacob begged, it was a more special presence whereby he
might show that he was interessed in Him, and concerned for him, a presence of
Special Favor, Love, and Kindness, to be present, as to let it appear that he
cared for him and studied his good: This is the Presence of GOD which Jacob
requires and the Reason why he so earnestly asks it, and does thus prefer it in
the first place, is no doubt because he had learned from his Fathers Abraham,
and Isaac, that it was this that made them so Thrive and Prosper in the World:
The Reason why they were so Singularly Blessed above others, was, because GOD
was with them. Thus also the good luck which Joseph had, is ascribed to the
Lords being with him, Genesis 39. 3. and this likewise is made the cause of David's
Wisdom, Courage and Success, as you may see 1 Samuel 18. 14, 28. 2 Samuel 5. 10.
and it was a thing very useful with the Ancients, when they would express how
well and happy a man was, to say, that GOD was with him.

And indeed how can it be but well with that Person, whom GOD is with, what can
he want who has him to be his Friend; He who has the Divine Presence
accompanying him withersoever he goes is Richer, and Happier, than if he had
all the treasures of the world carried about with him: For God is the Author
and Fountain of all Good, from Him every Good, and perfect Gift does come, he
can easily command any desirable thing where, when, and to whom He pleases: So
that he who enjoys GOD has enough, and needs not fear or care for the want of
any thing, for GOD will be to him in stead of all things. And in having Him he
may say truly as that Philosopher said, Omnia mea mecum porto, that is, I
carry about with me all things proper, all things necessary or requisite,
either for my Support or Comfort, for GOD is all that. It was a vain and proud
boast of Cesars to the Mariner, who was wafting him over the Adriatic to
Italy, when he perceived him seized with Fear and ready to turn back, Perge
audacter, ne timeas, Caesarem vehis, Caesarisque fortunam, be not afraid you
carry with you Caesar and his Fortune: But truly every one that has GOD with
them, may with reason confidently say to himself, be not afraid, sad or
dejected, Deum habes ejusque favorem, you have GOD and his favor; and having
that, what cause can there be of Fear or Dejection? For He is Wisdom, Power,
all Goodness, and All-sufficiencie it self, and therefore He is a True Aid, and
Support, and a sure Rock to build on, which will never fail. Blessed are all
they that put their trust in Him, Psalm. 2. 12. Though I walk, says David,
through the valley and shadow of death, yet will I fear no evil, for thou art
with me, thy Rod and thy Staff they comfort me. Psalm. 23. 4. The very hopes of
this special Presence and Favor of GOD, did mightily cheer up the Psalmist's
Spirit, when he was like to be overwhelmed with trouble, he chides and is in a
chaff with himself, for being any ways troubled, having this hope, Why art
thou cast down, says he, O my Soul, and why art thou disquieted in me? Hope
thou in GOD, for I shall yet praise Him, who is the health of my countenance
and my GOD, which he repeats twice, Psalm. 42. and once, Psalm. 43.

Many excellent Blessings and advantages follow him whom GOD is with. First. he
is sure of Counsel and Direction which is a very necessary and desirable
thing: The life of man while in this World is for the most part Dark, Intricate
and full of Difficulties, it is like a Labyrinth full of perplexities, we cannot
well discern the outgate; We know not what certain course to Steer for our
profit and advantage: As the Prophet Jeremiah says, the way of man is not in
himself, it is not in him that walks to direct his steps, Ierem. 10. 23. It
is not safe to follow our own Devices, things ordinarily succeed worse when we
do so; the wittiest Men have sometimes befooled themselves by leaning too much
to their own Wit. No Man's Wit and Judgment can be sufficient of it self to
guide him, and oft-times we are not much better of others, for they are short
sighted too as well as our selves, and may mistake things as well as we: we can
never therefore be sure that we are right, but when we follow the Counsel and
Direction of GOD, when we are guided by him who cannot err, because his
understanding is infinite. But if he be with us, his Counsel will be with us
too, if he has set his Heart upon, and chosen us for his Friend, he will also
guide and instruct us, and show us the way wherein we should walk; What man is
he, says David, that fears the LORD? him shall he teach in the way he shall
choose, Psalm. 25. 12.

But here some may ask, How does GOD teach us? And what way are we to expect
Direction from Him? Must we look for Revelations, Dreams, and Visions? Indeed
this was not unusual under the Old Testament, GOD did then very ordinarily this
way manifest himself to the Patriarchs, and others his Eminent Servants; but
now it pleases Him to forbear it, at least, that so common use thereof; and we
are neither to ask nor to look for Advice and Counsel this extraordinary way.
But however, if we wait on GOD, we may be confident of Direction from him,
which he will communicate to us two manner of ways: First, by the inward
suggestions of his Spirit, he will not only enlighten our minds, and clear our
understandings with wisdom and knowledge, so that in the general we shall be
able to know what is good and right; but he will also help us to discern what
is fit and proper in that particular case and circumstance wherein we stand,
and will secretly incline and draw us whither his Wisdom sees it fit for his
Glory, and our comfort. This is no idle Fancy, or Delusion, it is no piece of
Fanaticism, or a Dream of Enthusiastical persons, but a certain real Truth,
which all Good and Holy Persons have felt from their experience; Though these
words of the Prophet, Isa. 30. 21. Thine ears shall hear a word behind thee,
saving, this is the way, walk ye in it, when ye turn to the right hand, and
when ye turn to the left; are not altogether to be restricted to an inward
inspiration, but also to be understood that external Voice in the Word, and by
the Ministry of His Servants: Yet Solomon seems to hold out this, when he
says, in all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths, Prove.
3. 6. This also must be the meaning of Elihu, in these words, There is a Spirit
in Man, and the Inspiration of the Almighty gives them understanding, Job 32.
8. This Voice is inward, and therefore not audible, or perceptible by our
outward Senses, but however it may prove effectual enough for to move and sway
us: And though as one says, this secret Direction of Almighty GOD is
principally Halls Cont. of the fear of GOD.
seen in matters relating to the good of the Soul, yet it may be also found in
the great and Momentous Concerns of this life, which a good Man that fears GOD,
and begs his Direction, shall very often, if not at all times find. I hope none
will be so injurious as to think, I intend to countenance or authorize those
who father horrid impieties and most impertinent extravagancies upon GOD,
pretending they are carried thereto by a secret impulse of the Spirit. I know
and would have every one to assure himself that God is never the author of what
is evil, foolish or ridiculous, whatever comes from him is worthy of him, that
is to say, suitable to infinite Wisdom and Goodness; neither does GOD show
himself thus to any mean trivial things, but in matters of serious Importance.
But because some have been so far out of purpose, as to allege Inspiration for
every thing, and to lay such things upon GOD, as are inconsistent with the true
notions of a Diety, therefore to deny all such Commerce betwixt GOD and Men, or
that he ever does suggest Counsel or Advice to any in any matter, I think very
unreasonable; both these are Extrems, which I desire to shun* I doubt not but
good and virtuous Persons, who commit themselves entirely to the Divine Conduct
may, and do find themselves sometimes extraordinarly directed in Weighty and
Important Cases, especially when their own Wit and Reason is at a stand. To
this purpose I was told a remarkable Passage, when Dundee was stormed and taken
by the English, in our late Revolutions; This Town being fancied foolishly to
be a place of strength, and able to hold out, therefore many resorted thither,
and among the rest, a certain Citizen of Edinburgh, with his Wife and
Apprentise, who finding themselves sadly disappointed upon the entry of the
Enemy, and sacking of the Town, were in great anguish of Spirit, and concluded
themselves lost, and therefore they recommended their Souls to GOD'S Mercy; but
the Woman was extraordinarly moved to go down to the street, and no entreaties
of her Husband could dissuade her; when down, the first she espied was one of a
goodly countenance, whom she laid hold on, desiring he might go with her; When
he comes to the house she falls on her knees, and said, Sir, you shall have all
my goods, only save my Husband's life, which he granted, telling her withal,
that Providence had directed her to him, for the last Fight he was at, he
received a courtesy from a Scots Man, which made him swear, to save the first
that sought quarters in this. This had not well passed betwixt them, when the
enraged Soldiers thronged in upon them, and if it ha^ not been for him, they
had undoubtedly perished. This was a singular Providence, and I had it from the
good Woman her self, who stills remembers it as an instance of GOD'S kindness,
and which among other things she makes the Matter of her Devout, and thankful
Acknowledgement. A second way whereby GOD directs us, is External, viz: By
the Wise and Happy Occurrences of his Providence, ordering the Circumstances of
things so happily together, and making several things to fall out so well at
one time, as that we are necessarily and in a manner unawares engaged into that
course he Designs we should take, which will always be for our well, if we
commit our selves unto him. Thus he made Abraham's Servant to light very happily
upon the house of his Masters Brethren, and the Woman whom he should choose for
his Master's Son's Wife; and thus also he directed Jacob to Laban, and Ruth to
Boaz. The steps of a good man, says the Psalmist, are ordered by the LORD,
Psalm: 37: 23: He by his secret Providence does so dispose of him, and engages
him to such a conduct in his affairs, that his Good, Peace and Advantage,
Credit and Comfort is carried on better than he desired, or could have
expected, and by ways and means which he could never foresee. These methods of
Divine Providence, sometimes look not Fair and Favorable, at the beginning
they may look as if he frowned and threatened us: But the issue of them even
then proves most happy, as we see in Ioseph's case. Who so is wise as to
observe the tract of his own life, and GOD'S dealings with himself and others,
shall come sufficiently to understand both this Wisdom and Loving Kindness of
the LORD.

But secondly, GOD'S Presence is not desirable for Counsel and Direction only,
but upon many other accounts: nay there is no Reason which may move us to
desire any thing whatsoever, but the same should excite us to this: For either
he can give the good, which we desire, or he can supply the want thereof; He
has every thing at His disposal, and whatever Virtue or Property any Creature
has is from Him; Neither can they produce even their most Natural effects
without him, but when he pleases he can work his will without them. It is not
Bread alone which preserves our Life, but his Blessing upon it, and he can
easily when he sees it fit, maintain our Natural Life, and vigor without all
Food, as he did to Moses, and Elijah, and our Savior. It is not Medicine nor
Physic which recovers our Health, but his Blessing in our use of them, and
even when these Means are wanting, yet his Hand is not shortened; but that he
can make Whole and restore Health without them. It is not our Labor and
Industry or any Endeavors we can use, which will make us compass the ends we
would be at, unless He act and concur with us; For if he give not the Blessing,
if he speak not the Word, all that we can do will be in vain. It is in vain for
you, says the Psalmist, to rise up early, to sit up late, to eat the bread of
sorrows, for it is he who gives his Beloved sleep. Psalm. 127. 2. And the
Prophet Haggai tells us plainly, that men may sow much, and yet bring in but
little, they may eat, and not have enough, drink, and not be filled, they may
be clothed, and yet not warm, and earn wages but put it into a bag with holes,
Hag. 1. 6. So that the Favorable Presence of GOD is desirable, both to supply
what we want, and to make these things which we have useful and comfortable* He
that has GOD with him, has not only a Wise Friend, but a powerful one, who
can do whatsoever he pleases in Heaven or in Earth, who can oblidge and
command Angels and all Creatures to Serve and Minister unto him whom he loves:
Thus he caused the Ravens to feed the Prophet Elijah; These Fowls by Nature
are more ready to steal and take away then to give, and yet at the Command of
GOD, they brought him Bread and Flesh in the morning, and Bread and Flesh in
the evening, 1 King. 17. 6: He made the jaw bone of an Ass to afford drink unto
Sampson when he was ready to to faint for thirst. He caused the Heavens to rain
down Bread to his People in the Wilderness, and gave them Quails in great
abundance, so that even then they were fed to the full: And in a word, as there
is nothing impossible unto GOD, as by his Power he can do all things whatsoever
he pleases, so he will never fail to work Mightily and Wonderfully for those
whom he loves, when his Glory or their Good requires it, he will withhold
nothing from them which their necessity or comfort calls for, and will make all
things, even what seems most rough, severe, and adverse, to work together for
their good, as the Apostle speaks, Rom 8. 28. and as may be easily made appea^
from many instances drawn from Scripture, and also other History.

Though neither private Persons nor public States, are now to expect to be
maintained and supported by Miracles and extraordinary manifestations of the
Divine Power, so much and so frequently as the Children of Israel were of old,
yet particular Providence must not be denied; We must not think that GOD has
now abstracted himself from the Government of the World, and from taking care
of such as love and fear Him, His eyes are still upon the Children of Men; He
interesseth himself in their Affairs, and has the chief hand in the disposal
thereof, His eyes are still upon the Righteous, and his ears are open to their
cry; now as much as formerly, he still shows a special care of his own, and
when ordinary means and methods fail, and prove ineffectual for compassing
their good; He interposeth himself by Ways and Means extraordinary, as might
be made evident from the lives of some who have been eminently Holy and Pious.
I doubt not but who will be at the pains to make Collections, may find many
Instances almost parallel to those we read of in Sacred Writ; I shall mention
some which may perhaps help to the remembrance of others; and that deserves the
first place, which the Reverend Archbishop Spotswood tells us of Mr. John
Craig; (Spots: Hist. lib. 6. p. 462) This eminent Person having fallen upon
Calvin's Institutions at Bononia, by which Means, he came not only to know the
Doctrine of the Protestants, but also to be persuaded of the truth thereof,
which being discovered, he was thereupon delated, and sent to Rome, where he
was tried by the Court of Inquisition, who condemned him to be burnt as an
Heretic. But it pleased GOD, before the day of his Execution, to remove Pope
Paul the 4th, whose death occasioned an uproar in the City, and several
disorders amongst the rest, the Prison doors were broken open, which afforded
to Mr. Craig the opportunity of an escape; And as he fled he met with two
remarkable Instances of Provividence; For first, Passing through the Suburbs of
Rome, a company of Banditi met him, one of whom accosted him, and asked if he
knew him, which Mr. Craig denying, the other remembered him of a Courtesy he
formerly received at Bononia, and for which he not only bestowed on Mr. Craig
some Money, but also conveyed him safe sorth of the City, and directed him in
the right way to Bononia, whither he intended. But not finding that good
Reception there he expected; he resolved upon Millan, without either knowledge
of the way, or the necessary means of a support for a Traveller; and while he
lay pensive at the side of a little Brook, he received a second instance of
GOD'S special Favor and Providence; for a Dog came to him with a purse of
Money in his mouth. This (as the Reverend Historian says) may seem somewhat
incredible; yet I cannot see how the truth thereof should be rejected, seeing
Mr. Craig himself did frequently relate the story; for both the holiness of his
life, frees him from all suspicion of Forgery, and any design of Imposing upon
Men; and also the eminent Employments he was honored with, both before and
after his Conversion to the Protestant Religion, shows him to have been far
from the simplicity of being cheated and deluded himself. It is also reported
of D. Barnaby Potter,

That after he had passed the ordinary time See Wilkinsons Treat: of GODS
alsufficiency.
of his Studies in the University of Oxford, he was like to have missed his
Degrees, for want of Money to defray the Charges thereof, upon which he retired
to his Chamber, and vented his grief in Prayers and Tears before GOD; and while
he was at Prayer, One came knocking at the door, and required him to come and
speak with the Vice-Chancelour, who bestowed on him as much Money as his
present necessity called for. To these I shall subjoyne two or three more of
latter date, which I have from very good hands. And first, it is reporred of a
worthy Divine of our Neighbor Nation, who was redacted in times of the late
Troubles to great Straits; And one time especially, he and his Family had been
a day or two without victuals; and being much moved with their looks and
speeches, by a secret suggestion of the Spirit, he commanded the Servant-Maid,
to go with her basket to the Market, (albeit he had no money to give with her.)
When she came there, passing up and down without offering to buy any thing, she
was espied by some who were drinking nigh by, They invited her in, and began to
make merry with her; but she not being in a disposition for it; told them
sadly, That though they were at their cups, yet such a good Man her Master and
his Family were starving. Upon which they presently collected a sum of Money,
and gave it her, with which she bought Provisions and took home with her. A
Second Instance shall be of a Widow-Gentle-Woman in this same Country, who was
left with several small Children, but little or nothing to maintain them with;
and it being in these troublesome Times wherein there was little occasion for
showing Industry, or using honest Shifts, this made her condition the more
hard: One day, t^ diver^ her from the cries of her Children, she resolved to
make a visit to some person living at some distance, and as she was passing
thither, GOD sent a rain, which occasioned her to step into a Milne, for fear
of spoiling a new Played which she carried about her, where she rencountred with
an Aquaintance who was making meall for the service of the Public, and he
understanding her condition, caused take home with her two loads of meal for
the use of her self and family. I shall mention but one Instance more, which
fell out much about the same time, and it was of another Widow Gentlewoman, who
had been in a prosperous condition, and might have continued so, if it had not
been for the Public Revolutions; One time being somewhat pinched with the want
both of Money and Provisions, and not willing to make her condition known, she
with her Daughters went to hear Sermon, and after Sermon they fetching a walk,
met with a Gentle Man, who first gave them an entertainment, and thereafter
proposed Marriage to the eldest Daughter, though he knew their present
difficulties; it was accepted of, and as he was able, so he actually did
maintain the Mother as well as the Daughter, handsomely and Creditably all her
lifetime.

Those who have small sense of GOD and his Providence, will be ready enough to
mock at some of these Instances, and to name others but chance, and accidental
things, Hits of Fortune only But certainly considering all circumstances they
cannot be looked upon as other then special and particular Providence. It is
unreasonable to reject the truth of a thing, merely because we cannot
understand how it could be brought about, and it is no les^ unreasonable to
refuse to acknowledge it to be of God, be cause the same is not intimat to us
by a Prophet, or particular Revelation. By these Instances and others which Men
may gather from their Experience and Reading, it does appear what GOD is able
to do for us, and how many things he may contrive, and make to occur for
relieving us out of the Straits and Troubles we fall into. But for preventing
Men's mistakes, it will not be amiss to add a Caution, and it is this, That we
do not think that we are only beholden to GOD and his Providence, when we meet
with such extraordinary occurrences, for GOD must still be acknowledged the
Author of all our Comforts, when they come to us in ways Ordinar and Common,
as well as when they are brought about by Miraculous Means and Methods, He is
the Preserver of our Life and Health, when we Eat, Drink and Sleep, no less
then if we should live without either of these: Our Prosperity is to be
ascribed to him, when it follows our Diligence and Industry in our Employments,
no less then when it falls out by Ways and Methods extraordinary, and
unthought of, to convince us of which, GOD does sometimes blast Natural Means,
for that shows the Effects does not wholly depend upon them. And as GOD must
still be acknowledged the Author of all the good we enjoy, by what ever Means
or Instruments it comes to us, so we must not expect any extraordinary
manifestation of his favor and Providence but in extraordinary cases, that is
to say, when ordinary means and methods fail, and that such special and
singular instances of the Divine Power and goodness, are requisit^ for
Supporting a staggering Faith, and the engaging our selves and others, to a
cheerful dependence upon GOD in times of Trouble and Calamity. And though even
in these cases GOD should not interpose himself thus extraordinarly on our
behalf, yet there were no Reason to complain of the Want of special Care of us;
we must not think they are all deserted of GOD, who do not find Miraculous help
and relief upon the want of Ordinary Means, for GOD may see it as much for
their Spiritual good to leave them in these straits and difficulties, then it
would be for their temporal good to be relieved out of them, so his Love is as
great the one way as the other.

But thirdly, though the Divine Presence should not thus signally manifest it
self in procuring External Successes and Advantages, yet it rendereth one
happy, in that, Peace and Tranquillity, Joy and Gladness does ever flow from
it, and the sense thereof. Inward Peace and Contentment and Gladness of Heart
every man covets, but few rightly understand where or how it is to be had: It
does not flow from an abundance of Temporal things and an Affluence of Worldly
enjoyments; one may have as much of these as heart can wish, and yet be without
inward peace and Satisfaction, and however it is but a weak and brittle peace,
a very slender comfort which a man can suck from these outward and perishing
enjoyments; when these things are not considered as tokens and expressions of
the Divine Favor, they can yield no more but vanity and vexation of Spirit, as
Soloman proves, by his manifold experiences. True Peace and Joy can be built
upon no other foundation then GOD Himself, it results only from the enjoyment
of him, and a sense and Assurance of his Favor and Love, if he be with us, he
both can and will give us a Peace, which the whole World cannot give, and which
none can take from us. Thou will keep him, says the Prophet, in perfect Peace,
whose mind is stayed on thee, because he trusts in thee, Isa. 26. 3 when
others were earnestly craving and gaping for this, and the other Worldly
delight, saying, who will show us any good: David prays seriously, LORD lift
up the light of thy Countenance upon us. And he adds the reason why he desired
this so much above all other things, because says he, Thou have put Gladness
in my heart, more then in the time that their Corn and Wine increased, Psalm. 4.
6. 7. That is, he had more Joy from GOD'S Presence and Favor, then Men use to
have in the time of Harvest when all things most abound with them. This Peace
and Comfort, which GOD gives, is not necessarily annexed to outward Plenty and
Prosperity, nor always attended with it: There may be outwardly nothing but
Want and Poverty, Sickness and Distress, Trouble and Affliction, and yet even
in this case, GOD may inwardly afford a joy unspeakable, and a peace which
passes all understanding. Wherefore Christ tells his Disciples, that in the
World they should have trouble, but in me ye shall have peace, as if he had said
be not afraid, for the trouble you meet with in the World, shall not bereave
you of that peace I promise; and therefore also Solomon says Prove. 14. 14.
That a good man shall be satisfied from himself, that is, his satisfaction and
comfort depends not on External enjoyments, or things without him, but he can
draw it from within, through the intimat presence of GOD which does always
attend him. And thus you see how desirable a thing the Presence of GOD is, and
how happy he must needs bewhom GOD is with.

Wherefore let all of us be so wise as to imitat Jacob, to seek this in the
first place, and to prefer it before all things; Let us Pray to GOD that he may
be with us, and even convenant with him, as Jacob does here for this end; that
in him, and by him, we may be supported. Does not our experience tell every one
of us that we are not able to sustain our selves? and that we must be propt
and upholden, or else we cannot choose but droup and fall. Man is like unto the
Hop or Ivy, and such other weak Plants, which cannot stand of themselves, nor
bear their own weight, but must have something to lean to: How miserable would
we be if we were left to our selves, and destitute of all external help? how
insignificant would one be if he had no other supplies, but what he could
furnish from, and by himself? We have certainly no sufficiency or subsistence
of our selves, and therefore we ought to cleave unto him, who only can stay and
support us: If we lay the stress and comfort of our Souls upon any other thing
besides GOD, it will be but like the Hop or Ivie's clasping about a Thistle, or
Nittle, for want of an Oak, which brings both to the ground. Alas the
generality of the World trust to the Creatures! And how foolish a thing is it?
For they prove to them as the staffof Egypt, which the Prophet compares to a
broken reed; whereon if a man lean, it will go unto his hand and pierce it,
Isa: 36: 6. The Creatures and all things in the World of themselves are but
fleeting vanities, and so must needs be but miserable comforters, they are not
durable, and though they were, yet they are not sufficient, not stedable to all
ends and purposes, they are so far from lessening ones vanity, that oft-times
they increase it, so far from easing his mind, or supporting his burden, that
they produce ^ome more vexation of Spirit. Riches is a vain thing to trust to,
for they make to themselves wings and fly away; As the Wise Man observes, and
as every Man may take notice of as well as he, and though they did stay more
constantly, yet could they not answer all things: What could they profit a man
in the day of Wrath? could they make his bed in His Sickness, or comfort him in
his Languishing Condition? Could they ease his Pain, or assuage his grief? If
he were seized with the Gout or Stone, reproached in his Name, or inwardly
Wounded in Spirit. And what may be said of them is applicable to all other
things, which one may or can possess. All outward ^enjoyments serve only to
blow up* Men's Fancies, and to feed their Hopes while they are in Ease and
Quiet, and in no difficulty; but so soon as Trouble overtaketh them, and that
they fall into Straits, then these Gayeties shrink away, and discover how
little strength or solidity is in them. He who confides in his Wealth,
Greatness, Friends, Power, and such like, builds upon a Sandy Foundation* a
Foundation which will certainly fail him when he has most need to be. Sheltred
and protected. The Psalmist makes a supposition, that Father and Mother may
forsake us, Psalm. 27. and indeed sometimes they do it of their own accord, and
sometimes they are constrained thereto; Friends and Acquaintances; as Job
observed, prove like. Winter brooks, which flow in wet Seasons, but dry up when
heat and drought comes: And then what comes of him, all whose Ho^e was placed
in them? So who trusts to the World, trusts to no sure Friend, it never proved
true to any yet, it has deceived both its own Children, and the Children of
GOD, it has forsaken both its Adore^s* and those who cared little for it*
these who deserved well, and those whose* Merits were but small; this the
History of every Age, and every Nation makes out, we need not go beyond Seas,
nor look back to former Times, to learn this; we need not fetch from Antiquity
the Story of Craesus, or Darius: We may prove this from the History of our own
Times, and from what has been frequently transacted in this same British*
Isle, this Age, and the last. Lord Cromwell of Essex, the Seymours, Bacon, Lord
Verulam Chancellor of England, and some others who had a higher Office than
that of Chancellor amongst our selves, are eminent proofs of this vanity and
uncertainty of the World. But there is no need of bringing single Instances,
every day's observation furnishes us with Proofs enough of this kind, so that
he must be very blind, and very obdured, or very much besotted, who does not
see the vanity and folly o^ trusting to the world and the things thereof. He
that leans to these only shall fall, but he that trusts in the LORD GOD, is
Blessed, for he shall be upholden: I have set the LORD, says David, always
before me, because he is at my right hand; I shall not be moved; Psalm 16: 8:
And again, Psalm. 46: ^2: GOD only is our refuge and strength, a very present
help in trouble, he is a refuge sure and steadfast which neither can not will
deceive us, and he is a present* help, because he is always ready, hard at
hand, and he is not more present than he is stedable and sufficient. Wherefore
as the Psalmist goes on, We need not fear though the Earth be removed, and
though the mountains be carried* unto the midst of the Sea. O LORD of Hosts,
Blessed is the man that trusts in thee; for in GOD there i^ fullness which may
fill our emptiness, in him there is sufficiency which can answer all our needs,
there is no want in him, and that good which we crave, and which we are still
seeking after is in him and him only* It is reported of a Soldier, who
contrived a Target or Shield, after such a fashion that it served both to
defend him from the darts of his Enemies, and was also useful to help him over
Rivers and Waters, and that therefore he used to hug and kiss it, calling it
the true companion of a Soldier, being serviceable both upon Land and Water.
This shield is no unfit Emblem, to set forth the excellency and advantage of
the Divine Presence which serves not for one season, but for all, and is
useful for every purpose: God is stedable both in Prosperity and Adversity, in
Health and Sickness, in Company and solitude, in Youth and old Age^, at Sea and
on the Land, in Peace and in War, in a Word, at all times and in all
conditions; He can Supply all our Wants, and afford us whatever we need;
Nothing is so Difficult, but he can remove it, nothing so adverse, but he can
make it advantageous; no case so perplexed, but he can resolve it* and no
condition so Barren, but he can and will make it Comfortable, if he be with us:
And if he once engage to be with us, he will not easily or lightly, forsake us;
He will not cast us off upon surmises and suspicions, while we continue
Faithful and Dutiful to him, he will never leave us, or fall to be with us.
Wherefore Cardinal Wolsey said truly* though very sadly for himself, If I had
served my GOD as well, and as faithfully, as I have done my King, be would
never have deserted me. And now that we may never have ground for such a
complaint, that we may never have reason to bewail the folly of a vain and
false Confidence, and trusting unto a deceitful hold; and that especially when
there is no time of redressing it, let us therefore, I say, presently and
speedily draw near to GOD, let us seek him with our whole hearts, above all
things, let us secure His Favor, and engage him to be with us. And then we
shall taste and see better than words can unfold it, that the LORD is good, and
that the Man is Blessed* that trusts i^ him; That it is better to trust in
the LORD, than to put confidence in Man, in Princes, or in any thing under the
Sun. None that wait on him shall ever be ashamed: They trusted in thee, says
the Psalmist, and were not confounded. Be of good courage and he shall
strengthen your heart, all ye that hope in the LORD, Psalm. 22. 5. and 31. 24.

CHAP. III. Why Jacob mentioned other particulars, seeing the first Request did
comprehend them, and all things else he could ask The second Request treated of
the Reasons of Jacobs Fear, and the lyableness of all Men generally to Dangers.
No true Security, but in the Divine Protection; an Application of all.
IN the preceding Chapter we have spoken to Jacob's first Request, and have
showed what it is to have the LORD with one, and how large and comprehensive a
Blessing it is; for in effect it contains not only the other two which follow,
but all other things else, which one can reasonably desire: All the good that a
man has or which he can desire, is merely the effect of GOD'S favorable
presence. And so Jacob needed have asked no more to make him Happy, but that
GOD might be with him. But because the holding to generals, does not
sufficiently alley or dissipate* our fears, this is only done when particulars
are condescended on; therefore the Patriarch here as in general, he begs GOD'S
Presence, so that in particular he might know it, first by his being protected
from these Dangers he was liable to* and secondly by the receiving a competent
supply of his Wants, which two things fall next to be considered.

The second Request Jacob here made, is in these words, If he will keep me in
the way that I go; Which words speak out, that he was both apprehensive of
Dangers, and that he thought none but GOD could truly defend him from them, or
deliver him out of them. And indeed, first it was no wonder that he was
apprehensive of Dangers, the fear of his brother Esau's wrath was one Principal
Reason, why he left his Father's house, and seeing Friends and so near
Relations bore him such ill will, and were ready to do him mischief, what might
he expect from Strangers, who were no ways tied or obliged unto him? if
Abraham and his Father Isaac were in such fear of their Lives when they
sojourned, that they denied their Wives, calling them their Sisters,
notwithstanding of their Power, and the numerous Family they had; What fear
might he be in who had none with him but himself and was destitute of all help?
And besides the Dangers which he might ^ee himself exposed to through the
malice and wickedness of men: Jacob could not but perceive innumerable others,
which might befall him in the course of his Pilgrimage, the Wild Beasts of the
Field might devour him, he might be entrapped unto Snares and Pitts; out of
which there was no recovery. As he passed through the Waters, they might
overwhelme him; the excessive heat of the Day, or the cold frosts of the Night,
might bring on heavy Sicknesses and Diseases. It Is impossible to reckon up all
the evils which may befall a man* or to point at all the Sources from whence
they flow; For we are lyabe to Dangers from all the Elements, and from every
part of the Creation; A thousand Mischances and Accidents may happen to put an
end to our life, or to render it miserable. But our greatest and sorest enemies
are those of our own Kind: Man is to Man the worst Foe: The Plague and
Pestilence have killed their thousands, but Malice and Revenge ten thousands;
some Vineyards and Gardens have been taken away by the innundations of Rivers,
but more by Covetousness; As some Merchants and Seamen have been brought to
ruin by Storms and Tempests, so others by Pirates and Thieves and the Barbarity
of those to whom they run for Shelter. And thus upon many accounts it is true,
That Man that is born of a Woman, is of few days and full of trouble, as Job
says; which Jacob might now understand by his Reason, as afterward he spoke
it to Pharaoh from his experience, Genesis 47. 9. And it is indeed a Truth which
stands now valid and undoubted, by some five thousand years experience; For
this life as a Heathen says, (...) it is not truly a Life, but a Calamity. And
the Wise Son of Sirach, has observed, that great Travel is Created for every
man, and an heavy yoke is upon the Sons of Adam, from the day that they go out
of their Mothers womb, till the day that they return to the Mother of all
things, Eccl. 40. 1.

Now as every Prudent Man foreseeth the Evils and Dangers which he is liable
to, as he has an apprehension both of the common Calamities of Mankind, and of
the particular Troubles and Distresses which may befall him in his
Circumstances, so he is desirous to guard against them and shun them. And
unless we know some Remedies against the Troubles we may meet with, unless we
know how to prevent them, or how to remove them, or how to be eased under them,
and how to be safely delivered from them, our Minds can enjoy no true Rest nor
Quiet. And what Defense can one have unless he have it from GOD? How can any
think to be kept in safety, unless He do it whom Jacob here calls upon?
Except the LORD, says the Psalmist, keep the City, the Watch men waketh but in
vain, Psalm. 127. 1. And the same may be said of private Persons, for if the
LORD be not on our side, if he do not look to us, and take a care of us, When
men rise up against us, they should certainly swallow us up quick, when their
wrath is kindled against us: certainly the Waters of trouble when they approach
should overwhelm us; And the stream should go over our Soul, Psalm. 124. 2, 3.
But he is secure who has GOD for his help; I will (says David) both lay me
down in peace and sleep, for thou LORD only make me to dwell in safety, Psalm.
4. 8. and in the former Psalm, he tells us plainly, I laid me down and slept, I
awaked for the LORD sustained me; I will not be afraid of ten thousands of
People that have set themselves against me round about. The like confidence may
every one have who is interessed in the Divine Favor, for he that dwells in
the secret place of the Most High, shall abide under the shadow of the
Almighty. Because thou have made the LORD which is my refuge, even the Most
High thy Habitation: There shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any plague
come nigh thy dwelling. For he shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep
thee in all thy ways, they shall bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash
thy foot against a Stone. Thou shall tread upon the Lion, and Adder, the young
Lion, and the Dragon shall thou trample under foot. Because he has set his
Love upon me, therefore will I deliver him, I will set him on high because he
has known my Name, Psalm. 91. That is a great Comfort and Encouragement and a
true Antidote against all Fear of Danger, or Trouble, which GOD gives to his
Servants and People; by the Prophet Isaiah, Thus says the LORD, that created
thee, O Jacob, and he that formed thee, O Israel, fear not, for I have redeemed
thee, I have called thee by thy Name, thou art mine: When thou passest through
the waters I will be with thee, and through the Rivers they shall not overflow
thee. When thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither
shall the flame kindle upon thee, for I am the LORD thy GOD, the Holy One of
Israel, thy Savior, Isa. 43. 1, 2.

Thus it appears what safety and security one has whom GOD takes into his
Protection, such an one as Eliphaz speaks, Shall be in league with the stones of
the Field, and the Beasts of the Field shall be at peace with him, Job 5. 23.
Which we are not yet to understand. as if the Children and Servants of GOD,
should never be in any Danger, nor ever meet with any trial, no. there is no
such thing promised, nor must it be expected: Dangers they may be in, enemies
they may, they will, nay shall have: a life of perpetual ease is no where
promised, nor yet an exemption, from Trouble altogether; yea, all temporal
Promises are to be interpreted cum exceptione Crucis, with an attendance of
Afflictions and Dangers; as our Savior intimats to us, Mark 10. 30. But the
thing which GOD promised to do for his Own, and which all who sincerely seek
him may look for, is, that either first he will prevent and keep off Dangers,
and such evils as are threatened by men, or which we may have cause to fear from
other things; or Secondly, that he will abate the Severity and Rigor of them
when they come, and keep us from feeling too much the smart of them, by sending
something or other at the same time, which may Ease and Comfort our Minds, that
we may be the better able to bear it; or thirdly, he will procure us a Happy
Issue and outgate so that we may not altogether be swallowed up by them; nay
fourthly, that he will even make the Evils and Mischiefs threatened, and
inflicted, to turn to our Good, and to prove instrumental either to our
Spiritual or our Temporal advantage; That even upon this account we may have
reason to rejoice for the days wherein we have seen evil. This is the Nature
and Manner of that Defense and Protection that we must look for from GOD; and
to fortify ^ur Minds with the hopes of this, he has not only given us his
Promises; But laid before us several excellent examples of his Providence,
toward his Saints and Servants in the Disposal of their Calamities and
Afflictions. Thus though Abraham was in hazard by coming to the land of Canaan,
for being a Stranger, the Inhabitants might have been jealous of him, and have
thought it their interest to hinder his settlement, yet GOD suffered no man to
do him harm. With every disaster that befell Joseph, GOD granted him some
comfort, for he made him always to find favor in the sight of those he was
among. Moses was exposed to perish in the waters, but he ordained Pharaoh's
Daughter to step in, and take him up, which occasioned him to get a more*
Liberal and noble Education, than what his Parents could have given him. David
was often in danger both from Men and Beasts, yet the LORD delivered him out of
them all. The three Children were cast into Nebuchadnezzar's fiery furnace; but
he suffered not the fire to have power upon their bodies, nor was a hair of
their head singed, neither were their coats changed, nor had the smell of the
fire passed on them; Dan. 3. 27. Daniel also was thrown into the Lions Den, but
GOD sent his Angel, and shut the Lions mouths that they did him no hurt, Chap.
6. 22. And this same Jacob though he was hated by his Uncle and his Sons, and
hotly pursued by them, yet when they overtook him, the LORD suffered them not
to speak either good or evil against him, or to do him any manner of mischief.
His Brother Esau also, when he heard of his coming homewards, came out with
four hundred Men against him, for to cut him and his off; but when they met, in
steed of Fighting, they kissed each other, and gave mutual expressions and
assurance of Kindness. So that as Solomon observes, When a Man's ways please
the LORD, he makes even his enemies to be at peace with him; Prove. 16. 7. that
is, He will either turn their Hatred into Love, and their Malice into Goodwill,
or He will so bridle their Wrath, that they can do him no hurt, but be oblidged
to behave themselves as to the Outward part civilly. Of this we have many
Proofs in all Ages throughout the World, but it is especially evident in the
Revolution of States: for in these turns of Affairs, it has been often seen,
that some have been preserved and suffered to live in Peace, when in all Humane
appearance, the contrary might been expected, yea was actually looked for by
all; because the letting them alone, was so little agreeable to the
inclinations and interests of those who had grasped the Power into their hands.

From all these therefore let us learn, First, when we apprehend any cause of
Fear, or foresee any Evil coming, from whatsoever Airth it be, let us, I say,
seek GOD as Jacob did here, and shelter our selves under His Protection; we may
indeed and ought to use Prudent and Ordinary Means, but take heed that our
chiefest confidence be in GOD, and his Help: Let us not be taken up with any
thing we our selves can do, or with any Refuge we may expect from others, as to
forget to depend upon the LORD; and to call upon Him for His Aid and
Assistance; I will, says the Psalmist, lift up mine eyes unto the Hills from
whence comes my help; And that we may know what Hills these were he meant of,
he adds, my help comes from the LORD, which made Heaven and Earth; Psalm.
121. 1, 2. If thou will run to the LORD, he will certainly keep thee; other
Keepers may fail thee, or they may be asleep when thine Enemy comes upon thee,
as Abner was and all the Host with him, when David stole in upon Saul. But if
GOD keep thee, thy Keeper will not slumber. Behold, says the Psalmist, He that
keeps Israel* shall neither slumber nor sleep, in the forecited place.

Secondly, Let us consider whither we enjoy any Safety, have we escaped any
Dangers, and Evils which were threatened us? Are the Storms and Clouds dispelled
which we feared? Do we at present enjoy any Ease and Quiet? If so, we may learn
from what has been said, whom we are obliged to for this, and whom we must
thank, even GOD, for He and none other is the Author of all this; For whoever
or whatever were the immediate Instruments, He was the Supreme Cause and
Director. Owe thou any thing to the Favor and Good* will of Men? It is he
and he only, who turns their Hearts toward thee, it is GOD who Ordered and
Contrived all these Favorable Circumstances which occasion thy present Peace
and Safety: It is the LORD who is thy Keeper, He is thy Shade upon thy Right
Hand; and therefore see that thou do acknowledge it by Rendering Him thy Hearty
thanks, and ascribing the Praise of all to his Almighty Power and Goodness, and
take heed lest your unthankfulness make him who has hitherto been thy Friend,
to turn thy Foe, and to give thee up to the will of thine Enemies.

Thirdly, and lastly, Does any man want Peace? Has his life been still full of
disquiet and trouble? Wants he the Hearts and Good will of those he lives
among? Where ever he goes, and whatever he does, does he still find Enemies
and Persons who bear him Malice and Ill will? Does one Cross and Danger come
upon the back of another, so that he has no Rest or Security? Such an one may
learn by what has been said also where the fault lies, and who is to be blamed
for it: it is perhaps because he has never sought the LORD, nor studied so to
order his Ways, as to Please GOD, he has trusted too much to himself, His Wit
and Industry, his Wealth, Power, or Friends, because of these he has thought
with himself, that it should be always well with him, and therefore he has
not cared much for GOD; and therefore GOD has set himself to vex and trouble
him. For as the Eyes of the LORD are upon the Righteous, and his Ears are open
unto their cry: so the Face of the LORD is against them that do eVil, to cut
off the remembrance of them from the Earth; Psalm. 34. 15, 16. Because DaVid
displeased the LORD in the matter of Uriah, therefore it is said, That He raised
him up many Enemies. Let every Man therefore Try and Examine himself, let him
search his ways, and see what sin lies at his door, and repent of it; and let
him turn unto the LORD, and He will cause His Face to shine Favorably upon
him, happy shall he be, and it shall be well with him. Make GOD thy Friend, and
He shall preserVe thee from all eVil: He shall preserVe thy Soul. The LORD
shall preserVe thy going out* and thy coming in, from this time forth and eVen
foreVermore; Psalm. 121* 7. 8.

CHAP. IV. Jacob's third Request considered, in respect of himself; Though the
generality of Men ask more, yet all wise Heathens and Jews have preferred this
Portion to all Others. The confining our Desires to this, is showed by Several
instances to be Wise and Reasonable; and that therefore eVery one ought to
content himself with his Competency. All Men's Competency is not the same. What
is the Duty of him, who has got his Competency? what of him who has less? and
what his, who has more?
JAcob's third Request, which he here makes, is for Maintenance, this is the
last thing about which he conditions with GOD; And in this particular he was
not Immodest and Exorbitant; His Desires were far from being Inordinate and
unreasonable, for he craves only what was simply necessary and Requisite for the
Support of his Life: He asks no more, but that GOD would give him Bread to
eat, and Raiment to put on; without these he could not live, and having these
he thought he had enough, all that was Needful or Sufficient, as to his Present
State and Condition. And that Jacob confined his Desires to this Sober Measure
of Food and Raiment is the more observable, seeing we find a little before, GOD
making him large Profer's, and great Promises of the whole Land in which he
was. It might been thought that he would at lest taken in GOD'S own Promise
unto him, as one of the Conditions of his Vow, and that he should have said,
well, if thou will indeed give me all this which Thou have Promised, and do all
these things to me which Thou have spoken, and make me so Great, and so Rich a
Man, then Thou shall be my GOD* But he takes another Method, and Proceeds after
another Manner, he passes by all these large Profers of Wealth and Greatness,
and pitches only upon a mere simple Sufficiency of Food and Raiment, thinking
it Improper and Unreasonable, and a piece of Immodesty for him to seek more
than was necessay for him* If GOD gave more, it was an Act of His Bounty; if
his Wisdom and Goodness thought fit to bestow a larger Allowance, and a greater
Measure of these Temporal things, it might be matter of Praise and Thankful
acknowledgment; But it did not become him to prescribe and set down* Rules to
the Sovereign LORD of Heaven and Earth: he knew his Happiness was not tied to
these outward things, and that Man's life did not consist in the abundance of
these things which he possessed; Food and Raiment was sufficient for the
support of his Life, and therefore he craved no more.

The generality of the World are otherwise minded, their desires are not
bounded with Jacob's, they are not satisfied ordinarily with the portion of
Food and Raiment, however sufficient it be of it self; they are not contented
with mere necessary Supplies; but greedily covet a Superabundance, which is
both their Folly and their Sin. We have showed how wise and understanding the
Patriarch was in the two former Particulars, and have proposed him as our
Pattern, and if we will consider it, we shall find him to be no less Wise in
this, and no less Worthy of our Imitation. Wherefore let us set this holy Man's
Example before us, and let us moderat our Desires after the things of this
Life, according to this Measure and Model, which he gives and sets to himself.
and to which all Wise Men have ever proportioned their Desires. Thus Agur
prayed, Give me neither Poverty, nor Riches: feed me with food Convenient for
me; Prove. 30: 8. And as Solomon Contemned Riches and much Wealth so far, as
that he would not ask them from GOD when he had it in his choice what to ask,
so he has Advised us ^o Despise them, and not to seek after them. Labor not,
says he, to be rich; Cease from thine own Wisdom; Prove: 23: 4. As if he had
said, thou art not wise, thou understands not they self sufficiently, if thou
think it a fine or a good thing to be Rich, and to have great abundance. St.
Paul judged this, which Jacob here required, sufficient matter of Contentment,
having food and raiment, says he, Let us be therewith content; 1. Tim: 6: 8:
And we might instance even in many Heathens, who sought no more than a mere
Competency, and in their Judgment preferred that to the greatest affluence of
Worldly Wealth, and Grandeur. Horace calls this, Auream mediocritatem, a Golden
Competency, because it is the best of Conditions; and elsewhere he says,

-- Been est mi Deus obtulit Parca, quod satis est, manu.
-- Thrice happy he, to whom the wise indulgency of Heaven,
With sparing hand, but just enough has given.
Plutarch in his Banquet of the seven Wise Men, brings in this Question, Which
is the happiest Family? Which one of the Sages answers thus, Where Necessaries
are not wanting, and Superfluities are not sought. How much Seneca speaks in
the commendation of a Moderate State, and how much in the contempt of Riches,
is known to all who have seen any thing of his Writings; and the following
lines speak out his sentiments thereof,

Fata si liceat mihi
Fingere arbitrio meo, etc.
Tuta me media vehat
Rita decurrens via.
If all my Wishes, I could have
I for Felicity,
No other thing would crave
then Mediocrity.
It is a saying of Cicero, in his book, de Officiis, Nihil est tam angusti
animi tamque parvi quam amare divitias, that is, Nothing does more bewray
ignorance, and meanness of Spirit, than the love of Riches. And certainly to
crave and be desirous of more than what is Competent for the Maintenance and
Support of our Lives, is both inconsistent with that Dependence and Subjection
we owe GOD, and does also bespeak a great deal of Vanity, Folly and
Inconsideratness.

GOD who is the great Master and Governor of the World, he Allows and
Commands, that we wait upon Him for the necessary Supplies of our Life; yea,
this much we may lawfully seek from Him. Wherefore our Savior in that Prayer
which he prescribed his Disciples, he taught us to Pray for our daily bread,
comprehending under that all other necessary Supplies; According to that of St.
Augustine, quando rogamus panem quotidianum, quicquid nobis propter carnem
nostrum necessarium est rogamus; that is* when we ask our Daily Bread, we
also ask all other things necessary for the Preservation and Comfort of our
Lives; And as it becomes us to pray for this, that we may own and show our
Dependence upon GOD; so it becomes us to rest satisfied with the seeking of it,
and to be contented when we have gotten it: To ask and be desirous of more, is
but immodesty and does b^wray an Unruly and Stubborn and Unreasonable
Disposition; As the holy Father we just now mentioned says, Food and Raiment
is necessary, without it we cannot live; there is no immodesty in seeking it;
But it is impudency to ask Riches, it is one thing to ask, what may nourish our
Pride and Vanity, and another thing to seek only what is proper for the
sustenance of our life.

Aliud est unde superbias aliud unde vivas. When a Servant has received his
Allowance, is sufficiently Fed and Clothed, what an insolency is it for him to
desire his Master to give Superfluities over and above what he needs, merely to
please his Fancy, or to gratify his Humor? It is not Discretion to set down
Measures, and to prescribe what should be given, where nothing is due, Now GOD
owes us nothing, He is not oblidged to give us any thing at all: But only
because we are his Creatures, he is Ready and Willing to preserve us, and has
in some sense oblidged Himself to Maintain and Cherish that Life he has
given, which yet gives no Allowance to seek for the satisfying of our
unreasonable, and unsatiable Appetites. Necessaries we may call for but
Superabundance and more than enough, we ought not; seeing we Live merely by the
Bounty of Almighty GOD, we ought not to carve for our Selves, but the Alms and
Portion which He bestows we should take Thankfully, and sit down Contentedly
therewith. It is observed that though we have several other failings of the
Servants of GOD mentioned in Scripture, yet there is not one instance of an
immoderate desire for Temporal Goods in any one of them. For as the excessive
Love hereof is inconsistent with the true Love of GOD, so the express desire of
them is arrogant Presumption which the Servants of GOD are ever careful to
keep themselves free of.

And as it is Immodesty and Undiscretion in regard of GOD to be desirous of
more than a Competency, then what is sufficient to maintain us in our State and
Condition: So really it is an unreasonable and vain thing in it self. To what
purpose is it to seek more than that we stand in need of? All that is over and
above is perfectly vain, useless, and unreasonable; And it is no real, but an
imaginary Satisfaction only which a Man can promise to himself thereby. If one
keep the Wealth by him which he stands not in need of, if he hoord it up in his
Chests and Coffers, and put it to no use, what is he the better of it? What
does it really signify more to him, than if it were yet an hundred fathom
under Ground in the Bowels of the Earth, except that he has a great dale of
Care, Fear, Anxiety, and Trouble which he would want, if it were still there?

Fond Man! what good or beauty can be found?
I^ h^aps of Treasure buried under ground?
Which rather then diminisht, e're to see,
Thou would thy self too buried with them be;
And what is the difference, is it not quite as bad*
Never to use, as never to have had.
Cowley.
Dionysius the Elder, understanding a certain Citizen had Gold hid in his
hou^e, he commanded it to be brought to him; But afterward when the same
Person went to sojourn in another City, and did Trade with a little which he
had stolen away; Dionisius sent for him, and restored him all back again,
because he began to use his Wealth, and to leave off the rendering an useful
thing useless; Thereby showing that the true use of Money is not to hoord it
up, but to lay it out in such and such ways as tend to the Public good;

-- Surely use alone,
Makes Money not a contemptible stone.
Herbert.
Again, if one should resolve to use and spend it on his Family and
Housekeeping, if a Man design to keep a great Retinue, and to live up sutably
to the Abundance which he possesses; Yet even in that case, there is more of
Fancy than Solid Pleasure and Satisfaction; When goods enc^ease, says Solomon,
they are increased that eat them: and what good is there to the Owners thereof,
saving the beholding of them with their eyes; Eccl. 5. 11. Which truly is a
very small and vain good; Let a Man have never so much of this World, yet even
in that abundance his Natural necessities are not better supplied, than if he
had only a simple competency; of all his Dishes, he fills but one Belly, and of
all his fair Houses, and Rich furnished Rooms, he can lodge but in one at once,
and neither the Variety, nor the ^ineness and Delicacy of the things he
enjoyes, does secure from Death, or Sickness, and Diseases, and the other
encumbrances of our Life. Man's life, says our Savior, consists not in the
abundance of the things he possesses; Luke 12. 15. That is, a Man's Life is
not prolonged thereby, he must not necessarily live as long as he has any
thing to spend, even though he have much goods laid up for many years, his Soul
may be very soon required of him, as the Parable there shows. And as the
Abundance makes not our Life the longer, so neither much the better. True
Pleasure and Contentment does not always follow great Measures of this Worlds
goods; he that has little, and but a moderate competency, passes his days
ordinarily more Quietly and Contentedly, than he that has much Riches, and his
sleep is always sounder. The sweetest sleep does not necessarily follow Beds
of Down, and Pillows of Silk. The sleep, says Solomon, of a laboring Man is
sweet, whither he eat little or much; but the abundance of the Rich will not
suffer him to sleep; Eccl: 5: 12. Our Natures may be well enough supplied with
little, Natura paucis contenta, and ordinarily when that little and moderate
competency is only enjoyed, it affords greater Pleasure, and more
Satisfaction than Excess and Abundance. What is superfluous and redundant
commonly turns to our Hurt and Damage, breeds Surfeitings and Loathings, Pains
and Diseases, and does Violence even to our Natural Complexions, and so tends
to the shortning of our days.

But farther a State of Mediocrity or Competency proportioned unto our
Necessities is far more desirable than Great or Superfluous Abundance, because
this condition is more safe and secure, and less subject to changes and
alterations. A man in this State (as is well expressed by the Excellent Lord
Hales Contemp. part first page 181.
Justice Hales) will not be so readily disquieted through the malice and envy
of others; as he who is in an Estate of External Grandeur, Wealth, and Power;
For he who is in the former State, has nothing that others do covet or desire,
but the latter has gotten the Golden Ball that the generality of mankind are
fond to have, and restless till they have gotten it, which makes the Man's
estate unquiet and unsafe, because he has many competitours for what he
enjoys, which are continually endeavoring to trip up his Heels. Just as we see
when a Bird has gotten a booty or prey, all other birds of prey are following
and catching after it, and ever molesting him that has it. He that enjoys much
either of Honor or Wealth or Power is the object of the envy of other men,
which is a busy, restless pernicious Humor, and ever picking Quarrels and
finding Faults, and studying and endeavoring the ruin of its object. Whereas
a State of Mediocrity is a state of Quietness, and free from the Assaults and
Shafts of this Pestilent Companion. The great Difference of these two states
may be well ^een in Jacob the Person in the Text, for whilst he had nothing but
his Staff, his Bread to eat, and his Raiment to put on; the necessary supplies
of Nature, he was in great Quiet and Safety; but so soon as Wealth increased
upon him, his Uncle and his Sons first envied him, and then pl^tted against
him, so that he saw no other Security but to fly for it. And how many such
instances may we collect from the present Age, and even too within this Isle?
H^w many lived Happily and Contentedly until they were raised unto places of
Dignity and Advantageous Emolument? How has this engaged them into a life of
Strife and Debate? they have been so far from Augmenting even their temporal
happiness, that many have losed it altogether, their Enemies not being content
to take away what was so much envyed by their ambition and covetousness, unless
they also reduced them to circumstances worse than their former, that they
might not be in a capacity of revenging themselves

Besides all this, such a competent Condition as we are speaking of, is of it
self by far perferrable to any other, because there is less care and trouble
attending it, and it affords a man time and leisure for acquiring knowledge and
virtue, and for minding and waiting upon the Great Concerns of another World.
He that either wants what he stands in need of, or has much more, both of them
are often necessitat to be a drudge to this life: all their thoughts, and
cares, are for the most part about the World, and the things of the World,
which debaseth a man very much, and is a stouping of him far below the design
of his Creation, he was created for the enjoyment of GOD, for converse with his
Maker, and the Exercise of Divine virtues, which both a state of want and a
state of superfluity and abundance does very much hinder and divert him from.
This made Agur pray against both, give me, says he, neither poverty nor
riches; not Riches, left I be full and deny thee, and say, who is the LORD. Nor
yet poverty, left I put forth my hand and steal, and take the Name of my GOD in
vain. There be a great many Temptations in both States, but more in a state of
plenty and fullness, than in want. They that will be rich, says S. Paul, fall
into a temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful Lusts, which
drown men in Destruction and Perdition. 1 Timothy: 6. 9. This Crates that Pagan
Philosopher had some sense of, when he threw his money into the Sea, declaring,
that he would drown it, lest it should drown him; he might indeed have found
many better and more Virtues Ways of disposing it, for preventing the mischief
thereof; But however this shows, that even Natural Wisdom teaches that there
be more inconveniency in Having, then in Wanting riches. Of all Conditions in
the World (says Ibid page 180.
that excellent Personage formerly mentioned) a redundant and over plentiful
condition is most subject to the most Dangerous and Pernicious Temptations in
the World; As namely forgetfulness of GOD; Self-Dependence, Pride, Insolence,
Oppression, Injustice, Unquietness of Mind, Excess, Luxury, Intemperance,
contempt of others. I have very often, says he, known these persons that have
carried themselves steddily, and commendably in a Condition of Mediocrity; nay
have been able to bear with Victory the shocks of these Temptations that arise
from want and Poverty: yet when in the late times being advanced to Wealth,
Power, and Command, they were lost, and could not bear the Temptations that
attended Grandeur, Wealth, and Power. So that the sun of wealth and Prosperity
quickly disrobed them of that mantle of Innocence, Piety, and virtue that they
keept about them against the Storms of Wants and necessities. And perhaps
there be few, but from our experience we may learn and observe the like. Though
Men little regard it, yet certainly it merits our consideration, seeing it was
spoken by our Savior, Verily, verily I say unto you, that a rich man shall
hardly enter into the Kingdom, of Heaven; and again, I say unto you, it is
easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, then for a rich Man to
enter into the Kingdom of GOD, Mat. 19.

Thus you see what Reason and Wisdom there is in this Request of Jacob's, and
how much it does really concern us to bound and measure our Desires thereto.
Food and Raiment we may and ought to seek, because without this, we cannot live
conveniently and comfortably; but to ask more, as it is Insolent and Immodest
in regard of GOD, so it is Vain and Unreasonable in it self, unsafe in respect
of others, and very Dangerous for our selves.

Quod nimium est fugito, parvo gaudere memento
Tuta mage est puppis, modico quae flumine fertur,
Despice divitias si vis animo esse beatus.
Quas qui suspiciunt mendicant semper avari.
Fly what is too great, be with small things content,
That Ship's most safe to which small gales are sent;
Would happy be? For wealth do not much care,
Who it affect, Beggars and greedy are.
Wherefore let every one in the first place sit down and wisely consider what
is their competency, their convenient Food, as Agur terms it; for it is certain
that this varies according to the various conditions of Men: Some require more
and some less, the same measure does not fit all; a single Man needs not so
much as he who has a Family, a Private Person so much as a Public, one in a
low Condition, as he of better Rank and Quality, every Man's Necessities are
according to his Station, Calling, and Circumstances; and therefore as Zeba and
Zalmunna said to Gideon, as is the man, so is his strength; ^o we may say in
this Case, as is the Man so is his competency. But whatever it be, having found
it, let us Humbly and Modestly ask it of GOD as Jacob does here, and let us not
think to obtain it without him, for unless he give it, we cannot come by it; It
is vain for you to rise up early, to sit up late, to eat the bread of sorrows,
for so he gives his beloved sleep, Psalm: 127. If the eyes of the inferior
Creatures, as the Psalmist tells us, do all wait upon GOD, that he may give
them their meat in due Season; how much more does this become us, to whom he
has given reason and understanding, by which we know that our food and raiment
are his peculiar gifts; It is true they who seek not GOD, may come to have
these things; For we see the wicked and ungodly have them usually in
abundance: But then they cannot be considered as tokens of Gods love, as
effects of his special favor and particular care, and as pledges of better
things in the life to come, and so they loss their lest savor, they want that
which would give them the sweetest taste. It is the love of the giver which
puts a value upon the Gift, and so our chief delight in these temporal things
should be, because they come from GOD, and witness his favor for us; otherwise
they can afford but a Mean and brutish Satisfaction, no greater then what an Ox
or Horse, has over their fodder. Now, who wait not upon GOD, though they have
their sustenance and more, yet it is not given them as a Blessing, they have
reason rather to look upon it as a Curse, that they may be among those whose
portion is in this life only. Omnia temporalia Dei munera sunt, ne putetis quod
aliquis illa possit dare nisi unus Deus. August: And as we should ask our
necessary sustenance, as it becomes us to seek our dole and allowance, so let
us be careful not to offend him by craving arrogantly more for which we have
neither Precept, nor yet any Pattern of any wise or holy Man in all the
Scripture. But we must not content our selves to seek this by Prayer only, it
behooves us to seek it, and also to wait upon GOD for it, in the use of these
prudent lawful and ordinary Means which his Providence has appointed; for
it is this way ordinarily that he gives it, and by which we must expect it.
Prayer ought to be used, but it must not be wholly rested in; When the LORD
directs us to Pray for our daily bread, the meaning is not, that GOD may give
it without our own endeavors; we do not Pray that GOD may Feed, and Cloth us
by a miracle, as he did the Prophet Elijah and the children of Israel in the
Wilderness: But only that he would bless our diligence and industry in those
honest Courses which his Wise Providence has Ordained and Established, that
thereby we may procure the means of our subsistence and the comforts of our
lives. That sentence which GOD past upon Man after the fall, stands yet
unrepealed, In the sweat of thy face thou shall eat thy bread; This is still in
force it binds all, and it is in the observance hereof, that we are to expect
our necessary Maintenance and Support. Only in following these Ordinary means
and Methods, we ought to beware of all immoderate care, anxiety and Solicitude,
taking no thought what we should eat, or what we should drink, or wherewithal
we shall be clothed; For our Heavenly Father who feeds the Fowls of the Air,
and provides for the Beasts of the Field, and clothes the Lillies, will not
suffer us his Children who are Created after his Image, to want the necessaries
of our life. He knows before hand what things we need, and if we trust in Him
he will not fail to bestow them. The young Lions says the Psalmist, may lack
and suffer hunger, but they that fear the LORD, shall not want any good thing;
Psalm: 34.

In the next place, it will be fit and proper that we consider our present
State and Condition, and what be those things which GOD has already bestowed
on us, that accordingly we may know how to behave and demean our selves sutably.

First, I^ GOD has blessed us with a competency, if we find that we have a
sufficient Supply of our Wants, and a convenient Support and Maintenance in our
present Condition, then we ought to be well Contented, and also should be very
thankful to GOD who is the author thereof: we ought to Bless and Praise Him,
who has put us into such a convenient Condition, as is every wise Man's choice,
and wherein there is such Freedom from Cares and Anxieties, Molestations and
Envyings of others, which gives such Peace and security, and allows Time and
Opportunity for improving our selves in Virtue and Wisdom, and acquainting our
selves with GOD here, that we may enjoy him for ever hereafter. The Man is
truly Happy who is in this case, and may say with David, the lines art fallen
unto me in pleasant places, yea I have a Goodly heritage, therefore I will
Bless the LORD, etc. Psalm: 16. 6. and 7.

But secondly some will perhaps say, that they have not a Competency as yet,
that they are so far from having enough, that they are in Wants, Straits, and
Difficulties, and indeed it may be so; however let them take heed that they
mistake not their case and Condition; perhaps you may call that a State of Want
which is really a Competency; you may perhaps judge that Poverty, which some
will look upon as Fullness; and every Reasonable Man will count sufficient: The
Table you despise, some would think a feast, the clothes you disdain to wear,
another would be vain of, that which you all a trouble and Mortification, sober
and Rational Persons would not complain of, but esteem it Easy and
Comportable, and then it is only needful to rectify thy Judgment, and to take
up a true estimate of things for to know the Happiness and Sufficiency of thy
present Lot. For to be informed of the inconveniency of our present Condition,
we must not proceed by those Measures which Pride, and Vanity, and Luxury, and
Voluptuousness, and corrupt Customs lay down, but we must examine and consider
things according to their true Nature and Use, and as Sober and Modest Reason
does dictate. Magis nos docere debet judicium veritatis, quam praejudicium
consuetudinis. If we have wholesome Food, though it be not Rare, Costly or
Delicious, if we have Clothes that are Useful and Comely, though they be not
Gaudy and Splendid, and for great Ostentation, if we have as much as serves to
relieve our present necessities, and to afford us Necessary and Convenient
Accommodation, though not for Lavish and Prodigal Spending, or so much as
others have, or equal to what our Ancestors enjoyed, in this case we have no
Reason to complain. And if we do complain in these Circumstances we shall never
be satisfied in any, he that is not contented with a Moderate and Reasonable
Competency will never think the greatest Abundance enough; when Men's desires
once go beyond their necessities, no measure of Wealth or Riches can stay them;
Crescit amor nummi, quantum ipsa pecunia crescit: And Solomon tells us, he that
loves Silver, viz. with an immoderate Love, shall not be satisfied with
Silver; nor he that loves abundance with Increase, Eccl. 5. 10. The best and
readiest way to become Rich is not to seek to increase our Substance, but to
Moderate and Abridge our Desires. The true way to fill a leaking Vessel is not
to carry it to the Ocean or some great River, but to stop the leaks, for so
long as they continue, it were no more possible to fill it at the Ocean, then
at some small Rivolet, even so if we would draw Contentment and Satisfaction
from our present State and Condition, we must not let our Desires reach farther
then what is Just and Equitable, otherwise the whole World will not be able to
content or satiat them.

But suppose that it shall be found even by the narrowest Measures, that thou
art in an Estate of Want, and have not a Sufficiency answerable to thy
Necessities; in this case indeed thou have not full matter of Contentment, but
however thou must Labor to support thy self with Patience, considering that
this is the Lot which the All wise GOD has given thee to whom thou owe an
entire Submission, and who may have appointed this, as to punish thy former
Follies and Sins, so likewise both to further thy greater good and also to
prevent greater mischiefs and evils which might have befallen thee. And though
thou may very lawfully seek to be out of this present Necessitous Condition,
(providing it be by Lawful Means and Moderat Cares and Endeavors) yet thou
have no reason to Fret and Repine thereat: For consider, that as thy Estate is
little here, so thy account shall be the less hereafter, and thou art also at
present delivered from many Dangerous Temptations, which perhaps thou could
not well have resisted, and art rid of many Encumbrances and Intanglements
which would either have hindered thy Progress in Virtue and H^liness altogether,
or else rendered it very difficult Remember also that even in this State there
are fair and good Opportunities of wining Heaven and Eternal Life, as well as
in any other, and if that be sufficiently secured, it is the less matter what
come of other things: i^ we be sure to be happy hereafter, we need not be much
concerned how we fare here. And it is certain that neither our Praise nor our
Reward depends upon any external condition of this World, but upon our living
Virtuously and Uprightly, Devoutly and Piously in whatsoever Condition GOD puts
us. The state of Man in this World may be compared to a play, whereof we all
are the Actors; and as in a play it is of no great moment, what part a Man act,
providing he act the part alloted him handsomely, and well, for he that acts
the part of a Servant or Clown rightly, gets as much Praise and Reward as he
who plays the part of a Prince: So let it not trouble thee, whither this or
the other Condition has fallen into thy share, whither GOD has given thee
this or the other Station to show thy self in, but whatever it be, do thou what
becomes thee, walk sutably to thy place and Circumstances, see that thou carry
thy self so as that GOD may be Glorified, thy self Praised* and others Edified,
and when the Play is done, when this Life is ended, great shall be thy Reward.

Lastly if thou find that GOD has put thee into an Estate of Redundance and
Plenty so that besides the liberal supplies of thy Necessities thou have much
considerably over and above; if so, then thou owe first great thanks to GOD
for his Bountyt and Liberality to thee, whilst many others in the World are
Pinched and Strained: Thou broughtest as little into the World with thee as
they did, and therefore if the Divine Providence had not made the difference
and kept it up, thou should have felt their Poverty, and they might have
enjoyed thy present Plenty. Make therefore an thankful Acknowledgement unto
GOD'S Goodness, as this Jacob did afterward upon the like Consideration, O
GOD, said he, I am not Worthy of the least of all the mercies and of all the
truth which thou have showed unto thy servant, for with my staff I passed over
this Jordan, and now I am become two bands; Genesis 32. 9: 10.

But as thou art thus oblidged to Gratitude and Thankfulness, so in the next
place you will do well to consider, what Warriness and Circumspection and
Watchfulness thy present condition requires and calls for. A Plentiful State
is Difficult and Dangerous it produces many and strong Temptations, so that
thou have need to take head to thy self that thou be not overcome; keep a
strict Watch and Guard over all thy ways, that thou wax not Proud and Wanton,
that thou be not ensna^ed to Rioting and Excess, that thou oppress not thy
Inferiors: Let not thy Abundance make thee Forgetful of GOD, or keep thee
from the thoughts of another World, for if these be the effects and
Consequences of thy Plentiful Condition, it is a Curse and not a Blessing, and
it has brought thee to utter Ruin and Destruction, if thou thus abuse thy
Plenty, thou shall one day pay sadly for it; and the more thou Satiats thy self
here, the greater shall be thy Penu^y and Want hereafter: Then thou shall feel
the folly of Abusing Plenty-after this sort, and shall be Glad to have one sent
that he may Dip the tip of his finger in water to cool thy tongue, but it shall
not be granted; in steed of this thou shall hear, Son, Remember that thou in
thy life time receivedst thy good things; Luk: 16. 25. Now he that would not
have such a Comfortless Memorandum to be given unto him in the other World, let
him Remember to walk warri^y in this, let him not give himself to Pride and
Luxury and Voluptuousness, but let him Exercise himself to Godliness, and keep
that charge which the Apostle gives, and which he commands all Pastors of the
Church to give them that are Rich in this World, that they be not high minded,
nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who gives us richly all
things to enjoy; that they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to
distribute, willing to communicate, laying up in store for themselves a good
foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life; 1.
Tim. 6. 17. Remember that thou art no more then a Steward, of what more then
sufficiently serves thy self, and that thou must be accountable for it to him
who trusts thee with it, not that it mightly idly by the, or that thou
might abuse it to the Maintenance of Impiety and Profaneness; But he gave it
thee that thou might thereby show thy Wisdom, manifest thy Virtue, glorify
his Name, and profit Mankind; and especially to distribute to the Necessities
of those that want. We mistake it very much if we think GOD is so fond upon one
sort of men more then another; that he gives in abundance to the one for to
feed, and Pamper their Lusts to the full, and is content in the mean time that
others starve; no certainly, GOD can be accused of no such partiality; but as
His Wisdom has not thought fit to make an equal Distribution of this Worlds
Wealth among Men, so the Reason why he has given to one, and withholden from
another, is* that the one might learn the Virtue of Patience, and the other
exercise Charity, and that by such mutual Giving and Receiving, Love* Unity
and Concord may be preserved, and kept up in the World. Quando Dominus Pauperem
facit, Divites probat, says the Father, when GOD makes one Poor, it is to try
the Rich, it is to put them to a proof of their love to Him, and of their
Kindness to their Brethren. He therefore who keeps all to himself, or imploies
it only for his own proper use, is an unjust Steward, and does pervert GOD'S
Design in giving it him. Non solum Avarus est qui rapit aliena* sed ille Avarus
est qui cupide servat sua, that is, He is not only Covetous and Unjust who
robs others, but he also who basely keeps his own, without Communicating to
others; who eats his morsals alone, as Job speaks, without calling the
Stranger and Needy to share with him. There is no evil in Rich Men's eating the
Fat, and Drinking the Sweet, providing they send portions to them, for whom
nothing is prepared: But if this be omitted they abuse the good Creatures of
GOD committed to their Custody, and are as unjust as that Steward, who feeds
highly himself, but lets his Fellow Servants starve. He only is a Wise and
Faithful Steward, who is Liberal and Charitable of those Goods which GOD has
given him, who feeds the hungry, clothes the naked, visits the Si^k; and such
as are in prison, and Administers to them. And as by a Wise and Charitable
Distribution of the Mammon of Unrighteousness, he purchases to himself Love
and a Virtuous Commendation in this World, so he makes to himself Friends that
never die; but who, when he removes hence, will recive him into their
everlasting Habitations? Luke 16. 9. We will not insist farther on this Point
at present, because we will have occasion to Discourse thereon afterward in
the Second Part; And therefore we shall now conclude with those words of our
Savior, often used, He that has ears to hear let him hear; He that is
concerned let him remember and take notice of this and do in like manner, that
it may be well with him, that he may escape the Danger of Riches, and not
through them make Shipwreck of his Salvation: But notwithstanding of these
Impediments and Difficulties which they throw in his way, he may obtain a safe
Arrival into that Heavenly Canaan which is above.

CHAP. V. Of the end which Jacob proposed to himself in th^se Requests. His
Condition here a fit Emblem to represent the Present State of Mankind; All Men
considered as Pilgrims and Sojourners both in a Literal and Moral Sense. The
Patriarchs lived in expectation of a Future State; The certainty of this State
held forth, and some account thereof given. The Conclusion of this first part.
THE last Particular to be taken notice of in this Part of Jacob's Vow, is the
end which he proposed to himself, in asking those things from GOD, viz. that he
might come back to his Father's house in peace; And hereby the Reasonableness
and Equity of his Requests will farther appear; he was at this time going a
Pilgrimage, traveling a to Foreign Country, where he intended not to take
up a constant Residence, whatever he might meet with: he resolved only to
Sojourne for sometime, and then to return to his Father's house, the place of
his Birth and Education.

He Designed to take up his rest and settled Abode, no other where then his
Father's house, and this Land of Promise he preferred to Kingdoms, and the best
Inheritance elsewhere. And therefore it was that he now asked no more then
what was Suitable, and Necessary to his Present State, and Condition of a
Pilgrim, and Traveller.

The present Condition of this Patriarch, is a fit and proper Emblem to hold
forth the Nature and Quality of Man's Life, while in this World; for what
Jacob was at this time, all Men may be said to be, during their abode upon
Earth. This same Jacob when he appeared before Pharaoh in Egypt, calls his
whole Life A Pilgrimage, without respecting this particular Journey which he
made to Mesopotamia; And he says the same of the Life of his Fathers, The
days, ^aith he, of the years of my Pilgrimage, are an hundred and thirty
years; few and evil have the days of the years of my life been, And have not
attained unto the days of the years of the life of my Fathers, in the days of
their Pilgrimage; Gen: 47: 9: David also says the same, Psalm. 39. 12. I am a
stranger with thee, and a Sojourner as all my Fathers were; And again, he says
plainly, I am a stranger in the earth, Psalm. 119. 19. And indeed all men while
they are upon Earth, are to be considered only as Strangers and Sojourners. Our
very Life here is nothing else but a Pilgrimage, and that both in a Literal and
Moral Sense. It holds even for the most part true Literally, for there is no
settled Condition here: like Travelers we are still in a continual motion,
flitting up and down; what do we else but traverse the World, and go from one
place to another? He is truly a singular person who has never been from his
Mothers knee, nor seen any other place then that of his Birth, nor conversed
with any other Men then his particular Friends and Relations, and those he was
Born and Bred amongst. The secret Providence of GOD, the pursuing our Callings,
the desire of a Livelihood and Subsistence, the seeking out greater Peace and
Security, drive us with Jacob from our Father's house. We are hereby often
constrained to a wandering Course of Life, which exposes us also to Wind and
Weather, and all the Incommodites which Travelers meet with: Men cannot almost
by any Means, or the greatest Foresight, secure to themselves a fixed Sta^ion
in this World, but are either by their ^hoice willingly, or through necessity
changing their Habitations and Employments. When we think our selves most
secure, and are building to our selves Houses and Tabernacles of Residence,
hoping that here we shall fix and settle, behold, presently some thing or other
occurs which defeats our Design, and alters our Purpose, and constrains us to
make Trial of some State and Condition we little thought upon. And thus all Men
almost from their own Experience, may say, that their Life and Condition he^e
is like that of a Traveller and Pilgrim.

But however true it hold in a Literal sense, it is always Morally true, that
Man while upon Earth is but a Sojourner and Stranger whatever be his Lot and
Portion. For first, GOD has not intended us a Sure and Lasting Abode here, he
has resolved not to suffer us to make any long or considerable stay on the
Earth, he designs only that we should take a short view of things, take a turn
or two and then remove hence. Man's Life here is but of few days, even those
who attain to the greatest number of years, their life if compared to Eternity,
is but a span-long; and seeing that thus we have but so short and so uncertain
Possession of this World, our stay therein cannot be counted other, then a
Sojourning. It cannot be said properly that we dwell here, but only that we
lodge; For we are not true Inhabitants, but only wayfaring Men, who take a
Nights Lodging and afterward are gone. We can call no place here our Home, we
never go Home till we descend into the Grave, and pass over into the other
World; that is our Home, because there is no changing of it, nor flitting from
it.

Secondly, As we are to account our selves Sojourners, because our Life is
short, so Strangers, because of the want of an agreeable Habitation. All
Creatures have a proper Element, whither also their Natural Propensitie
inclines them; that is the Proper and Natural Element of any Being which is
suitable to its Nature and Quality, and where it finds Rest and Ease; but on
the contrary, that is Improper and Unnatural which agrees not with its
Disposition, and where it lives with Difficulty, and in much pain. Thus the
Air is an improper Element for Fishes, as the Water for Fowls, and Terrestrial
Creatures; and consequently this World is not the proper place and habitation
of Spirits, and Rational Beings: And therefore also not of Men, seeing we are
of this Order by our better part. The Creatures to be met with here below, are
not capable of Converse with us; and all the Delights and Enjoyments here can
only gratify the Body, and be profitable for chearing those frail Tabernacles
we carry about with us; But it is little service they can do the Soul, and
therefore however proper these lower Regions may be for Bodies, yet certainly
our Souls soar higher, and aspire after a Happiness beyond what is to be found
here. Wherefore whiles we are upon Earth, we may be truly called Exiles, and
said to suffer Banishment, for Heaven only is our Native S^yle, it is in yonder
Regions above that we can only expect to find a suitable Habitation and abode.
The very Heathens had this Sentiment, they accounted their Stay here a perfect
banishment, and esteemed the Body the Prison, which detained the Soul from its
Native Country. So Anexagoras being asked, whither he had any Care or
Concernments for his Country; because he troubled not himself with the Public
Affairs and Transactions. His answer was, GOD forbid that it should be
otherwise, indeed my mind is greatly toward my Country, pointing with his
finger to Heaven. That is a Man's Home where his Friends and Relations live,
where his Wealth and Estate, and the Possessions wherein his Happiness lies are
reserved, and where his Heart and Affections are placed; And so Heaven is and
should be only our Home. Thither should we aim, for our Souls are descended
thence, there GOD our Father lives, and JESUS CHRIST our elder Brother; and
Angels and Seraphims, and the Spirits of just Men made perfect; our Friends and
Companions, and Fellow-Citizens; and there be the Treasures of our Happiness:
That Good which our Souls crave and seek after is shut up there, and no where
else. This World affords no perfect Contentment, or true solid Happiness: All
we can expect here is some little Refreshing to keep us from Fainting and
Languishing. This World is an Inn, too narrow and scanty for to give
Satisfactorie ease and fullness; this is only to be looked for when we come to
our Fathers house, where there are many Mansions, and all Richly and well
Furnished; In his Presence, there is fullness of joy, and at his Right Hand
there are Rivers of Pleasures for evermore; Psalm. 16. 11.

This Earthly Canaan which was here promised to Jacob, was a type of Heaven,
and given as a Pledge thereof: It is not to be doubted* but that the Patriarch
had a prospect beyond the Land wherein he was, though it was the pleasantest
upon Earth, he had already tasted these Delights which Canaan upon Earth
afforded: and albeit they were good enough of their kind, yet he could not but
be sensible, that they were far short of of satisfying the Appetite of the
Soul: And that therefore there was something to be desired, more then what is
to be found even in the best Country here. Jacob had certainly the best and
most virtuous Education of any in the World, he was preserved from Vice and
Immorality, which render Men brutish, and so enfeeble their Minds, that they
can Dream of nothing but what savours of the Flesh; he was early taught all
Natural Wisdom and Knowledge, and Instructed also in things which Natural light
could not reach to: And therefore he certainly knew, and was persawded that
there was something within him besides Flesh and Bones; even a Divine Soul
capable of, and designed for a more noble kind of Life, then what Man enjoyes
at present: Because the Promises made to the Patriarchs expressed in Scripture
are Temporal, we must not from thence conclude, that they had no other,
Spiritual and Eternal Blessings were Veiled under these, and might perhaps also
be Promised a part, though they be not particularly mentioned* No doubt more
was Revealed to them then what we have an account of, but what is written was
only necessary to be known to us for the pointing out of the Messiah. It is
very unreasonable to think, that they who were so Dearly Beloved of GOD,
Honored with many Particular Revelations, and whose Wisdom and Virtue was more
then Ordinary, I say it is unreasonable to think that they were left ignorant
of a future state. Such a thought is injurious to the Love of GOD, and also
inconsistent with that Character they deserve; as questionless they had a
Curiosity to know, whither there was another better life hereafter. So GOD
would not refuse to satisfy the same, it being very Laudable and very
Necessary for the directing of their Life and composing their minds in Peace,
It is but small Comfort and Satisfaction, the Patriarchs can be supposed to
have had, in the Promises that were made them; if we take away the Hopes and
Expectation of another Life: For the Promises did more concern their Posterity
then themselves; And as for the Favors presently conferred, the pleasure
thereof could not but be very much marred with the thoughts of their Death.
Nay, the more Good they Enjoyed, the more they would be Troubled, when they
reflected upon their Mortality; And they could not but frequently reflect
thereon, seeing every where Instances thereof are to be met with. Death damps a
Man's Spirit, and Imbitters his Life; The greater matter of Contentment one
has at present, the greater will be his Disquiet when he thinks he will die:
Unless he believe his death will be followed with a long and better Life. It is
the Wretched and Miserable, who desire death, or think upon it without Regrate:
Others cannot think upon it without sadness, if they have not the Comfort which
arises from the Assurance of after Happiness. O death, says the Son of
Sirach, how bitter is the Remembrance of thee to a Man that lives at rest in
his Possessions, And to the Man that has nothing to vex him, and that has
Prosperity in all things, Yea, unto him that is yet able to receive Meat;
Eccles. 41: 1, 2. If then the Patriarchs had been ignorant of a Future State,
and without the Hopes of it, their Life would have been very Miserable; And the
Singular Blessings GOD bestowed on them, would have but tended to increase
their misery. But that another better State was made known to them, and that
they lived in the expectation of it, is plainly intimat to us by St. Paul Heb.
11. 13. etc where he says, these all died in Faith, not having received the
Promises, but having seen them a far off, and were persuaded of them, and
Embraced them, and Confessed that they were Strangers and Pilgrims on the
Earth, for they that say such things, Declare plainly that they seek a
Country; And truly if they had been mindful of that Country from whence they
came out, they might have had Opportunity to have returned but now they desire
a better Country, that is an Heavenly. Therefore GOD is not ashamed to be
called their GOD, for He has prepared for them a City. And a little before he
tells us particularly of Abraham that he looked for a City which has
foundations, whose Maker and Builder is GOD. Which he could not look for in
this World, and therefore certainly he expected it in that which is to come.

If we break off the Fetters of Lusts, and Disintangle our selves from Carnal
and Worldly interests, and allow our Souls but any measure of Rational Wisdom;
As then our Desires would soon take Wing and flee above Sublunarie Enjoyments,
so our Minds would be easily inclined to believe another better State to
succeed this: For without this Supposition, Man is the strangest and most
Puzling Phenomena, the most Unaccountable thing in Nature, a Being patcht up
of Irregularities and Contradictions: For by Nature he is capable of
Immortality, and yet as to his Duration but an Ephemera, of so short a Life,
that he bends to die almost as soon as he begins to live; He is capable of the
highest Perfection, and fitted for the Noblest Employments, and yet i^ we do
not suppose another Life, he has nothing else to do, except to eat and drink,
and serve the mean ends of an Animal Life; which the brute Beasts attain to
with much less toil and trouble. Thus He who is the Chiefest of all the
Creatures we see, and seems to be designed Lord of them, would be in the worst
Condition of any; Because never attaining the End and Perfection his Nature is
capable of, neither receiving the Satisfaction of his most Reasonable, which is
the most Manlike desires. If there were not an after-State preferrable to this,
Man would not be the Ornament of the Creation, but rather its Deformity; And
would afford some ground of Impeaching the Divine Wisdom and Goodness, as if
either the Contrivance had been marred, or the Design of Creating him cruel, in
that he is endued with Capacities never to be Perfected, and with Desires and
Appetites which cannot receive Satisfaction. Hence it would follow that GOD is
kinder to the Beasts then to Man; And that he is the happiest Man who least
uses his Reason and Understanding, that is, that lays aside that which
makes him Man, and endeavors to be as the Beasts who perish. Then they should
be in the worst case, of all others the most Miserable who Love and Fear and
Serve GOD most, and are most Careful to Please Him. These and a great many more
Absurdities would follow the Negation of a Future State, which cannot be
admitted, unless we deny a Providence altogether, and ascribe all things to
blind Chance. And indeed the Immortality of our Souls seems to follow so
necessarly from a belief of a Deity, that there have been very few who doubted
of that, without calling this in Question too.

But though those things may incline us to the belief of a Future happy State,
yet they do not certainly assure us thereof; They are great and strong
Presumptions indeed, but no certain Demonstrations: Because it might be
alleged that these Absurdities are rather the Consequence of our Ignorance,
which cannot understand better, then of that supposed state of Man; And that we
cannot conclude any thing to be, because that otherwise we are unable to Salve
and Vindicat the Wisdom of GOD: For how do we know what is Consistant or
Inconsistant with Infinite Wisdom? Many things may be agreeable thereto which
we cannot find out. The undoubted certainty therefore of an after happy State,
can only be drawn from the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST; He has brought Life and
Immortality to Light, 2 Timothy 1: 10. He has put this matter clearly out of
doubt, so that it needs no longer be Disputed as an uncertain Problem. JESUS
CHRIST by his plain Assertions, and express Promises, and his own Resurrection,
has Demonstrate to the World that there is another Life to succeed this: So
that nothing but Perverseness and Obstinacy can make Men call it in Question. He
that will not be Convinced with this Evidence which the Gospel gives, is
proof against all Evidence, and it is impossible to Convince him; He who will
not believe Moses and the Prophets, CHRIST and the Apostles, will not believe
though One should rise from the dead.

And as it is the Gospel which does only ascertain us of a Future state, so it
is from it only that we may learn any true account of the nature and qualities
thereof. This is a thing not so easy to be guessed at as the other. If any
should offer to describe the State of a Country which they had never seen,
neither has any true Idea of, this description would be but bad and far from
exactness: Now Heaven does infinitlie transcend the best state in this World,
and is of a quite different nature, so that our conceptions could not reach it,
unless it were revealed. The Heathens who had not this true light to direct
them, entertained wild and extravagant fancies about the nature of that Life
which is to succeed this: But yet they were not so gross and absurd as Mahomet,
who set aside the light of the Gospel, and followed his own dreams, which have
suggested an odd kind of Paradise, and such Monstrous Pleasures there, as can
relish with none but beastly and brutish Persons: for others certainly cannot
but despise them, and be so far from counting such enjoyments of happiness,
that they will certainly reckon it the greatest misery to be tied to them
eternally. Some of that False Prophets followers, are so ashamed of this
account he gives of Men's happiness in the other World, that they study to put a
fair construction thereupon, by interpreting the same allegorically: But though
this should be admitted, it will not excuse; for such Similitudes should have
been shuned, which can only serve to beget in Men's minds base and low thoughts
of that Blessed Life, and which are so far from engaging men to purify
themselves here in order to it; that they rather foster an persuasion, that
none are fitted and disposed for it, but impure and unclean persons; seeing it
is represented by the exercise of impuritie and the grossest sensualities. It
is true, the Gospel makes use of Earthly comparisons, in holding forth the
Joys and excellency of Heaven; Because otherwise it is impossible to convey
to our minds any apprehension thereof: for as Children must be taught in
Childish terms, so men cannot be instructed in things so sublime, and so far
above the reach of their understandings, but by using expressions and
Similitudes familiar to them though not so just and adequat in themselves. But
though the Scripture when it speaks of Heaven, adapts it self to the weakness
of our apprehensions, yet at the same time it guards sufficiently against all
low and sordid thoughts: for both the Metaphors used are choice and cleanly,
and the manner of handling them such, as gives us to Understand, that we are
not to take them Literally. The glory of the other Life it set forth by Growns,
and Scepters, and Banquetings and Rivers of Pleasures; But we are allo
abundantly cautioned against the expectation of carnal gratifications; for
these cannot be looked for there, where the state of things makes them no ways
desirable, but altogether unnecessarie; for then men live not an Animal Life,
but a life Sublimely Spiritual.

All the circumstances and particularities of the Life to come are not
revealed, neither are we yet capable to know them. At present our faculties are
not fitted to discern the pleasures and enjoyments above; even though they were
laid out before us, we could no more take them up then a blind Man colors, or
the Infant in the Womb, the Cheerfulness of this lightsome World, or a Child
the strong contents of riper Age. When St paul was caught up into Paradise he
was so transported besides himself, that he knew not well whither he was in the
body, or out of the body; And what he saw and heard there, he tells us is
unspeakable, and not possible to be uttered; 2 Cor. 12. 4. Until the temper
and Disposition both of body and mind be changed and Spiritualized, we can
neither enjoy that Life above, nor yet fully understand the Pleasures and
satisfactions thereof.

But that all possible Felicity, will both be then bestowed, and there also
enjoyed, is not only expressly promised, but this we may very well conclude from
what is revealed. For first, that State above, has nothing troublesome or
uneasy in it. It is not like this World liable to rough Weather, severe
Storms, or excessive heats, which occasion fainting; nor does there ever fall
out any sad disaster or calamity to discompose the minds of the Inhabitants.
There be some Mountains, as Tenariff, which surmount the Clouds, and it is said
the Air about the top of them is always so calm, that the smallest Sand or
Dust will remain unblown away, and in the same manner it was first laid down,
which may be no unfitt Emblem of the Tranquillity of Heaven: It is the Fate
only of these Sublunarie Countries; to be infested with Fogs and Mists, with
Wind and Rain; such is the constitution of this World, that the pleasures here
are marred and allayed, by some or other disgustfull inconvenience which always
attend them: but the Heavenly Regions are ever Clear and Serene, there is a
perpetual Calm there, and a constant Freedom from all sort of Disturbances.
They, who are there, says St. John, shall hunger no more, neither thirst any
more, neither shall the Sun light on them, nor any heat: For the Lamb which is
in the midst of the Throne, shall feed them, and shall lead them unto Living
fountains of Waters, and GOD shall wipe away all tears from their eyes. And
thereshall be no more death; neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be
any more pain, for the former things are passed away, Rev. 7. 17. 21. 4.

Secondly not only what Disquiets our present Life, and holds us in continual
Vexation, is for ever thrust out of Heaven: but also the Beauty and Ornaments
of this World, are laid aside as Imperfections and Unnecessarie things; and
what is infinitlie more glorious, take places in stead of them. The Sun is the
Beauty of this lower World, and how disconsolat would our Condition be without
the light thereof* But so glorious is the State above, and so excellent*, that
the Sun it self, and its Light would be but a Blemish there: for St: John tells
us, that the Heavenly Jerusalem had no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to
shine in it, for the Glory of GOD did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light
thereof; and again, there shall be no night there, and they need no candel,
neither light of the Sun: for the LORD GOD gives them light, Rev. 21. 23. and
22. 5. All Kings and Princes, Study to have their Courts answerable to their
Magnificence and Dignity; The Palaces of Kings are always Seated in the best
part of their Kingdoms, and thither are brought the Chief delights which their
Countries can afford: How Glorious and Magnificent then must Heaven be, which
is the Palace of the great King, the Peculiar habitation of GOD himself? if he
has so Beautified this World, and Replenished it with such variety, when it is
only the lower apartment of beasts; or at the best but a transient quarter for
Man, What do we think will that be, and how sumptuously Enriched, which he has
designed to be his own everlasting abode, and the Habitation of those peculiar
ones whom he has set his love upon, and with whom he has determined to remain
for ever? There certainly GOD will display Himself, and His Glory, and will
give Admirable Manifestations of his Wisdom; Power Goodness, and other
Perfections; beyond what either eye has seen, or ear heard, or what can enter
into the heart of Man.

T^irdly, The excellent company which are in Heaven is no small Addition to the
Happiness thereof; They are Persons far from Malice and Envy, from intertaining
Suspicions and Animosities, or from being ready to fall out in jars and
contests: But as they are Enriched with the best Endowments, so they are Acted
with the largest Charity and Good Will; loving each other entirely, and
intertaining one another with all the Indearing expressions of Friendship. Of
all pleasures, Friendship and the society of Excellent Persons is the greatest;
it affects the mind most, and fills the Heart with the greatest Measure of Joy
and Gladness: what Delight and Satisfaction then, may be expected in the
Society of Angels and Archangels, Cherubims and Seraphims, and the Spirits of
just Men made perfect?

But fourthly, in the other life we shall find our selves, not only in a far
better State as to Externals but shall also feel great and Glorious Changes in
our selves. For first, we shall not be tied to the necessity, of Eating and
Drinking and Sleeping, in which mean exercises, the one half of our time is
consumed; there we shall not be cloged and fettered to a crazy, infirm, and
sickly Body as now, for then this Corruptible shall put on Incorruption, and
this Mortal, Immortality. And CHRIST JESUS shall change this vile Body, that it
may be fashioned like unto his Glorious Body, according to the working whereby
He is able to subdue all things to himself; 1 Cor. 15. Phil. 3. 21. There shall
be a vast Change in the ^rame and Constitution of our Body: For there shall be
given to it, Glory and Power, and Splendour, and some other Subtle and
Excellent Qualities, so far above the common Nature of Bodies, that the Apostle
thought fit to term it a Spiritual Body. Secondly, As such Glorious Changes are
to be wrought upon our Bodies, so the like shall be done to our Souls; the Body
is thus changed into the better, because the Soul is also made more perfect:
these excellent Endowments are bestowed upon the Body, because the Perfection
and Dignity to which the Soul is now raised, require that it should be
solodged; For being our inward Faculties are much better then Formerly, the
outward Organs and Instruments of Action should be better too. Now our Souls
shall not only be delivered from Ignorance and Error, and all the Disorders
which sin has involved them into, but shall also have all their Faculties
rectified, and elevat to the outmost hight of Perfection, of which Creatures
are capable. Truth shall not then be veiled with Absurdity, nor shall we be
oblidged to seek the Knowledge thereof; by such tedious and uncertain inquiries
as now we are necessitate to: But shall be endowed with all desirable Wisdom;
Now says the Apostle, We see through a Glass darkly, but then face to face;
now I know in part, but then shall I know as also I am known; 1 Cor. 13. 12.
And to make our Souls completely perfect, there shall be added unspotted
Purity and Holiness, and a participation of the Divine Nature. Beloved, says
St. John, now are we the Sons of GOD; and it does not yet appear what we shall
be, but we know that when He shall appear we shall be like Him, for we shall
see Him as He is, 1 John 3. 2. The Image of GOD, shall be renewed upon our
Souls, and that more clearly and brighty then it was at our first Creation; the
Divine Perfections shall be transcribed upon us, and thereby we shall be
brought into a near and inconceivable Union with GOD. And now seeing this does
appear, what needs more? Here we may well stay our Thoughts, for indeed there
is no climbing higher; GOD is Perfection it self, and the Fountain of all
Happiness, he therefore must needs be most Happy, who is like GOD and United to
him. It is simply impossible to conceive greater Happiness and Satisfaction,
then this Enjoyment of GOD and likeness to him. David doubted not of receiving
Satisfaction from this, when he said, As for me I will behold thy Face in
righteousness, I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy likeness; Psalm. 17.
15.

This is true Felieity, and should be aspired after, it is a shame for any Man
to sit down lower, or to content himself with less Degrees of Happiness, seeing
GOD is willing to bestow this upon him. The obtaining Heaven and Eternal Life
should be our main Project, and the great Design we should be always dryving
on, nothing should divert^us from this; but all our Endeavors should be to
further it on: And our Prayers to GOD should be chiefly, that he would be
pleased to favor this aim of ours, and not suffer us to miscarry. Some whom
Worldly Love and Carnal Affections have seized and enslaved, may with Reuben
and Gad wish to have their Tabernacles set up this side Jordan: And providing
they could get their Portion in this Life, would never seek after the Land of
Promise: But such certainly Act contrary to Reason, and unbecoming the Dignity
of their Natures, They must put off the Man very much who intend no higher
Pleasures then what are Bodily, and arise from the Enjoyment of Earthly things;
Which though gluted to the full, can never satisfy the Soul. As all Men's
Experience do testify. As Noah's Dove found no rest until she returned to the
Ark; So neither can the Soul of Man have any solid content until it ascend
into the holy hill of GOD; and rest in the bosom of him from whom it had its
being.

And as Man's true Felicity lies not in this, but in the other World, so the
chief Satisfaction which we can have at present, flows from the sure and well
grounded Hopes of that after Happiness; even as the greatest content of a
Merchant while he is Trafficking abroad, is in the Expectation of the Gain he
will make when he comes home: And as the chiefest delight of an Heir while he
is Minor, is in his hopes of succeeding to his Father's Honor and Fortune when
he arrives at full Age. Here we are as it were, in the Quality and Condition of
Minors, and therefore have no Reason to grudge though we be not put actually in
the Possession of full Happiness. We may be very well satisfied for the
present, that the same is surely reserved to us, and waiting upon us till that
we be ripe for it; Blessed be the GOD and Father of our Lord JESUS CHRIST,
which according to his abundant Mercy has begotten us again unto a lively
hope, by the resurrection of JESUS CHRIST from the dead, to an inheritance
incorruptible and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for
us; 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4.

The Design of this present Treatise is to direct to true Felicity, which as it
is of great Importance to be known; so we judge we have made some plain
Proposals, which may sufficiently instruct those who are desirous to know, if
they be also unbyassed. The sum of all this is, that true Happiness consists in
the Enjoyments of GOD; for in him only is to be found what may satisfy all our
Desires: All the Creatures are but finite things, and consequently their use is
Limited and Restrained to some few Particulars; they can neither remedy all
evils, nor procure every thing Good and Desirable. The Sun gives Light, but
does not nourish; Meat nourishes, but does not Warm; Clothes they warm us, but
cannot recover our Health; Physic may do that, but cannot protect us from
Dangers; and therefore we should be little the better, for the Enjoyment of one
or a few of these Temporary Goods, unless we had all: and even though all were
enjoyed, our Souls would crave some Satisfaction beyond what they could afford.
The way to be Happy then, is not to seek to amass Wealth and Honor, and the
other things of this World: the best and surest way is to seek GOD and make Him
our Friend, for in him we shall find whatsoever is necessary, He is infinite in
himself, and the inexhaustable fountain of all Good, and there is in him what
may serve all our necessities, and satisfy our Desires. And as he is our
Summum bonum, our Chief good; so he is most ready and willing to Communicate
himself to us: If we Labor to Please Him, and to approve our selves to him, he
will befriend us as much as is requisite to our present Condition here, and
hereafter when we are rendered capable thereof, he will Bless us with the full
Enjoyment of Himself, whereby we shall be possessed of the most Perfect
Felicity.

Perfect Felicity is not to be met with in this World, in vain do men look for
it, it is reserved till the next Life: All the Happiness which here we can
enjoy, consists in the hope of that perfect Happiness which is to come, and in
having fair Opportunities to secure it, together with the competent Supply of
our present bodily necessities. He then who would be truly Happy, let him make
GOD and Heaven his great aim; for this will certainly lead to that Complete and
unspeakable Felicity of the other World; And in the mean time will procure him
all the Satisfaction desirable in this. If we were so wise as to propose this
to our selves, our Life would not be so uneasy and troublesome as ordinarily it
is: but we should enjoy a great deal of Tranquillity and Peace. For hereby we
should be preserved from immoderat cares, discontentedness, and impatience,
which so much disturb our Minds, and are the only hindrances of our present
Felicity. First, he who places his Happiness in GOD, and sincerely pursues
Eternal Life, needs not vex himself with cares about the things of this Life:
but may cast all his care upon GOD, who will undoubtedly sustain him; and who
has promised, that if we seek first the Kingdom of GOD, and his righteousness,
all these things shall be added unto us. Matthew. 6. 33. Secondly, this will
bring our Minds to be contented, with Moderat and Competent Supplies, by taking
off our thoughts from Wealth and Greatness and Honor, etc. Having food and
Raiment, says the Apostle, let us be therewith content: And good reason, seeing
it is all that Travelers stand in need of. All that is requisite to one in a
Journey, is his Viaticum, convenient Diet, Clothing, and Lodging, and a safe
and Peaceable Passage: Other things would but retard the Journey, and render it
less easy and safe.. Thirdly, this would free us from impatience the last
Enemy of our Peace, and would make us bear trouble and Receive Disasters with a
Serene composed Spirit; Considering that our time here is but short, and soon
at an end, and that when we come Home to our Father's house, we shall have all
things to our Mind, and shall soon be made to forget our Toil and Travel. No
Wise Man who sets out upon a Journey will fret and be dejected because the
Weather is not always Fair, and the way smooth, and that he finds not every
where as good Accommodation, as at Home. While Men are Travelers in foreign
Countries, they must resolve upon Hardships and inconveniences: And we have
this great encouragement, to Patience and Cheerfulness even in the midst of
Troubles, that no Trouble or Calamity can defeat our Designs, if we be but
steadfast to them; If we keep our Hearts fixed upon GOD, and constant to the
prosecution of Eternal Life, we shall certainly arrive there, what ever weather
it blow, and whatever Opposition we meet with. It is impossible for either Men
or Devils, to separate us from GOD, or to keep us out of Heaven, if we continue
sincere in our Love, and Endeavors.

And now that we may draw to a Conclusion, as what has been said shows where
our true Felicity lies, So it discovers the Wretched Folly of the greatest
part of Mankind; Who though they all desire Happiness, yet miss it: Because
they ^eek it not where it is, but place the same in some vain empty Enjoyments.
It is sad, to behold how Wild and Extravagant Men are in their Aims and
Proposals, how hotly they pursue Toys and Trifles and very means Things? and
in the mean time, how careless they are of what they should most mind, viz. GOD
and their eternal Interest. All are sensible that they cannot live here for
ever; Its evident and visible unto them, that Nill they, Will they, they must
be gone out of this World: And yet very few, are so wise as to endeavor that
it may be well with them, when they remove hence. Their Thoughts for the most
part are about the present World, and the things thereof, as if they were never
to leave them; Certainly though they could brook them always, they could not
intend them more earnestly, or be more busy about them. Some being dazzled with
the Splendor and Glistering of Riches, labor for them with all their Might,
others grasp at Power and Command, as if that were some Fine or Happy thing;
some study to be accounted wise and and Learned, some would raise themselves a
Name, And desire to be the talk and Discourse of the World, every one has his
Different aim and design which he follows, trahit sua quemque voluptas; And
that they may compass these their several Aims, They are still holding
themselves and others in continual Vexation and Trouble, and do fill the World
full of Jarres and Contests. Now this behavior of of Men is most Unreasonable
and Unaccountable, seeing our Days are so few and that we are of so short
continuance in this World; these things might be somewhat excusable if we were
to live here for ever; but seeing that cannot be, seeing by the Eternal Decree of
GOD, we are only appointed to Lodge here for a short time, how vain and foolish
is it to make a great dale ado about that which is neither necessary to our
Present Peace and Comfort, nor yet to our Future Happiness; It is just as if a
Traveller coming to an Inn, where he were to stay but for a Night, and finding
it but Poor and Mean and ill Accommodat, should presently send for Masons,
Carpenters and Painters to repair and beautify it: Or as one upon his Arrival
to any great City, should presently aspire to the highest Dignity and
Preferment in it: And raise Stirs and Factions for that end, when he knew
assuredly that he must leave it the next day. If by such Impertinencies Men did
only disturb their Present Peace and Quiet, the matter were yet the less,
though even here their Loss would exceed their Gain, suppose they should obtain
their Desire? But alas the great concerns of another World are often put in
hazard thereby! Their Souls for the most part perish in these Attempts, and by
their Eagerness to have those vain and short Enjoyments of this present Life,
they often keep themselves from receiving the Satisfactory and Eternal
possessions above. O that men were wise, O that they understood this, that they
would consider their Latter end! O that they were so Wise, and Happy, as not to
enterprise or engage themselves into any Pursuit: until they first Weighed and
Examined the importance thereof, whither the Fruit and Event would recompense
the Pains and Labor! O that they would but put that Question often home to
themselves, What is a man profited if he should gain the whole World, and loss
his own Soul? And what will a man give in exchange for his Soul? Matthew. 16. 26.
What a Madness and Unexcuseable Folly is it to be much concerned for a
Transitory Life, and little for Eternity? To take much thought for things which
perish, and which we must shortly leave, and to mind little or to seek with
indifferency that which endures for ever? Here says the Apostle, we have no
continuing City, but we seek one to come; Heb. 13. 14. Our Heads and our
Hearts, should be still toward Heaven, the recovery of that Country above,
for which we were first designed, and to which we Naturally belong; this I say,
should be our chief Aim and main Project; All other things in comparison to
this are but idle Fancies, and building Castles in the Air; He that does not so
live as that he may be received into Glory when he dies, he has lived to very
little purpose; He deserves the Tom^ and Epitaph of that Luxurious and Useless
Emperor Sardanapalus, in which there was drawn two Fingers, and sounding one
upon another with these words, NONTANTI EST, that is, all is not worth the
while. Men are seldom wise till it be out of time, but sure if they did but
consult their own Experience, they should be more sensible of the Folly of many
of their Designs and Enterprises; And if we did ask the greatest Warrior and
Conqueror in the World, he that had been the most Succesfull in his Aims to be
Rich, and Great, and Honorable, when he were departing hence, what pleasure or
profit he received thereby? He would no doubt give us Solomon's Verdict, All is
vanity and vexation of Spirit, the Prosecution of them produces Vexation, the
Enjoyment proves Vanity, and the Reflection makes them tristes ineptiae, sour
and sad trifles, and they carry little away with them, besides the Memory of
being so ill employed.

What have thou by thy happiest project gained,
But thou repent'st thy pains, and wish obtained.
This Saladine that great Sultan of Egypt, loudly proclaimed to the World, when
he discharged all Funeral Solemnities, and ordered only a Black shirt, in
which when dead he was to be wrapped, to be carried through the Camp on a Lance,
and one to cry before it, This is all which Saladine the Emperor receives of
his great Wealth, and vast Empire. Which Bocarius has put into this dis^ich;

Vixi Divitijs regno tumidusque trophaeis,
Sed pannum heu nigrum nil nisi morte tuli.
With Riches, Power, and Trophies I did swell,
Now a Black-Shirt does only with me dwell.
Death is a convincing proof of the Vanity of all Worldly things, it shows to
how little purpose it is to Labor and contend so earnestly for them; for when
that hour comes, they must be all thrown away, the use of them cease. When a
man dies, says the Psalmist, he shall carry nothing away, his Glory shall not
descend after him; Psalm: 49: 17: And though it should, yet in the other World
Men do not take place as in this, according to their Birth, Wealth and
Grandeur, it is Virtue only and True Holiness, which makes a Man's way there. In
the morning when they awake, it is the Upright only which shall have dominion;
And therefore let Men reckon when they will, he is the most Happy who has
enjoyed the greatest Quietness and Peace, tho it should not be much attended
with outward Pomp and Grandeur; And who when he is to leave this World, has
some good and well grounded Hopes of being admitted into that blessed State,
where he shall enjoy GOD, and the Society of Angels, and Immortal Felicities.

Now that we may be all thus Happy, let us henceforth take off our Eyes from
viewing the Vanities of this World, let us beware of being deceived with its
gaudy allurements: But let us seek and endeavor seriously, to lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all Godliness and Honesty. Let us as much as in us lies,
follow Peace with all Men, and prevent unnecessary and impertinent Strifes and
Debates; That enjoying an outward Peace with others, we may be the more capable
to maintain the inward Peace of our own Consciences, and a true Peace with our
GOD: That when he has served himself of us in this World, he may thereafter
receive us, to the enjoyment of himself, and of his endless Glory.

Seneca Thyest Act. 2.
Stet quicunque volet potens
Aulae culmine lubrico:
Me dulcis saturet quies;
Obscur^ positus loco,
Leni perfruar otio;
Nullis nota Quiritibus
Aetas per tacitumfluat.
Sic cum tran^ierint mei
Nullo cum strepitu dies,
Plebeius moriar senex,
Illi mors gravis incubat,
Qui notus nimis omnibus,
Ignotus moritur sibi.
Let him that will ascend the tottering Seat
Of Courtly Grandeur, and become as great
As are his mounting wishes; as for me,
Let sweet repose, and rest my portion be.
Give me some mean obscure recess; a Sphere
Out of the road of business, or the fear
Of falling lower, where I sweetly may
My self, and dear Retirement still enjoy:
Let not my life, or name, be known unto
The Grandees of the times, tossed to and fro
By censures, or applause; but let my age
Slide gently by, not overthwart the stage
Of public action; unheard, unseen
And unconcerned, as if I never had ^een,
And thus while I shall pass my silent days
In shady privacy, free from the noise
And busles of the World, then shall I
A good old innocent Plebeian d^e.
Death is a mere surprise, a very snare,
To him that makes it his life's greatest care
To be a public Pageant, known to all,
But unacquainted with himself, does fall.
HALES.

The Character of a Happy Life.
How happy is he born and taught,
That serves not another will?
Whose Armor is his honest thought:
And simple truth his outmost skill?
Whose passions not his masters are,
Whose Soul is still prepared for death;
Unty*d unto the World, by care
Of public Fame, or private Breath.
Who envies none that Chance does raise,
N^r Vice has ever understood;
How deepest wounds are given by praise,
Nor rules of State, but rules of Good.
Who has his life from rumors freed.
Whose conscience is his strong retreat.
Whose state can neither flatterers feed,
Nor ruin make oppressors great.
Who GOD does late and early pray,
More of his grace, then gifts to lend:
And entertains the harmless day
With a religious book, or friend.
This man is freed from servile bands
Of hope to rise, or fear to fall:
LORD of himself, though not of lands,
And having nothing; yet has all.
The end of the first Part.
JACOB'S VOW OR MAN'S FELICITY, and DUTY. Part Second.
Chapter First. A short Review of the First Part. The Case proposed, how far it
is Lawful to eye the Reward in our Resolutions of Obedience. The Resolution
given in five Particulars, with an Application of all to Jacob here.
THere are two things to be considered in every Vow, viz. What is Promised, and
what is desired, this last we have handled already, as to this Particular Vow
of Jacob's here; we have in the former Discourse opened up the Nature of his
Requests and showed what he sought of GOD, and made it appear, that as he was
Humble and Modest herein, in respect of GOD, so very Wise for himself things
craved comprehending all that is Necessary and Requisite to complete ones
Happiness in this present World, he who is accompanied with the Favorable
Presence of GOD, who is kept and protected by the Power of the Almighty, and
who has Food and Raiment, that is, what is Competent and Sufficient for the
serving his Necessities, and the Maintenance of the Present State, he has all
that is desirable in this World; And therefore Jacob is a fit Pattern to direct
us how we should steer our course, and what we should Aim at, while in this
World, and wherein the Happiness of this Present Life does consist.

Having thus cleared and treated* of the Conditional part of this Vow; It
follows next that we consider and speak to the Promissory part thereof, that
we may see what the Patriarch binds and oblidges himself to do to GOD, if so be
he bestowed and granted these things to him.

But first, We will Answer and Resolve a Question which any may readily start
here, and it is this, whither it be lawful to take in conditional Clauses in
our Resolutions to serve GOD, or how far we may have a respect to our benefit
in our Purposes of Obedience, for it would seem that Jacob's service here was a
little Mercenary, that he made a formal Bargain with God, and that he resolved
only to serve him upon condition he did such and such things to him, for he
first asks, and then he promises. For answer to this, we shall first consider
the Case in general, and then speak to what Jacob did here in particular.

And first, you must know that we owe to GOD all possible Service and
Obedience, even abstracting from these External Rewards which he has to
bestow, and which we have good ground to expect from him. Indeed no Man does or
shall serve GOD for naught, they be-lye GOD, and speak falsely, who say, It is
in vain to serve Him, and what profit is there in keeping his Ordinances; for
he plentifully rewards such as seek him in sincerity and truth, and is most
Liberal to all those who come unto him: but however there are other prior
Obligations and strong ties upon us to Obey and Please Him, so that although we
had no Advantage* by serving the LORD, yet we could neither Reasonably complain
of, nor decline His Service, for he is the Author of our Life and Being, we
are his Creatures and the work of his hands; And therefore he has just Right
and Power to command us, and all the Service we are able to do, is small enough
requital for what he has already done to us; And he may justly call for it,
though he should add no farther Favors. It is his own Bounty and Goodness
which makes him load us with his Benefits, there is no Obligation upon Him
therefore, our Services do not, nor can they Merit any thing at GOD'S Hand, and
though we should suppose them never so exceptable or Worthy, yet GOD is always
aforehand with us, and we can never draw him in Arrears to us, for our very
Life and Being is more then sufficient payment for all that we are able to do.

Secondly, the chief Motive to the Service of GOD and the great Principal by
which we should be acted in our Obedience, is that of love. God himself, and
his glory, should be the chief end, which we propose to our selves, otherwise
our Service is neither Reasonable nor Acceptable. GOD is not like man, that he
may be profited by us, our goodness, as the Psalmist says, extends not to
thee; Psalm. 16. 2. And how little will he value what is not done to him, but to
another? Now though we be never so much taken up in the Acts of Religion and
Virtue, yet that cannot be counted Homage and Worship paid unto GOD, unless we
make him our last end; But it is service only paid to that which we chiefly
aim at, be it our selves and Riches, or Honor, or Pleasure, or whatever else
we have the greatest regard to. That for which any thing is beloved, is of it
self more beloved, when David dealt kindly and lovingly with Mephibosheth for
Jonathan his Fathers sake, it is a certain Argument that he loved Jonathan more
then Mephibosheth. He that loves a Man for Money, and for Meat, loves Money and
Meat more then the Man, for these are the Causes and Ends wherefore he loves
the Man; so he that serves GOD for any other End then GOD, he certainly loves
that more then GOD. Now if we prefer any thing to GOD, we do not love him
truly, nor will he regard us as upright before him. He, says our Savior, who
loves Father or Mother, Son or Daughter, or his own life more then Me, is not
worthy of Me; Matthew. 10. 37. Luke 14. 26. CHRIST upbraided the Men of Capernaum
for following him, because it was for the loaves. We do not reckon them our
Friends, nor do we think our selves oblidged unto them who wait upon us and do
us service, because they bring Gain and Advantage to themselves thereby; these
are Mercenary Persons, but he is our Friend, who abstracting from his own
Interest, or from any Advantage which we might procure him, does freely and
heartily set himself to please us, or to assist us in our Affairs. If a Man
visits a sick Friend, and watches at his pillow for Charities sake, and because
of his old Affection, we approve it, but if he does it in hope of a Legacy, he
is a Vulture, says Seneca, and only watches for the Car^ass; So he is a
Mercenary and sordid person who respects more the Benefits which fall from
GOD, then GOD himself, and GOD will not much regard this Man's service; but he
indeed shall please him, who being acted not so much out of Self-interest, as
out of a pure regard to GOD, does Serve and Obey him, who makes the Glory of
GOD his chief end; and who aims at nothing more then to please him, and who is
more glad of the Occasion thereof, then of any external Advantage which redound
by it. Non sine praemio diligitur Deus, says holy Bernard, etsi absque praemii
intuitu diligendus sit; that is, GOD is never loved without a reward, albeit he
is not to be Bernard. Tract. de dilig. DEO.
loved chiefly for the Reward; our Love to Him can never be unprofitable, but
yet it should not be Mercenary, for it should not seek its own things. The Soul
that loves GOD should not require a greater Reward of its Love, then GOD
himself, or if it require any other thing, it does not love GOD, but that other
thing.

But Thirdly, though we must chiefly serve GOD for himself, and what we do to
him and for him must in the first place be out of pure love to him, yet we may
have also a respect to our selves, and to our own proper good, this does not
hinder the other; these two are not inconsistent together to love our selves,
and to desire our own Happiness needs not imped, but should rather further our
Loving GOD above all things. The best way of loving our selves is to endeavor
the enjoyment of GOD, ille satis se diligit qui sedulo agit ut summo fruatur
bono. There are implanted in our very Nature great desires of Happiness, and it
is impossible to root them out; we shall as soon cease to be, as cease to have
Desires for our Preservation and well being, or not to intend this in all we
do, and therefore it is certainly Lawful to have an eye to our own Good and
Felicity, providing that we subject this to the Glory of GOD, and make it
subordinate to the Desires of pleasing him. It does not Spoil or cast a Blot
upon a Son's respect and love to his Father, that he minds and seeks his own
interest, and does expect a share in his Father's Inheritance; if so be he do
it not to the grief and displeasure of his Father; neither does it show that we
want True Love to God, that we seek and aim at our own Happiness, if so be we
do not prefer our selves to GOD, nor yet take Courses to obtain our Happiness
contrary to the Will and Commands of GOD. In the LORD'S Prayer, which is both a
Pattern of our Prayers, and the rule of our Desires, we are taught as in the
first place to intend the Glory of GOD, the hallowing of his Name, the
Advancement of his Kingdom, and the fulfilling of his Will; So thereafter to
desire our own Good in the necessary Sustenance of our Soul and Bodies, and in
our Deliverance from Sin and Danger. The Gospel does not (says one) Plainly
prohibit us the Love of our selves, but teaches only to Moderate it rightly,
to Subject it to GOD, and to referr it to Him, we must not Love GOD for our
selves, so as that we our selves are to be considered as the Last end, and GOD
only to be placed in the Order of Means, by the fruition of whom we may be
rendered Happy, but because we pertain to GOD whom we ought to Love above all
things, therefore also we ought to Love our selves with a reference to GOD: our
Good is therefore to be sought, that in it we may taste the Goodness and
Sweetness of God, and that Gods peculiar measure, (so to speak) may be so much
the more enlarged; thus our own proper love should be swallowed up in that
Ocean of the Divine Love.

Fourthly, It is not only Allowable, but it is Necessary and Commanded, that we
propose to our selves and have still before our eyes the Eternal Rewards of the
other World, and We can never intend these enough. They do not understand
things well, who study to take Peoples thoughts off these, and who go about to
persuade Men, that that Obedience is not Perfect, which is done for Heaven;
these are wild and Extravagant Principles, and it is sometimes advanced and set
forth by as Romantik a fable, of a Woman's going with a Torch in the one hand,
and a Bucket of Water in the other, the one to burn up Heaven, the other to
drown out the fire of Hell; That Men might serve GOD neither for the Hopes of
the One, neither out of Fear of the other. It is a piece of Arrogance to model
Men's Obedience otherwise then GOD has done, and to offer to take away these
things which GOD has Ordained, and which he has proposed to Men to push them
on the more forewardly in all manner of well-doing. And as one says, if the
Dowry which GOD has given to Virtue, and Religion, were taken away, they would
perhaps have but few Platonic Lovers.

-- Quis enim virtutem amplectitur ipsam,
Praemia si tollas?
However all the Saints and Servants of GOD mentioned in Scripture, are said to
have had the Promises of GOD for the future Life before them. We are told of
Moses, that he had a respect unto the recompense of the Reward; Heb. 11. 26.
And Saint Paul proposed to himself the Crown of Righteousness; 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8.
Yea it is said of our Savior himself, that be had an eye to the Joy which was
set before him; Heb. 12. 2. And St. Peter tells us the end wherefore there are
given unto us, such exceeding Great and Precious Promises, is that thereby we
might be partakers of the Divine Nature, having escaped the Corruption that is
in the world through lust; 2 Pet. 1. 4. Thus it is not only Lawful and
Necessary for us to look often to that which GOD himself has proposed to us;
that we may be the more Powerfully Excited and Encouraged to run the Ways of
GOD, and to keep his Commandments: Nay the Glory and Felicity of the other
World is a thing which GOD has chiefly before him, and therefore we should
have it also. Obedience to the Laws of GOD is the Means only to carry it on,
and so the end why we should do this, is to obtain that, and by intending that
we truly Glorify GOD, and do show that we prefer him before all things. For
the Main and great Happiness of Heaven it self consists in the clear Knowledge
and full Enjoyment of GOD; and therefore, as one says, it is too great nicety
to distinguish between GOD and Heaven, his Glory and our Salvation, for they
are not really things distinct; We cannot in a true Sense seek the Salvation of
our Souls more then the Glory of God, for the one is the Advancement of the
other. Heaven is not a thing without us, nor is happiness distinct from a
Conjunction with God, to love God above our selves, See Smith Sell: Dis: page 399
is not indeed so properly to love him above the Salvation of our Souls, as if
they were distinct things, but it is to love Him above all our Sinful
Affections and particular Beeings, and to conform ourselves to him.

Fifthly and Lastly, the proposing to our selves the temporal enjoyments of
this World, as a Principal end, the making Wealth, Honor and Riches a main
Motive why we serve GOD, and Obey him, is altogether Unlawful. It is a piece
of the grossest Hypocrisy, and Men do thereby dishonor GOD and Religion, in
making them stoup for to Serve their base Carnal designs; they who are guilty
of this, cannot be said so much to exercise Religion and Virtue, as to abuse
them, and in steed of Honoring GOD they do but put a Mock upon him, like that
Gentleman in Elian, who coming into the presence of the Persian King, at his
entry into the Presence Chamber he stouped to take up his Ring, which he
purposely let fall, that thereby he might be thought to pay that adoration to
that Monarch which the Laws obliged him to. Satan laid this to Job's charge,
and would have made it believed, that it was only GOD'S Blessing him with
Outward Prosperity which tied him so much to the Service of GOD. does Job,
says he, Fear GOD for naught? Have thou not made an hedge about him, and about
all his house, and about all that he has on every side? Thou have blessed the
work of his hands, and his substance is increased in the land. But put forth
thine hand now, and touch all that he has, and he will curse thee to thy face;
Job 1. verse 10, 11. The Devil thought Job was of the humor of some who keep
close by a Man, whilst any thing is to be expected from him, and that he is in
a capacity of doing them good, but so soon as Fortune frowns, and his Condition
alters they turn their backs and run away: To take off which tash from Job, and
to convince the World of the falsehood of this Accusation, it was that GOD gave
Satan power over all that which he possessed. And indeed though the serving of
GOD be the most Natural, Reasonable and Proper Way, for securing to our selves
the good things of this Life, yet he suffers his Faithful Servants sometimes to
fare worst, that their Sincerity may be tried and manifested, and that Men may
learn thereby to seek and serve him for higher and more noble ends. GOD
requires us to mortify all immoderate desires for the things of this Life, to
be so far denied to all sublunary enjoyments, as neither to care much, whither
we have them or want them, not to be overjoyed and lifted up when they come
unto us; nor yet dejected and cast down when they remove from us; and therefore
it is not lawful for us to have our Hearts set upon that which GOD teaches us
to despise, and besides that can be no true and proper Motive to Religion, and
the Service of GOD, which sometimes cannot be obtained, otherwise then by
swerving from them; ye cannot serve GOD and Mammon, says CHRIST, and the
Reason is clear, because their Commands often interfere and come in Competition
together. We cannot sometimes secure our Life or Fortune, our Honor or Means
but by renouncing GOD, and Obedience to his Laws, wherefore our Savior tells
us plainly, if any Man come to Me, and hate not his Father and Mother, and Wife
and Children, and Brethren, and Sisters, yea and his own life also, he cannot
be My Disciple; Luke 14. 26. That is, if a Man cannot find in his Heart to part
with these freely, he needs not offer to follow Him, for he will sometimes be
necessitat to leave him. If to have the World be the chief motive why one comes
to GOD, for the same Reason, he will sometimes foresake him, and GOD will have
no Regard to that Man, who minds not to be constant, but who serves only for a
time. Wherefore I wish that Wealth, Honor and other Temporal things, were less
insisted on as Motives to Christian duties, though I deny ^t, but that it may
be proper enough sometime, or occasionally to show that Religion conduces to
our present happiness, as the Poet says,

-- Semita certe
Tranquillae per virtutem patet unica vitae.
But who come to CHRIST merely for these Worldly Respects, cannot be accounted
Converts: and as he upbraided the Men of Capernaum, so it may be said to them;
Verily, verily, I say unto you, ye seek me not because ye saw the miracles, but
because ye did eat of the Loaves, and were filled; John 6: 26.

But here it will be objected and said, by some, does not GOD in the Scripture
give us many Temporal Promises? Does he not frequently propose to us Wealth,
and Honor, and the other good things of this Life, as the Reward of our
Obedience; and is it Unlawful to have an eye to GODS own Promise, and to
Desire that Reward which he has proposed? For Answer hereto, we are to
consider that GOD makes these Promises, not to draw our Hearts after the World,
or to make us think that our Happiness lies in the enjoyment thereof; but only
to free us from Immoderate Cares, and to engage us to serve Him without Anxiety
and Solicitude for these Temporal things we stand in need of while we are here
That we may not be diverted from the Service of GOD, nor interrupted in our
pursure of these Eternal Felicities in the other World, by a too great
thoughtfulness for the Relief of our Necessities in this; therefore it is that
GOD has made us the Promise not only of what is simply Necessary, but even
also of Plenty and Abundance, and the only use we are to make of these
Promises, is to encourage our selves with the Expectation of what is Good,
Useful and Convenient for us, and all the Reason Temporalia haec me, O Domine,
juvent utentem, non corrumpant mentem and amorem meum retorqueant in te
Artificem eorum, ne in his quae placent mihi, ego displiceam tibi. Amem haec,
sed plus te amem, and haec propter te amen; Et si ista diligam, ut subjecta
diligam, ut famulantia diligam, diligam ut arrham sponsi, ut munera amici, ut
beneficia Domini, sic tamen ut meminerim semper, quae tibi debeam, ista propter
te, and per ista, and super ista te diligam. Illis adhaeream dilectione
transitoria, tibi inhaeream dilectione mansoria.
why we should desire these things here below is, that we may be rendered
thereby more serviceable to GOD, and more Profitable unto others, that the good
things of this World may become to us Pledges of these better things above.

The sum of what we have said in Answer to the Question proposed is this, That
there is an Indispensible Obligation upon us to serve GOD, abstracting from any
Consideration of the Benefit to be had thereby, and that our Services are then
best and most Acceptable, when they are performed in Regard of GOD himself, and
out of Pure love to him: but that however we may Respect our own Good, and Seek
our own Happiness, and pursue for Heaven and Eternal Life; for this is not
inconsistent with the Purest love of GOD, but only Subordinate thereunto. But
as for the Temporal things of this World, it is Unlawful to make them our Chief
and Ultimat End, or to propose them to our selves as any main Motive and
inducement to the Observance of GOD, or his Laws, for we should resolve to
cleave to GOD, whither he gives us these things or no; Nay though he should
leave us altogether Destitute of all Worldly Help and Comfort, yet it should be
our Resolution never to forsake him, saying with holy Job, though he slay me,
yet will I trust in him; Job. 13. 15.

Now as to Jacob's case in Particular, it does not appear that he swerved from
these General positions, which we have laid down, yea it seems evident, that he
kept close to them. He makes, it is true, his Requests for himself first, but
his Serving and Honoring of GOD might be the chief thing he had before him: If
he had Aimed more at his own Private Interest, than at the Glory of GOD, he
would not have been so Modest in his Desires, nor yet contented himself with so
small a Portion as Food and Raiment, he would certainly have sought more; but
that he did not seek more, makes it clear, that he gave himself freely to GOD
without Respect to his Benefits. GOD had been promising him the whole land of
Canaan for a possession to him and his Posterity, and he to let see that it was
not upon that Account he tied himself to GOD, and Resolved to become his
Servant, he asked no more but Food and Raiment. As if he had said, though thou
do not so great things, if thou grant but Food and Raiment. If thou will but
bring me back to my Fathers house in peace, though I should never brook this
Land as my Property and Possession, yet thou shall be my God. Thus Jacob loved
GOD for himself, like a Friend and not for his Benefits, like a Merchant. Could
Jacob have passed by Food and Ray^ent as well as he did all other good Benefits
of GOD, he would not have given himself thus unto GOD upon Composition, but
absolutely and Hales Rem: pa: 223.
without Condition. Now he is constrained to fall upon the Condition of Food
and Raiment, for without this he could not love his GOD, because without this
he could not Subsist, nor have his Being, by which he evidently witnesses, that
he therefore and for no neither End desired to be, but only to Love and Serve
his GOD. It was an excellent speech of Crispus Passienus, a witty Gentleman of
Rome, quorundam se judicium malle quam Beneficium, quorundam Beneficium malle
quam judicium, that is Some Man's Respect and good Opinion is more to be
esteemed then another Man's Benefit; and one says, that Jacob here does
express the same Conceit: for when he came to compound with Laban he made his
Bargain in another manner, he would not serve him for Bread and Raiment only,
but fourteen years for his Daughters, and sex years for his Flock, by which
Means he became Rich, and Wealthy, and the Reason why he Covenanted thus
differently with GOD, and with Laban was, because with Laban he sought his own
commodity, but with GOD only his Acceptance and Favor.

From this Example of Jacob's we should all of us learn this Lesson to aim at
the Glory of GOD in all our Desires, when we make any Requests for any
Particular Favors, the chief thing which should Prompt us thereto should be
that we may have the occasion of serving GOD, some way or other more eminently.
Thus Hannah when she Prayed for a Son, she at the same time vowed to devote him
to GOD. And David besought the LORD earnestly, to have mercy upon him, and to
consider the trouble which he suffered of them which hate him; and the end why
he desired this was, that I may, says he, show forth all thy Praise in the
gates of the Daughter of Zion; Psalm. 9. 13, 14. Whither we call for Spiritual
or Temporal Blessings, we should seek them not for themselves, or to rest in
the mere enjovment of them, but to reflect Honor on GOD, that we having such
things may be capacitated and enabled to do him greater Service, we must not
let the Reins loose to our Desires, and be over anxious for the enlargement of
our State; for oftentimes there is as much of Vanity, and seeking our own
Praise in this, as any other thing. Whither we have little or much, what ever
our Condition be, be it great or small, we may yet have opportunities enough of
Glorifying GOD; Jacob sought here but Food and Raiment, and supposing he should
get no more, yet he devoted himself to GOD, and resolved to own and acknowledge
Him.

CHAP. II. Showing the Importance of the Words, The LORD shall be my GOD.
SECTION I. The True Sense of the Words is given, and a Proposal of the
Particulars to be Treated on under this head.
WE come now to the particular Consideration of what the Patriarch vowed and
promised here. He puts up three Requests unto GOD, and here also he makes three
express and particular Promises: the first of which is, that the LORD shall be
his GOD. Some render these words otherwise then we have them in our
Translation, and put another sense upon them; they have it cumque fuerit
Dominus mihi Deus, making it a fourth Petition, importing as much as if he had
said, if the LORD indeed will be to me a GOD, which is indeed a very great and
comprehensive Request, and does include all desirable Hapiness, for what can
One ask more then that GOD should manifest his Wisdom, his Power, his Goodness,
and all his other Glorious Perfections for his particular behoof and benefit.
Wherefore the Psalmist having prayed for the flourishing of their State, That
their Sons may be as Plants grown up in their Youth, and their Daughters as
Cornerstones, polished after the similitude of a Palace, that their Garners may
he full, affording all manner of Store, that their Sheep might bring forth
thousands and ten thousands in their streets, their Oxen strong to labor, that
there be no breaking in or going out, nor any complaining in the Streets;
Having, I say, prayed for this, and being much taken with the Consideration of
that Happiness, he cries out, Happy is that People that is in such a case: but
presently he checks himself, and upon second thoughts cries, Yea, happy is that
People whose GOD is the LORD; Psalm. 144. 15. intimating thereby to us, that the
LORDS interessing himself in any People, and becoming their GOD, was a greater
Happiness, then all that which he had formerly spoken of, did amount to.

But how great and Desirable soever this be in it self, yet we see no Reason
why we should interpret the words in this sense, especially seeing they should
by this means coincide with the first petition; for the LORD to be with One,
and to be Ones GOD, is one and the same thing; and it is not likely that Jacob
would have come over twice with one thing in so short a Prayer. However our
Translation in this agrees with the Hebrew, Septuagint, and the Vulgar Latin,
and we judge it best and more Reasonable to take the words this way.

Here then when Jacob promises, that the LORD shall be his GOD, it implies two
things, First, that he would not serve the Gods of the Nations, whither on this
or the other side Jordan, that he should take care not to be corrupted with the
Idolatry of the rest of the World. Secondly, that he should Faithfully serve
the GOD of his Fathers, Abraham, and Isaac, who had here honored him with a
signal mainfestation of his Presence, and that to him, and to him only, he
should pay all the Homage, Deference, Worship, and Service which is due from
Reasonable Creatures to the true GOD. For to take One to be our GOD, is to
carry toward him, as to such a Supreme and Infinite Being, and to yield him
what is proper from us who are so far below the Deity, and who depend upon it
for Life, Breath, and all things.

Thus you see what the Patriarch here engadged himself to: And it does first
appear, that it was not an Arbitrary Free-willoffering which he here Pitched
upon; it was not a thing which he could have passed over, and been Blameless;
It is a Natural or moral duty, which he and all Men as Men, that is, as
Rational Creatures are strictly oblidged unto, This is the first and great
Commandment, all other are but parts and branches of this: Wherefore it is
that we find this set first in that sum and Abridgement of the Moral law, which
Moses had from GOD, and delivered to the People of Israel: Thou shall have no
other GODS before me, Requires the same, and neither less nor more then that
which Jacob here Vows and Resolves on, Viz. that there shall be no declining
and falling off, to the Worship of false GODS, and that the true GOD shall have
all the Worship and Service which properly belongs to him.

Wherefore that we may be stirred up to imitate Jacob's Practice, and to
conform to his Resolutions as well as his Desires: we shall GOD willing clear
and make out these following Particulars, First, that all Men ought to Worship
GOD. Secondly, that they ought to be very wary in the Object of their Worship,
that it be the true GOD and none else whom they adore. Thirdly, we shall show
what Worship and Service is requisite to be paid to the true GOD.

SECTION II. Of the Reasonableness and Necessity of Worshipping GOD.
AS to the first, that all Men ought to Worship GOD, we shall not need to
insist much thereon, it being a confessed Principle, and the very dictat of
Natural Conscience: So that not only those to whom the Word of GOD has come,
but even such also as never had any Particular Revelation, have yet looked upon
themselves as oblidged to the Worship of a diety. All the World have consented
in this, for though there be some Nations without Learning, Coin, Clothes, and
the like instances of Politness and Civility; yet none are so Barbarous as to
be without the Acknowledgement of a GOD. Some considering the Natural pron^ess
of Men to the Worship of a GOD, have defined Man to be Animal Religiosum, and
have made Religion and not Reason the difference betwixt him and other
Creatures: And indeed we never show so much Reason, or Act so much above the
Inferior Creatures, as when we are taken up in the Exercise of Virtue and
Religion; all other Actings are but Sense, and Animal motions, in which there
be many Brutes who do often outdoe us. But when our Reason does exerce it self
in Religion, it is so far above their reach that they cannot offer at an
imitation.

Religion and the Worship of GOD, does indeed suppose that there is One, which
we may very well suppose, it being a Truth so evident and demonstrable. Every
thing in Nature does so clearly prove the existence of a Deity, that we can
never sufficiently admire the Blindness and Stupidity of those who call it in
Question: And indeed because it Argues such Stupidity, some have doubted
whither there be, or can be, any real speculative Atheists, and do imagine that
such as have pretended Atheism, have done it only out of an ostentation of Wit,
and for to show their Smartness, in being able to Oppose and Dispute the
plainest and most received Opinions. But whither there be any Atheists or not,
the Being of a Deity may be easily made appear to any whose eyes are but open
to see it: His very Nature carries a Demonstration in it, and all things else
do prove his Existence, Praesentemque refert quaelibet herba Deum. If we look
within our own selves, there seems to be such an Impression of a GOD stamped
upon our Minds, as is not easily defaced and blotted out; And how we could have
this, without a GOD, is very hard if not impossible to Resolve. And if we take
a view of the World without, either of the Parts singly by themselves, or in
their Conjunction together, we shall discern such admirable Wisdom in their
Contrivance, as might be sufficient to draw the most Incredulous to an
Acknowledgement: for these things are either the effects of Chance, or they are
the Works of a Wise Agent; If the last be said, a Deity is granted, and it will
be very strange if any have the Impudence to assert the first. He may believe
anything in the World, though never so Monstrous, who can imagine blind Chance
could have hit so well, or that things of themselves could have jumped so
luklily together, as that the greatest or even infinite wisdom cannot be
supposed to Rectify, or to have contrived otherwise. And therefore it was well
said by the Lord Verulam, I had rather believe all the fables in the Legend,
Essay 16.
and the Talmud, and the Alcoran, then that this Universal Frame is without a
Mind. The Atheists ordinarily object, against such as believe a GOD, as if they
were too Credulous, and of an easy belief; But there is more Reason to retort
this upon themselves, for they are the most Credulous who believe the most
unlikely things, or what has the least appearance of Truth: Now what can be
more improbable, nay impossible then that Things should be produced without any
Cause, or that there should be no Wisdom or Understanding, where the greatest
Effects and Instances thereof are to be seen. Though one did take Garagantua or
Don Quixot for true History, or did believe the Wildest and most Unlikely
Forgeries of the old Exiravagant Romances; I could not yet think him so absurd,
or judge him to have so large a swallow, as the Atheist, who denies a GOD, when
there are so many and so great evidences and Demonstrations thereof.

Now if there be a GOD, as certainly there is One, there is nothing more clear
then that He should be Worshipped. The very Atheists will grant this, even
those who as yet deny a God, will acknowledge the necessity of Worshipping One
if he be found; And in Truth it is hard to tell which of the two are most
unreasonable, he who denies there is a GOD, or he who refuses to worship the
GOD whom he believes. If Prudence and Interest, do oblidge Men to Honor and
Obey Kings and Monarchs, that under their Favor they may enjoy Safety and
Peace; should not every one for that same very Reason, adore and do homage to
the great King, to whom all the Princes and Potentates of the World must submit
and bow themselves? Though he sit in the Heavens, yet His Dominion reaches
over all; the whole World is filled with his Presence, he rules the Children
of Men, and there is no safety but in his Protection, nor any Security but in
his Favor. The LORD, says the Psalmist, is a great GOD, and a great King
above all Gods. In his Hand are the deep places of the Earth: The Strength of
Hills is his also. The Sea is His, and he made it: And his Hands formed the
dry-land. Therefore he infers, and that rightly, O come let us Worship and bow
down, Let us kneel before the Lord our Maker, for he is our God, and we are the
People of his Pasture, and the Sheep of his Hand; Ps. 95. 3, etc. If Men needed
not either care for the Divine Favor, or much to fear his Wrath, they might be
somewhat excusable, though they did not highly regard GOD, but seeing it is
utterly impossible that ever they can be in such a Condition, wherein they
stand in no need of GOD, or may easily protect themselves from the effects of
his Anger, it is the most unaccountable madness to neglect him, and to be
careless to please him. It is even such and greater madness, as 't would be for
a poor Peasant or other mean Fellow, to slight or show a contempt of some
mighty Monarch, while under his Power, and within his Reach. None have less
Reason to make Pretensions to wit, then those who slight Piety, and cast off
all regard to GOD; because none act more contrary to common Prudence and the
Principles of Reason. Contempt or carelessness of the Divine Worship can never
be justified; unless Men could be certainly assured that there is no God, which
the greatest Atheist never yet pretended to, nor can he? or else that they
could extricate themselves from all dependence upon GOD, which as it is not
desirable, so neither is it possible. And therefore it is absolutely
necessary, that all Men concern themselves in the Worship of GOD, and that they
be careful while they live to Own and Acknowledge Him, which who so Refuses
shall not pass Unpunished. They who will not willingly Own and Submit
themselves to Him, shall certainly fall under the dint of his Fury. Now
therefore, consider this, ye that forget GOD, lest He tear you in pieces, and
there be none to deliver; Psalm. 50. 22.

SECTION III. What Care should be had to Direct our Worship to the True GOD;
Rules how to do it. Where also the Idolatry of the Romish Church is considered.
AS thus you see it is necessary we Worship God, so by the same Reason it
becomes no less necessary that we Worship the True GOD, which was the Second
particular we promised to speak to. As there is a GOD, so there is but One True
GOD, to whom and to none else we must direct our Worship, and our Religious
Services; For if we adore any other then him, or make any Partner of our
Worship with him, we are guilty of a Crime which is not easily pardoned, for it
is a dethroning of GOD. And therefore, Job, says, If I beheld the Sun when it
shined or the Moon walking in brightness: And my heart has been secretly
enticed, or my mouth has Kissed my hand? That is, if ever he was guilty of
Worshipping the Sun, or the Moon, he acknowledges that this were an iniquity
to be punished by the Judge: For thereby, says the he, I should have denied
the GOD that is above; Job. 31. 26. 27. 28. Sceptra non ferunt socium. Kings
can endure no Copartners, nor will God suffer any Rival with him? he will not
endure that any should share in that Honor which is due to himself alone. I am
the LORD, says he, that is my Name, and my Glory will I not give to another,
neither my Praise to graven Images, Isa 42. 8. Idolatry or the Worship of false
GODS, is such an abomination, and does so highly provoke the True GOD, that
nothing will, or can excuse it; neither is there any thing which he is more
Jealous of: A Man's Serousness or Sincerity will never endear his Worship, and
render it acceptable, Unless it be directed to the right Object, Though one be
a favourer of Monarchy in the general more than any other Government, yet he
can never be counted Loyal, if he neglect his True Prince, and follow an
Usurper, no more then he who is for no King at all. Even so though one be never
so Devout and Serious in his way, yet unless it be the True GOD whom he Adores,
he is not to be esteemed a Friend, and Lover of GOD, he cannot be Reckoned
otherwise then as an Enemy, as well as those who are altogether Irreligious and
Profane. We must be sure then that we Worship the True GOD and none else,
otherwise it is to no purpose to Worship any: For to worship none, and to Worsh
a False GOD, will be alike profitable, that is certainly, they will be both of
them hurtful and pernicious: for either of them will incense the true GOD, and
make him set himself against us to destroy us.

Now as it concerns us to worship the true GOD and none else, so that we may
be sure to worship him and none other, let us first Labor to get right
Apprehensions of the Divine Nature, and Attributes. Let us be careful to keep
in mind how he is the Supreme Being, Eternal, Infinite and Independent from all
others, that he is Almighty, most wise, most just, and good, and Holy; A pure
Spirit, who is not only free from all imperfections, but who is infinitlie
excellent beyond what can be apprehended, and who is every where present. For
as the Apostle says, he is not far from every one of us in him we all live,
move, and have our being. It Is this and nothing else which we call GOD, He and
none other has these Properties and Excellencies; And therefore not only what
we Worship, must be such; but also we must be careful to Worship Him under the
consideration of a being thus infinitely excellent and glorious, or else we
Worship we know not what. Instead of the True GOD we do but set up an Idol,
which our own Fancy has devised. It Is true an adequat Comprehensive Knowledge
of God, or of any of his Attributes, is not possible; for he dwells in the
light which no man can approach unto, whom no man has seen, nor can see; He
being infinite, and we finite, we are not capable of such an exact full
knowledge of him. Wherefore it will not follow that One is ignorant of the True
God, because his knowledge of him is imperfect, for the knowledge which the
best have, or can have is no other. Nay farther, it is not reasonable to infer,
that men are mistaken about the true God, because they err about these things
which are deduceable from the right consideration of some of his Attributes, or
because they have not right or true apprehensions of some of the effects of his
wisdom, power or goodness. Every one is not capable of drawing proper
consequences from truths, and the consequences are not always so clear as the
truth it self; it would be too severe to charge one with the denial of a truth,
because he does not close with what may follow upon it: Unless the one be as
clear and evident as the other, when two things are not a like evident, neither
their connection very palpable, though in themselves they may be really
inseparable, Men may err very innocently and excusably about them; and cannot
be said to reject what is evident, because they do not hold the other which is
not so. As to the present case, that God is Almighty, Wise. Just, Holy, and
Good, is clear and demonstrable, so that they are altogether inexcusable who do
not believe it: But the most proper methods and manner of exercing his Power,
Wisdom, and Justice, etc. Are not so discernable by us, and therefore if men
differ about them, it is no great wonder; and it savours somewhat of
arrogancy, to offer to determine them too particularly. If silly
Country-clowns were to speak of State Policy, and Regal Grandeur, it is not to
be doubted but that they would err grossly, because they have not true or exact
notions thereof: But it is less to be doubted, that it is more beyond the
wisest man's reach, to tell exactly what is suitable to the glory of God, and
agreeable to infinite wisdom, power, and justice. What boldness were it tosay
peremptorly, God should have done or not have done this, and that if he had or
not had done so and so he would have acted unworthily? What of the divine
actions are plainly revealed, we see clearly are agreeable to the most perfect
conceptions of a Deity, and what is kept secret, we ought rather to admire in
silence, then to sit down and curiously resolve* And if men will needs attempt
the resolution of the hidden mysteries of GOD's Council, and prescribe Rules
for that end, they should rather be checked for their bold and too curious
meddling, then unbraided with a false god, because their sentiments cannot be so
exactly adjusted to the more common notions of justice and equity which men
have. Wherefore the deriding the God of the Calvinists, * as one of late has
done, deserves a severe censure and chastisement; For whither these
Calvinistical tenets *Turners Defense of his Sermon about Necessity and Freedom.
concerning Gods Decrees, be true or false, the believing or not believing them
will not infer a denial or not owning of the true God? and seeing the Calvinists
acknowledge all the essential Attributes of a Deity, and believe in him only
who is declared the true God, therefore they cannot be said to worship any
other: and he who mocks at the God whom they worship, mocks at the true God
himself, and how great a sin this is, I leave it to any to judge. But to return
whence we degressed, it is requisite that every one study to get the highest
and most worthy thoughts of GOD, and it is absolutely necessary that they
acknowledge what is expressly contained in the very Idea of God, as that he is
Almighty, most Wise, most Just and Good above all things, and the cause of all
things: For God is only a short term, used to express these perfections by;
and therefore who takes any of them away, destroys the very nature of God; and
who worships what he does not ascribe these properties to, worships not God,
but some other thing. Even as he is altogether ignorant of a circle or
triangle, who does not consider the one, as a figure made up of three lines
with three distinct angles; and the other of one round line, whose parts are
all equally distant from the center; who knows not this, is quite destitute of
the notion of these figures: But if one knows this much, he cannot but be said
to have the right notion of a circle and triangle, though he do not understand
all which knowing and skillful Mathematicians demonstrate about them.

But it is not enough for preserving our selves from Idolatry that we get and
maintain some right true and proper notions of a Deity. Men may have these, and
yet be Idolaters; in that they fix these notions where they ought not, and
ascribe them to that which in it self is not God. Thus the Heathens were guilty
of Idolatry: for many of them, were not so much mistaken in their conceptions
of God, as in the application of their general conceptions, to the particular
objects of their worship, when they spoke of God (at least the wise and
understanding persons among them) they showed that they believed him a Supreme
Being of great Wisdom, Power, and Goodness; and therefore they termed him
always the Summum Numen, Deus ter optimus maximus. So that their sentiments
concerning the Nature and Attributes of GOD, could not be so much found fault
with as their gross absurdity in misapplying these properties of the Divine
Nature: For some affixed the Numen or Deity to the Sun, others to the Moon, or
to some other of the Celestial Bodies; as the Author of the book of wisdom
speaks, they deemed either Fire, or Wind, or the swift Air, or the circle of
the Stars, or the violent water, or the lights of Heaven to be the Gods which
govern the World; Wis. 13. 2. And though this was a sotish error, yet not so
detestable as theirs who worshipped four footed beasts, and creeping things, and
roots and herbs, as we read the Egyptians did.

They may have been misled into these abominations, through the infirmity of
their Minds which could not fix steedily on a thing so Spiritual, and so wholly
abstracted from Sense as GOD is, without the help of Sensible representations,
which might affect their imaginations; Wherefore, the better to bring GOD to
their Minds, and that they might keep him the more easily in their Thoughts,
thy have have devised such Bodily figures and gross representations. Or not
attending to the True Nature of GOD, they have imagined that he was confined to
some peculiar place and seeing none more Glorious then the Sun, or other
Celestial Bodies, therefore have at first only fancied these to be the Seat of
Divine Majesty: But in Process of time have degenerate into the grosser belief
of their being Gods. Being delighted with there beauty, says the foresaid
Author, they took them to be Gods. And as to that Astonishing as well as
inexcusable Blockishness of Worshipping Beasts, and Insects, and Roots, it might
been occasioned either through a misunderstanding of their Sages or Wisemen,
who treating of GOD have used such Symbols and Hieroglyphics: Or else upon the
surprise of some virtue and useful quality, or a destroying Power in these
things, which their Ignorance could not otherwise resolve by a particular and
some more then ordinary presence of the Deity.

But it is nor ou^ present business, to enquire into the cause and occasion of
Men's being guilty of Idolatry. The chief thing which at present we would have
marked, is that Men may be Idolaters, even while their apprehensions of a Deity
are not so very gross: it is true the Attributes and Perfections of GOD, and
the nature of things Visible and material are so inconsistent, that it might be
thought none would take what is of this last kind, for the other; but it is as
true, that there is nothing more ordinary, then for Men to Join in their
opinions and Practices what are really repugnant and inconsistent together.
Wherefore to shun all Guilt and Suspicion of Idolatry it is not only necessary
to have some knowledge of a GOD, how he is a Being, great and powerful, etc.
But also that we be sure of his Deity, whom we Worship, and to whom we
address our selves, by finding out in him what only can be appropriate to the
true GOD, and none else. A Woman must not only have an esteem for her Husband,
and a resolution to admit none other, but must actually take a care that she do
it not, otherwise she does not preserve her Faith and Chastity: If one address
himself to her, and She should admit him to a Conjugal Freedom, without
examining whither he were her true Husband, or receiving any certain evidence
thereof, she commits Adultery. So if we take any for GOD, and honor him as
such, without sure and infallible tokens which manifest his Godhead, we draw on
our selves the guilt of Idolatry, which is Spiritual adultery. If Men's minds
had never been corrupted with Idolatrous apprehensions, if they had never
turned aside, and devised strange gods, that is more then one; then it would
have been sufficient to have directed our Worship to a Deity, for then all
Worship would have been the worship of the true GOD: But now that the World
has been, so miserably o'respread with Idolatry, and that Men are become so
vain in their imaginations as to set up false Gods and to ascribe a Deity to
many things; Therefore it is necessary that we be very wary, and not only
Design to have our Worship terminate in the True, for who Worship False Gods
intend this: But that it may really do so, we must discern what does certainly
particularize the true GOD, and as it were Single him out from all the false
Gods of the World.

Now it needs not puzle us much or put us to any great difficulty to find out
who is the True, amongst the several pretended Deities; a small enquiry will
easily determine the point: We shall not have well begun to examine, when it
shall appear who is True, and who False. It is a speech of Tully, the Heathen
Orator, utinam tam facile veram religionem invenire possim, quam falsam
convincere; I wish I could as easily find out the true GOD, as detect who is
false: But the one will certainly follow upon the other. Solomon at once
discovered the false Mother, and the true by making a trial of their Motherly
affection and behavior; So by examining the account of those Gods which are
mentioned among Men, and the Actions ascribed to them, which of them are the
most God-like, we shall presently discern both the True GOD, and such as are
false.

These can be no Gods who have derived their being, whose Genealogies can be
given account of, who could do no great thing for those who adored them, nay
could not deliver themselves, who were acted with Humane Passions, and were
guilty of Gross vices, and who never gave any token whereby they might be
known to be Gods; But are merely supported by Poetical Fictions, and the
imaginations of Men. And so Jupiter and Saturn, and Apollo, and all the
ancient and present Pagan Gods must fall to the ground; And in a word, none can
stand but the GOD whom the Jews of old Worshipped, and who is still Worshipped
and acknowledged by Christians: For what he has done, speak him out clearly
the True and Ever-living GOD, who alone reigns in the World.

And as it is Man's interest as well as Duty, to Worship the True GOD; So this
true GOD never left himself without Witness in the World, that such as were
desirous, might know and find him, and that others might be rendered in
excusable. The invisible things of him, says St. Paul, from the creation of
the World are clearlie seen, being understood by the things that are made, even
his Eternal Power and God head, so that they, who are not convinced, are
without excuse. His Works which are every where to be seen, did point him out;
but such was the perverseness of Men; that they withstood them: Because they
were common and ordinary, therefore they became ineffectuall, for bringing
them to the Knowledge of the True GOD, and the ret^ining them in His Service.
They lost memory of the Creation; and as for the daily Acts of GODS Providence,
in doing good giving rain, and blessing with fruitful Seasons, they wrought
little or nothing upon them: And then he was pleased, to give other Signal and
extraordinary manifestations of himself, which was sufficient to convince the
most Obstinat and Incredulous. Thus to a^cend no higher, he raised up Abraham
to be a special and extraordinary witness of the True GOD; none could boast of
any favor from the Gods they Worshipped, as Abra^am could show from his GOD,
as particularly that of getting a Son in his Old Age, and when the Womb of his
Wife too was become dead by the Co^rse of Nature, which could not be effectuate
by any other then an Almighty Power. And therefore it was evi dent that he was
the True GOD who did all this; and therefore also all to whom the knowledge of
this came were oblidged to own the GOD of Abraham. And indeed we find that
these singular Providence, which followed Abraham and his Family, did draw a
Confes^ion from these Strangers with whom they lived, that it was the tru^ GOD
whom they feared. See Genesis 12. 17. 14. 20 20 3, 17. and chap. 26. v. 28. We
have Abimelech confessing that the true GOD was with Is^ac, and upon that
account desiring a Covenant to be made betwixt them; We saw, says he,
certainly that the LORD was with thee; and he said let there be now an Oath
betwixt us, even betwixt us and thee; and let us make a Covenant with thee for
thou art now the bl^ssed of the Lord. Nay such clear Testimonies were Abraham
and Isaac of the true GOD, that GOD himself uses them for the Conviction of
Jacob at this time, for upon his first appearance he called himself the Lord
GOD of Abraham, and the GOD of Isaac, as you may see, v. 13.

As GOD made use of Abraham Isaac and Jacob to be his Witnesses in their time,
so he continued still to use their Posterity; for convincing the World of the
vanity of their Gods, which were generally worshipped and to let them see that
he was the true GOD, whom all should serve and obey: For, for this end he
wrought so many Wonders for them in Egypt, did so strangely plague Pharaoh and
his People, brought them forth with such a high hand, and used many and so
great Miracles in settling them in the Land of Canaan: For being the Fame of
these things could not but reach to all Nations and People, so who ever heard
and seriously considered th^se things, might be forced to confess that he who
did them, that is, the GOD of Israel, was a great GOD, above all Gods, a GOD of
Power and Majesty, that he was the true GOD, and that there was none besides
him. What other but the true GOD, can command the Wind and the Sea, the Sun and
the Stars, and all the Elements, and force them to obey his Word? Who can make
Night and Day when he pleases? who can change the course of Nature? and when
he has done so, can easily bring it back again? but he who is the Author of
Nature, and the Creator of all things, GOD blessed for ever.

Wherefore the God of Israel, whose Mighty and Wonderful Acts are Recorded in
the holy Scripture, is the only true GOD: And who would be found worshippers of
the true GOD must direct their worship to Him. All who do not own and
acknowledge him are Idolaters; for if they reject him, the Gods whom they serve
and bow down to, are only false Gods, Vain Devices and Imaginations. Now who
would be reckoned amongst the Worshippers of this true GOD, (...) testify
themselves to be such, first by owning these special and particular
Manifestations, whereby he has revealed and made himself known; For as these
do certainly point out the true GOD, and make a distinction betwixt him and all
false Gods devised by Men: So it is only Faith in these Manifestations, which
must put the difference betwix^ the worshippers of false Gods, and uncertain
Deities, and those who do certainly adore the only true GOD. Hence it is that
we find the Servants of GOD, when they sp^ke of Him* styling him by these
particular manifestations; and when they addressed themselves to Him, having a
special respect to them. Thus Jacob called GOD, the GOD of his Father, and the
fear of Isaac. Nay it seems evident that GOD would have himself named from
these things, and worshipped under these designations: for when he appeared
again to Jacob, he called himself the GOD of Bethel, where thou anointedst the
pillar; Genesis 31. 13. and thereafter we find Him (when he required of Jacob the
accomplishment of this Vow) bespeaking him thus, Arise go up to Bethel, to dwell
there, and make an Altar unto GOD, that appeared unto thee when thou fledst
from the face of Esau thy Brother; Genesis 35. 1. GODS constant Title under the
Old Testament, was, that of the GOD of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; GOD that
brought the Children of Israel out of Egypt; and they who owned not these
Titles were accounted Strangers to the True GOD: There is now another Name and
Designation given to GOD, suitable to the Gospel*dispensation, viz. The GOD and
Father of our Lord JESUS CHRIST; the Reason why GOD takes to Himself these
Names and Titles, and will have himself acknowledged according to them, is
because they are particular Denominations, and do more directly lead to him.
The Title of Creator is due to GOD, and can belong to none other: but they who
have worshipped false gods, have acknowledged a Creator; but who is the true
Creator of all things, is only owned and adored by those who believe and
receive the Revelation of the holy Scriptures.

They who attend not to the light of the Scriptures, and reject their
direction, if they own a Deity, it is only a Numen vagum, an unknown and
uncertain God, as the Athenians did. If GOD had never made any other discovery
of himself, then by this outward and visible World, then Men would have been
only oblidged to worship the Deit^, according to that Manifestation: But seeing
it has pleased him to give other Manifestations, for the illustrating of his
own glory, therefore it is Reasonable and Necessary, that these be acknowledged
as well as the other, and that we adore him out of a respect to these Super
added Revelations, as well as out of a regard to the Creation of the World. And
who do it not, are so far from owning the True GOD, that they oppose and set
themselves against him. Thus certainly P^gans, and Infidels, and such as
disbelieve the holy Scripture of the Old and New Testament, must be excluded
from amongst the Worshippers of the One True GOD. Which I wish were more
serio^sly considered; for many Persons of this Age, content themselves with the
belief of a Deity, and think they have gone a very great length, by
acknowledging this, though they deny Faith to the Gospel: Who are not
convinced, By the Testimonies of Scripture, are as much without excuse, as they
who will not be persuaded there is a GOD, upon the evidence thereof, from the
existence of other things, and the Wi^e and useful Order, and Ha^monie, and
Stedfastness which is visible in the World: for the rolling over the production
of this material World upon blind chance, the attributing it to a various
tossing and tumbling of Attoms, without any Guide or Director, as was the dream
of Epicurus and Democritus, would be no greater absurdity then to think that
the Miracles and Prophesies, and other things narrated in Scripture, the
admirable correspondence between the Old and New T^stament, and the excellent
Agreement between the Christian Doctrine and the Nature and State of Man, when
truly considered should not be of God, but only a cunningly devised fable. and
as for the Truth of Matters of Fact in Scripture, there is as much evidence for
them, as in Reason can be desired, and they cannot be called in Question,
without overturning all Humane certainty every Man acts daily in his Civil
affairs, as much upon Trust as he is obliedg'd to, by receiving and obeying the
Gospel; So that Infidelity is a most unreasonable thing. And as it is
unreasonable so it averts a Man from GOD: Who have an evil heart of unbelief
depart from the living GOD; as the Apostle insinuates, Heb. 3. 13. Theisme,
and Atheism, are somewhat of a kin together, and he who is only a Theist may
be very soon induced to be an Atheist: for though the existence of a Deity may
be learned by Natural light; yet without the Revealed light of the Scriptures,
it is hard, i^ not impossible, to discuss the doubts which may arise, from the
consideration of that unequal, and as it would seem, unjust disposal of Men,
besides other things which may be instanced: And without the help of
Revelation, all that can be known of GOD by mere Nature, will not be effectual
to counterpoise the corruption of our Natures, and to restrain us from
following Sensual and Brutish appetites, which being cherished, drown all sense
of GOD, and cast out all Fear and Regard for Him.

As Faith in the Divine Revelations of the Scripture is requisite to qualify
us for being Worshippers of the True GOD: So in the next place it is necessary
that we adore the Godhead according to that Incomprehensible Mystery of the
Trinity. Reason and Scripture both teach, That there is but One True GOD; For
it is impossible there can be more then One supreme Infinite Being: But though
Reason do not, yet Scripture does declare, as plainly and clearly as it does
any thing, that in the Unity of the Godhead, there are a Trinity of the
Persons, viz. the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, each of which is
proposed to us as the due Object of all Divine Adoration; therefore who do not
adore all three, and all three as one God, does not adore the true God: For the
true God, is this Trinity of Persons, as he has plainly manifested Himself,
and manifested it for this end, that he may be so worshipped and acknowledged
by men. That the Trinity is not contained within that Idea of God which we
have by Nature, will not excuse the disbelief thereof, when clearly revealed,
as I suppose every one will find who lays aside their prejudice. We are as
much oblidged, to believe the word of God, as the dictats of our own Reason;
and when Men will not believe God's word, because their Reason cannot fathom
the depth of it, nor easily conceive the truth thereof, as in the present
case, then they make an Idol of their Reason, and may be said rather to adore
it, then GOD: Seeing they will not acknowledge him according to what he really
is in himself, which he has also plainly declared, but according to the
appearance of their own Imaginations. If the nature and essence of God agree
with their sentiments, they are very ready to own and acknowledge him; but if
it differ in any thing from these, then they are Stubborn and Refractory: Which
I may fitly compare, to those who make a nice distinction betwixt the name and
Authority of the King, and his person; the King's Authority they profess to
regard as much as any, but however they are still Plotting and Rebelling
against His Person. If one should take away Omnipotency from God, all would
acknowledge that it is not God reallie, but a fantome of his own devising, which
he pays worship too: For that is no God which is not Omnipotent. Now he does
the same who removes Veracitie from God: for Truth as properly belongs to him
as Power: And therefore as the consideration of God's Omnipotency does oblidge
us, to believe that he can work not only above what we our selves can do, but
beyond our conception, for all things must be possible to him; so the
consideration of his Veracity, oblidgeth us no less to believe all to be true,
which he speaks and declares, though our reason cannot comprehend it. If God
had pleased, he might have made the mystery of the Trinity, and the other
Mysteries of the Gospel more intelligible; But then he would have wanted the
homage, and acknowledgement which is due from our understandings, which the
Scripture calls the Obedience of Faith, and which is no less reasonable then
the obedience of the will and actions: He who does not submit his will to the
laws of God, cannot be said to own him or his Authority; Neither he who
refuses to yield His judgment to God to be informed by him: And the
withdrawing the submi^on of our understandings will not be excused by paying
the obedience of our wills; for one duty, will not make up the breach of
another, which is as necessary of it self. Hence it is that Faith is so much
spoken of in Scripture, and made so necessary a duty to the being accounted
Righteous before God, and therefore also it is that Abraham is proposed for our
Pattern, who against hope, believed in hope, for being not weak in Faith, he
staggered not at the Promise of God through unbelief: but was strong in Faith,
giving glory to God, being fully persuaded that what he had Promised, he was
able also to perform: and therefore it was imputed to him for righteousness,
Now, says the Scripture, it was not written for his sake alone that it was
imputed to him, but for us also to whom it shall be imputed if we likewise
believe. By this rule Socinians, and Quakers will be cut off from the pretenses
of Worshipping the true God; for as much Reason as the one sets up for, and for
as great Piety as the other endeavors to make a show of.

Thirdly that the True GOD may be our GOD, it is absolutely necessary that we
pay all divine worship to Him alone, and not share it among others besides him:
for seeing there is but One GOD, therefore to have more Objects of divine
Worship, is to be guilty of Idolatry; and Idolatry and the worship of the
true GOD cannot agree together. It is certain, that GOD will not accept of
their worship, who pay the same adoration to others besides him: Therefore the
First command which He gave to his People of old, was this, Thou shall have no
other Gods before ME. Intimating thereby that the very foundation of true
Religion, and the very first thing to be done in the Acknowledgment of the true
God, is to resolve to Worship him only, according to what our Savior says,
thou shall Worship the LORD thy GOD and him only shall thou serve; Matthew 4: 10.
This Joshua understood well, and laid plainly before the Children of Israel, in
his last solemn speech to them, wherein he endeavored to reclaim them from
Idolatrous practices, that is, the paying divine respect to any other besides
the True GOD, by showing the absurdity thereof, and its inconsistencie with the
Worship and service of the true GOD; for having bidden them choose whom they
would serve, lest they might have thought that they could well enough both
serve Him who had done so much for them, and others besides, he roundly tells
them, ye cannot serve the Lord, for he is an holy God, he is a Jealous God, He
will not forgive your transgressions, nor your sins, if ye foresake the Lord
and serve strange gods, then he will turn and do you hurt, and consume you
after that he has done you good. And when the People expressed their
resolution to serve the LORD, that they might give a true Testimony thereof he
said to them, Now therefore put away the strange gods which are among you, and
incline your heart unto the LORD GOD of Israel, Joshua 24.

Some perhaps will say that these Passages of Scripture, do only strike against
plurality of gods, or the Worshipping of false gods, with a neglect or contempt
of the True, or the Substituting any in his Room, but not at all against the
Worshipping of Subordinate Beeings, while one Supreme LORD and GOD the Creator
of all things is owned and worshipped. But to this it is answered, that
certainly all is to be included in the Prohibition, which derogates from the
Glory of the True GOD, and is inconsistent with the Worship and Service due to
Him; and therefore among other things, this of paying Divine Worship to any
besides: For who does this, does not Glorify GOD as GOD, nor acknowledge that
Infinite distance, which is betwixt him and all other Beeings. They are guilty
of Lose* Majesty and commit Treason against the Person of GOD, who either level
Him with others, or exalt others to a parity with him; and yet this is done
when GOD is not Honored above others, and that Creatures are honored with all
the Acts of Worship, and Testimonies of respect proper to the Creator. In the
Scripture a Covetous man is called an Idolater, not that he sets up his Money
as an Idol, falls down before it, makes Prayers, and counts it his Creator, but
because it enhanceth his Affections, is the Ground of his Confidence; and that
he cannot be more earnest to Please GOD, then he is to get Money and keep it:
Now is he not much more an Idolater, who designedly, and of set purpose, pays
all that homage and Worship to others which he owes only to GOD; is not this to
return to the Idolatry of the Gentiles; for their Crime was, that they did
service unto them which by nature are no Gods, as St: Paul tells us, Gal. 4. 8.
And in that he says, they did it when they knew not GOD, it clearly implies
that they who know him aright as the Gospel manifests him, ought not to do it,
otherwise they walk contrary to the Gospel, and dishonor GOD.

To guard men against this crime, God has in Scripture declared himself, a
Jealous God; like a Jealous Husband, who cannot suffer with patience, the least
appearance of dishonesty in his wife, or any the least inclination to strange
embraces. And indeed as a Woman would be guilty of Adultery, though she did
not quite abandon her husband, if she did but prostitute her self to another,
and entertain him with the affection and kindness due to her own husband: So
they are guilty of Spiritual whorrdom and adultery, who honor with divine
worship any besides the true God; though they do not cast him off. As the
Husband is not content, unless he have his wife's whole heart and entire
affection; so neither is God, unless those who pretend to worship him, do it
without reserving any homage or service for another. And as she comes at last
to have her heart wholly enstranged from her husband, who has been too
familiar with another: So they who allow themselves to perform Divine Homage
and service to creatures, are at last altogether alienated from the Creator,
when men are drawn, to worship any other then God, they prove wholly forgetful
of him; they let those whom they intended at first only to be Copartners to
turn absolut Proprietors of their hearts and service. Wherefore who would take
the Lord to be their God, must resolve to devote themselves entirely to him,
and to have none other beside him.

Lastly, who would worship the true GOD, and have their service find acceptance
with him, as they must not dishonor God by giving him Copartners; so they
must not make their adress to him, by the means of Images or such sensible or
external objects, but must direct their worship immediately to God himself,
without application to any other thing for the conveyance of their worship; for
this he has expressly forbidden, and that worship which he has forbidden and
declared his displeasure with, can never be said to terminate in him, That He
has forbidden it, is evident from the second Commandment, where all sort of
similitude and resemblances are discharged: And that there is forbidden, not
only Images and similitudes designed for honor of false Gods, but even also
such as might be intended for the honor of the true GOD, appears clearly from
Deuteronomy: 4. 15. where Moses says, take ye good heed unto your selves (for ye saw
no manner of similitude on the day the Lord spoke unto you in Horeb out of the
midst of the fire) least ye corrupt your selves and make you a graven image,
the similitude of any figure, the likeness of Male, or Female, the likeness of
any beast that is on the Earth, the likeness of any winged foul that flies in
the Air, the likeness of any thing that creeps on the Ground, the likeness of
any Fish that is in the Waters beneath the earth, and least thou lift thine
eyes up to Heaven, and when thou see the Sun, and the Moon, and the Stars,
even all the Host of Heaven, should be driven to worship and serve them. In
this passage not only particular Resemblances, but all kind of similitude
whatsoever with a design to worship it, is absolutely forbidden: So that there
is not the least shadow of pretense, for the thinking any lawful to be made
use of. And that God not only prohibits the use and worship of Images
themselves, and for themselves, that is to say, when the worship is made to
terminat in the Image or material object it self; but also when the same is
used, as a means of honoring and worshipping God, is clear both from the due
consideration of what has been already said, and likewise from the instances
of the Golden Calf which Aaron made, and the two Calves in Dan and Bethel,
which Jeroboam set up: For they who worshipped these Calves were not so gross
as to terminate their worship in the Calves themselves; but used only the
Calves, to stir up their remembrance of the true God, and their devotion for
him as appears by their saying, these be thy Gods, O Israel which brought thee
up out of land of Egypt. Exodus 32. 4. 1 Kings 12: 28.

The reason why God discharged the worshipping of him, by Images and external
Resemblances, or any kind of visible objects, and which makes this still
unlawful, is because it is a very improper and disagreable thing in it self,
and that which begets dishonorable thoughts of God, and which seldom or never
fails to make men guilty of the grossest Idolatry. What an improper, and
unsuitable thing is it, to study to make him visible who by nature cannot be
seen; and by material and corruptible things, to represent him who is
Spiritual and Incorruptible; nothing which we can make or fancy bears any
proportion to God, neither has any resemblance of him; the glory of the best
and chiefest creatures, is far below the glory of God; and therefore it would
be but a dishonouring of him to Resemble him to them, or to set up them as
Images of him. To whom, says the Prophet, will ye liken GOD, or what likeness
will ye compare unto him? Who has measured the waters in the hollow of his
hand, and metted out the Heaven with his span, and comprehended the dust of the
Earth in a measure, and weighed the mountains in seals, and the hills in a
Balance. He sits upon the circle of the earth and the Inhabitants thereof
are before him as grasshoppers, he stretches out the Heavens as a Curtain, and
spreads them as a tent to dwell in. By what figures and similitudes then can
he be represented? As St. Paul says, we ought not to think that the Godhead
is like unto Gold or Silver, or Stone, graven by Art and Man's device. And as
there is no truth in these resemblances which men make of GOD, so by making
them they dishonor GOD, and occasion people to intertain mean and
dishonorable thoughts of Him: they who set up visible representations of the
Deity are said to have changed the Glory of the Incorruptible GOD; and thereby
also the true dread of God, came to be taken away from among men. For by the
meannesse and foolishness of Images, men came to despise the Deity which they
represented; as some of the wiser and sober Heathens have observed. Farther the
use of Images is attended with the grossest Idolatry; For who are accustomed
to Worship them, fancy something of Divinity in them, for they think good luck
attends them, and that it bods ill when they want them; as appears by Micah's
speech, to those who stole away his Images, ye have taken away my Gods which I
made, and what have I more? But though one should never be so Cautious in the
use of Images, and guard never so well against these abuses of them, yet
certainly it is not lawful to have them with a Design to Worship them, seeing
GOD has expressly forbidden it, and that he has declared he will not own that
Worship, which is given in and by an Image or any visible form and
representation.

Now by the two last Particulars, it does easily appear how corrupt the Church
of Rome is, and how much guilty of Idolatry, for though that Church profess the
knowledge of the One true GOD, yet She both has other Gods besides whom She
Worshippeth, and also Worshipped the True GOD for the most part in that way
which he has expressly discharged, and which by his word we are assured he will
not own. First the Church of Rome holds other GODS besides the True, for I
may well call these People's Gods, to whom they paid Divine Homage and
Worship: And so Angels, the Blessed Virgin, and other departed Saints,
Crucifixes, Images, the Host, or consecrated Bread, and other Relics are Gods
to the Papists; for they pay to them Divine worship and Service, even all that
is usual to be paid to the true GOD himself, they fall down before them, make
Prayers and Vows unto them, Sacrifice and burn Incense, build Temples, and keep
Festivals in honor of them, and in a Word, there is scarce any Testimony of
respect paid to GOD himself, which is not also given to them; and the service
of these is very little, if any thing different from the service of GOD.
Certainly some few subtle Distinctions, which of late they have set up will
not put any essential difference betwixt the Worship of GOD, and the Worship
of these other persons and things, so long as they are the same upon the
matter. Nay though I should say that they served these more then GOD, I would
not calumniat them, I would but speak the truth; For they pray oftener to the
Saints, particularly to the Virgin Mary, then they do to GOD; She has ten
Aves for a every Pater Noster; there be more Temples built to Her and the other
Saints, and many more days kept to their Memory, then what are consecrat for
the Honor of GOD; their Altars and Shrines are more frequented, and greater
offerings made at them; and by many instances it might be made appear, that
great Privileges, as Indulgences, etc: are bestowed by the Pope, for their
devotion to the Virgin and other Saints, then for the acknowledgement of GOD
and of JESUS CHRIST. Thus what St. Paul said of the Gentiles, is applicable to
them, even that they Worship and serve the creature, more then the Creator, who
is Blessed for ever.

These practices are so palpably Idolatrous, so contrary to GODS word, and so
inconsistant with the honor and worship due to Almighty GOD, that it is a
Wonder indeed how men who pretend to Learning and Reason should go about to
excuse them; They are so gross, that the very Ignorant Vulgar could discern
them, if they were allowed the use of the Light: But alas poor People! they are
therefore Industriously keept in the dark, and the word of GOD is hid from
them, which would teach them the Heinous abomination of these things, and how
highly displeasing they are to GOD.

How little these Practices of the Papists, in Worshipping of Angels, the
Virgin Mary, departed Saints, etc: are to be justified, yea how much to be
abominated will presenty appear by considering the ground they are built on,
and the reason pretended for the defense of them.

First, That whereon all Saints and Angel-Worship is founded, is the
Supposition that they are Agents, and Mediators betwixt GOD and Man, by whose
moyen and Means, both Temporal and Spiritual good things are dispensed: Remove
but this supposition, and the the whole frame of this Service will fall and
prove an idle ridiculous foppery* Now as to this, first we say it is the same
pretense which the Heathens made, for the Worshipping of their several
Deities, as does clearly appear from their Writings; for we must not think,
that they believed all whom they Worshipped to be Gods, in the strictest sense
of the word: No indeed, they believed but One Supreme LORD, One real GOD, who
created and ruled all, whom therefore they called the Father of Gods and Men.
But besides him, they held several others, to whom they gave the name of Gods,
not that they thought them Uncreated and not Subordinat to the great GOD; but
because they were superior to Man by their Nature, and made use of by the
Great GOD, in the Government of the world, and the disposal of Humane Affairs.
Not having right apprehensions of the infinite nature of GOD, they thought that
he either could not, or that it was below him, to superintend all things
himself; but that he did all things by the intercourse of these Inferior
Deities, to each of whom they assigned Particular offices; giving to one the
charge of the Earth, to another the Sea, to a third Fire; some they appointed
to be the Guardians of Cities, and whole Countries, others of particular Men,
and some were set over Beasts, in a word, there was no Art, nor Trade, nor
Disease incident to Man or Beast, nor Passion, nor Virtue, nor Vice, which they
did not commit to the oversight of some Deity or other, which they failed not
to invock, according to their various Conditions and Circumstances. By this it
appears, that the Opinion which the Heathens had of their Deities, was just
such which the Papists have of Saints and Angels, and that the One has no
other ground for the Worshipping of Saints and Angels, then what the other
pretended for the worshipping of Jupiter, Juno, Minerva, Mars, Vulcan, etc.
these Dij minorum gentium, these Gods of the lower rank and order. Neither can
any thing be said in defense of the one which may not be alleged for the
other. And in truth, it would seem that the Romish Church has been so much in
love, with that scheme of Heathen Religion, as to think fit to transcribe it
wholly: for there be little difference in this point, except some change of
Names, that whereas they Worshipped formerly Juno, Jupiter, etc. Now some more
Christian names are set up to be adored. And though certainly the holy Angels,
and some of the Christian Saints, are by far preferable to the best of the
Heathnish Deities; yet it is no more lawful to worship the One, then the
other: for the doing either, is to do service to them who by nature are no
Gods, which the Scripture condemns, Gal. 4: 8* And which they who are thus
worshipped would abhore. If there were any communication betwixt us and the
Angels and Saints, they would certainly declare against the Worshipping of
them, and would show themselves so far from being gratified thereby, as to be
highly displeased therewith. That the Angels would forbid it, we have good
reason to believe, seeing they have done it when occasion offered; for when St
John was about to worship the Angel, who showed him these things he sets down
in his Revelation, he withheld him, saying, see thou do it not, for I am thy
fellowservant. And if Paul and Barnabas returned to the earth, they would no
doubt as earnestly restrain men, from paying Divine homage to them, as they
did once the People of Lystra, and that too for the same reason, even because
they are Men of the like passions; for though they be freed from sin, and these
frailties we are liable to here, yet they are men still, they are Glorified
indeed, but not Deified, and therefore not proper Objects of Worship.

But to return and to speak more particularly to this, which is pretended for
the Ground of Saint and Angel worship. In the next place, we say it is a thing
very uncertain, what use God makes of the Angels and Saints, what be their
charge, and office, and what employments they are put to. We read indeed in the
Scriptures, that God has sometimes employed Angels, in the affairs of his
Servants here below: But whither he does this always, whither each Saint or
Angel has a particular constant employment, or what is the particular
employment of each of them, is not revealed; men can only guess at them,
neither have they any rule to make their guesses probable, and therefore there
is no reason to worship them or to make any adresses to them. For Religious
worship and service, should stand upon better grounds, then mere conjectures,
yea I may say idle and fantastic dreams. What Ground of assurance can be given
that Raphael is appointed for traveling, St. Roche for the Pox, St. Cornelis
for the falling sickness, St. Loy for Horse diseases, St. Apollina for the
toothache, and that the Virgin Mary can give all that either Soul or body
needs; I say what assurance have we of this? And if there be no assurance,
(as certainly there is none*) what a foolish thing is it to make adresses to
these Saints, for these favors which (for ought we know,) do not belong to
them to give, but to other Saints, if to any at all; if men be desirous of the
favors they seek, me thinks they should make application where they are surest
to be had, that is, they should rather go to God then to Saints or Angels; for
we are sure he has all good to bestow, but what gifts are at their disposal,
or whither any, is a thing we know not.

Thirdly, though all should be true that is alleged, that we receive good
things from hands of Saints and Angels, and that they could procure us what we
desire; yet this were no real ground for worshipping them: For they are not
the Author and cause of these things, which are thus supposed to come from
them. Do not err, my beloved Brethren, says St. James, every good gift, and
every perfect gift is from above, and least we should mistake him, and think he
included Angels and Saints, he adds, and comes down from the Father of
Lights, with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning, James 1. 17.
Saints and Angels at the best, are but the means and Instruments of the
conveyance of God's blessings, and therefore it is not reasonable to worship
them, as we worship God. If they ought to be honored with Divine worship,
because God uses their Ministry, in blessing us with Spiritual and Temporal
benefits; then for the same reason, a Merchant or Seaman may adore the Wind,
when its favorable; and every one may worship his meat, for by the use of our
Meat, GOD gives us the Blessing of Life: and it will not cast the Balance, as
to the being a Ground of paying Divine Worship to Saints and Angels, that they
are Intelligent Beeings, understand what they do, and what good they do us,
they do it with good will; for if this were sufficient then it should be of as
great force, for the Worshipping of the Pastors of the Church, or any other
Earthly men, whom GOD raises up to be the instruments of our Temporal or
Spiritual good. The Means and Instruments should indeed have a due respect,
but it should be far below what is paid to the Author and main cause; Saints
and Angels indeed ought to be honored and had in great esteem, because they
stand always near GOD, and are his chief Servants: But there is no Reason to
equal then with GOD, by giving them the same homage, and paying them the same
Acts of Adoration A great difference should be put between the Servant and his
Lord, Ministers of State and the Person of the King, and so betwixt GOD and
Angels, and Saints; Which also shows the unsufficiencie of that other Reason
and Pretense, which some make for the worshipping of Saints and Angels, viz.
That hereby they do Honor to GOD, for though GOD would have them Honored, yet
he would not have them Honored as Himself.

2. Some of the Papists, are so sensible of the absurdity of Worshipping Saints
and Angels directly, that to take away the shame thereof, they study to put
another face on these acts of Adoration, which they pay to Saints and Angels,
telling us that they intend thereby no more, but to entreat the Saints and
Angels to interceed with GOD for them, which may be as well done as the seeking
of Prayers of those upon Earth. To which it may be replied, first, that what is
alleged is not true. 2. That it will not excuse this worship nor free it from
Idolatry.

First, the thing alleged in the excuse of Saint and Angel worship is not
true. For besides the building of Temples, the erecting of Altars, offering up
to them Christ in the sacrifice of the Mass, which without the most violent
stretching cannot be interpret a desiring them only to pray for them; I say,
besides this, there is nothing more evident, then that their Prayers to Saints,
is put up in as express terms, as they should be to GOD Almighty; and it is
impossible for any to address themselves to GOD, more humbly and devoutly then
they do, Particularly to B: Virgin; or to speak more highly of God, then they
do of her; or to attribute more to the One, then to the Other; or to Petition
the greatest Graces in more plain and direct Terms, as appears from many
Instances in that office of B: M: Authorized by Pope Paul 5. There She is
called the Queen of Heaven, the most Glorious Lady, which is exalted above the
Heavens, and in that Hymn which begins Ave Maris stella, they bespeak her thus,

Hail ^ou the Seas bright Star,
Who God's pure Mother are,
Offenders bonds unbind,
Give light unto the Blind;
Our evils clean disband,
All good for us demand,
Do like a Mother bear
Our Prayers, up to His ear.
O singularly chaste,
Whose meekness all surpast
Our sins, from us exil*d,
Render us, chaste and mild,
Grant that our life be pure, etc.
This as it is the sense of that Hymn, so it is their own Translation, as may
be seen in that English Manual of Prayers Printed at Edinburgh, this year 1685.
though it bear the name of Paris. See page: 76. and least the citation of
foreign or old Books may be discredited, we shall produce some passages of this
Book which is lately emitted by themselves, and which the Curious may easily
get a sight of; page: 81. in a Prayer to the Virgin, after very high titles,
they pray, be thou with me in all my troubles, and afflictions, and in the hour
of my death receive, I beseech thee, my Soul, and offer it to thy sweet Son
JESUS, that for thy sake he may accept of it, and place it among the Quire of
Celestial Spirits. And page 85. in the Hymn Memento Rerum Conditor.

Blessed Mary pre*ordain'd to be
Mother of Grace, and Clemency,
Defend us from our mortal foe
Receive us when from hence we go.
And every where throughout the book they speak to her, and of her, as if she
were a Goddess in the strictest sense. But not only they pray thus directly to
the blessed Virgin, but to Angels and other Saints, as may be seen there. The
Prayer to the Guardian Angel, is O Angel of God, to whose holy care I am
committed by the Supernal Piety, illumnat, defend, and govern me this day in
all my thoughts, words, and actions, page 18. And as they sometimes bid the
Saints only pray for them, so at other times they desire GOD to interceed with
the Saints. Thus, O Lord we beseech thee, that all thy Saints may every where
help us, and while we reverently celebrate their merits, we may feel their
Patronages. page 52. and page 108. they amply recommend their souls into the
hands of the Saints, Angels, and Patriarchs, that not only by their
intercession but by their assistance they may be delivered from the Prince of
darkness, and from all dreadful torments.

And if they intended no more in the Worship of the Virgin, and other Saints,
why was that book condemned, which was printed at Cullein for the rectifying
these abuses, which had crept in into the worship of the Virgin Mary, as if the
Author had been guilty of Impiety, against the Scriptures, the Virgin, the
Saints, etc. And on the other hand, why was the book of F. CRASSET allowed, and
Authorized by the Provincial, and the Archbishop of Paris to be published Anno
1679; wherein as an Antidote against the poison of the former, all is
reestablished, which the most shameless Ad^rers of the Virgin, ever asserted;
that an Almighty power in Heaven and Earth belongs to her, that nothing is
impossible to her, that she can save those who are ready to perish, that she
comes to the Tribunal of God, not as a Servant to entreat her Lord, but as a
Mother which may command Her Son; page 28. Thus by what has been said, and an
hundred more instances which might have been given, did we not fear to be
tedious, it appears that the Papists do more, then pray to the Saints, to pray
for them: And that this alledgance is merely a blind, whereby they may the more
easily deceive such as are not yet fully disposed to receive the whole
Saintworship in gross.

But 2l^, though this were true, it will not excuse, nor free those who thus
worship Saints and Angels from Idolatry. 1. Because even this much cannot be
done, without ascribing to them the peculiar properties of God, as
Omnipresence, Omniscience and the knowledge of men's hearts and secret thoughts
If the Saints do not, neither can hear us, its a vain thing to pray to them and
they cannot be supposed to hear the prayers which are put up every where
througout the World, unless they be made every where present, or so Omniscient
as to know whatsoever is done or said upon the earth: Which to say of them, is
reallie to make them Gods, for the Scripture and Reason both appropriate these
things to GOD only. Thou even thou only, says Solomon, knows the hearts of
all the children of Men; 1 Kings 8. 39: And it is One of the proofs we give of
the Deity of CHRIST, that he says of himself, I am he which searchest the
reins and hearts; Rev: 2*. 23. Which would not be sufficient, if any other
could know these save GOD only. Therefore there is a great difference betwixt
the praying to departed Saints in particular, and the seeking the assistance of
good men's prayers upon earth: For there is a free intercourse between us, and
our fellow Christians here; but there is no means of Communication with
departed Saints and Angels, who by their Nature are finiee* and so confined to
one particular place, which makes it a very Improper and Absurd thing to call
upon them every where. ^ly, the seeking the Mediation and Intercession of the
Saints and Angels so much,, and the laying stress upon it, is Idolatry in
respect of CHRIST: For it is a robbing him of his Prerogative, and the
clothing others with it. It belongs to CHRIST only, to make Intercession at
the right hand of GOD; for as St paul says, there is but One GOD, and One
Mediator, between GOD and men, the Man CHRIST JESUS, 1. Tim. 2. 5. And it
seems, St John knew not any other, when he said, if any Man sin, we have an
Advocat with the Father, JESUS CHRIST the righteous; 1. John 2. 1. He speaks
not of many Advocats, but of One, and that One to be neither Saint nor Angel;
but JESUS CHRIST. It is an injury therefore to him, and an Incroachment upon
his Office of Mediatourship, which he has purchased by his Death and
sufferings, to establish other Mediators and Intercessours besides ^im And to
say as they are frequently taught, accept O most Gracious GOD, by the Prayers
and Merits of the Blessed Virgin Mary, and of all Saints the office of our
service. See page 88. of the forecited book.

Thus the Ground of Saint and Angel-worship the pretenses for it, and all that
can be said in excuse of it, are altogether frivolous and unsufficient, and
will not free it from Idolatry. And as it is down right Idolatry in it self, so
by it the worship of the true GOD is shuffled aside: For men run sooner to
Saints and Angels, then to God; and Pray more readily to the B. Virgin, then to
Jesus Christ, as if the One were of easier access then the other; it is more
ordinary for People, to commit them selves and theirs to the protection and
guidance of some Saint, then to the * providence of Almighty GOD; and to bid
some or other Saint to be with them in their journey, and the Management of any
Business for to speed them, then to Pray as Jacob does here, that GOD may be
with them. Wherefore if the Pope were as true to God and Jesus Christ, as his
Vicar and Viceg^rent should be, which are the titles he assumes to himself, he
would take Care to Abolish that, which tends so much to the dishonor of GOD,
and which estranges men so much from GOD; especially seeing there is neither
precept nor example for it, in all the Scripture. The Kings deputy is very
unfaithful, and ill worth his Trust, who sits and sees Customs introduced, and
keept up, which tend to the dishonor of his Master, and are like to justle him
out of His Throne.

But leaving the Worship of Saints and Angels, we come in the next place, to
consider their Worship of dumb Images, relics, and particularly the Cross,
which has not the grounds and pretenses of the former Worship. They cannot say
that they are Mediators betwixt God and them, and that they may interceed in
their behalf; and yet the worshipping of them is enjoined by the Council of
Trent, defended by their Doctors, and daily put in practice amongst the
People, which is so manifest that I need not stand now to prove it by
instances. However I shall mention One concerning their devotion for the wood
of the Cross; On Goodfriday, the Priest in the time of service, holds up a
Cross, and says, Ecce lignum Crucis, behold the wood of the Cross, and the
People are taught to answer, Venite adoremus, come let us worship, and and so
they pray to it, O crux ave, spes unica hoc passionis tempore auge piis
justitiam, reisque da veniam; Hail thou Cross, our only Hope at this time,
increase the Righteousness of the Godly, and grant pardon to the Guilty. Lest
any think that the Cross is used figuratively for Him who was crucified on it,
the following words will remove that suspicion sola digna fuisti, far secli
pretium; Thou only wast worthy to bear the price, or Him who was the price of
the World, In that English Manual (done at Edinburgh) there is a particular
Office for the worshipping of the Cross, and one of the Antiphony's, is, O
venerable Cross, which has brought Salvation to wretches, by what praise shall
I extol thee, for that thou have prepared the Heavenly Life. Page 332. and the
general Let any in that Office; is that GOD would deliver them, not by CHRIST'S
Death, or Passion, or Crucifixion, but by the Sign of the Cross. Thus as it is
evident, that they worship Images, etc. so it will not be excused and
justified, that they do it for the sake of what is represented by them; for as
we formerly made appear, God has absolutely discharged the use of such things
in His Service and will not accept of any Worship or Honor tendered him
thereby. The Images of GOD and CHRIST, should not be worshipped for themselves,
for they are but the work of Men's hands; nor yet for their sake whom they
represent, seeing they have forbidden it: and the Images of Saints should far
less be worshipped, seeing it is not Lawful to Worship the Saints themselves,
as we have made out; and therefore the Homage which the Papists pay to Images,
Crucifixes, etc. cannot be acquitted of Idolatry: How much the Heathens are
accused of Idolatry in the Scripture for the usage and worshipping of Images,
is known to all who read these holy Books? And if there was Reason to fix this
Guilt upon the Heathens, there is no less Reason to leave it at the Papists
door; seeing their use of Images, now is little or nothing different from the
Customs and Practices of the ancient Heathens, as might be easily made appear,
could we allow our selves to pursue every thing at full length. But as we said
of the Saints and Angel-worship, that it was nothing but a transcript of the
Heathen Demon Worship; so who are pleased to compare them together, shall find
the Religious use and Observance of Images among the Papists, to be a perfect
imitation of the Heathen Idol-Worship: for as to their Matter whereof they are
made, it is the same, to wit, Stone, Wood, Brass, Gold, Silver, etc. as to
their quality they are not different, both the one and the other being dumb
and senseless, having mouths which speak not, eyes which see not, and hands and
feet, which can neither handle nor walk. Nay in many places the Images honored
by the Papists, are the very same which the Heathens used, only the name is
changed, thus it is said, that in the Vatican Church at Rome, the Image of
Jupiter Capitolinus, stands this day for St. Peter; only they have taken away
the Thunderbolt, and instead thereof have put the Keys in his hand: but it
may be easily discerned to be Jupiter, because of his long thick and curled
hair, whereas all the other Images of St. Peter are made bald. And at Bordeaux,
in the Metrapolitan Church of St. Andrews, an Antic of Jupiter going up to
Heaven upon an Eagle, served sometimes to represent Jesus Christ ascending up
to the Heavens; And who doubts, but the same thing may have happened in diverse
places? However the Papists agree with the Heathens, as to the Ceremonies and
external Acts of Adoration paid to Images; they clothed, and decked and
perfumed them; they kissed them, prostrated themselves before them, burnt
Incense and lighted Candles to them, and carried them in Pompous processions,
all which the Papists do: * yea some not only See Iur: prej. cont. papisme.
Protestant-writers, but of their own, undertake to prove, that the
Superstition of the Heathens, never carried them so far toward the honoring
of Images as the Papists have gone: And certainly, nothing can be brought in
defense of the Papists, which may not as well be alleged for the Heathens: Nay
except some few logical distinctions, which prove very frivolous, all the
specious pretexts which the Papists make, for justifying their Practice, are to
be found in the Apologies of the Heathens. Do the Papists say, that their
Worship terminats not in the Image it self, but is carried by it to what is
thereby represented? the Heathens said the same. Do the Papists say, that they
use Images only, to remember them of the Invisible objects of their Worship? So
did the Heathen as appears from Maximus Tyrius, and some others. Are the
Heathens taxed with a gross conceit, that the Gods inhabited their Images and
that some divinity resided in them? The Papists entertain the same fancy of
theirs, at least a great part of the Vulgar do, else what means the high esteem
of one Image of the same Person above another? Why are tedious Pilgrimages
undertaken, to visit the Images of the Virgin, or some other Saint in such and
such places, when the Images of the same Saints are every where? How comes it
that miracles, the gifts of healing, etc. Are ascribed to Images, if they do
not think that there be something of Divinity in them? Therefore the Papists
opinions and practices anent Images, are one and the same with the Heathens,
for which they are accounted Idolaters in Scripture: and consequently all
subtilties of the Roman Doctors, will not free their Church, from this horrid
and provoking crime. And as both reason and Scripture declare against them, so
they cannot plead here the practice of the Ancient Church; for nothing is more
manifest, then that the Primitive Church abstained from the very appearance of
this Idolatry and Superstition, so far were they from practicing it, witness
that known Fact of Epiphanius Bishop of Salamine in Cyprus, in tearing a Linen
cloth whereon the Image of Christ was painted, which he found in the Church,
lest it should be an occasion of Idolatry to the People, this was about the end
of the fourth Century; And about the sixth, Serenus Bishop of Massile brake to
pieces all the Images of CHRIST and Saints, which were in the City, fearing the
People who were then Declining from the Purity of the Christian Religion,
should be drawn to worship them. And that the worship of them, was not at that
time Publicly allowed, nor brought into the Church, appears clearly from
Gregory the first his Letter to the said Bishop, wherein he has these words,
that thou did forbid Images to be Worshipped, we praise altogether, but that
thou brakest them we blame; who would be fu^ther instructed in the Judgment of
the Fathers, in this point of Image Worship, let them read the English
Homilies, where also they will clearly see, the great Disagrement betwixt the
present Church of Rome, and the Primitive Church for hundreds of years, so
little Reason have they to plead Antiquity.

But though all should be admitted which the Papists say, for their Vindication
in worshipping Angels, Saints and Images; yet this would not free them
altogether from Idolatry so long as they Worship the Host, or Consecrated
Bread: For though there were no other Reason to tax them with this Crime, yet
this were sufficient, which we come now in the last place to speak to; And the
rather, because they go not about to excuse this, nor do they color it with
subtle Glosses, as in former Instances: they do not cry out, that they are
wronged and calumniat, when they are said to worship the Host, for they
publicly allow it, and the Council of Trent has pronounced an Anathema upon
all who do not think the same Worship due to GOD, ought to be paid to this
Sacramental Bread. That whereon the worship of the Host is founded, is the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation, or a total Conversion of the Bread into the
Body and Blood of the Lord JESUS CHRIST; and therefore if this Doctrine be
taken away, or showed unsufficient it will clearly appear, that they are guilty
of Idolatry, as some of themselves plainly acknowledge.

Now as to the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, it cannot be expected that we
should here treat of it fully and particularly, for this would carry us too
far from the design of this Present Treatise, and make it swell too bigg. All
we shall say at present, is that there is no Evidence for it, no Ground to
believe it, and consequently no Reason for establishing this Worship, which
they make to follow upon it. If we examine the several ways, by which we come
to know and to be assured of any thing; it will easily appear that there is no
Evidence for Transubstantiation, no Ground to believe that the Host is the real
Body and Blood of JESUS CHRIST. All things are Manifest to us, either by Sense,
or Reason, or Revelation, and what appears by none of these, is a groundless
conceit, a Fantastic Opinion, which ought not be made the Foundation of any
Religious observance, and such will the Doctrine of Transubstantiation be found
to be: For first if we examine our Senses, and believe their Testimony: there
is no Transubstantiation, but the Bread continues Bread after consecration; the
Figure, Shape, Cllour, smell and Taste, are the same were before; and if it be
keept any while it moulds and corrupts as Bread, so that to the appearance of
Sense there is nothing but Bread. And if we have recourse to Reason, it will
not contradict, but confirm the Testimony of our Sense: And farther show what
an absurdity it is to think otherwise: because it would, quite destroy the
Nature and Properties of Bodies, if the Body and Blood of JESUS CHRIST were in
the Host; For then it would follow that one body might be in Diverse places at
once, that Matter might be without Extension, that the Accidents, Effects and
Properties of a Body may remain when the Body it self is destroyed, and such
like absurdities; Thus Transubstantiation is founded, neither upon Sense nor
Reason but is contrare to both. And therefore if there be any such thing, it
must appear by Revelation, but it will appear as little this way, as any other:
for there is no Revelation to be trusted, but what is set down in the
Scripture, and they are altogether silent. What ever was the occasion of this
Doctrine, sure the Scripture was not, for it is not plainly asserted, nor is it
to be deduced from clear or Positive Truths. Nay the Scripture gives so little
ground to fancy this, that on the contrary, it speak so of this Sacrament as
may assure us there is no such thing as the Papists dream: for it calls it
Bread, both before and after its Consecration, and the usual Phrase for the
celebration of this Sacrament, is in Scripture, the breaking of Bread, which
would have been a very mean expression if the Bread were turned to the Body of
JESUS CHRIST. The pretext for Transubstantiation, from Scripture, are these
words, this is my Body, which in Truth when considered are no Pretext at all;
because none but such as are Prepossest with the Fancy, could understand that
to be the Meaning of them: such a Mystery and Miracle as Transubstantiation is,
had need to have been asserted more plainly and clearly, that is to say in
Terms which do more necessarly import it. The Disciples who used frequently to
trouble our LORD, about the meaning of His Words, and to raise Scruples when he
spoke of things far more Credible, it is not likely that they would have let
this go, if they had understood him as the Papists do; if they had so taken him
up, as to think that he said, what He Reached, and what they Received, and Eat,
was not real Bread, but that same real Body which was before their eyes, they
would no doubt enquired farther into the matter, and asked how such a thing
could be? But having a little before, in the Celebration of the Passover, heard
our LORD say of the unleavened Bread, according to the Jewish custom, this is
the Bread of Affliction which our Fathers eat in Egypt, they could not
understand the Bread now distribut, to be his Body otherways, then the
unleavened Bread was the Bread which their Fathers eat in Egypt, to wit, not
the same reallie, but only the Symbol or Memorial thereof.

Thus it appears that the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, is a mere groundless
Conceit, favored neither by Sense, nor by Reason, nor Scripture, but flatly
opposed by all of them: And so though the Bread in the Sacrament, be Consecrat
to an Holy use, and though it serve for Holy ends and Purposes, yet as to its
Nature and Substance it is still Bread, and therefore who worship it, worship
not GOD, but a Creature, and a dumb Senseless Creature of it self too, which is
as gross Idolatry as any can be. Neither will it excuse them, that they think
it to be him who is their GOD: for then all Idolatry should be excusable, he
who Worships the Sun should be excused if he fancied a Deity therein; Men's
Opinions will not alter the Nature of things, nor make that Justifiable which
is of it self Damnable, otherways the greatest Crimes may prove no Crimes. Nor
will it acquit the Papists of Idolatry in worshipping the Host, that they
intend therein to worship JESUS CHRIST, seeing their Worship is directed
immediately to another thing; otherwise the Israelites, who worshipped the
Golden calf, might upon the same account be freed of Idolatry. And yet the
Papists in worshipping the Sacramental Bread, are more gross then the
Israelites in worshipping the Golden calf: For they made not the Calf their
GOD, neither did they terminat their worship in the Calf it self, but used it
only as the means of conveying their Worship to the true GOD. Whereas the
Papists believe the Bread in the Sacrament, to be the very LORD JESUS CHRIST
himself, and do terminat their Worship in the very Sacrament it self. Then
which I hardly think there can be a grosser instance of Idolatry produced from
among the Heathens whither Ancient or Modern: If says Coster, a
Popish-Writter, the Sea Stilling: Idolat?
Doctrine of Transubstantiation be not true, the Idolatry of the Heathens in
Worshipping some Golden or Silver statue, or any Image of their Gods, or the
Laplanders Worshipping a red cloth, or the Egyptians an Animal, is more
excusable then that of Christians Worshipping a bit of bread. And another of
them says, that if there be nothing but bread in the Eucharist, they are all
Idolaters. Thus they confess, that it is the Supposition of Transubstantiation
only, which can vindicat them from the grossest Idolatry: but that there is no
such thing to be supposed, we have already proved, and they who will needs
believe a thing not only without all ground, but contrary to all Evidence of
Sense, Reason and Scripture, their Error is wilful, and neither is it to be
excused, nor the Practices which they build thereupon to be Extenuated. And it
will be to little purpose here, to have recourse to the Fathers for the Defense
of this Opinion; for first, we are not obliedged to believe any of them
contrary to Sense, Reason and Scripture. And secondly, it has been frequently
showed that they say no such thing, for until about the Eight or Ninth Century
this Opinion did not creep into the Church, it only entered in with the Worship
of Images, for which among several others, see a late discourse of
Transubstantiation.

But though there were ground for the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and that
CHRIST should be really in the Sacrament, as the Papists imagine; yet according
to their Principles, it is scarce possible, yea I may say altogether
impossible, to know certainly, or to have any assurance, when the Bread is
truly Transubstantiated, or that CHRIST is Really in the Sacrament: and
therefore who Adore it run always the Hazard of committing the grossest
Idolatry, which is the most Heinous of Crimes. According to the Principles of
the Romish Church, there can be no Transubstantiation, if the Elements be not
prepared of due matter, viz. The Bread of true Wheat, and the Wine of ripe
Grapes, and neither of them any ways spoiled or corrupted; if the Priest who
Celebrats, be not a true Priest, that is to say, Rightly ordained, and
according to them, a great many things are requisite to make ones Ordination
valid, and it is not possible to know when they are wanting or when they are
present, but thought he should be a True Priest, yet if he intend not seriously
the Consecration of the Sacrament, or does not pronounce the words, or does not
pronounce them right, but does either mangle or transpose them, in all these
cases, there is no Transubstantiation, neither is there any difference betwixt
the Elements of Bread and Wine which seems to be consecrat, and common Bread
and Wine. And therefore it is impossible to know, when the Bread is
Transubstantiated, or when not, when CHRIST is really present, and when he is
absent; for it is one to an hundred, but some one or other of these necessary
conditions of a right Consecration is wanting; and therefore also who adore the
Sacrament; can never be certain that they adore JESUS CHRIST really, but
instead of him, may be paying Divine worship to a mere creature, to lifeless
Bread and Wine, which may perplex the minds and consciences of such as
seriously consider the heinousness of the crime of Idolatry. To evade this
Difficulty, they tell us that the Adoration of the Sacrament is always with
the supposition of Christ's presence, that they adore the Bread upon this
condition, that it is the Body of JESUS CHRIST: But this is a silly evasion,
and will never free their Church of Idolatry; for it is only Doctors or the
Learned who may use these subtilties; as for the Vulgar they do not make any
such supposition, nor do they worship the Sacrament with any such salvo. And
besides, both the One and the Other pay the same Adoration when it is no
Sacrament, as when it is: for without any scruple, they worship always and
every where the Bread which is pretended to be Consecration, when it is certain
sometimes, nay oftimes, it is not Transubstantiated into the Body and Blood of
JESUS CHRIST, because of the want of those necessary conditions which infer
that change. And when it is but simple Bread, will it take off the guilt of
Idolatry, to say, I worship thee if thou art CHRIST? Which is, as if a Woman
should pretend to excuse her Adultery, by saying when she admitted a stranger,
I do this if thou art mine Husband. A woman is not honest and faithful, if she
embrace another upon light pretenses and appearances; she should be always
certain, that he is her real Husband to whom she pays the duty of a wife: in
like manner, none are faithful to God, who throw away the worship due to him
only, upon uncertain objects. He is a jealous GOD, as jealous of his glory as
any earthly Husband is of his honor, and therefore will never be pleased with
us, if we worship rashly, when we are not sure that it is him we worship. Thus
though it were granted, that the Bread and Wine should be turned into the Body
and Blood of Jesus Christ, yet seeing it is so uncertain when it is de facto
thus turned, it is much safer not to worship then to worship: because there is
no crime in not worshipping, but by worshipping we may run the hazard of
Idolatry. No King would find fault with one that were blind or half blind, for
not falling down and paying homage to him, when he were Ignorant of his
presence. But if such a one, upon presumption of the King's presence should
prostrat himself before the empty Chair of State, or mistake a Courteour for
the King, and accoast him with all the Titles of Soveraignity, and pay him all
the respect proper to Kings, both he should render himself ridiculous in the
sight of all, and also what he did would be altogether vain and unprofitable;
for it would find no acceptance with the King, nay would very readily displease
and incense him, because it would imply that the Majesty of the King, were as
much to be seen in others as in himself. The case is the same in the Sacrament
which any one may easily apply.

But lastly, we shall suppose in general, that the doctrine of
Transubstantiation is true, and also in particular, that the Sacrament it self
is duly consecrat, so that the Bread and Wine is actually transubstantiated
into the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ: yet it will not from hence follow,
that the Sacrament is to be adored, for which there is neither precept nor
example in all Scripture. Our Savior did not enjoin it himself, nor yet the
Apostles after him, neither did they look upon themselves as oblidged to this,
for we read that at the first institution of the Sacrament, they received it in
the same manner they did their other common Meals. And we cannot conclude that
the Eucharist should or may be adored, because it is said, this is my Body,
even understanding the words literally: for if this reason hold good, it would
follow that all things might be adored. The body of Jesus Christ is only the
object of adoration, because of its union with the Godhead; wherefore if we
may worship the Sacrament, because it contains that which is united to the
divine nature, we may and also ought to worship every other thing where the
essence of God is; and therefore every Stone, and Tree, and Animal, all Animat
and Inanimat Creatures, should be worshipped, for God is in them all. But to
worship God in and by the Creature is flat Idolatry. God is not to be
worshipped with a particular reverence to any thing, but either when it is
expressly commanded, or when he shows there visible rays of Majesty and
Glory, and even then we are not to worship the thing it self, but God who
shows himself thus present at it, as the Israelites worshipped not the Ark,
but toward the Ark, and as Moses worshipped God who manifested himself in the
burning bush, but not the bush it self. But where God or Christ is not present
by such visible rays of Majesty, there worship should not be paid; we are
sure Christ dwells in all the faithful, but I hope none will say, that every
believer should be worshipped: so though Christ should be really present in the
Sacrament, yet it will not follow that the Elements whereof it is constitute
should be adored, no more then the Manger wherein Christ lay, or the Clothes
which covered his Body and therefore the Papists who adore the Sacrament it
self, that which they see, feel, and taste with their bodily senses, they adore
the creature with the Creator, and commit as great absurdity, that is to say,
as gross Idolatry, as they who should have adored Christ's garments, as well as
his person.

Thus whatever way we consider the Sacrament, and the words of its institution,
whither we take them Figuratively (as certainly they should,) or even
Literally, as the Papists would be at, it is clear that the Sacrament is no
object of adoration, and they who religious adore it, do service to that which
by nature is no God, which is down right Idolatry. And as the Papists are most
unreasonable, in looking upon the Sacrament as a due object of Adoration, and
by entertaining no less esteem of it then they do of JESUS CHRIST himself; so
they commit gross absurdity, and are guilty of unaccountable stupidity in
eating, chewing, and digesting; and consequently letting forth to the draught
what they have such a high Opinion of; to believe it to be no less then the GOD
whom they should adore, and yet at the same time to treat it thus seems most
disagreeable and inconsistant: For this is both to elevat and to depress it, to
raise it as high as is possible; and at the same time to debase it as much as
can be. Adoration is the highest honor which can be paid, but it speaks out
the greatest contempt of a thing, to eat and devour it. Wherefore I think it
would be very agreeable to the tenets of the Romish Church, that the Pope
should interpose his Authority to discharge people to treat the Lord Jesus
Christ as they do common food, which is to put upon him the greatest indignity.
It Is true, Christ has said, take eat this, but that needs be no hinderance to
the Pope to enjoya the contrary, who pretends to have power to alter and
dispense with Divine Commands: Christ said of the Cup too, drink ye all of it,
and yet this has not hindered the Pope to take it away from the People; and
there cannot be alleged greater inconveniences in giving the Cup, then in
giving the Bread to be eaten and chewed. If the People saw the Host only in the
Priests hands, when it is elevat; their respect and esteem thereto might be the
more easily keept up: but nothing may occasion more the vilifying thereof, then
the allowing them Liberty to use it as they do the most Despicable food. It is
said, that GOD commanded the Israelites, to eat what was usuallie adored in
Egypt, that the Egyptians thereby might be undeceived in their Opinion of the
Deity of these things: And if it may convince one, that a thing is no God, when
he sees it eaten by another: how much more may he be reasoned out of that
Belief, when he is accustomed to eat it himself; For as the Heathen Orator
speaks, is any man so mad as to believe that which he eats to be God. The
Church of Rome therefore should either let go the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, or they should abolish the Custom of Feeding upon what,
they say and profess to believe, to be changed into the Body of their LORD: for
these two seems not to agree well together. There can be nothing more brutish
then to adore what they eat, and to eat what they adore, whereby they make
themselves and their Religion liable to the greatest contempt and Derision. A
proof of which we have in that known speech of Averoes the Arabian Philosopher,
I have traveled, says he, over the World, and have found diverse Sects, but so
sottish a Sect, or Law, I*never found, as is the Sect of the Christians;
Because with their own Teeth they devour their God whom they Worship.

By these Instances which we have adduced, the Idolatry of the Church of Rome,
does clearly appear; it is evident that that Church both teaches to adore as
GOD what is not GOD, and also allows to have Compartners in the Worship of
the True GOD: Which we have the longer insisted on, both because it was
pertinent to our subject, and also seasonable to the times, when Rome is
likely to be so active by its Emissaries, to re-establish its Authority among
us, and that so many fair and plausible things are pretended for the inclining
Men to embrace its principles and practices: but whatever specious pretncees be
used, we may see by what has been said, that there is all reason to avoid the
communion of that Church, whose communion cannot be keept, without drawing on
our selves the guilt of Idolatry, and the having accession thereto in others.

Now that we may draw to a Conclusion of this Section; seeing the Knowledge and
Worship of the True GOD is so necessary, and that all Worship is in vain which
is not particularly directed to Him, what matter of Thankfulness have we that
our Lot has been in these Times, and in these places where we may so easily
come to the Knowledge of the true GOD, and what way to find acceptance in his
sight. If we had been born in former Times, or in many other Places of the
World, we might have remained for ever without the true knowledge of GOD, and
so without all Hopes of true Felicity. It was once matter of Praise to a
Poor-man, when he passed by a Toad, or some other Venomous Creature, that GOD
had made him a Man, and not so Vile a Beast: But truly it should stir up
greater Thankfulness in us, that GOD has not left us to wander after the
Foolish and Ignorant Devices of our own Hearts, nor to be involved into the
Idolatrous Abominations of such as know not GOD, which should have Deformed and
Debased our Natures, and rendered us more ugly and loathsome in the sight of
GOD, then such Vile creatures are in our sight. Blessed be GOD, who has sent
us the Light of the Gospel, which has dispelled the Darkness of Heathenish
superstition and Idolatry, and drawn us from the Service of those who by Nature
are no gods, which could have been no ways Profitable to us, but many ways
Hurtful. This is a Blessing for which we can never be enough Thankful, and if
we have a right Sense thereof we will value it above all Blessings. Many
Heathens and Infidels indeed enjoy a Pleasanter soil, their Country perhaps
affoords them rich Mines of Gold and Silver, and abundance of Wines and
Spices, which we want: But yet we have no reason to envy them upon that
account, or to think them happier then we, seeing we have that which brings us
better then a Temporal Happiness, even Eternal Life: for this is Life Eternal,
that they might know thee, the only true GOD, and Jesus Christ whom thou have
sent; John 17: 3.

Now if we look upon this Knowledge of the true GOD as any Happiness, let us
Praise and Highly esteem it and testify the same, first, by taking a care to
get and to keep this Knowledge: for they slight and despise a thing who are
careless of it, and ready to prefer any other thing to it. It might have been
expected, that there should have been no need, of exhorting People to seek
after the knowledge of GOD; but that ere this time, every one both Old and
Young, Great and Small would have abundantly known Him, seeing we have so many
good Occasions of acquiring this Knowledge; But alas! the contrary is very much
to be seen, our knowledge of God is not answerable to the means of instruction,
we have amongst us, some can give so little account of what is known of God
either by Nature or Revelation, that one might imagine they had been always
tedder'd in the deserts of Arabia, and not bred up in the green Pastures of
Britain. There is generally gross ignorance of God, and little desire to know
him; every thing even the most trifling shufles aside, and diverts from the
knowledge of GOD, and all things are hotly pursued except this, which (though
People will not avow it, yet) do speak out a contempt and undervaluing thereof.
The Prophet tells us, that God had a controversy with Israel, because there
was not knowledge of God in the Land; Hos: 4: 1. and surely we have reason to
think, that his controversy with us will be no less, seeing besides our lake
of this knowledge, we do but despise it, in that we neither much desire it nor
endeavor after it. God has given clear manifestations of himself, but some
will not believe them, and others are careless to be acquainted with them,
loving darkness rather then light, which in Truth is to love their Mi^ery,
rather then their Happiness: For certainly this inner darkness of the Mind will
bring on outer and Eternal darkness; who are without the knowledge of God
here, shall be debarred His presence hereafter, especially considering that
their ignorance is wilful and without excuse.

2ly. As we ought to show our regard for, and estimation of the True GOD, by
taking care to get and maintain the same, so likewise by walking worthy of it,
in studying to Glorify Him whom we thus profess to know, otherwise we shall
but make our guilt and condemnation the greater. It will not avail us much to
profess GOD with our Mouths, if we deny him by our works; to acknowledge him
with our tongues, but not with our deeds and actions; if our knowledge of God
does not lead and excite us to the honoring of him, it will prove much to our
hurt and damage; as we may learn from, Rom: 1. where we see, what plagues and
judgments God gave them up to, who when they knew God, did not glorify him as
God, neither were thankful. It is said, he gave them up to a reprobate mind, to
do those things which are not convenient, that they all might be d^mn'd who
believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousnes^, as we have it;
2These: 2. 12 Seeing therefore we have found out the True GOD, and that he has
revealed himself to us, let us not slight or neglect him, and be careless to
please him, But let us with all Readiness and Cheerfulness, pay that Homage,
Worship and Service which is due unto him. To show which, was the third
Particular we promised to speak to, and we shall treat thereof in the following
Sections.

SECTION IV. Showing what Worship and Service is due to GOD, and how we may
come to know the same.
THE Knowledge of this is most necessary, for it is not enough that we find
out who is the True GOD, unless we also own and acknowledge him, which is not
done unless we pay him that Homage and Worship which is due unto Him: For as He
is our Master whom we serve and Obey, and as He is our Soveragin to whom we
swear Loyalty, and pay the proper Acts of allegiance, so He is our GOD to whom
we give the Worship due to GOD, which can never be rightly performed, unless we
know well what it is.

Now to find out this, we must proceed Warrily and take right Measures,
otherways we cannot choose but fall into gross Mistakes, we ought not to follow
at random, the Devices and Imaginations of our own Hearts; for what pleases us
may Displease GOD, and be unsuitable to his Majesty, and improper for the
advancing his Honor and Glory. Nor will it justify and warrant any way of
Worshipping GOD, that the same is observed by others: for whither we view the
old, or the present World, we shall find that the generality of mankind, have
deviated much from the true way of worshipping God; they have set up various
forms of Religion and Worship, which are not acceptable to God, because in
modelling these, they have studied more their own several humors and
dispositions, then what was proper in it self, or suitable to the Divine
Majesty. Thus for example, the manner after which the Heathens worshipped God,
was an abomination unto him; for how could he who is a spirit, be but
displeased with empty outward shows, with senseless insignificant actions? How
could it but offend his unspoted purity, to be worshipped by debauchery, and
acts of filthiness and impurity? How odious to his infinite wisdom, that
Foolish and ridiculous Gestures should be thought his Honor and delight? and
how unsuitable to his goodness and mercy, to be courted with Cruelty and
Barbarity? As Lucian says, they rather deserve the name of Impious then
Religious, who think God takes pleasure to be worshipped after that manner. The
practices of the Heathen in their Worship, destroy the very Ide^ of GOD, and
chock these Sentiments of him which we have by Nature: for they were the
occasion of these Poetical fables, which made their Gods guilty of theft,
murder, adultery, and the like vices; which Fables were again necessarly keept
up, that they might the better defend and support that Foolish and unreasonable
Worship, which was so far from holding forth the Glory of GOD, that it did only
serve to beget mean and unworthy thoughts of him.

The practices of men therefore, is a very uncertain rule to walk by, as well
as our own Fancy; and seeing men have differed about nothing more, then the way
and manner of worshipping GOD, it would be a tedious task to examine their
various sentiments. The surest and nearest way, to be informed wherein the true
and acceptable Worship of God consists, is to apply our selves to the
consideration of the Divine Nature, and ^o search out his will and pleasure
concerning us: for as when we are about to make presents, and to offer gifts,
we do not so much consider what we our selves would be taken with, as what will
be grateful and acceptable to the person whose favor we are seeking; so the
worship of God being designed to please him, we ought not to seek therein the
satisfaction of our own humors and inclinations, as what will find acceptance
in his sight. And nothing will find acceptance with him, but what is agreeable
to his Nature, conform to his will, and which does properly express the glory
of his Attributes and perfections; So none can show us these things but God,
and if he do not declare them, we cannot be sure not to err: an express
particular Revelation therefore is necessary to determine the Worship of God;
for who besides himself should presume to order it? It is our part to set about
the service of God, but it belongs to him only to prescribe it.

It Is true something of GOD'S mind and will, and consequently part of his true
Worship, may be learned by Natural light; for the will of GOD is founded upon
his Nature, which never varies, but is still the same: Wherefore a due and
serious consideration, of the Divine Nature and Attributes, might bring us to
the knowledge of His will, and of what is acceptable to him: the Dictates also
of Reason and Conscience being from GOD, they do teach us his Will. But though
Natural light may thus teach us part, yet it can not show all that is
necessary; it is good and useful so far, and ought not to be slighted, but it
is not full or sufficient, neither so very certain now, by Reason of that
darkness which Sin has raised, which is too thick to be dispelled by Natural
Light: yea, Sin has so mingled it self with our very Nature and Constitution,
that it is sometimes difficult to distinguish betwixt the Dictates of right
Reason and Conscience, and the erroneous sentiments of that Sinful contagion.
And farther, seeing we have not kept our First state, but are become Sinners,
some other Homage and Worship is requisite then if it had not been so: For it
is not Reasonable, to think that such as have offended GOD should do no more,
then if they had still retained their uprightness; another acknowledgement is
due from Traitors and Rebels, then from these who have been always Loyal, else
it will not be accepted. But what Homage Sinners should pay, or how they should
Address themselves to GOD, cannot be known, unless he declare it: Natural
Reason does not teach this, for though it were cleared of its present
encumbrances, it is only adapted to the State in which we were Created, that is
a State of Innocence, and does not serve to direct our behavior if we fall
from that state. Thus it is evident that some new Revelation is necessary to be
superadded to natural Light both to confirm it and to supply its defects.

And what was thus necessary, GOD has not withholden from Men; but as he made
Particular Manifestations of himself to distinguish himself from the False
Deities which Men had devised, as was showed above: So he has given express
Revelation of his Mind, concerning the way how he will be Worshipped; that Men
may not be to seek herein, nor yet make an offer of what is Abominable in his
Sight. The Worship of GOD is not now left to Men's uncertain conjectures, and
unless they be Perverse and Obstinate, they need not perplex their Minds long
with such enquiries, wherewith shall I come before the LORD, and bow my self
before the high GOD? Shall I come before him with burnt offering, with Calves
of a year old; if we be truly Serious we may soon come to a resolution, for as
Micah says. He has showed thee, O man what is good, and what the Lord do
inquire of thee. He has given a sure, plain, and fixed rule, which to use the
words of Moses, is not hidden from thee neither is it far of, it is not in
Heaven that thou should say, who shall go up for us to learn and bring it
unto us, that we may hear it and do it. Neither is it beyond the Sea, that
thou should say who shall go over the Sea for us, and bring it unto us, that
we may hear it and do it; but the Word is very nigh unto thee, in thy Mouth,
and in thy heart, that thou may do it; Deuteronomy: 30. 11.

The holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament are the Word of God, as is
witnessed by the Divine Testimonies, of Miracles, Prophecies, and the like;
which could only come from God: who ever also considers impartially and
attenti^ely the Matter of them, and Manner of expression, cannot but
acknowledge they are of Divine Inspiration. For as to their matter, they both
teach things not discernable by natural light; and also the dictates of human
reason, could not be so purely and with such evidence held forth by any mere
man, sure all the writings of the Philosophers come far short of them, even in
this particular: and as to their Style and expression it is so fitted to teach
men, and yet at the same time so becoming God, and so suitable to the divine
Majesty, that the Spirit of God only could join these two together, and it is
impossible for the Greatest Master of Eloquency to counterfeit them: So that
there be many evidences of the Scriptures being from God, and as they are his
word, so the Design of them is to direct us in the Worship of GOD, and to
prescribe that Service which is due to him, and will be accepted by him.
Wherefore who would be informed of the true Worship of GOD, ought to consult
these Holy books, especially the N. T. even as a Subject to know his Devoir to
his Soveragine, would do best to consult the public acts and statutes of the
Kingdom; and who would Worship GOD acceptably must do it according to the
direction of the Scriptures, as he who would show himself a Loyal and dutiful
Subject, must do it by a careful observance of the Laws and Statutes of his
Prince.

Some will be ready to ask here wither any service will be acceptable, besides
what is enjoined in the Scripture; which I shall study to answer plainly and in
few words. First it is certain that it is not lawful to exchange the divine
appointments with our own divices; for nothing which we can do will excuse the
neglect of Commanded duties, nor will be received in compensation of them: we
then truly adore GOD and own him, when we heartily and readily comply with his
holy will and pleasure and as this will please him better then an Ox, or
Bullock, that has horns and hoofs, yea better then thousands of oblations and
burnt offerings, so though we would do never so much or so many things it
would not please him if that were left undone, as Samuel said to Saul, has the
Lord as great pleasure in Sacrifices and burnt offerings as in obeying the
voice of the Lord; behold to obey is better then Sacrifice, and to hearken then
the fat of Lambs; ^ Sam. 15. 22.

Secondly, if we make the acts of Religion and Devotion which are of our own
Devising of equal weight, and value with what is Commanded, they are
Abominable Superstition. But Thirdly, if these two be guarded against, it cannot
be said to be unlawful or displeasing to GOD, to do things not expressly or
particularly enjoined, especially if the end and Reason of doing them, be
mainly to help forward that Service which is enjoined. This matter will be
farther cleared by the following Example, if some Capricious and Conceited
Person should either counteract or slight the established Statutes of the King,
and resolve to express His Loyalty by new ways of his own, it is evident that
he would not find acceptance with the King, though his aim be good: But on the
other hand, if one duly observe the King's laws and pay the Homage required,
and moreover out of the greatness of his Affection will do more or something
else, then what by the Laws he is tied to, the King will not be displeased
with him, yea cannot but highly favor him. The very same may be said to the
present question, only there is this difference, that all humane laws are
imperfect, so that a Man may out-doe them, his Actions often may be better then
the Law, by which he may pretend to merit at the King's hand: but the Law of
God is most perfect and reaches to all things good and commendable either in
themselves or in Order to other things; and none have Reason to plead Merit
before GOD upon the account of any thing they do, For their Actions which are
commanded fall short of the Perfection required, and if they do any thing not
expressly or particularly required, if it be Good or Useful any wise, it comes
under some general Command, if it be not Good and Useful, it is but a vain and
unreasonable service, which GOD does not value or regard.

Thus having showed, that GOD has prescribed the Worship he would have in the
holy Scriptures, and that they do not worship in an acceptable manner, who do
it not as they are there directed: It comes next to be considered, what that
Worship is which is there required, and by which we testify that we own the
true GOD to be our God. Now in discoursing hereof, we shall begin with that
which indeed must have the first place in our Addresses to God, viz. Faith in
Jesus Christ, both as he is a Mediator, and a Propitiation for sin. Without
this the Scripture tells us, it is impossible to please God; Heb: 11. 6. And
the reason thereof is clear, for seeing we have offended God, and thereby made
him our enemy, it is necessary that our peace be first made, before either our
Persons or Actions can find Favor in his Eyes: and there can be no peace
without the Mediation and Intercession of some third Person. When Parties treat
together immediately by themselves, it speaks out an equality; and so it would
savor of great Arrogance in us to presume to draw near of our selves, the
infinite distance betwixt God and us, makes it absolutely necessary that there
be some Dayes-Man; and not to acknowledge the necessity of such an one is to do
a dishonor to the Divine Majesty. Nw Jesus Christ is a Mediator, and there is
none other, by him we have access to God, but without him there is none; I am,
says he, the way, the truth and the life, no man comes to the Father but by
Me; John 14. 6. There is not Salvation, says St. Peter, in any other, for
there is none other Name under Heaven given among Men whereby we must be saved.
Acts 4. 12 When ever therefore we present our selves before God, it ought to be
in the Name of Christ, and all our services ought to be tendered in and by him;
according to that of St. Paul, whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the
Name of the Lord Jesus, giving Thanks to God and the Father by Him. Col: 3. 17.
for what is not done thus by Faith in Christ, is rejected as the addresses of
an irreconciled enemy which nauseat and stir up wrath: all the Sacrifices and
services of Unbelievers are an abomination to God.

Therefore also, besides Faith in Christ as Mediator, we must draw near to
God, by Faith in him as the Sacrifice and great Propitiation for sin: for as
the Majesty of God requires that, so the justice of God exacteth this; it
being most just and Reasonable that they who do a wrong, should both
acknowledge it, and make satisfaction for it, otherwise the Injured Person has
no reason to remit the wrong, or to take the Party offending into favor.
Jesus Christ has made Satisfaction for us, by submitting Himself to the death
of the Cross, because we could never have done it our selves but it remains
necessary, that we by Faith give our assent to what Christ has done in our
name, and that by Faith we offer up unto God, this death of Christ, as that
which is just and due to be paid unto him, for our offenses and sins; for
without this, what Christ has done cannot be imputed to us, nor received as a
satisfaction for us. For as in the case of an affront, when a third Person,
understanding well all the points of Honor, is desirous to Reconcile the
Affronted and Affronter, by drawing up a writ, in which there is an ample
acknowledgement of the fault of the one, and a sufficient Reparation of the
honor of the other; this Writ is only accepted and becomes satisfactory, when
he who gives the affront subscribes it: but if he refuse to own and ratify it,
it is altogether void and null; neither is there any reparation of the honor of
Him who is injured. It is Even so here, the Death of Christ is in it self a
sufficient atonement for sin, and does truly repair the Divine honor and
Authority which are affronted and injured by out sins: but it is not effectual
to make our peace with God, until we assent thereto by Faith; for until that
be done there is no actual reparation made by us, what Christ has done is his
own deed alone, and can be reckoned ours no manner of way, and so no more valid
then the Writ in the former case, which the offender neither drew up, nor yet
consented to after it was drawn up. Thus it appears, how necessary Faith is in
our addresses to God; for as it is only for Jesus his sake and by virtue of his
blood, that we ha^ liberty to approach God, so it is only Faith in Him which
makes him become our Advocate, and a Propitiation for our sins in particular;
Without Faith it is impossible to remove out of the way, the wrath of God due
to Sin, and the approaches of Unbeleevers will but prove their confusion and
destruction.

But though Faith be necessary, yet it is not all that is necessary; it must
indeed have the first place in our worship of GOD, and addresses to him; but
after the acknowledgement of Faith, we ought to mind other things too, else we
mangle the Service of GOD, and are very much wanting in that Worship which is
due to him; As when a King to show his clemency, has Indemnified rebellious
and Disobedient Subjects, It is their duty not only to come and lay hold on the
Indemnity, and to claim his Protection and Favor and other Privileges only
by Virtue thereof: But also to return to the Loyalty and Obedience of good
Subjects, and to be careful to manifest the same by such proper acts and
Services, as they have occasion of. So we are justified by faith, and have our
peace with GOD through our Lord Jesus Christ; but this does not absolve us from
paying to GOD, what his Law and the Dignity and Excellency of his Nature
require of us; we are rather the more oblidged to set about carefully, what was
our duty before our revolt, and all these other services, by which it may
appear that we own and acknowledge the LORD GOD. Therefore though Faith makes
our way to GOD, and renders our Actions acceptable to him, yet will not serve
instead of all those duties we owe him.

We must first Reconcile our selves to God by Faith, and then by proper and
suitable acts both of the Inward and Outward Man, endeavor to honor him, and
to set forth the Glory which is Due to his Name. To worship in the General is
nothing else but to make an acknowledgement of some excellency in another:
Therefore the true worship of GOD, consists in a serious sense of what he is,
and in giving proper and suitable expressions thereof; and seeing GOD is
infinitely great, and powerful, and wise, and good, etc: We are taught by
Reason and Scripture, to fear and love him above all things, to trust in him,
depend upon him, to offer prayers and praises unto him; for these Divine
attributes of Power, Wisdom, etc: are not otherwise glorified, nor can we any
other way show a sense of them.

But seeing GOD is not only Power, Wisdom, Goodness, etc. but our Maker,
Preserver, and the Author of all me have, therefore a ready and cheerful
Obedience is due to him; And by this especially we must testify that we own and
acknowledge him. What Obligations are on Servants to obey their Masters,
Children their Parents, Subjects their King, the same and greater Obligations
are upon us to obey God: And so there is nothing more evident, then that we
disown and reject him from being our GOD, whom we refuse to obey in any thing
he commands. Now all the Commands of GOD may be reduced to two sorts. First,
there be some whose reason is apparent to us, such are those which are
discernable by natural light, and usually called the Moral law. The observance
whereof is required by the very Order of Nature: for if we act rationally we
ought to follow this Law as closely, as the Brute Creature do their Natural
instinct. But besides the commands of this first kind, there be others Merely
Arbitrary, which God has enjoined chiefly to hold out his absolute
Soveraginity over us, and to prove our Subjection to him; These Divines
ordinarily term Positive Precepts, and they are only known by Revelation. GOD
never suffered Man to be without some command of this Nature, the Jews had many
such, but Christians have few, and those few too are made very serviceable to
the great ends of Religion, the perfection of our souls, and their Union with
God. How ever though 'twere otherwise, they ought to be observed, if we would
have it appear, that we serve and Worship God: for if it be a part of Divine
Worship to own Gods Authority, as we have made it appear, then we ought to
observe positive Precepts as well as the Duties of the Moral Law; seeing thereby
we signify a true respect to the Authority of GOD, because there is no other
Reason which induces us to such an Observance. Our chief motive to the
obedience of the Moral Law, should be the Will and Authority of GOD, otherwise
it is no Act of Religious worship: but it cannot appear that our Obedience to
that Law is for GOD, if we refuse to observe the positive Precepts of
Scripture; for that Obedience is no true Obedience, which consider rather the
Reason of the thing then the authority of the Injoyner.

Indeed if Moral and positive Duties come at any time in Competition together,
then these last should give place to the first; for this is the Will of GOD
according to that Rule, I will have Mercy and not Sacrifice; that is rather
then Sacrifice. But when there is no such Reason for suspending them, it is a
great sin and contempt of GOD to slight or neglect them. It was by the breach
of a positive precept, that our first Parents revolted from GOD, and which
brought all this Mass of Sin and Misery upon Mankind; Which shows Divine
Authority is affronted by small things as well as great, and that the Wrath of
GOD may be provock'd by the neglect of positive Commands no less then of What
is Moral. Wherefore they are grosely mistaken who think they are only concerned
to be what we call Moral good Men, and that it is little matter whither they
observe the positive Ordinances of the Scripture. He is indeed no true servant
of God, nor a right Worshipper of him, who is Vicious, and whose Conversation
is not Honest and Righteous, for that is a Weighty matter of the Law: but
neither can He be said to Worship God, who makes no Conscience of doing these
Acts of Religion, which God has been pleased to enjoyne, to show his
Authority, and to try what regard we have thereto. One may be Chaste,
Temperate, Just, Bountiful, etc: Not for God's cause, but for his own, because
it is agreeable to his Constitution, and for his Health, Interest, Reputation
etc: but who is all these, and also careful to express his devotion, those
otherwise which are peculiar to the Scripture, gives a true proof that he owns
God and does what he does only for him.

Thus we have given a General View of tha^ Worship and Service which is Due to
GOD. To condescend to Particulars, and to treat of them Severally would be a
tedious Task, who are desirous must be at the pains to gather them from the
Scripture; and they may be much helped herein by that Excellent Book, The whole
Duty of Man: But for the present we shall only speak to one or two points,
which may help to a farther understanding of the Nature of Gods Worship.

SECTION V. Of the Fear of GOD.
THAT we may show more Particularly, how and wherein GOD is to be Worshipped
and Acknowledged, we shall instance, first, that of Fear. And here we shall not
need to prove from Scripture, that GOD should be feared, it being so known and
manifest a thing, that all who have ever acknowledged a GOD, have also
Acknowledged that he ought to be feared; so that not only in Scripture, but
even amongst all Nations, all Religion and Divine Worship is frequently
expressed, by this one particular, he Fear of the LORD. And indeed it would be
very strange, if any should think GOD ought not to be Feared; a greater Parodox
was never vented among Men: Fear ye not Me, says the Lord, Will ye not tremble
at my Presence, which have placed the sand for the bound of the Sea, by a
perpetual decree that it cannot pass it, and though the Waves thereof toss
themselves, yet can they not prevail, though they rear yet can they not pass
over it. Ier 5. 22. And again, as the same Prophet has it, Chap. 10. 6. 7.
Forasmuch as there is none like unto thee, O Lord thou art great, thy Name is
great in might, who would not fear thee, O King of Nations? For to thee does it
appertain; yea it is a saying of that excellent Roman Orator, quis non timeat
amnia providentem, and cogitantem, and animadvertentem, and omnia ad se
pertinere putantem, curiosum and plenum negotii Deum: That is, who would not
fear that GOD, who sees and takes notice of all things, so careful and full of
business as to have a Particular concern for every Action and Person in the
World.

But as it is certain that GOD is to be feared, so by this we do not mean that
servile and slavish fear, which makes Men only apprehensive of the hurt and
evil which GOD may do them, and which such have who consider GOD only as a
Being of great Might and Power, which he uses Arbitrally, without considering
that his Power is always managed by his Wisdom, and determined by his
Goodness. This Kind of Fear ingendereth Superstition, and does as often avert a
Man's mind from GOD as incline it to him; Plutarch observes in his Treatise of
Superstition, that this ordinarily turns to Atheism, and nourishes it. such
was the Fear of the Israelites, when they saw the Lightnings and heard the
thunderings from Mount Sinai, as we read Exodus 20. 18. for it is said there,
when the People saw these things, they removed and stood a far off, and they
said unto Moses, speak thou with us, and we will hear: but let not God speak
with us, lest we die. It was this fear also, which possessed our First Parents
after they had eaten the forbidden fruit, they were afraid of God, and
therefore they hid themselves from the presence of the Lord God amongst the
trees of the Garden; Genesis 3. 8. Nay, the Devils themselves are seized with this
Fear, they also fear and tremble, but by doing so they do not please God, nor
find any acceptance with him.

The True and Commendable fear of God is what we call a filial fear, such a
fear as a Son carries to his Father, whom he loves dearly, a fear which
breeds love and delight, which makes a Man to rejoice in God and glad that he
is; whereas the other fear makes one wish there were no God, and is
inconsistent with love, and does fill one with dread and horror: Of which kind
of Fear it is that the Apostle speaks, when he says, There is no fear in
love, but perfect love casts out fear, because fear has torment, he that
fears is not made perfect in love; 1: John 4: 18.

This true Fear of GOD, is founded upon his Nature, and does proceed from the
right Knowledge of GOD, and a deep Sense of his Glorious Attributes and
Perfections. Some say, Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion, But it is quite
contrary; for the more one knows of GOD, and the greater apprehensions he has
of these infinite excellencies which are in him, the more he both Fears and
Loves Him, and therefore it is we find that those to whom God revealed himself
most, did ever Fear him most: Abraham and Moses seemed to have had GOD in
greater reverence then all other Men, because they were most intimate with Him;
and certainly the Angels in Heaven do yet Fear him more then any the most
eminent Saint upon Earth, because they see him more clearlie and know him more
fully: For it is certain, the more ones worth and perfection is known it is
always the more valued and esteemed, and as there is no Love nor Desire of a
good unknown, so it is a small regard which any can have to the Worth and
Perfections which they are Ignorant off. Wherefore that we may be possessed
with the true fear of God, it is necessary that we get the right knowledge of
Him, we must learn what he is, and how great he is; we must furnish our minds
with true and proper nations of his Almighty Power, his unsearchable wisdom,
his infinite goodness, his unspotted holiness, his admirable greatness, his
unspeakable glory, his strict and severe justice, and his Sovereign Dominion
over all things; which made David to say, my flesh trembles for fear of thee,
and I am afraid of thy judgments; Psalm: 119. 120. I say, we should labor to
know these things, and should let them have a deep impression on our Spirits,
and should ever bear the Sense of them about with us, or else we can never
truly fear God.

And as this is the way to come to the true fear of God, so it expresses it
self always in two things viz. 1. in reverence toward his Name and Person;
and 2ly. in a care not to offend him.

First, if we truly fear God, we will highly honor and reverence Him, and that
both inwardly and outwardly. Inwardly, by having him in a high Esteem, and
thinking upon him always with a holy regard and Humble Deference. When ever
God comes into our mind, or that we present our selves before him, our Spirit
should be struck into fear and ^w; we should lay aside all Vanity and
Lightness, and become Grave, Serious, and Composed, as is suitable to so High
and Holy a presence. The serious Thoughts of God, should make us stoop and
humble our selves and be very submissive; when we consider God and his
Greatness, we should strip our selves of all Pride, and Self-conceit and look
upon our selves, and all things else as little and inconsiderable; yea as very
nothing, for what else are we, or any Creature, nay all Creatures together when
compared to God. Behold, says the Prophet, the Nations are as the drop of a
bucket, and are counted as the small dust of the Balance: behold he takes up
the Isles as a very little thing; All Nations before him are as nothing, and
they are counted to him less then nothing, and vanity; he sits upon the
circle of the Earth and the inhabitants thereof are as Grasshoppers; Isai: 40,
15, 17, 22. They who are proud of themselves, or big with conceit of any other
thing, do either not know God or they do little reflect upon him: for as the
lesser Stars disappear when the Sun arises; and as the Diamond does obscure
with its brightness, the Peeble, and counterfeit Stones, when it is set beside
them, so certainly when God is seriously considered and thought upon, he will
make all things appear small and inconsiderable; the sense of his Greatness and
Glory will cast a shadow upon the Beauty, Luster, and Excellency, even of the
best of other things. The Right fear of GOD will not suffer him who has it to
be proud, but does always fill him with low and mean thoughts of himself, and
with a high esteem of God and greater reverence for him; yea, also it makes a
Man to admire the least Act of Favor and Condescension which comes from GOD.
Thus we find Abraham humbled himself when he talked with GOD, and showed what a
high esteem he had of him, behold, says he, Now I have taken upon me to speak
unto the LORD, which am but dust and ashes; Gen 18: 27. Job likewise when he
had a clear Sight of GOD, he was base in his own eyes, behold I am vain, says
he, what shall I answer thee, I will lay my hand upon my mouth: And again, I
have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eyes sees thee,
wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes; Job 40, 4: 42; 5.
And when David had considered the Heavens, the works of God's Fingers, the
Moon, and the Stars, and was drawn by them to the consideration of of the
greatness of the Maker, he presently looks down with contempt and disdain upon
himself and all Mankind, and admires GOD'S Goodness unto them. Lord, says he,
what is Man, that thou art mindful of him, and the Son of man, that thou
visitest him? Psalm. 8: 4. Thus it appears, that the fear of God does always
make us to reverence and esteem him highly in our minds, and thoughts, and also
to contemn and undervalue our selves, and all other things out of respect unto
him.

But as we must thus reverence God Inwardly, by studying to have great and
worthy thoughts of him, and mean and low thoughts of our selves, and all things
besides for his cause, so we ought to show reverence toward him Outwardly, by
a Grave and Humble deportment of the Outward man before him: All reverence of
the Divine Majesty must not be confined within us, it must sometimes appear
without also, and certainly if there be much Within, there will something of it
Kyth Outwardly. The Inward Thoughts, Sentiments, and Inclinations of the Soul,
are always to be discerned by the Outward behavior; and therefore if we
Inwardly fear GOD and reverence him, we will discover it both by speaking
always of him with great Respect and Deference; and also by such Acts and
Gestures of the Body when we set about his Worship or present our selves before
Him; as are proper to express and speak out the sense of that Infinite
Disstance which is betwixt Him and us: And so we read that Abraham, and Moses,
and David, and all the Prophets, and Servants of GOD in the Scripture, used to
bow down and fall upon their Face to the Ground when they appeared before GOD,
or that he appeared unto them. Yea, GOD himself expressly required this of Moses
and Joshua, at these Manifestations of his presence unto them, which we find,
Exodus 3. 5. Josh 5. 15. For there he commanded them, to put off their shoes
from off their feet, which according to the custom of the Eastern Nations, was
then a Testimony of Respect and Reverence. And indeed seeing we bear no
proportion to the Greatness of God, there is nothing more Proper or Reasonable,
then that we should Reverence and Exalt him, by such depressing of our selves
and humbling of our Bodies in his Sight. The very Angels, these Glorious
Spirits, are said to vail and cover their faces when they appear before God;
And how much more Reason is it, that we be abashed and humbled who dwell in
houses of clay, and whose foundation is in the dust. Certainly if there be any
Gesture or Posture more humble then anoher, it becomes us to use it; and it
does bespeak little Reverence to God, to use that Gesture and Carriage, when we
speak to him, or he speaks to us, which we would not make use of, but when we
were conversing with our Equals, or Inferiors. Sitting therefore at Prayer,
and having the head covered when Divine Worship is performed, are very undecent
and unbecoming things. I wonder how ever this creept in, or came to be in
fashion amongst us; and I think it yet more strange, that there should be some
who take upon them to defend that which is condemned not only by the practice
of all the Saints and Servants of God, we read of in Scripture, but also by the
Custom of all Nations whatsoever: For even the very Heathens, would account it
irreverence toward their False Gods; which many Christians in this Country are
not ashamed to do toward the True and Living God. What the Lord says by the
Prophet Malachy, in another case, will be very applicable here, a Son honors
his Father, and a Servant his Master, if then I be a Father, where is my
honor, and if I be a Master where is my fear: offer this now unto thy
Governor, will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy Person, says the Lord
of Hosts? Mal: 1. 6. 8. Nay, to pass Kings and Princes, and those of the best
quality, even the meaner sort of Gentlemen, would look upon themselves, as
affronted and uncivilly Treated, if they had not greater respect paid them,
then what some show to God: who would not be incensed and provock'd, if his
Tennent or any other Poor mean Fellow should thrust into his presence, without
uncovering his Head, and sit down and talk with him? I doubt not but there are
some, who would be ready to cause kick such all manner'd Persons, to the door;
and I cannot see, how that can be reckoned as reverence and a sign of devotion
to God which men look upon as rudeness and incivility.

There be some which very much mistake that place of the Prophet, Isai. 29. 13.
Where the Lord complains of his People of Old, that they drew near Him with
their Mouth, and that they honored him with their lips, as if that were a
discharge of all external Worship or of outward reverence therein: whereas it
is not the outward honor and reverence which the Lord there finds fault with,
but only that their hearts were far from him: God values not the Body without
the Soul, for then it is but a dead Carcass; he cares not for our outward
reverence and Prostrations, when the inward Spirit of devotion is wanting: but
as he calls chiefly for the Heart and Mind, because it is the better part of
Man; so he expects that having the inward, the outward man will follow: and
indeed what God has joined together should not be put asunder. The Apostle
enjoins the honoring of God outwardly as well as inwardly, when he says,
Glorify God in your body, and in your spirit which are Gods; 1 Cor: 6. 20.
'Tits true superstition is a fault, but it is not the best way to redress it,
to turn Profane and irreverent. God is not pleased with the humblest postures
of our bodies, when our hearts and souls do not accompany them: but to make up
that want, we must not turn away from the necessary and becoming testimonies of
devotion and reverence: What our Savior said on another occasion to the
Scribes and Pharisees, I may well apply here, these ought ye to have done, and
not to leave the other undone. Matthew: 23. 23. As hypocrisy may be joined to
the outward acts and expressions of humility and reverence, so it is as certain
that there is little true sense of God within, when the outward behavior is
not Grave, modest, and Humble: wherefore it is the saying of One, I will as
sure believe him temperat, who is staggering in the Streets with drink, and him
chaste, whose eyes are full of Adultery, and him merciful, whose hands are
imbrued in blood, as that he can truly fear God who shows no outward
reverence in his worship. The outward reverence of the Body, is not only
necessary to testify the inward respect of the mind; but it is also requisite
for the quickening and stiring it up: as the outward Pomp and Grandeur of
Princes and Magistrates is necessary, to put People in mind of their Power and
Authority, which otherwise they would be ready to forget, or to be too bold
with; so the outward Humiliation of our Bodies, serves to cherish and to keep
up in us the sense of God's greatness and Glory, which otherwise perhaps would
slip out of our minds.

Thus we have spoken to that reverence both Inward and Outward, which is due to
GOD, which is always One of the fruits of his fear. The other effect thereof,
consists in a great care and circumspection not to offend or displease him: And
indeed if this be wanting, there is no true Fear of GOD, nor will any Reverence
which we show toward him find acceptance with him. As Children who truly
honor and respect their Parents, are always very loath to give them any
manner of offense, and as they are grieved when at any time they chance to do
it, though they do not Fear nor apprehend to be chastised; so such as are
sincerly acted with the Fear of GOD, will carefully watch against all manner of
sin, and will have an aversion from it, though there where no ground to dread
Hell or other punishments; but even because that this is contrary to him, whom
they entirely love and honor: And when they have sinned, the consideration of
the offense which is given GOD thereby, will afflict them more, then these
bitter fruits which sin always produces. Therefore the True fear of GOD, does
always restrain Men from doing these things that are Evil in his sight, and
does incline them to that which is good, the fear of the LORD, says the wise
Man, is to hate evil; Prove: 8: 13: And again, by the fear of their Lod, men
depart from evil. Chap. 16 6. This is a great Aw* band over men, and will crub
them more then all humane Laws and Authority: For such as are possessed with
the Fear of GOD, will not only for bear gross and open transgressions, which
may make them liable to punishment from Men* but even also as much as possible
Secret and lesser Faults, which the World takes no notice off. Thus Joseph
would not yield to the enticements of his Mistress, though perhaps he might
have done it, without being in hazard of a discovery, for he feared GOD: How
shall I, says he, do this great wickedness, and sin against GOD. Genesis 39. 9.
And when his Brethren were seized with Panick fear because of that rough and
severe countenance which he put on toward them, he encouraged them with this
consideration that he feared GOD, as if he had said, Though I have all power
and Authority here in Egypt, yet you have no reason to be afraid of me, for I
am not one who will abuse my Authority, and wrest my power to do Men hurt, and
prejudice, for I fear GOD: Genesis 42. ^8. When Men are not very careful to avoid
sin, and to do good, it is certain there is little or no Fear of GOD before
their eyes, and they do in vain pretend it: How impertinent and unreasonable a
thing is it, to say, we Fear that Person whom we nevery study to please, and
whom we are careless whither we offend or not? There cannot truly be greater
signs and evidences of contempt and disrespect then this, and it is impossible
that we should both Fear and Despise, Slight and Reverence the same Person at
one and the same time.

And hence it appears how little of the true fear of God is in the World, even
among us who are called Christians, seeing there are so small endeavors to
please God, Nay such a forwardness to displease him, by doing these things
which he hates and Abhors, and which he has so often expressly forbidden. It is
a sad, but a certain Truth, that the Mogul and Cham of Tartar, nay some of the
Petty Indian Princes, are not only more honored and feared by their own proper
Subjects, but also may be said to be had in greater Reverence by many
Christians, then the true and everliving GOD is: because they do not slight
them so much as they do Him, their laws they do not so often violat, their
power and Authority they do not so frequently bafle and trample upon as they do
Gods; and it is certain their name is not so much nor so often profaned and
derided, as the Name of the Great GOD; for some, nay many both Old and Young
amongst us, are come to this now, that they cannot open their mouths without
profaning the holy Name of God, though he has said expressly, that he will not
hold them guiltless who take his Name in vain. Judge I pray you, if this be to
fear the Lord, or if it be not rather to mock him, and to have him in Derision;
for certainly though Men would set themselves to affront Him, they could hardly
do it more effectually; And is this then fair and equal dealing by such as
profess themselves Friends and Servants? Did every Nation or People ^reat the
God whom they worshipped at this rate? Men have not cared to scorn and
dishonor these Dieties, whom they did not own, but was there ever such a
strange and absurd thing as this? That People should profess and acknowledge
One to be the true GOD, and yet carry no respect toward him, neither show any
care to please him* but daily and hourly live in the greatest contempt of him.
These things are so unworthy and so inconsistant, that I neither know how any
can excuse them, nor can I find out any similitude or comparison proper and
sufficient, to set off the madness and unacountable absurdity thereof. To
convince Men hereof, I would ask them what they do mean by being thus careless
to please God* and why they do so easily offend Him? Do they think Him ignorant
of their Actings? Say they (as Eliphaz speaks) how does God know, can he
judge through the dark Clouds; Job 22: 13. And with these Atheists, in the 94.
Psalm. who say, the Lord shall not see, neither shall the God of Jacob regard
it* If so, hearken to what the Psalmist there teaches, understand ye brutish
among the People* and ye fools when will ye be wise? He that planted the ear,
shall be not hear? He that formed the eye shall he not see? He that chastises
the Heathen shall not be correct? He that teaches men knowledge shall not he
know? The Lord knows the thoughts of Man, ^ea he spieth them out a far off;
he is privy to all our ways, and there is nothing that we do, hid from him,
how therefore dare any presume to offend and to provoke Him? For God is a
terrible GOD, and of great power, if he but touch the Mountains they smoke,
when the voice of his thunder was in the Heaven, the lightnings lightened the
World, the Earth trembled and shook. At the rebuke, O GOD of Jacob, says the
Psalmist, both the Chariot and the Horse are east into a dead sleep, thou
therefore even thou art to be feared, and who may stand in thy sight when once
thou art angry? Psalm: 76: ^. 7. If God arise his enemies shall be scattered,
they also that hate Him shall flee before him; as smoke is driven away, so
shall be drive them away, as wax melts before the fire, so shall the wicked
perish at the presence of God. Psalm: 68: 1. 2. It Is strange to see how warry
Men will be of offending those who may ruin their Fortune, or take away their
Lives, or make them miserable here, and yet at the same time, to find them not
in the least afraid of exasperating God, who besides the punishments he can
inflict in this World, is able to render one eternally miserable? and what a
folly is it then to fear any more then him, and to be more careful to shun a
small evil, then that which is unspeakeably great? I shall conclude with these
words of our Savior, I say unto you my Friends, be not afraid of them that
kill the body, and after that have no more that they can do: but I will
forewarn you whom you shall fear, fear him, which after he has killed, has
power to cast into Hell, yea I say unto you, fear him. Luke 12. 4.

SECTION VI. Of Walking with GOD.
It Is the Error of some, that they think the whole of Religion consists in
some few External Acts and Performances, which having done, they think they
have acquitted themselves sufficiently of the Worship of GOD: Thus for
Example, they make Religion to be, to Fast, and Pray, and keep the Church, and
Observe the Sabbath, etc. and by doing these, they imagine they have done
enough, to set themselves up for the true Worshippers of GOD. But though these
Actions be necessary parts of Religion, yet they prove but dull insipide
things, if the Intervals betwixt them be not likeways filled up with proper and
agreeable Exercises, which tend to the Honor and Glory of GOD. To Worship GOD
is not to perform a Particular set of Actions, but to order the whole Life and
Conversation aright before him. Wherefore in Scripture it is generally set
forth, by the Phrase of Walking with GOD, thus says the Prophet Micah be has
showed thee O Man, what is Good, and what does the Lord thy GOD require of
thee, but to do Justly, and to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with thy GOD;
Micah 6. 8. It is recorded also of Enoch and Noah to their commendation, that
they walked with GOD; Gen: 5. 24. 6. 9. And it is a certain rule, that when GOD
commends any thing in any of his Servants, it lays an Obligation on all the
Rest, to imitat that thing, that thereby they also might please him.

That there is Frequent mention of walking with GOD in the Scripture, is known
to all and we design at present to unfold the Importance of the Phrase, and to
show the things comprehended therein, are necessary acts of GODS worship, and
that who so would own and acknowledge him, ought to do it by these Instances.

The Septuagint, and Saint Paul following them, render the Phrase by Pleasing
GOD: But in doing so, they rather have had an eye to the End of this Duty; then
to explain the Particulars thereof. The scope and design of Walking with GOD is
to please him, but by what Means we shall best do that; we will learn by
considering the Reason of the Phrase and what is employed therein. It is a
Metaphoricallspeech taken from the custom of Men's convensing together,
especialy of Inferiors keeping company with their Superiors: And it imports
these several Particulars, first, a dutiful regard of GOD'S Presence. Secondly
a careful observance of what he does. Thirdly, the consulting him about what
concerns us, especially the great and Momentous Acts of our Life: Fourthly, and
and lastly, a steadfast and Faithful following, or keeping close those
Directions and Advices which he gives. We shall take a view of each of these;
and First,

Of Regarding GOD'S Presence.
First, walking with GOD, implies a dutiful regard to bi^ Presence, that is
out of respect to GOD, we ought to take care to carry our selves decently and
sutably before him, for the Presence of great and Worthy persons does always
oblidge to a discreet and civil Behavior. There be some indeed who are never
overawed by any, but speak, and do what ever comes in their head, and what
ever their Humors prompts them to, what ever place or Company they be in; which
bewrayes a great want of Discretion* and shows them to be insensible of what
respect is due to those before whom they take this liberty. Certainly is is
very great insolency, to act foolishly, or speak impertinently, before such
whose either place, or wisdom, or virtue, does command respect and reverence
from us. When Servants are before their Masters, or Children before their
Parents, or Subjects before their Prince, they ought to forebear not only what
they know will certainly displease; but also all things light and undecent, as
Foolish jesting, and Filthy communication, and the like: But how much more
ought the Presence of Almighty GOD oblidge us to compose our selves to a
humble, Holy, and Virtuous behavour? GOD gave it in Precept to Abraham, walk
before Me, and b^ thou perfect; Genesis 17. 1. That is, consider thy self always
as in my sight, and walk agreeabl^ to the belief thereof, by behaving thy self
Perfectly and Uprightly*. All the ways of a Man are before the Lord, and he
sees ^ll his goings, as it is Job ^4* 21. None can hide themselves from him in
secret places that he cannot see them, for every Creature is naked and open
before Him: And therefore, what Solomon advises, when we come to the house of
GOD, ought to be our care in every place, though never so secret and remote
from the sight of Men, seeing God is present every where as well as in his
Temples; keep thy foot, he not rash with thy mouth, and let not thy heart be
hasty to utter any thing before God; Eccles. 5. 1.

By this we do not mean, that Persons should every where and at every time, be
taken up with Prayer and Meditation, and such other Religious Exercises, as are
proper for the House of God, for God has enjoined other employments besides
these, and our present State and condition makes it necessary, often to mind
other things. But what we would* here inculcat* is that the sense of the Divine
Presence, should make us take up David's resolution, I will take heed to my
ways, that I sin not with my tongue; Psalm: 39. 1. We ought to cut off from our
Conversation whatsoever is evil and offensive to God, and to study as much as
possible to demean our selves always sutably, that is, as becomes our Station,
the Time, Place, and other Circumstances requisite to be observed. Because Gods
Eye is always upon us, it should be our endeavor to do those things which he
approves of, which does not tie us to do always what is best in it self simply,
or when compared to other things, but only that we never be busied in other
then Lawful and innocent things, and that we be ever careful to do what is
best relatively, and agreeable to the Occasion, Time, Place and Witness of our
Actions.

When we thus study to order our conversation aright, and to remove from it,
what is evil, foolish, and undecent, in regard of God's presence which attends
us, we do highly honor God, and it is as acceptable Worship as we can pay to
Him: And without this, he will little regard our set and solemn services. And
indeed how can it be said, that they own or honor God, who are no ways
careful how they behave themselves before him? But they may be truly said to
acknowledge him, who out of a due deference to his presence which fills both
Heaven and Earth, do shun warrily what they think unworthy of it. Though there
be some so out of measure, insolent and wicked, as not to care in whose
presence they are; yet generally the presence of men have some influence upon
us, and will restrain us from many things, which otherwise we would, and are
inclined to do, what gross Atheism then is it? And what a high contempt of God
does it speak out! To be overawed by the eye of Man, and not by the presence
of Almighty GOD! To do and forbear any thing, because Men are witnesses, and do
approve or discommend it, and yet not to care to do or neglect the same thing
though God see us, What a dishonor is done to God, when we regard Man more
then him? And do we not regard man more then God, when we are more desirous of
applause from Men, then to find favor in the Eyes of GOD? And when we withdraw
our selves from the eyes of Men lest they should know our evil Actions, but
never value God's sight and knowledge thereof? He who does thus, has not taken
the Lord to be his God, he does not own and acknowledge him, he bows only to
Men, to his own Credit or Humor, and has set up these for his GOD. Wherefore
who would not be guilty of such gross Idolatry, as to worship the Creature more
then the Creator, and and who would testify and make it appear that they
indeed adore the true GOD, let them not slight or despise the Divine Presence,
but let them always eye and consider it, and be careful to carry themselves
always, as before so Great and Glorious a Majesty. And seeing that God is every
where, and has his eye always upon us, let us in private and in public, at
home and abroad, at all times and in all places, walk wisely and circumspectly,
let us not be guilty of such incivility toward God, as to do any unworthy
thing before him: but let us labor so to behave our selves, that he may think
us worthy of that testimony, which he gave unto Job, whom he said, was a
perfect and upright man, One that feared GOD, and eschewed evil; Job 1. and 1,

Of Observing GOD'S Ways and Actions.
In the second place, Walking with GOD, implies a careful observance of
whatsoever he does: For it is usual for such as are in company together, to
watch and take Notice of one another Words and Actions; and if one be more
eminent for Wisdom and Ver. tue, or any other excellency, then such a are with
him are the more obliged to eyes his Motions and and Behavior. Nothing which
Excellent and Worthy Persons speak or do, should fall to the Ground
un-observ'd; and it does speak out some contempt of one to think that what
they do or say is not worth the noticing: as therefore out of respect to Great
and Eminent personages we ought seriously to consider them, their Speeches and
Actions, and to count them worthy our remembrance, so much more should our eyes
be fixed upon God, and it is much more our duty to consider him, what he has
done and what he daily does in the World; that the consideration thereof, we
may return Him due praise and glory. For this end GOD endued us* with Rational
Spirits, and with understanding Faculties, that we might be capable of
Contemplating himself, and his works. And therefore, when we turn away our
eyes from such Contemplations, or neglect them, we do in so far swerve from
the Design of our Creation, and do disappoint GOD of that Tribute of Praise
which is due unto him, yea, in steed of honoring him, we do actually dishonor
him, by slighting the Effects and Products of his infinite Wisdom, Power, and
Goodness. All GOD'S Actings are like himself and do show forth his Admirable
Perfections, there is no part, even of the Material world, but is stamped with
some impression of his Almighty power and unsearchable wisdom, and Infinite
goodness: And therefore what the Psalmist says of the Heavens, Psalm. 19. 1.
May be said of all GOD'S other works; they all declare the glory of GOD, i. e.
As a Curious engine or Fine Piece of Work, does hold out the Skill and Cunning
of him that made it; so all the Works of GOD have in them, what does set forth
and proclaim, how wise, how great, and good he is. And as the External and
Material World, does contain Visible Characters of the Divine greatness and
Perfections, so GOD has created Rational and Intellectual Beeings, viz. Angels
and Men, capable to discern and read them; that by so doing they may sound
forth his Praise.

The Contemplation and Admiration of God's works and Ways, is our proper, and
should be our constant employment: And if it had not been for this, there would
not have been bestowed upon us such Powers and Capacities. Wise and
Understanding Persons, will not Expend more upon any thing, then it is worth;
they will not rear up stately fabrics merely to lodge Swine, nor will they
buy fine Silk and Carpet to Wipe shoos and Dishes: and neither would GOD have
endued us with understanding Souls, Immortal Spirits, if we had been only
destined to the Acts of a Brutish and Sensual life; for then what Judas said
impertinently, when the Box of Ointment was powered upon our LORD, might have
been here put as a very pertinent question, What needed all this Cost. For
something less then Reason and Spirit, a mere Animal Sagacity might have
served, and been sufficient for finding out and taking care of Bodily
Pleasures, and Accommodations. GOD and his Works therefore, are the only
suitable object, for our thoughts to be employed about: these indeed are
answerable to the capacities of our Soul; and as the considerations thereof,
tends to the Honor of GOD, so it clevats our selves to a proper and becoming
Dignity; whereas the most of other things are so far below us, and so much
within our reach, that it is a debasing of our Natures, too much to mind, or to
be taken up with them.

However, it is certain all the Saints and Servants of GOD have ever thought it
their Duty, and a proper and necessary Testification of their Respect unto GOD,
to be taken up with the Contemplation of his Works, both of Creation and
Providence, and to set a part sometime daily for this purpose. We are told that
it was Isaac's custom, to go out to the Field and meditate about even-tide;
Genesis 24: 63: and no doubt his Meditations were such as we are speaking of. The
Book of Job shows how much that holy Man and his Friends were accustomed to the
consideration of GOD' S Works and Ways; for all their Discourse and Reasonings
are taken thence. Yea, when GOD himself appeared unto Job, he calls him to a
particular consideration of his great and wonderful Works, and does therefore
largely display them before him, in the 38. and following Chapters. Nay, what
are all the Psalms, but as so many devout Meditations of GOD'S Works, or Pious
Hymns composed in memory of them? The Works of the LORD* says the Psalmist,
are great, and they are sought out of all them, that have pleasure therein. His
Work is honorable and Glorious and he has ordained his wonderful Works to be
remembered; Psalm. 111. 2. 3. And again he says, All thy works shall praise
thee, O Lord, and thy Saints shall bless thee? That is, as his works contain
the matter of his Praise, so the Saints shall publish and Declare it, by
admiring and magnifying of them, they shall, as he goes on, speak of the
Glory of thy Kingdom, and talk of thy power to make known to the Sons of Men
his mighty Acts, and the Glorious Majesty of his Kingdom, Psalm. 145. 10. etc:

Thus it appears, that the observing of GOD'S ways and works, makes a great
part of his Worship; and that hereby we do truly acknowledge him to be what he
is, not only of great Majesty, but also a GOD of Infinite Wisdom and Power:
Because by so doing, we declare that He does nothing in Vain, nothing that is
not infinitely Worthy, of our most Serious Consideration, and that our thoughts
can never be better employed, them in the Contemplation of what he has done
and daily does in the World. Let us therefore frequently betake our selves, to
the Contemplation of GOD' S Works both of Nature and Providence; Let us sit
down and seriously and devoutly consider them, and Admire, and Adore that
Wisdom, Power and Goodness which appears in them.

It will become us to take notice, how manifold the works of the LORD are, and
in what Wisdom he has made them all: How he has reared up this vast fabric
of the World out of nothing, and Wonderfully beautified and adorned it. How he
has stretched out the Heavens like a curtain, and in them has set a
Tabernacle for the Sun, which is as a bridegroom coming out of his chamber, and
rejoices as a strong man to run a race, whose going forth is from the end of
the Heaven and his circuit to the ends of it, and there is nothing, hid from
the heat thereof. What a wise and admirable contrivance is* the Situation and
Motion of the Sun, whereby all the parts of the world are equally enlightened?
For what any part wants at one time, it has at another, those places which are
longest without the Sun, have him also longest with them, so that his Presence
always equals his Absence. And the dispensing his presence thus differently is
much more useful and convenient, then if it had been otherwise; it is visibly
better that the Sun moves now betwixt the two Tropicks not in a straight or
direct Line, then if it had rolled regularly upon the Equator: for then those
under the Line or near it would have had all the Advantage, and his influence
upon the rest of the World would have been very faint, like to that in March
and September, which is not sufficient to produce and ripen the various fruits
of the Earth, which are useful both for our Support and Pleasure. But when we
have our eyes lifted up to the Heavens, the Sun is not all which is worthy to
be observed there, we ought likewise to consider the Moon which GOD has
appointed for the Distinguishing Seasons, and has placed as a Lamp to give
light in the night, that those whose necessities call to travel then, may be
derected and see their way. We ought to view the Stars also, these admirable
Embellishments of the Heavenly Frame, which we have reason to think vastly
bigg, beyond their appearance, else how would they be seen at such a distance?
And seeing Reason teaches them to be so great in quantity, and that our eyes
show them to be many in number, and Art yet far more, we (...) well conclude
that the work of GODS Creation is great and magnificent above the reach of our
Apprehensions: And therefore it may fill us with wonder and astonishment, that
GOD should take such notice of Man, who bears so small a proportion to the rest
of the Creation; When I consider the Heavens, says David, the work of thy
Fingers, the Moon, and the Stars, which thou have ordained; Lord, what is man,
that thou art mindful of him? Or the Son of Man that thou visitest him? Psalm
8. 3. 4.

The Earth is to the rest of the World as a point to a great glob, or a grain
of sand to a high mountain, and yet it affords many instances both of the
Wisdom and Power of GOD. It hangs upon nothing, as Job speaks; and yet as the
Psalmist has observed, he has so laid the Foundations thereof, that it cannot
be removed for ever; the Earth is ordained a Temporary abode for Man, and it is
made most useful and convenient; for it affords not only Necessaries but
Comforts; it yelds not only Food to sustain our Life, but also pleasures to
affect our fenses; there are proper objects to every appetite, and things
suitable to all the ends and purposes of our Present Condition. Every place
gives the necessaries of Life, and what is else desirable is wisely (...), so
that they who live in the several parts of the world may be engaged to
entertain mutual Commerce together. Though the State of things be not now as
'twas at the beginning, (because sin has altered the order and beauty of them,
by reason thereof every creature groaneth and travelleth with pain) yet we may
easily discern that GOD designed us all content and satisfaction even here
below: For with what variety of delights has he replenished this world: What a
multitude of living Creatures of diverse kinds, has he put therein for our use
and service? And how wisely are they all disposed? The Cattle go upon the
mountains the wild beasts-lodge in Forests, Fowls nest in Trees, the high hills
are a refuge for Goats, and the rocks for the Coneys. And though our sins do
provock GOD to turn the earth into a barren Wilderness, yet he still visits and
waters it, and greatly enricheth it, he Waters the ridges thereof
abundantly, and sets the furrows thereof, he makes it soft with showers,
and blesses the springing thereof: He crowns the Year with his Goodness, and
his paths drop Fatness; they Drop upon the Pastures of the Wilderness, and the
little hills rejoice on every side, the Pastures are clothed with flocks, and
the valleys also are covered with Corn. He causes grass to grow for the
Cattle, and Herb for the service of Man: that he may bring forth food out of
the Earth, and and Wine that makes glad the heart of Man, and Oil to make his
face to shine, and bread which strengthne^h Man's heart. The earth is full of
the Riches of the LORD; so is the great and wide Sea* wherein are things
creeping innumerable, both small and great Beasts, who herd together in
Companies, as well as those upon the Land, at their appointed Months and
Seasons, they ascend from the bottom of the Deep and walk upon the Surface of
the Waters, that they may be caught by the Children of Men to serve for Food
and other necessaries. There go the Ships: there is that Leviathan, whom GOD
has made to play therein. By his neesings a light does shine, and his eyes are
like the eye lids of the Morning; out of his mouth go burning lamps, and sparks
of fire leap out; out of his nostrils go smoke as out of a seething Pot or
Cauldron. He makes the deep to boil like a Pot, and the Sea to be as a Pot of
Ointment, he makes a path to shine after him, so that one would think the Deep
to be hoar^. Upon the Earth there is not his like, so that one may be cast down
at the very sight of him; as it is Job 41. 9. Where also he is largely
described. The frame, the sagacity, the ends and uses of the several sorts of
living Creatures are wonderful, and their dependence on GOD no less: for they
are all made to wai^e* upon GOD, that he may give them their meat in due
season, what he gives they gather, he opens his hand and they are filled
with good. He hides his face and they are troubled; he takes away their breath,
and then they die and return to their dust. Again, he sends forth his Spirit,
and they are Created; thus he still renews the face of the Earth.

These Various and Wonderful Works of Nature, which we have daily and every
where before our Eyes, we ought not to slight; but should duly and seriously
consider them, that we may have more abundant matter for praising him, whose
greatness they show forth. We mistake it very much, if we think the
Consideration of these things, should be reserved and put over to Natural
Philosaphers; nay, they are proper for the meditation of every Christian.
Neither is it necessary to be trained up at Schools, to become qualified for
such contemplations: for the most Ignorant Person, and he or she that is least
Book-learn'd, if they but seriously set themselves to it, may be able well
enough to discover and find out the greatness and Wisdom and Usefulness of
God's Works and if they do this, it is all which is requisite: The wisest
Philosophers can aim no farther, and when they do not aim at this, their
Speculations turn vain, empty and insipid things.

But of all Gods Works, none ought more to be considered, then those of His
Providence, His Actings, and Dealings with the Children of Men: How the LORD
looks from Heaven and beholds all the Sons of Men; from the place of his
Habitation he looks upon all the inhabitants of the Earth, he fashioneth
their Hearts alike, and considers all their Works. And though there be many
devices in Men's Hearts, yet he suffers his own Counsel only to stand; for he
brings the Counsel of the wicked to naught, and makes the devices of the
People of none effect. It Is well worth the while to take notice, how
miraculously he sometimes preserves Kings and Kingdoms from Destruction, when
it is much threatened them by Enemies; and how again at other times he causes
them to be minis^ed and brought low, maugre all the humane endeavors to the
contrary. How he powers contempt upon Princes, and causes them to wander in
the wilderness, where there is no way, that they may know themselves to be but
Men; and that the most High rules in the Kingdom of Men, and gives it to whom
he will. And how on the other hand to let the People see that there is no power
but of GOD, he curbs their Rage, stills their Tumults, defeats their
Conspiracies and Rebellious Designs, and and forces them to stand in aw of the
Authority established over them, which otherwise is too weak to restrain their
fury. The Lord makes Poor, and makes Rich, he brings low and lifted up, he
raises up the Poor out of the dust, and lifts up the Beggar from the
Dunghill, to set them among Princes, and to make them inherit the Throne of
Glory. It Is fit to observe, how variously and wonderfully, God punishes Sin,
and rewards Virtue and Righteousness; for his Hand finds out sinful Men,
and makes them to smart for all their evil Deeds, and repayeth them as they
have dealt with others, that with Adonibezek, they may say, as I have done, so
GOD requited me. But he blesses the Righteous and gives them Peace; he
sends them many Afflictions to teach them Wisdom, and to perfect them in
Virtue, but also he delivers them out of them all, that Men may learn to
trust the LORD, and to seek his Favor above all Things. Thus we ought to
consider the various instances of Gods Providence toward the Children of Men,
what Straits, Difficulties, and Dangers they fall into, and how strangely they
escape them and how wonderfully their Peace and Comfort, their Honor and
Happiness are brought about by ways unseen, and by methods unthought of either
by themselves or others. Whos^ is wise, says the Psalmist, and will ohserve
th^se things, even they shall understand the loving Kindness of the Lord; Psalm*
107. 43. And certainly such as are truly wise either to GOD, or for themselves
will not fail to observe GODS working in the World, especially his manifold
Providence, and Wonderful works toward the Children of Men, whereby they
shall both increase in Wisdom, even the chiefest Wisdom, and shall also
understand, and be made sensible of GODS gracious Love and Favor: Which shall
yet farther appear to their Comfort, if they take exact notice of the Divine*
Providence toward themselves, how wonderfuly they were made! How carefully
preserved! how much they are followed with his goodness! And what wise
contrivances are made for their good, which they little know* of, or think
upon! Every one of us may discover these things, in the course of our Life: And
as this discovery will manifest the Divine favor, so it will ravish our Souls
with delight, there being nothing more delightful and pleasant, then to / find
out that we are Beloved of GOD. Wherefore as it is a piece of slight put upon
GOD, not to observe these his Admirable workings, and Manifestations of his
Power, Wisdom and Goodness; So it is a prejudice unto our selves; in that
hereby we are deprived of unspeakable Pleasures and Delight, which otherwise
would accrue unto us. And is it not strange that this so pleasant Duty, should
be so much neglected and laid aside; the meaner sort drudge always at their
Work, and take no leisure to meditate; and those who can, and do allow
themselves some spare hours, do for the most part employ them in hearing and
telling News, in Curious enquiries about the Motions and Transactions, of some
remote Prince, which little concerns them, and which amounts to little when
known, they becoming thereby neither wiser nor more Happy. Nay it is to be
feared, that even those we call Studious Persons, make these Divine
Contemplations the least part of their Study: but bestow more pains to know the
Journeys of a Caesar, or Alexander, the opinions of Ancient and Modern
Authors, and the like. I do not say, we should be altogether taken up with the
consideration of Gods Ways and Works; but certainly nothing concerns us more,
nor is there any thing more worthy of us, this is most worthy of Angels. What a
foolish thing then is it to mind Trivial and Inconsiderable things, and to
slight what is of greatest moment? To be much busied about what we have nothing
to do with, and in the Mean time to neglect and be careless of what is both our
Interest and Duty? what respect to the Divine Majesty oblidgeth us to, and by
doing of which we may procure to our selves much Joy and Satisfaction.

Now as it is our Duty thus to observe the Works and ways of GOD; so that we
may be enabled to make a wiser Observation of them, 'twill be necessary to
follow the Light and Direction of the holy Scripture: By which means we shall
both ^ee the more clearly, and shall also understand the ends and uses of GODS
works more fully. Many things which lie hid from the light of nature, may be
discerned by the Word of GOD, this gives us a better view of many of GOD
Actings, then what is possible to have otherwise. And hereby only we are
instructed in one Work of GOD, which of all others is the greatest and most
wonderful, I mean, the Work of Man's Redemption; This is a deep Mystery, and of
the greatest importance; both for it self, and because helps to unriddle all
the other Mysteries of Divine Providence. Such as are ignorant may with the
Greeks count it Foolishness, but who seriously examine it, shall find it the
Power of GOD, and Wisdom of GOD; Therefore it is said, the Angels desire to
look into it; 1 Pet. 1. 12. And seeing it concerns us more then them,
certainly we can never sufficiently either Consider it or Admire it. If it be
our Duty to observe the Divine Transactions, as we have made it appear, sure we
ought to Contemptlate this which is the chief Contrivance of his Wisdom, and
the very end of all the other purposes of his Eternal Counsel. In the Mystery
of the Gospel, are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, as St. Paul
speaks, Col 2. 3. Here we see the most amazing things, viz. An union betwixt
two Natures, infinitely distant, a Reconciliation betwixt infinite Justice; and
infinite Mercy, the greatest severity toward Sin, and the greatest kindness
toward Sinners, expressed by one and the same Act. All Gods works declare his
Glory, but never any more or so much as this; his Power, Wisdom, Goodness,
Holiness, Justice, Mercy, and other Perfections were never so Illustriously
Displayed as here. On this therefore we must in a more special manner fix our
Thoughts and that not merely to satisfy our Curiosity, or to stuff our Heads
with Notions: but to fill us with a greater Knowledge of GOD, to raise our
Admiration of him, to excite our Love to him, and to stir up our Souls and
all their Powers and Faculties, to Bless and Praise Him for his Goodness and
Wonderful Works to the Children of Men. And as this should be our End, in
Observing and Contemplating the Ways and Works of God; so upon this very
account we are oblidged thereto, because that this is the proper and necessary
mean to carry on this End, we cannot Love, nor Admire, nor Adore nor Trust,
etc: What we do not know, and we cannot know GOD otherwaves then by his Works,
and those Manifestations which he has given of himself, for there can be no
Immeditat intuition of his essence, and the Idea which we have of him by nature
will soon be defaced, if it be not cherished by such Meditations. That
therefore we may know GOD, and knowing him be engaged to those Acts of Love,
Praise, Trust, Dependence, etc. Which is due to him, we ought to observe those
Works and Actions of GOD which he has laid before us, in Nature; and in his
Word, and which daily appear by the Administration of his Providence toward
our selves and others.

Wherefore also we must not do this only now and then, or in a slight overly
manner: But we ought to be taken up frequently with such Contemplations, and
when we set about them it should be with all Seriousness and Attention, that we
may understand what we Consider, and that it may have a due Impression on us;
short and Superficial glances do little good. Indeed what occurs to us, as we
Converse with others, or go up and down about our A (...), we need not stay
long thereon, but may observe passingly: But 'twill be necessary besides, to
set a part some particular time for this purpose, that our Meditations may be
more Deliberate, and free of Distractions. How much time should be allotted,
and what hours are best must be left to each ones Prudence and Discretion; for
there can be no general rules, prescribed to all: some have their time at their
own Disposal, and can use it as they please, others are not so. The First sort
may keep hours, and are oblidged to spend more time in this Exercise; but for
the Last, they must take the Evening, or the Morning, or Midday, as is most
convenient for them, and must continue long or short as agrees best with their
Station and Employment. Every one has the Lords day almost free, and therefore
it is every ones Duty to employ this Day thus, which is indeed the Main end of
the Day; and they who cannot command much time all the Week, are above all
others oblidged to use this Day well to the present purpose. As to the Order
and Method of Meditating, it is not very Material, neither need any be nicely
Curious, in what Order, or after what Way and Manner they proceed in
considering these Works of God, Providing they seek them out seriously, labor
to understand them truly, and make proper and useful Reflections on them. At
every Retirement, we cannot make serious and deep Observations of all Gods
Works, therefore to consider them well, 'twill be requisite to consider them
severally. Sometimes our inward Disposition, External state, the present
occasion, and other Circumstances make some of Gods Works more proper and
suitable then others, when it is so, we should determine our Meditations to
these especially: But ordinarily when there is no such particular Reason to
determine us, 'twill be best and most profitable to follow the course and order
of the Scripture, for we may call the Scripture, Divine Mom^ires, which hold
forth to us the great and admirable Actions of the Universal Monarch of the
World. And thus much of the Second instance of Walking with God.

Of Consulting GOD.
The third particular meant by walking with GOD, is the consulting Him about
what concerns us. For as is usual for such as are in Company together, to
Advise with one another; so by walking with God we are to understand, the
asking his Counsel and Direction, and the Guidance of his unerring wisdom. The
more eminent any one is, the more others are obliged to advise with him,
especially if with all he has a Jurisdiction and Authority over them, and that
there be Obligations on them to study the pleasing him. Thus Servants and
Children ought to consult their Parents and Masters, not only because they
should think them more wise then themselves: but also because it is their Duty
to Humor and Please them, and so it being our Duty to walk worthy of the Lord
unto all pleasing; as it is Col. 1. 10. Therefore we should do nothing without
his Warrant and Advice. The way of Man is not in himself, as the Prophet has
it, it is not in him that walks to direct his Steps, Ier. 10. 23. We are for
the most part Foolish and Ignorant, and do not know what is the best and and
safest Course to steer, and which is worse we are oftimes carried away by
diverse Lusts; and these Lusts do blind our Judgments, and hinder us from
discerning the Truth, and therefore it is great presumption in us to follow the
devices and suggestions of our own hearts, unless we find them allowed and
approved of by God: Unless he Guide and instruct us, we may, nay shall certainly
^erre, and our Designs shall miscarry. Our Peace and Comfort here, and
Happiness hereafter, are not the effects of Chance; but the Fruits of God's
Favor and Love, which is not procured by walking at random, or doing any thing
inconsideratly, never taking heed whether it be fit or not: We only then please
God, and gain His Favor, when we wisely consider our doings, and do seriously
deliberat about all we have to do especially what is of greater moment and
concernment, that all may be agreeable to the Mind and Will of GOD. As Solomon
therefore advises, Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and lean not to
thine own understanding; In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct
thy paths; Prove. 3. 5, 6.

There being now no Prophet to enquire. at, nor any Empowred (as the High
Priest of old) to deliver Oracles and give Responses; it will be asked what we
mean by consulting GOD? wherefore to clear this Matter and to prevent all
Mistakes thereanent, and to guard against all Abuses to which some may be ready
to wrest it, I shall show two things.

1st. Whereabout we should consult God. 2ly. What way and manner it is to be
done.
As to the first, by consulting GOD, is not meand the betaking our selves to
him, to know the Event of any Business we are engaged in, or whither if we do
this or the other thing 'twill succeed and prosper; we may indeed, nay ought to
recommend all our Lawful and Virtuous Undertakings to God, that he may bless
them with success and we may lawfully wish Success thereto, but ever with a
Humble Submission to the will of God, according as our Savior has taught us
to say, not my will, but thine be done: but to be desirous to know beforehand,
what God purposes to do, is not allowed us. It is not for you, says Christ,
to know the times and Seasons, which the Father has put in his own power; Acts
1. 7. and as not the times and Seasons, so neither the things themselves which
he has determined to bring to pass. These Secrets of the Divine Counsel, God
has reserved to himself, and 'twould but offend him to be over curious to know
them. It is not the will of God that we seek for this, for he has given us no
Means to come to the knowledge thereof; for to have recourse to Astrologers,
Wizards, such as have Familiar Spirits, etc. Are means as Unlawful as they are
Uncertain and Deceitful. Nor is it profitable for us to know what shall befall
us, God keeps this Secret, because it is better to be Ignorant of it, then if
it were revealed; it is better that we live by Faith then such a sight, because
hereby these necessary virtues of Patience, trust in God, Watchfulness, and
Diligence, are exercised and confined. It is true the Jews of old had Liberty
granted them to enquire about future Events and their Desires were satisfied as
appears by many Instances in Scripture: but now the Reason of such
Extraordinary Temporal privileges is ceased, and the Gospel requires us to be
entirely resigned to GOD, and to be disposed either to Prosperity or Adversity,
to Disappointments and Success, with a kind of indifferency, because the Glory
of GOD and our true Felicity, depend neither upon the one nor the other, but
may be Advanced by either of them.

To consult GOD then, is not to enquire into secret purposes of his Counsel*
how he intends to dispose of us: but it is that we may be informed of our Duty,
that we may understand what becomes us to do in the several Periods of our
life, and in all those Stations and relations we stand in what course of Life
we should intend; How we ought to carry our selves having chosen one? How we
should best spend our Time and Order our Affairs, that as much as possible, we
may be without all offense either to GOD or Man.

From hence it follows that we ought never to deliberate about things certainly
unlawful, nor yet ask of GOD whither at any time we may venture upon them, for
this in plain terms is, to ask whither we should thwart his Will, transgress
his Laws, grieve his Spirit* dishonor his Name, and rebel against his
Authority. They therefore tempt God, and Act most impudently who ask Counsel in
such a Case; and what prompts Men to things sinful is not the Spirit of GOD:
the Counsel is not from GOD which Allows and Approves of any unlawful deed.
GOD is not the Author of Sin, He cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts
he any man; Iam* 1. 13. It is a delusion of Satan which draws Persons to
wickedness, or which make them continue the practice of any wicked Action
whatever such pretend, and whatever high conceit they may entertain of
themselves, yet the Scripture tells us, that it is a heavy Judgment and a sign
of a reprobate mind to be given up to do things unlawful, and which are not
convenient; Rom: 1. 28.

When therefore we come to Consult GOD, as we ought always in all doubtful
Cases, it should be to know what is lawful, and not only what is simply lawful,
but also what is expedient, what is suitable for us as we are so Stated and
Circumstantiated, and by what ways and Means we should prosecute those Ends we
ought to have before us, viz. GOD'S Glory, our Neighbors good, and our own
present Comfort, and after happiness.

Now having seen whereabouts we ought to consult GOD, we come in the next place
to show how we are to do it. And First, we must lay aside all prejudice and
biased affections and put on the Indefferency of a Traveller, who has no
Inclination to turn either to the Right or the Left hand, but to be directed in
the Right way. If we do not this, we are not Sincere when we seek Counsel of
God, nor capable to receive it though it be given; this was the fault of the
Young Man that came to our Savior, to ask, what he should do to inherit
eternal Life? For because the Answer would have parted him and his Possessions,
he would not listen to it. If Men be blinded with Prejudice, they will not see
the Light though it be clear; nor will they be persuaded though they have
Sufficient convictions laid before them, if their Inclinations be strong
another way, we must therefore free our selves of all Passion and Prejudice;
and be Sincerely Desirous of right Information. In the next place, we must
Address our selves to GOD by Humble and Hearty Prayer, that it may please him
to Enlighten the eyes of our Minds, to the discerning His Will, and the way
wherein we should walk: For is we do not Pray, we are not desirous hereof,
neither duly Value it, and so GOD will not think us worthy of it; who Despise
or Lightly esteem the Counsel and Direction of the LORD, shall be left to
wander in the Ignorance and Darkness of their own Minds: But he will lead and
guide them in the Paths of Righteousness, who humbly seek Him. But though
Prayer be good, yet it is not the only Means, it must not be neglected, but it
must not be rested in. We must not ask direction, as Pilate, what was Truth at
Christ, who when he put the question, presently went out and stayed not for an
Answer. After we have Prayed, we should listen attentively to what GOD says;
we ought to hearken carefully to the voice of GOD. And therefore, Thirdly, we
must search Diligently the Scriptures, for they are the Word of God, and in and
by them he speaks to us his Will and Pleasure. God has given the Seripture,
to be a Lamp unto our feet and a Light unto our Path; And so who would walk
uprightly so as to Please God, must follow the Guidance thereof. 'Ts true God
speaks also Inwardly by his Spirit to the Hearts and Minds of Men, but
Ordinarily it is by the outward Means of the Word. 'Tts seldom and in some
singular Cases only, that he speaks to men without the Mediation of the
Scriptures: However he never speaks but agreeably to the Scriptures, whatever
he says any manner of way must be consistent with the Doctrine and Precepts
of the Scriptures, for GOD neither can nor will contradict Himself. Wherefore
all inward Suggestions and Inspirations must be examined by the Written word of
GOD, which as St. Peter speaks in a like case, is the surer Word, 2 Pet 1. 19.
We have Reason to put greater Confidence in the outward Light of the
Scriptures, then what is inwardly suggested; for we may readily deceive our
selves here, and take the delusions of Satan, or our own strong Imaginations
for the Inspirations of GOD'S Spirit, every one cannot distinguish betwixt
them, and indeed it is often hard for any to do it, but by comparing them to
what is delivered in the Scripture, which we are sure is from GOD. We must not
then be too hasty in concluding our inclination to a thing, or aversion from
it, (after that we have prayed fervently) to be from GOD unless it be
warranted by the Word of GOD revealed in the Scripture, or at lest no wise
opposite to what is there enjoined us.

The Scriptures are the holy Oracles which deliver the mind of GOD, to them
therefore we must resort at all times, and on all Occasions to know what we
should do; and by them all Persons of each Sex, Age, Condition, Employment may
be instructed how to order their conversation aright before GOD. For they are
so composed, that the Man of GOD, by them may be perfect, thoroughly furnished
unto all good works; 2 Timothy 3. 17. It Is true every one will not find their
particular Case Stated and Resolved, but either Directly or Indirectly, either
by express Precepts or Parallel, and not much different Examples, they shall
see what may sufficiently inform and resolve them: And whosoever will give
themselves entirely up to the conduct of GOD in his word shall without doubt
(as we showed before) either by secret Suggestions of the Spirit, See part
first chap; 2?
or by some special occurrences of his providence be Particularly directed in
the disposal of themselves and their affairs which are of greatest concernment
and to which it cannot be expected that the Scripture should speak
particularly. The meek will he guide in judgment, and the meek will he teach
his way. All the paths of the LORD are Mercy and Truth, unto such as keep his
Covenant and Testimonies; Psalm. 25. 9. 10.

Thus we have showed how we should consult GOD, and by what means we may come
to be directed by him. Now certainly it concerns us very much thus to consult
Him, and to follow these Means for acquainting our selves with what is proper
for us to do. The Heathens of old gloried much in their Oracles, and used to
Consult them in all their affairs, though they were so uncertain and Ambiguous,
that they proved more often Snares to entrap them, then Lights to guide them.
But sure we have much more Reason to Glory and Rejoice in this Special
Privilege we have of Consulting the true GOD, who neither will deceive others,
nor can be deceived himself; and who has been Graciously pleased to speak to
us so plainly and clearly by his Word, and who Promises farther Direction as we
stand in need. Hereby we are enabled to walk wisely, and are showed the True
way of carrying on our Happiness, and Peace, the Testimony of the Lord, says
David, is sure, making wise the simple; the commandment of the Lord is pure,
enlightening the eyes. Psalm. 19. 7, 8. It was a laudable custom amongst the
Jews, to ask Counsel of GOD before they began any Enterprise; and so it becomes
us to resort unto the Scriptures for Counsel and Direction, where we shall
receive it fully and clearly if we be desirous thereof, and follow the
Direction prescribed above. David no doubt had many Counselors, and yet he
preferred the Word and Law of GOD before them all: thy testimonies, says he,
are my delight and Counselors. And again, he tells, us that he bad more
understanding then all his Teachers, for GODS Testimonies were his Meditation;
Ps 119. 24. 99. It is reported of the Heathen Socrates that he pretended to
have a certain Spirit or genius, which he used as his Counselor; and
therefore when ever he was required to speak or to do any thing, his usual
answer was, si Demon permiserit, if my spirit or genius will suffer. Now it is
our Happiness that we have a better Counselor to advise with, and therefore
also whenso e're any thing is propounded unto us, either to our understandings
or Wills, to be believed or practiced, let our Answer be with the Psalmist, I
will hear what GOD the LORD will speak Ps. 85. 8. I will first consult GOD, by
the Holy Oracles of the Scriptures. And if we never conclude or resolve any
thing without advising thus with GOD, we shall highly honor him and show an
entire regard unto him, and also take a Wise and most Profitable Course for our
selves. But alas! As Solomon complains, wherefore is there a price in the hand
of a Fool to get Wisdom, seeing he has no heart unto it? So it may be said, to
what purpose is it? And how little does it avail us, to have the Scriptures,
seeing we make so little use of them, and take so little notice of what GOD says
to us in and by them? How sad is it, and what matter of regrate to see how many
miscarry in this Point? There be many who will readily consult Flesh and Blood,
they will listen to the corrupt maxims of the World, they will hearken to what
the Devil himself does say, and suggest unto them; bnt only what GOD the LORD
speaks, they care not to hear: nay with the deaf Adder, they stop their ears
and will not hearken to the voice of the Charmer, though he Charm never so
wisely. And as Men hereby slight and dishonor GOD, in that they undervalue his
Counsel, so they entangle themselves in a World of Trouble and Difficultys: for
many, nay most of our Crosses and Sorrows, are but the effects of this folly.
For when we do not ask Counsel of the LORD, but will needs take our own
courses, then he blasts our designs, by leaving us to our selves, to stand by
our own strength; and so it comes to pass, that we have no ability to conquer
the difficultys we are engadg'd in, but must necessarly sink under them,
whereas if we con sulted GOD, he would not fail to concur with his Power and
Providence to effectuat that which he himself had advised or approved of. That
therefore we may be Wise in all our Undertakings, and have Comfort in them, let
us undertake nothing without GOD, let us be careful always to ask Direction
of him, praying with David, show me thy ways O LORD, teach me thy paths, lead
me in thy truth and teach me: for thou art the GOD of my Salvation, on thee do
I wait all the day. Ps. 25. 4. And then no doubt GOD would guide us with his
Counsel here, and receive us into Glory hereafter: If withal in the last
place, we Steadfastly and Faithfully observe the ways he lays before us, and
keep close to the Direction he gives, which we told was the last Particular
included in Walking with GOD; and which comes next to be spoken to,

Of Following GOD.
We must not Consult GOD out of curiosity to know his Mind and Judgment, but
out of a Sincere desire and Purpose to do his Will and Pleasure. As we must
first Advise with him what should be done, so having understood his Mind, we
should next with Care and Diligence set about the doing of it. We have Reason
sometimes to dispute the Reasonableness and Equity of Men's Counsels and
Advices, but we must never call in Question the Justice or Fitness of what GOD
propeseth unto us, but ought cordially and freely to close with it. Obedience
must be the fruit of our hearing, or else we Hear to no purpose; and therefore
Hearing and Obeying in the Scriptures, are often taken for one and the same
thing: to hear GOD is to obey him, and to consult with him, is to do his will.
True hearing, is opus animi, non auris, it is a work of the Mind rather then
the Ear: But though it reside in the Mind, yet it must spread through our
Affections and Actions, otherwise it is vain and unacceptable.

As he is said to walk with one, who follows him and takes the same way he
goes, so to walk with GOD, is to follow the ways of GOD, and to tread the
whole paths of his commandments: For the end of our walking with him must be to
please him, as the Septuagint still renders the Phrase; now we cannot please
him, if we frequently turn aside, and go out of the way which he commands us.
As a true Friend we must never leave him or part with him, but must follow
cheerfully whither so ever he leads us, be the way fair or foul, pleasant or
unpleasant. They cannot be said to walk together who only have some accidental
Rencounters: nor can he be said to Walk with GOD, who only complies with him
now and then, or in some particulats which suits with his Humor or proves for
his Interest. They only are said to walk truly together, who hold on the same
Way, keep still the same Pace, carry on the same Design, run the same dangers,
and who share together in every thing: even so he only Walks with GOD, who
Devots himself entirely to God, whose thoughts and Purposes, Motions, and
Actings are all GOD'S, that is, such as he requires and which tend to his
Glory; Who does not sometimes step aside to seek his own Ease, Pleasure or
Profit, nor yet takes ways which GOD does not allow of, but he minds wholly
the things of God, and follows altogether the courses he approves of, even
though thereby he expose himself to Danger and Trouble. In Walking with GOD,
there must be such an Union as is betwixt a Wife and her Husband, whereby his
Interest becomes hers, which makes it her Delight and Care to Please him, and
which engages her to abide with him, what ever be his Lot and Condition. It
was a noble and generous Friendship, which Ittai showed to David, when he fled
from Absalom, As the Lord lives, said he, and as my LORD the King lives,
surely in what place my Lord the King shall be whither in death or Life, even
there also will thy servant be. 2 Samuel 15. ^1. Ruth expressed the like toward
her Mother in Law, when she said, Whither thou go I will go, and where thou
lodgest I will lodge, and the Lord do so to me and more also, if ought but
death part thee and me; now if we would walk uprightly with GOD, we must walk
after the same manner: for as none but Friends use to walk together, so by
Walking with GOD, is meant such a High and Intimate and Constant Friendship,
which sticks not at Difficulties, nor startles at Dangers, but which makes a
Man cheerfully set about whatever the Interest or Pleasure of his Friend calls
for: An Eminent Instance hereof, we have in Abraham, who therefore is called
the friend of GOD; where ever GOD called him, he Cheerfully followed; whatever
he Enjoined, he readily Obeyed; he stumbled not at Difficulties or Dangers, or
any Inconveniences, but yielded an entire obedience to the Will of GOD when
ever it was intimate to him.

And as this is to walk with GOD, so by walking thus with Him we make the most
proper acknowledgement of him and pay the most acceptable Worship to him: for
hereby we declare a true sense of his Wisdom, Goodness, Greatness, and
Absolute Soveraignity; and that we think him worthy of all Honor, Love, and
Service. GOD is not truly honored, when we make not an Oblation of the best
things to him; for he who is Author of all should be served with he best, or
else he is badly requited: And consequently he is never truly Honored or
Worshipped but when we make an oblation of our whole selves to him. I beseech
you therefore Brethren, says St. Paul, by the mereies of GOD, that ye present
your Bodies a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable to GOD, which is ^our
reasonable service, and be not conformed to this World, but ^e transformed by
the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is that good and acceptable
and perfect will of GOD. Rom 12. 1, 2. Now what is it to make a Sacrifice of
our selves: but only to Walk with GOD, for who Walks with GOD as we have
showed, Sacrifices his understanding to God to Believe what he reveals, and to
Contemplate what he does; he Sacrifices his will to be entirely regulate by
his Laws, his Affections to be placed or displaced according to his Order; and
in a word, his whole Life and all its Operations to set forward the purposes of
his Counsel and the Glory of his Name; Which indeed is a most Reasonable
Service, for what less can be paid to him who is the Author and preserver of
our Being, and gives us whatever we enjoy? It is also agreeable to his Word,
nay the very thing it calls for (which perhaps is true meaning of the Apostles
(...)) for the very scope of the Scripture is to teach us this and to obliege
us thereto. Finally it is most acceptable GOD is very well pleased with these
Spiri tual Sacrifices, they have an Odor of sweet Smell with him: But if they
be wanting that thing which is savoury; if we do not walk closely and
constantly with God as above, though we would bring never so many Burnt
Offerings and Calves of a Year old, Thousand of Rams, and ten thousand Rivers
of Oil, yet He would not regard them. Sacrifice and Offering thou did not
desire, Burnt Offering and Sin Offering thou have not required; then said I, Lo
I come, in the Volume of the Book it is written of Me, I delight to do thy
will, O my GOD, yea they Law is within my Heart. Psalm. 40. 6. 7. Let none
think, says Lactantius, Divine Inst: Ep. Cap 2.
that GOD requires Victims, Incense, Donations, etc. For if he be not capable
of Hunger, Thrist, Cold, neither has the Desire of Earthly things, he will not
use th^se and the like which are brought unto the Temples: but as Corporeal
Beings require things of the like Nature, so a Spiritual Sacrifice is only
necessary to be offered to a Spiritual Being. What GOD has given to Man for
his use he himself needs not; and besides the whole World is his, and the
fullness thereof: he needs not a Temple, who has the World for his dwelling
place nor an Image, or Statue who is incomprehensible; he stands not in need of
Lamps and Earthly Lights, who has kindled the Sun and the rest of the Stars
for Man's behoof; what is it therefore, says he, which GOD requires of Man,
but the inward Worship of the mind seeing He himself is pure and Holy, for these
things which are wrought by the Hands, and which are without the Man, is no
true or proper Sacrifice; neither that which is taken out of the Coffer, but
which comes from the Heart; nor what is offered by the Hand, but by the Soul.
This is a true Sacrifice, when the Soul offers it self unto GOD: For what
signifies other Sacrifices? What does inccnse, what do Garments, and Gold, and
Silver and Precious stones profit, if the Worshippers mind be not holy and
pure? It Is only Righteousness which GOD seeks after, It Is in this that the True
Worship of GOD does consist. The true Worshippers of GOD, says CHRIST, shall
Worship him in Spirit and Truth, for the Father seeks such to Worship him.
And what is it to Worship GOD in Spirit and Truth, but to worship him by a
truly holy Life, and an upright walking with him? In this is his Delight, and
who takes this way to please him, shall be counted worthy of the Kingdom of
GOD. Enoch walked with GOD, and it is said, GOD took him, that is, he took him
out of this wretched Life, unto his Heavenly Glory, And all who tread the same
paths, shall meet with the same Reward. GOD will take every one to himself who
walks with GOD, though not after the same manner. Death puts a stop to our
Walking with Men, and forces us and them to part: but it does not break off our
Walking with GOD, it does unite us more firmly to him, this fellowship which we
thus begin here, results into an Eternal Friendship and Society in the other
World.

CHAP III. Of these Words, And this Stone which I have set for a Pillar, shall
be GODS House, The Reason and Meaning of them.
GOD is to be Worshipped not only in Private but in Public, he is not only to
be Owned and Acknowledged a part, by our selves in Secret, but ought to be
professed openly before all the World, by the Performance of such things as
Reason and the universal Consent of Mankind has established, to be public
Testimonies of our Alleagiance to him. He who does not this Last, can never ^e
very sincere in the First; neither will GOD own such to be true Worshippers of
him, who do not avowedly profess him before Men, according to that of our
Savior, whosoever shall confess me before Men, him shall the Son of Man also
confess before the Angels of God; but he that denies me before Men, shall be
denied before the Angels of God. Luke. 12. 8. The very Light of Nature teaches
this, and therefore it is that when Jacob here did Solemnly take the LORD to be
his GOD, he did not only engage himself to that Inward Spiritual Worship, which
is acted within a Man's own self, whereof we have spoken already; but also he
binds Himself to that Outward and Visible Worship, which is transacted by
things without the Man, that it may be manifest to al^ the World that he
Honored and Adored this GOD. This stone, says he, which I have here set up
for a Pillar, shall be GOD'S house, that is, here in this place where I erect
this Stone, when I come back I will build and consecrat a House to my GOD, for
the Honor of his Name, and the Celebrating of his Worship, where I will Call
upon him and Pray unto him. The Reason why he pitched upon this particular
place, was because GOD had made it eminent by so signal an appearance unto him,
as we read before; and what moved him to build a house to GOD; was because
this, was universally agreed to, as an Act of Honor due unto GOD, and as an
proper instance whereby men signify their Homage to him.

This which Jacob Vowed here, gives us Occasion to speak of Churches, or
consecrated places, of Prayer, and of public Worship.

SECTION I. Of Churches or Places Consecrat to GOD, the Origin and Necessity
thereof, what Regard and Reverence should be paid them.
AND First, as it is an universal Custom all the World over, to erect Temples
and to Consecrat places for the Honor and Service of GOD: So this custom is
most Ancient. At present there are not only Churches throughout all the
Christian World: but Mahumetans and Pagans also have Temples and Religious
houses of one sort or another, and it was so from the very beginning. It would
seem that even our First Parents in Paradise had some more peculiar place for
presenting themselves before GOD; Gen 3. 8. And after the Fall it is certain,
that there was a Particular place set apart for the Worship of GOD, whither
Abel and Cain brought their sacrifices; Noah came no sooner forth of the Arc,
but he built an Altar to the LORD: and in like manner we read of all the
Patriarchs that where ever they sojourned they built Altars, which were usually
ranged about either with Trees or Stones, where they and their Family
Worshipped GOD, and performed all their Solemn Acts of devotion; their wandering
course of Life would not allow them better; the Tabernacle which Moses pitched
in the Wilderness, was the first house of GOD we read of, which was covered and
adorned with Art, and it was followed and imitated by that magnificent Temp^e
which which Soloman built: Where all who lived at Jerusalem, and near it,
resorted for the Worshipping of GOD; and whither all the Males even in the
remotest parts of the Kingdom, were oblidged to come up, at least thrice a
year. But though 'twas not lawful to offer Sacrifice except in that one place,
yet there was every where besides both in Towns and Villages, in the Cities and
open Fields, Synagogues, and Oratories, where people came to Pray to GOD and to
join with others in His Worship, and to be instructed in His will. Of
Synagogues there are frequent mention in the New Testament, and by several
things it may be collected that there were of them during the first Temple: but
of Oratories, or places for Prayer, we read not so often, yet they be sometimes
spoken of, as particularly, Luke 6. 12. where it is said, our Savior went into
a mountain to pray and continued all night in Prayer to GOD; but the Original
will rather bear in the House or Place of Prayer. So likewise, Acts 16. 13.
it is said of Paul and others, that were with him, being come to Philippi of
Macedonia, they went on the Sabbath day out of the city by a River side, where
Prayer was wont to be made, or where there was an usual Orator^. Th^s it is
certain that 'twas frequent every where and in every Nation, to consecrate and
s^t a part Places and Houses for the Worship and Service of GOD: it is well
conjectured by the Learned Mr. Mede, from Josh: 22. 16. that these Lands and
Countries were reputed unclean, where there was no such Consecrate or Devoted
Places.

Now whither Men had an express Positive Precept, for the erecting houses to
GOD, and consecrating such places to him, or if they were merely prompted
thereto by the light of Nature, and the Stength of Reason, it does not very
clearly appear. But however it is certain, that GOD did very much approve
therereof; not only by allowing his most eminent Servants to continue in the
use and practice of this thing: but also by requiring it of them. Thus GOD was
so well pleased with Noah's building him an altar, that it is said he smelled a
sweet savor therefrom; Genesis 8. 21. and 35. 1. we have God putting Jacob in
mind of the Vow which he here made, and requiring him to make performance
thereof in this very particular. When it first came into David's Heart to build
an house unto the LORD, the motion did so please GOD, that he sent Nathan the
Prophet to tell him, that for this he would make a sure covenant with him, and
establish the Crown and Throne upon him, and his house for ever; though for
reasons he would not let him build the house, but deferred it to his Son
Solomon. 2 Samuel: 7. And we must not look upon Temples, as a Legal Ceremony
agreeable only to the Times of the Old Testament, not proper or necessary now:
for though GOD dwells not in Temples made with men's hands, and that his
Worship is not fixed to one particular place, as 'twas of old, yet it is no
less necessary now then formerly, to set a part Places and to consecrate
Houses for the public worship of GOD, that hereby he may be the more solemnly
acknowledged, and that his Worship may be gone about with the greater Decency,
Gravity, and Convenience.

These were the Reasons, no doubt which moved Men to this Act first, and their
Strength and Force is as great now, and as binding as ever. Wherefore the
Apostles, and first Christians, even such as was most zealous against Iudaisme,
did not think the use of Temples to be abolished by the Christian Law: but did
continue the use of them, and were careful to consecrate and set apart
Churches where ever they made converts and did propagate the Gospel. For though
the ontward state of Christians was then but mean and though they were also
liable to many persecutions, yet they wanted not Houses for that Worship and
service of God which was peculiar to the Gospel. This the Learned Man formerly
mentioned, has made very evident; and it appears clearly from 1 Cor. 11. 22.
and from these salutations to particular Churches of such and such a house.

At first Temples and Religious Places were but mean, plain, and simple,
without any great ornament: what the Patriarchs used seems to have been no
other then open uncovered places, set about with trees or Stones agreeable to
their own way of living, which was not constant or settled in any one place;
for they dwelt in tents only and removed from place to place. There be some
remainders of such kind of simple Oratories, yet to be seen in many places of
this Kingdom. But as People became more fixed and settled, and as they farther
improved in art and cunning, so they used to take greater pains in adorning
their temples and religious houses: and judged it to be their glory, to have
them Stately and magnificent. David was ashamed that he himself should dwell in
a house of Cedar, while the Ark of the LORD was only within Curtains. And GOD
complained by the Prophet Haggai, that the People who returned from the
Captivity, should have dwelt in Cieled Houses themselves while the Temple of
the Lord lay wast and unrepaired. The Churches of the first Christians it is
like indeed were not very fine, nor could much better be expected from them, if
we consider the meannesse and poverty of their State, and what hazards they run
by offering to meet together at all. They were then necessitate to content
themselves with any place, though it had not the convenience and adornments
which they wished: but so soon as the Emperors turned Christians, and that the
public exercise of the Christian Religion was allowed, then Churches were
every where built Stately and magnificent. They did not then proceed by the
scant rule of mere necessity, but rendered them not only convenient for
themselves: but such as might speak out the greatness and glory of that God
whom they adored. And though it cannot be denied but that there may be an
excess in adorning Churches, when more is bestowed on them then on the poor
which are GOD'S living Temples; yet certainly to have no regard of them, and to
grudge any cost upon them, is an other extreme much more to be condemned; seeing
GOD has been so bountiful to us, and to enrich this World for our use not only
with necessaries, but with comforts, and to make it not only convenient, but
also very beautiful, pleasant and delightful: therefore I think gratitude
should oblidge us, to make an acknowledgement hereof, by adorning his temples,
and taking care that these places of his special presence, have all the
ornament and comeliness, which our State and Country will allow. Sure by all
the rules of the World, it cannot be judged otherwise then a contempt of GOD,
or at the lest small esteem of him, when his houses are the worst of the Land,
as is usually to be observed throughout this Kingdom: nay in many places are to
be seen Stables and Buyers much more neat and handsome then the Churches beside
them, which certainly is a most shameful thing, and cannot but expose us to
the contempt of all strangers. What a shame? and how unworthy a thing is it to
be more curious about the apartment of our beasts, then the house of our GOD?
GOD ordered his Son to be born in a Stable and in a Manger, to teach us
humility and to be content with a mean State, but not to make us humble him
thereafter by lodging him no better then our beasts. I am sorry it should be
said, because it is our shame, but it is true that we have many Churches, which
look rather like barns byres and stables, and would be as proper for that use,
then what they are designed for. God did expressly prohibit under the law, the
dedicating the worst things unto him, and I cannot understand what precept or
example can be pretended forwarranding this under the Gospel: I would think
Nature as well as Religion does teach the contrary. GOD and Kings should be
always honored with what is best, and there is reason that the Courts of both
be beautified and Adorned with State and Splendor, that thereby that Reverence
and Respect which is due from all who approach them, may be engendered,
nourished and increased. But by Adorning of Churches, I do not mean what is in
use in the Romish Church, viz. Images, Lamps, Puppets, rare and various
Curiosities, etc. which are of no use in the Service of God, and do but divert
the minds of those who come up to Worship; gaudy shows are not the true
ornament of Churches but what makes them Grave, August, and Venerable. And
therefore the same Rules are to be observed in building of Churches, which Wise
and Discreet Persons follow in their Clothes, who seek out what is Decent and
Useful, and are careful to shun both what is nesty and course, and also, what
is Gaudy and Vain; because the one speaks out a mean sordide Spirit, and the
other too much lightness and childishness.

But whatever Churches be as to their external matter or form, whither they be
well or ill adorned, there is a holy respect and reverence due unto them; their
having or wanting the external Ornaments of Art or Beauty, does not alter
their Nature, or make them more or less the House of GOD, which is the thing
their very name imports, for Kirk or Church is from the Greek (...) which is as
much as the Lords. And upon this account they should be had in reverence, more
then for their Outward Pomp and splendor. Every thing which relates to GOD is
Sacred, and should be reverently dealt with, and particularly his Temples;
wherefore it is that the Wiseman advises, to keep our foot when we go to the
house of GOD. Ecl. 5. 1. He there alludes to the common Custom of pulling off
the shoes in token of respect and reverence, And though that particular Act be
now out-dated and worn out of fashion, yet still it is necessary to carry
reverently toward them; For GOD himself commands it, saying, ye shall
reverence my Sanctuary, and the reason he gives is, because I am the LORD; Lev.
19. 30. Now this Reverence to the House of GOD, was no Temporal Ceremony
peculiar to the time of the Law: but even a Moral Duty, to be continued as long
as it is necessary to keep up the use of Churches and consecrated Places, which
will be ever necessary in this World; as does appear from our Savior's Zeal,
in scourging out of the Temple, such as have profaned it, by buying or selling
therein. And the Apostle S^. Paul inveighs against the Corinthians for that
abuse which crept in amongst them in the Celebration of the Lords Supper,
whereby in eating every one, did take before another, and one was hungry and
another drunken: because as he tells them 'twas not only contrary to the Nature
and Purport of the Sacrament, but also a contempt of the house of GOD, and a
want of reverence toward it. What, says he, have ye not houses to eat or
drink in? Or despise ye the Church of GOD; 1 Cor. 11. 22. And when the same
Apostle urges the not defiling the Body, because it is the Temple of GOD; it
is evident that he takes it as a certain and undoubted Truth, that what is the
Temple of GOD should not be profaned, or else his Argument would not be good
or valid. Through all the World it is a custom to respect the Presence Chamber
of Kings, and such places wherein they use to appear in Majesty and State, and
to behave Reverently toward them, even when they are not Personally present:
And how much greater Reason is there to pay the like Respect and Reverence to
the House of GOD, and those Places where he uses to meet and bless his People,
and where he is always specially present, by the Attendance of his Angels and
Ministering Spirits? For that Churches are thus Honored with the special
Presence of GOD, seems to be very evident from the Scripture, both of the Old
and New Testament. GOD indeed is not in Temples so as to be included in them;
we must not think that his Essence can be shut up any where, wherefore in this
it is true, that He dwells not in Temples made with Men's hands; Nay, the very
Heaven of Heavens do not contain Him: But how ever it is certain that He is and
may be said to be more present in his Temples and Churches, then in other
places.

When GOD is said thus to be more present in one place then another, it is
either when there are some more visible Effects of His Presence by the
conferring of special Blessings; or when his Heavenly Host is there: for so
Iacoh here declared GOD to be in this place, because he saw the Angels of GOD
ascending and descending. Now that GOD is present in his Churches, the first
way appears from Exodus 20. 24. Where GOD says expressly, in all places where I
record my Name, I will come unto thee, and I will bless thee, upon which
account the Tabernacle, was called the Tabernacle of the Congregation or
meeting, not of Men's meeting, but of GOD'S meeting with Men. The like Promise
our LORD gives us, Mat. 18. 20. Where he says where two or three are gathered
together in my Name, there am I in the midst of them. And that he is also
present the other way, viz. by the attendance of his Angels and Heavenly Host,
was not only the constant Opinion of the Jews, concerning their Temple; but is
also expressed plainly by Solomon, Eccl. 5. 6. When he says concerning our
behavior in the House of GOD, Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin,
neither say thou before the Angels that it was an error. And in like manner,
St. Paul pleads against the undecency of Women's being uncovered in the Church,
because of the presence of Angels: for this cause, says he, ought the Woman to
have power over her head, because of the Angels; 1 Cor. 11. 10. Christ tells
us, Mat. 23. 21 That God dwells in his Temple, and how can he be said to do
it more there then else where, but this way.

Now that we may make what has been said useful to direct our practice, we
will proceed to draw some inferences. And first it teaches us, that it is the
duty of all those who would Worship GOD aright and who would manifest
themselves to be his Devoted Servants, to take care to consecrate places for
his Service, and to erect Churches for his Worship where there are none; and to
contribute cheerfully to the maintaining and keeping them up where they are:
for the Honor and Glory of God requires it, and Nature as well as Scripture
teaches this to be a proper Act of Homage and acknowledgement due to GOD. It
is the Duty of all who own and believe in him, to meet frequently together to
Worship Him, and that Worship which is due unto him, can never be rightly
performed, with requisite solemnity and decency, unless there be particular
places Consecrate for it. And if there be no care taken, what sort of places
these are, if they be suffered to be Mean, Nasty, Sordide, and Slovenly, it
will very much lessen Peoples esteem for GOD and his Service: for whilst Men
are in this World, they will be still creatures of Sense, and their
Apprehension of things will be always according to the outward impression they
make upon their Senses. How comes it that the meanner sort especially, are
less awed in the Church, then when they are in the houses of Lords and
Gentlemen? but because in these they see something of Grandeur, but in the
other nothing finer then what they have at home in their own silly Cottages.

Secondly, what Jacob Vowed and resolved on here, may be a fit Pattern and
Precedent to all the great Ones of the World, whose Quality and Condition makes
it requisite for them to have great and Magnificent dwellings: viz. That they
allow some particular room in these their Dwellings, and Palaces, for a private
Chapel and House of GOD, wherein they and their Family may daily meet together
to Worship Him. If they do not think their houses and dwellings convenient or
answerable to their Grandeur unless there be in them several Apartments for
several Offices; me thinks also they should judge them defective, if they
cannot allow one spare Room to be reserved for GOD and his daily service. We
would not have any believe us so Superstitious, as to think no Prayers
acceptable, but such as are made in the House of GOD or consecrated Places; for
without doubt, God will hear all who call upon him in sincerity and truth,
wheresoever they are: but yet there is great conveni ency and decency, in
appropriating one particular place for the performance both of our private and
more Solemn Devotions with the rest of the Family; for then we are not so
liable to disturbance and distractions: and therefore if our state and
condition allow it, it were commendable to set apart some particular room of
our house for this end only. It is not to be expected that the generality can
win to to this, yet those of the best Quality I think may, and if they may,
they ought too: and if they would thus give GOD an Interest in their Houses and
dwelling Places, we may very confidently say 'twould be their best security,
Except the Lord keep the house, they labor in vain that keep it; and he would
not fail to preserve and maintain that House and Family where he is so highly
Honored and devotely served. But alas this is little looked to now a days!
There be very few who regard much the interessing God in their houses, by the
consecrating them or any part of them to him; and which is far worse, who take
any care to have Him Worshipped in their Families either inseparate or common
Rooms. This part of Religion is but little in request amongst the Grandees of
the World, it is laid aside as an Antic and unfashionable thing: and as their
practice in other things is too ordinarily a Law unto the inferior Sort of
People, so it is very much to be regrated that it is so here. How seriously the
Heads of Families Worship GOD in their Closets, we do not, and we cannot know;
but it is too apparent, that there is but little care taken to have him
Worshipped decently by all the Family together; nay, this is now scarce looked
upon by any as their Duty; Joshua thought it incumbent upon him, when he said,
as for me and my house we will serve the LORD; as if he had said, not I in my
single capacity, but I also with my whole Family; and not I only by my self
alone in private, but I also with all my House; we shall be careful to serve
Him and Devotely to call upon Him: which certainly every one whose heart is
sincere with GOD will endeavor to imitate. Family Worship becomes now the more
necessary, that there is no public Worship Evening and Morning in our
Churches; if this were, Masters of Families should with their Families attend
it, and so the want of the other might be much excused: but seeing we are not so
happy as to have a daily public worship, every Family should serve God apart.
And though as we have said, there be some reason for setting apart particular
Rooms, for the exercise of Family Worship, by such as can do it conveniently;
yet the want of such convenience; needs neither be a hinderance to this
necessary serving of GOD, nor will it excuse the neglect thereof. When we
cannot serve God as we would, we ought to do it as we may, when we honor him
as far as we are able, he will not impute the want of what is without our reach
as a sin to us. Though there be no Room nor apartment in our house, but what of
necessity must be put to common use; yet let us not neglect to offer unto GOD
Evening and Morning the Sacrifices of Prayer and Thanksgiving, and they shall
certainly find acceptance in his Sight. By doing this our House and Family
shall be a little Sanctuary unto GOD, who will gracionsly vouchsafe to dwell in
them, and to establish with us his Comfortable Presence, which should afford us
greater Peace and quiet and Satisfaction, and should prevent those Unnatural
Tarres and Disorders, which fall out too commonly amongst those of the same
Family. If GOD were much among them, these things would not be; and he is not
among them, because his Name is not called upon, nor his Worship observed by
them.

Thirdly, we may see by what has been said, how much it is our Duty to
frequent the House of of GOD; for as it is Religion to erect Churches and
Temples, so it is with a Design to use them, and to come up unto them to call
upon GOD, and to hear what he will say to us. When Jacob resolved to build GOD
an House, he did not mean to shut the door thereof, and to be a Stranger
thereunto; but to visit it often that he might have Opportunity of meeting and
conversing with His GOD. If civility and kindness draw us to the House of our
Neighbor; and if such as are about Kings Courts, be obliged to come and
attend the King's person at those hours when the Court opens up, or that he
presents himself; sure we should think our selves much more obliged to come up
to the House of GOD, and to wait upon him at these times and hours which he
has appointed for meeting with us. What a Honor and happiness is it to have
the freedom to stand in his presence, and the Liberty to speak unto Him? The
Psalmist, it seems, thought it a great happiness when he cried out, Blessed is
the Man whom thou choosest, O LORD, and causest to approach unto Thee, that he
may dwell in thy Courts: we shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy house,
even of thy holy Temple. Ps. 65. 4. And again, How amiable are thy Tabernacles,
O Lord of Hosts, My soul longs, yea faints for the Courts of the LORD.
Blessed are they that dwell in thy House, they will be still praising thee. Ps.
84. Hereby it appears that he looked upon the Priests and Levits as very happy,
whose Office obliged them to a continual attendance on GOD'S House; their Lot
he thought was worthy of his ambition: for though he was a King, and upon that
account might have commanded the Chiefest Pleasures and Delights of the Sons of
Men, yet he undervalued them all in comparison of the Privilege of being in
GOD'S House. A day in thy Courts, says he, is better then a thousand; I had
rather be a door keeper in the house of my GOD, then to dwell in tents of
Wickedness. This favor he sought above all things, and preferred before all
things, as he plainly tells us, Ps. 27. 4. where he says, One having have I
desired of the LORD, that will I seek after, that I may dwell in the house of
the LORD, all the days of my life, to behold the Beauty of the LORD, and to
enquire in his Temple. And certainly whosoever comes up to the House of GOD,
with a sincere Love to and desire after Him, shall receive much Comfort and
Good thereby. It is not an Honor only, but an advantage also to be in GOD'S
presence: for he still leaves a Blessing behind him and has expressly promised
to meet with us in His House to bless us, as you have it, Exodus 20. 24. In
token hereof the Ministers of GOD are appointed to bless in His Name, as
appeared from Deuteronomy. 10. 8. which in all Reason must be extended to Evangelical
Ministers, seeing GOD'S Goodness is not narrower, but larger then it was of
old, We are not then to look upon Pastoral Benedictions, especially in the
solemn assemblies, only as intimations of their own good wishes; but as
Authoritative declarations of the Good will of GOD, which are effectual upon
such as are worthy; See Mat. 10. 13. Let none therefore withdraw from the House
of GOD, but let all accept of all Occasions of coming up thereto; as David who
tells us, I was glad when they said unto me, let us go into the House of the
LORD. Ps. 122. 1. For our coming shall not be in vain, GOD will not suffer such
as sincerely seek him to return without profit. I said not to any of the seed
of Jacob seek ye Me in vain. Isa. 45. 19. They speak Ignorantly and
unadvisedly, who say, they will not be the better by coming to the Church, and
that they may profit themselves as well at home: For seeing GOD has promised
to be there, such as are truly disposed and seek Him in sincerity, shall
undoubtedly find Him; they shall feel the influences of His Spirit moving on
their Hearts, and shall be made to taste and see his Goodness, that by
Experience as well as by Reason they may understand it is good for them to draw
near to God. It is true God is not tied to the Church or Public meetings, but
may and will manifest himself to his Servants also in other places; yet they
are not likeliest to find him at home, who stay there out of a contempt of the
Church, which is the place he himself has appointed for a Solemn meeting with
his People. We ought not to despise or neglect those means of Comfort and
Happiness which GOD has prescribed, but to use them Piously and Thankfully;
waiting humbly upon Him, that in and by them he may bless us. It Is a tempting
of GOD, to expect or desire he should show himself or conveigh his blessings by
ways extraordinary, while the ordinary means may be had. What is better then
to find GOD? What is more desirable then to receive Expressions of His favor?
And where shall we seek him? Or where may we with greater assurance expect
these, then where he has promised to be found, to wit, in His House and
Ordinances? Let us then resort thither, and we shall find Him whom our Soul
Loves, who shall resolve our Doubts, and Advise us in the Way we should take;
he shall ease our Hearts of our Secret Grief, comfort us against all our
Troubles, and shall Refresh us with new Strength and vigor, to enable us to
endure patiently to the End of our Race, that so we may obtain the Crown of
life. I have known some (and I believe 'twill be found nothing extraordinary)
who upon their coming to Church, have received a Resolution of their Particular
Doubts, Comfort for their Particular Troubles, and who when they little
expected it have had their present Case touched as if the Preacher had mainly
aimed at them, when yet he neither knew them, norintended them. Weak Preachers
will drop now and then good and useful Speeches, and though their Discourse in
the gross be not Learned nor Eloquent, yet sometimes they let fall short
sentences which may be, and often prove more beneficial then more fine and
Elaborat Sermons. I have known Digressions in Sermons, what is usually termed a
running from the Text, more pertinent to some of the Hearers, then if the
Minister had kept more close to his Subject, because they were thereby struck
home, and hit upon some Particulars of their Condition which concerned them to
understand, and to be rightly informed of. If then Men would but lay aside
their prejudices, put themselves in a Suitable Disposition, and listen
attentively, they might and without doubt should be Edified and Bettered by
coming to Church. The apprehended weakness of him who is to Officiat, ought to
be no discouragement, for GOD often uses weak and mean things to effectuat
great Matters, and by what we account the foolishness of preaching, he does
save those that believe. Though there were no Sermon, 'twould be our Duty
nevertheless to come up to Church, that thereby we may testify our homage to
GOD and acknowledgment of him: but however for our Encouragement, if we be
sincerely desirous to hear what GOD the LORD will speak, he will speak good one
way or other.

In the last place, when we come up to the House of GOD, we ought to be
careful to lay aside every thing which may offend, and be unbecoming so Divine
and holy a Presence: while we are there, we should behave our selves decently
and reverently; for if the presence of Kings overawe us, how much more should
the presence of GOD and Angels? If it be improper and most unseemly to appear
any ways light frothy and impertinent before Kings, especially when they are
sitting in Majesty, and State, it is sure much more unworthy to be guilty of
Indiscretion in the House of GOD, which is the Place where God is always
present, and that in Majesty and State too by the attendance of Angels and
Ministering Spirits. It were far better not to approach the House of GOD, then
not to be reverent when we are in it: he who stays away is but guilty of
neglect, which though it be a great sin, yet it is not so great as insolency and
a downright affronting of GOD, which he is guilty of who laugheth, Sporteth,
talks idly, or any ways plays the Fool within the Church, or sleeps and
snorteth away the time therein to the Scandal and disturbance of others; or who
abstracts his mind from the Service of GOD, and imployes his thoughts in
Worldly Matters. Such behavior, and irreverent Carriage cannot but highly
provock God, and obstruct our own Good and Benefit. If we do not meet with GOD
when we come to Church if he do not bless us, if we find our selves no whit
bettered, the reason must be our Irreverent and unseemly Behavior, or some
indisposition in our selves, for GOD is always ready and willing to manifest
Himself. Wherefore if we would see the Beauty of the Lord in his Temple; or if
we would taste the goodness of his house; we must guard against those things
which may provock him to withdraw himself from us. And must labor so to please
him by a Humble, Devout and Reverent Behavior, as that he may condescend to
come and manifest himself to our souls for our edification and comfort. And to
what purpose is it to come, if you be not resolved to do Reverence to GOD by
coming? what a dishonor is done to the House of GOD? When you only come up
unto it, because you know not otherwise how to spend the Time, or when you make
it only a place for meeting with your neighbors where you talk about News
and other Worldly Affairs, and where you may be informed what Garb and Dress
is most in Fashion, or where you may Sleep and take your rest, or where without
Disturbance you may ruminate on your Business and projects. as St. Paul said to
the Corinthians, have ye not houses to eat and drink in, so I say, have ye not
other places to do these things in? Or do ye indeed despise the Church of GOD,

Consider I pray you, that the Church (as St. Chrysostom says Vid. Mede, lib.
2. p. 439
) is no Barbers or Drug-sellers Shop, nor any other Crafts-mans or Merchants
Workhouse in the Market place; but the place of Angels, the place of
Archangels, the Palace of GOD, Heaven it self; think near whom thou stand,
with whom thou invocatest GOD; namely with Cherubims and Seraphims, and all the
powers of Heaven: Consider but what companions thou have: let it be sufficient
to persuade thee to Sobriety, when thou remembrest that thou who art compounded
of Flesh and Blood, art admitted with the incorporeal Powers to celebrate the
common Lord of all: when thou go into a King's Palace thou composest thy
self to Comeliness in thy Habit, in thy looks, in thy gate, and in all thy
whole guise: but here is indeed the Pala^e of a King, and the like attendance
to that in Heaven, and do thou laugh? etc. I know well enough thou see it
not, but hear thou me, and know that Angels are every where, and that chiefly
in the House of God, they attend upon their King, where all is filled with
these incorporeal powers.

SECT. II. Of Prayer.
HAving had occasion to treat of Churches or Sacred places, I judge it
necessary to subjoine some short discourse on Prayer, seeing that this is the
very use, and end of these: For upon this account the Church in Scripture is
called the House of Prayer. The very design of consecrate houses or Places, is
that Men may have in them convenience for Prayer; and thither men were wont to
come, not only to join in the public Worship, but also for the performance of
their private Devotions. But because our Lord perceived that the resorting to
such public Places, so often as we need to pray, might Minister to pride and
vanity, which spoil the odor of our Prayers, and hinder their acceptance with
GOD; therefore he has advised us, Mat. 6. to choose out the most secret and
retired Places, for our Private Prayers and addresses to GOD: and though the
place we pray in, have not the Honor to be appropriate to GOD, yet our Prayers
shall find acceptance, if they be sincere and rightly qualified. Prayer does in
some sense sanctify the place, but the place can add no weight or worth to our
Prayers. It may be more convenient for us to pray in one place more then
another, but our Prayers will not be more acceptable to GOD upon the account of
the place they are said in. GOD is every where, and we may freely address our
selves to him any where, and where ever Men lift up holy hands in Prayer
without wrath or doubting they shall be heard. If Churches be employed to any
other use then prayer, and religious services, they are profaned. See Mark 11.
15. but it is not necessary, nor expedient to go to Church each time we pray
to GOD. The Church should be reserved for Public Worship chiefly, but as for
what we do apart by our selves, we ought to seek out Places of the greatest
privacy to do it in, and as I said in the former section, if our State would
suffer it, 'twould be very proper and convenient to set apart one particular
Room of our House for this end, that we may perform our Devotions with the
greater freedom, and be less liable to disturbance, and those interruptions
which persons usually meet with who want this convenience.

But to leave the circumstance of the place, and to come to the thing it self.
Prayer is a special part of Divine Worship, enjoined by clear precepts,
recommeded by the example of all holy Men, and so necessary that who prays
not at all or but seldom, cannot be said to Worship GOD, whatever el^e they
do: For their other Acts cannot be properly referred to GOD, if they be not
accompanied with Prayers. Our obligation to Prayer arises not from one, but
from all the Divine Attributes; and by Prayer there is an acknowledgement of
all of them: He who prays declares GOD'S Omnipresence, His Omniscience, His
Omnipotence and All sufficiency, and that He is a rewarder of them that
diligently seek Him. But who neglects Prayer does not believe these Divine
Perfections, or does not seriously consider them; he makes no actual
acknowledgment of them, nay he lives in open defiance of them, and arrogates to
himself an independency and self-sufficiency, which are GOD'S prerogative.

Again there can be no Intercourse with GOD, but by the means of Prayer.
Without Prayer we can never arrive at he end of Religion, viz. Union with GOD,
and participation of the Divine Nature. He who is not exercised in Prayer has
his Heart alienat from GOD, and is wholly indisposed for receiving the Spirit
of GOD, and the impression thereof, without which there is no advancing toward
perfection Prayer is by some compared to Breathing, and not unfitly; for what
that is to the Body, Prayer is to the Soul; respiration is no more necessary to
our NaturallLi'e, then Prayer to the Spiritual Life, for hereby it ^s
preserved: and as the stiffling our breath ends our Life, so the ceasing to
pray destroys the life of God in the Soul. The b^dy which breaths not has no
sense or feeling, nor is it capable of motion; even so the man who prays not,
is without all due sense of GOD, neither makes he any motion toward him
Prayer is a sign of Spiritual Life, and shows a desire and capacity to receive
what is necessary to growth and perfection: and as the want of such a desire
and capacity obstructs the communication of GOD'S Spirit* so where this is he
will certainly manifest his L^ve, and bestow his Grace. To him who has the
desire and capacity shall be given. He who asks shall receive, he who seeks
shall find, and who knock^th it shall be opened unto him. Mat. 11.

But to make Prayer acceptable to GOD, and thus profitable to our selves, it
must be rightly performed and duly qualified. true Prayer is always
acceptable as incense, and never fails to bring down a Blessing; but many
deceive themselves with a mere show, they are contented that they seem to Pray,
but do not Pray really: some Pray much, but yet are never a whit nearer GOD,
nor move more forward in Holiness, which is both the undoubted Sign, and the
certain Effect of true Prayer. We ought then not only to Pray, but to pray
aright, else all the Labor we bestow this way is in vain. Ye ask, says St.
James, and ye have not, why? because ye ask amiss.

Now that our Prayers may be proper Prayers and effectual; first, We must take
heed that they be the Work of the Spirit, and not the Labor of the Lips: For
GOD is a Spirit, and will be Worshipped in Spirit and Truth, That is, by free
and proper Acts of the Mind and not by empty shows which have no Solidity or
Reality in them. If our Hearts be removed, he cares not for our drawing near
with our mouth, or the honoring him with our Lips as we learn from Isa: 29.
1^. To prostrate our Bodies before GOD, and to let our Minds love and wander,
is to offer a dead Sacrifice which is no Reasonable, or acceptable Service; to
utter words which we do not understand, or whose meaning we attend not to, is
not to pray but to prat, it is to babble without sense, to make a sound which
signifies nothing and deserves no more to be regarded, then the pronunciation
of Puppets and Mechanical Engines, which is performed by Wheels, and Springs
without understanding. Our Prayers are but brutish gru^tlings, if they come
not from the Heart and be not performed by the understanding. Wherefore when we
are to Pray, we should first fix our Spirits, and compose our Minds to a
serious Attention, and should endeavonr to wind up our Souls to that fervor
and earnestness which is Suitable to the weight* and importance of Prayers: And
to this purpose, ^ will be necessary to bestow some time in Meditation, and
Reading of the Seriptures, or some other devout book.

Having thus reduced our Minds to a due Attention, and secured as much as
possible against wandering thoughts; in the next place we must consider the
several parts of Prayers, the Nature and Property of each, and the Affections
suitable thereto, and frame our Prayers accordingly: For they cannot be
acceptable if lame and defective, nor though they have all necessary parts, if
each part be not rightly Adjusted and Properly qualified. To clear this better,
we will touch a little on them;

The first part of Prayer is Adoration and Invocation. This we should always
begin with, for as in our addresses to Kings and great Personages, we use first
to do them reverence, and to testify their dignity before we present our
requests: So in our addresses to GOD, we should first adore his Majesty and
invocate his Audience. Now the right way to do this, is not to be accoast him
with a heap of big tittles; but to call to mind his incomprehensible Nature,
and Adorable perfections, visible in his manifold Works. And if our
apprehensions of GOD be worthy of him, we will be abashed at our selves as
unfit for so great a presence, and most unworthy to be regarded by one so
highly exalted above all our thoughts: To express which and to cherish it too,
it is requisite to throw our selves in some humble posture. Thus the Publican to
signify his own vileness, and GODS greatness, he stood a far off, and would not
lift up his eyes, as one ashamed of himself. But lest the reflecting upon GODS
Majesty and Greatness, should take away the hopes of Acceptance, and rather
fill us with dread then confidence in him; we must remember his Goodness, his
Love, his Mercy, and how that he is reconciled to us in his Son JESUS CHRIST.
Therefore our Savior has taught us to draw near to GOD as in a sense of his
Ineffable Greatness whose throne is in the Heavens, so under the notion of a
Father who is always ready and easy to be entreated: When ye pray, says he,
say Our Father which art in Heaven; etc.

Confession is another part of Prayer. This must by no means be omitted, GOD
requires it; the rules of Justice and Equity make it necessary, and there is
no Remission without it; he who confesses has the promise of pardon, but who
covers his Sins shall not prosper. To perfom this aright we must consider
both our General and particular State, and make an acknowledgement of them: In
the General we ought to acknowledge what is common to us with all others, that
we are of a rebellious Race, miserably corrupted, and prone to all evil; but we
must not rest here, but must subjoine also a confession of our own particular
faults, all our sinful inclinations and actual transgressions, with their
Aggravating Circumstances: for which purpose we ought to search our hearts, to
examine our Disp^sitions, and to take account of our Lives. But if we make only
a simple Confession, it will avail us little; we must not confess our sins to
GOD, as usual People do the offenses they give one another, or some great Man,
which they do clearly out of Complement, or out of Constraint to shun some
present inconveniency, without any dere^ation of the thing: But as we must be
ingenuous in confessing our Sins, so we ought to confess them with sorrow and
contrition. Confession is a mere mockery, if it proceed not from an abhorrency
at Sin; and be not attended with indignation at our selves, and backed with
unfeinged purposes to abandon Sin, and guard against it: wherefore when we
confess, 'twill be necessary to consider how every sinful act is a complex of
Injustice, Ungratitude, Arrogance, madness and Folly, that sin is most
loathsome in its Nature, and most mischeivous in its Consequences. But because
GOD requires us not to remember and confess our Sins, that we may be filled
with despair: But to stir up in us desires of Mercy, and to prepare us for it*
So having humbled our Souls with the sight of our sins, and wrought our selves
to an earnest Desire of being delivered from the stain and Guilt of them, we
should next support our selves with the comfortable consideration of GODS
infinite Mercy, how that he is most ready and willing to forgive, and how that
to make way for his Mercy to Sinners, he has sent his own Son to satisfy for
our sins, and to repair his Honor which by our sins is affronted and baffled;
we should consider that JESUS CHRIST is the True Sacrifice and Propitiation for
sin, which by Faith we should offer up to GOD and thereupon both ask
forgiveness and confidently hope for it.

A third part of Prayer is Petition or a humble Representation of our Desires
to GOD; which he calls for, to teach us our Dependence on him, that it is in him
we live, move, and have our being, and that we may acknowledge Him the Author
and Giver of all good. To the right performance of this part, we must first
have a sense of our own indigency, and a strong Faith in Gods Power and
Goodness, in his Power that he is able, and in his goodness that he is willing
to give us what we ask: For it is a vain thing to ask of another what we think
we need not, or what we may get without him; and it is no less vain to address
our selves to one in whom we have no Confidence, whose Power or Goodness we
very much doubt. Now to* persuade us of GODS Power and Goodness, and of our own
Misery and Poverty, we need but to read the Scripture, call to mind the Nature
and Works of GOD, and take an impartial view of our selves. Secondly, we ought
to look to the Aim and Reason of our Desires that we have a right end before
us; for if we have an evil intention, our Desires are sinful and unworthy to be
presented to GOD, who is most Just and Holy, and who cannot be perverted from
what is right* Our Desires therefore must not terminate in our selves, we must
not intend our own Honor, Glory, Pleasure, etc: in this World; that must be
the chief end of our Desires and Petitions, which is the last end of our Life
and Being, viz. GOD himself and his Glory. This our Savior teaches us in
that short Prayer he prescribed; for there we are commanded in the first place
to Pray that GODS name be hallowed, that his Kingdom may come; But this does
not debarr us from respecting our own Eternal Felicity, for the Glory of GOD,
which we should seek includes that; in seeking the Glory of GOD, we seek our
own Eternal interest, and we cannot aim at Heaven without aiming at the Glory
of GOD: these two are inseparable. 3ly. We ought carefully to consider the
matter of our Requests, that in this also they be good and proper, that is,
agreeable to the will of GOD; for it is not lawful for us to crave what he has
not approved. And therefore we must acquaint our selves well with the Holy
Scripture, in which GOD has revealed his Will, and thereby regulate all our
Desires: what he has allowed we may, what he has commanded, we ought to ask;
but what he has forbidden we should pray against. From hence it follows. 4ly.
That we ought to pray with all earnestness for all Spiritual Blessings: but as
for Temporal things, though we should Pray for them too, yet not Peremptorly,
but with a Resignation to the wise Disposal of GOD'S Will: the Reason of this
Difference is, because he has absolutely approved of Spiritual Blessings, but
has declared otherwise anent Temporal Benefits; and because he has made it
always necessary for us to be Good, Holy, Chaste, Sober, Meek, and c. But it
is not always expedient for us to have health and outward Peace, Prosperity,
and other temporal good things, nor is it expedient for us to know when they
are fit for us. Fifthly, and lastly, each time we pray, we should not only
consider our general State as Men and Christians, and ask what is agreeable
thereto: But also our particular Station, the Condition of our Body and Soul,
the tentations we are in or liable to; and in a word, all the Circumstances of
our Affairs both Spiritual and Temporal, and lay them open before GOD, and
frame Desires suitable to each of these things: as a Man goes to his Friend
with a thing which befalls him, and as the Sick and Infirm make the Physician
acquainted with all their Distempers, so we should never fail to impart our
State and all our Concerns to GOD, and to ask the Direction and Assistance he
knows we stand in need of: Which being done in Faith of his Power and
Good Will, as was said before, cannot but be a great Ease and Satisfaction to
our Minds, because then we may have this confidence, that we shall have the
Petitions we desired of Him; 1 John 5. 15. For as all things are possible to
GOD, so all that is good and fit shall be done to them who believe in Him or
rely upon Him; Blesseod are they who believe, for there shall be a performance
of these things which are told them of the LORD.

Intercession makes a fourth part of Prayer, this St. Paul enjoins, 1 Timothy 2.
1. and it is insinuated in the Tenor of the LORD'S Prayer, for that being
prescribed to be a Form of private Prayer, and yet running all alongs in the
plural number; it teaches us that while we pray for our selves, we should also
be careful to hold up the concerns of others. Selfishness is contrary to the
temper of the Christian Religion, and it tenders our Prayers ineffectual; For
GOD hears us and deals with us only according as we are disposed toward
others, with what measure we met it shall be measured to us. The Apostle
requires expressly that our Prayers be without wrath, 1 Timothy 2. 8. intimating
thereby that where there is wrath, there is no acceptance; And according to the
Christian Law, there is Wrath, where Kindness is not testified; he hates who
does not love; he envies another Happiness, who does not heartily wish it:
That therefore our Prayers may be effectual for our selves, we must present
Supplications for others; that we may taste the goodness of GOD, let us not
confine it to our selves, but heartily wish it extended to all the rest of the
World. That GOD may be glorified in others as well as in us, thus it is our
duty to pray for all Men, whom we must specify according to their various
Conditions and Necessities, because we cannot name every one in particular; but
St. Paul bids us pray, especially for Kings, and those in Civil Authority, in
the forecited place, and for our Spiritual Guides and Rulers, in several of his
Epistles: both because they have much need to be prayed for, and also in that
the good of Mankind much depends upon them. And as Nature teaches us to
particularize those who are near or dear to us, so Religion requires us
expressly to mention our Enemies: and if our hearts will not suffer us to do
this, we need not pray at all, as our Savior plainly intimats; Matthew. 5. 23.
6. 14.

The fifth Particular whereof Prayer should consist, is Praise or Thanksgiving,
this must be always joined to our Prayers according to the Apostles Precept,
Col. 4. 2. 1 These. 5. 18. Very Nature teaches us to be thankful to our
Benefactors, and to make an acknowledgment of their Favors, so that an
unthankful person has been ever esteemed among Heathens most odious; what
Obligations then are on us to give thanks to GOD, who is the great Benefactor,
and who is even the Author of all the favors which others confer? And we are
the more oblidged to make this hearty and thankful acknowledgment, because it is
all the requital he seeks, and all we can return for what he does to us: for we
cannot be profitable to him again, as we may be to our fellow creatures, our
requests and the desires of our heart are intimat by thanksgiving, as much as
by Formal Petitioning, as appears from Phil. 4. 6. and moreover hereby, we in a
manner lay obligations on GOD, both to continue the benefit, and also to grant
us what else we ask: whereas by our unthankfulness, we provock GOD to withdraw
his Blessing already bestowed, and to turn away from our Prayers; How
unreasonable is it to desire or expect a kindness from him, to whom we have
showed our selves unthankful, for what he has already done? But because GOD
measures our Thankfulness not by our Words, but by the inward sentiments and
affections of our hearts, therefore we should consider, First, the number of
those blessings which God bestows on us, how they are almost, nay altogether
infinite, for who can reckon up all the Public and Private, the Temporal and
Spiritual Blessings they enjoy, the Good they possess, and the Evils which they
want? for as he gives the one, so he withholds the other. As the Psalmist
speaks, Many, O LORD my GOD, are thy wonderful Works which thou have done,
and thy thoughts which are to usward: they cannot be reckoned up in order unto
thee; if I would declare and speak of them, they are more then can be numbered.
Psalm. 40. 5. 2ly. The greatness of them, what matter of Content and
Satisfaction they afford, especially such as are Spiritual, for without them we
should be Eternally miserable. 3ly. How freely they are bestowed, for they are
all Acts of pure love in GOD, being given without either merit on our part, or
profit or gain to Himself. 4ly. How undeservedly they are continued, we rebel
against GOD, grieve his Spirit, and give him daily manifold Provocations and
yet he still loads us with his Benefits: if any Parent received but the
thousand part of these injuries from his only Son, He would certainly abandon
him. By these considerations, we must labor to make our selves sensible of
GOD'S Goodness toward us, and to estimate truly these expressions thereof we
have received, that our affections toward him may be enflamed, and that our
Souls and all within us may be stirred up to bless and magnify his holy Name.

These are the several parts of Prayer which if persons please they may rank
otherwise, for it is not material what particular method be observed: but by
this veiw we have given, it appears that Prayer is somewhat more then a bare
repetition of Words; that to pray well and effectually, there is more time and
greater deliberation requisite then People ordinarily imagine, or what I fear
the most bestow. If we would have our Prayers avail or take effect, we must ply
them seriously, and allot some time for the right performance of them. And here
none ought to pretend, that their business will not suffer this; for though
upon some urgent Occasion or particular emergency, Men may be allowed to shift
or abridge their Prayers: Yet it is not lawful for any to let the Ordinary or
Daily Business of their Callings, so take them up as not take time to retire
and pray in that manner we have showed; for this were to prefer Earth to
Heaven, the Body to the Soul, the cares of this Life to those things above;
whereas our Savior bids us seek first the kingdom of GOD, and his
righteousness. The Servant that is most strictly kept, has time allowed to
eat, drink and sleep, and the Man of the greatest business if he be Master of
himself, will allow himself some leisure to talk with his Friends or
Neighbors; and why also should not every one seek out some proper time for
Praying to GOD. It Is true, People may lift up their Hearts to GOD while at
work, and indeed they ought to be ever darting up Pious Ejaculations, wherefore
we are commanded to Pray always, and herein also Prayer is like to Breathing,
that it ought to be continual and joined to all other Exercises. But these
short Ejaculations or occasional Prayers, will not serve in steed of such Set
and Solemn Prayer as we have been speaking of, which GOD necessarly calls for,
which all Holy Men have taken care to perform, some seven times, some thrice a
day, and which none ought to do seldomer then twice, viz. Morning and Evening:
and those who fear that their Daily business hinder them from plying Prayer so
seriously as they ought, should set A Day of the Week, or once a Month, for
redressing their Daily Omissions in this Matter. And indeed none ought to
grudge at the time they employ in Prayer, even upon a Worldly account; for
though the hours we steall from our Callings to Pray and Meditate, may seem to
obstruct our interest, and to hinder our Thriving; yet on the contrary, they
shall bring a secret Blessing on the other hours which remain, and make them as
much or more for our gain then twice as much time: All these things, says
Christ, shall be added unto you.

I cannot now adduce all the Motives to Prayer, for they might be sufficient
for a Vosame. I shall at present content my self to say, that as Prayer is*
necessary, so it is the most pleasant and profitable exercise; it Sanctifies
for our use what we receive here, and secures the better things of the Life to
come; it sweettens adversity, and keeps us from surfeiting on Prosperity; it is
delightful in times of Peace, and disburdens our Hearts of Grief in times of
Trouble; and in a word is the greatest privilege we enjoy on Earth. But we
must remember that we hold it only by Jesus Christ, and therefore we must ever
conclude our Prayers in His Name and present them through Him.

SECT. III. Of Public Worship.
WHat Obligations are on us to worship GOD in private retirements, and how we
should order these secret Addresses, we have laid out in the former Section.
But we must not think that we have sufficiently served GOD, when these Private
Devotions are performed; we must also worship Him openly, in the view of all
the World, with those who hold the same Faith and Profession with our selves:
and without we pay this public Service, our Sincerity in the other does not,
yea cannot appear, as we have already insinuat Sect. 1st. of this Chapter,
where we showed our Obligations to frequent the Church or House of GOD.

But because the public Worship of GOD is so much disregarded now a days, and
every Person is so ready to quarrel with what is Established, and to take upon
them to Model it; therefore we have thought fit to treat here of somewhat
particularly, and to show First, the necessiity of this Worship. Secondly, the
time to be appointed for the performance thereof. And Thirdly the Nature and
Matter of it. As to the First, concerning the Necessity of public Worship, it
will not be needful to insist much in proving it; for though there be many who
slight the Public Worship of GOD in their Practice, yet we hardly think there
will be any who will take upon them to Justify their practice, by alleging the
non-necessity of Worshipping GOD publicly: And if any person should be so
hardy as to do it, he should herein not only set himself against all
Christians of what ever Persuasion, but also should oppose the Sentiments and
Practice of all Mankind. As the belief of a Deity has been every where
received, so all People have ever looked upon themselves as oblidged to
Worship* GOD publicly according to the knowledge they had of him. The Jews to
whom GOD revealed himself, were both enjoined such a Worship and directed how
to do it; and the Gospel only abrogate the Ceremonial part of the Law, it still
retains and confirms such Customs and Practices as are useful and agreeable to
the Nature thereof, and this is one of them: therefore the Apostles and Private
Christians, continued to assemble themselves publicly as the Jews did, only
taking care to adapt their Worship to the Christian Law. Our LORD supposes,
that His Church will have public Meettngs, and to encourage them here he makes
a special promise; Mat. 18. 19. St. Paul finds fault with those who for fear of
pesecution foresooke the Assembling themselves together. Heb. 10. 25. It Is not
only necessary that we Believe with our Hearts, but we must also confess with
our Mouth. Romans 10. 12. Mat. 10. 32. 33. And as we are thus obliged to a
public profession of GOD and Religion, so by the same Reason to a public
Worship: for this is the Badge and Evidence of that* And as the Glory of GOD
requires him to be woshipped Publicly, so the Edification of others, for
hereby says the Apostle, we provock one another to love and to Good Works;
Heb. 10. 24. Finally, our Private Interest, and the Concerns of the Common
Wealth where we live, oblidge us to meet together, to call upon GOD, that by
the Importunity and Strength of our united Prayers, we may procure all
necessary Blessings. Upon these considerations we are obliged to attend the
public Worship of GOD. And nothing can justify our withdrawing from it,
except those we live among require our compliance with some thing sinful and
which we know to be offensive to GOD.

Having thus seen the necessity of public Worship, it clearly follows from
hence that there must be some set time appointed for it. And seeing the Reasons
which oblidge to this Worship are always in force, therefore that it may seem
continued too, there must be no considerable distance betwixt the times
appointed for the performance thereof: there is a Cessation of the Worship, if
the returns of these times be not Frequent; for Men are said to leave off that,
which they do seldomer then there is need or occasion of doing it. Upon this
account even these who had no more then Natural Light, have thought them selves
tied to a daily Service in their Temples* the Pagans and Mahumetans do still
Assemble themselves several times a day* GOD enjoined his People of Old a
Sacrifice Morning and Evening, Exodus 29. 38. At which time also Public Prayer
was wont to be made, as appears from Act. 3. 1. And though Sacrifice could only
be offered in Jerusalem, yet the Jews who lived elsewhere observed those hours,
came up to their Synagogues, and made Prayers to GOD jointly, which is the
constant Practice of that People to this Day, as Buxtorf and some others tell
us. Now as I hinted before, CHRIST and his Apostles did not abolish such
Customs and Practices as were Moral and tended to the Glory of GOD, or
Edification of Men, but recommended them to be continued among Christians:
Sacrifices of Beasts, it is true, are not required nor is there any use of them;
but Sacrifices of Prayer and thanksgiving, these Calves of our lips are no less
exacted by the Gospel then the other by the Law. And I cannot see why the one
should been continued under the Law and the other discontinued under the
Gospel; the Apostles thought there was as much Reason for the one as the other,
wherefore they and their Converts continued to serve GOD daily by such public
Prayers and Worship, as is evident from Act. 2. 42. 46. Which Custom was kept
up in the Church afterward, and certainly the want hereof is such a defect, as
does more then spoil the Beauty of a Church; it is a main cause of the decay
of all true piety: and therefore the ignorance and stubbornness of the
Generality of this Nation is much to be lamented, which discourage our
Governors from Establishing this Daily Worship of GOD in Towns, Cities, and
other populous Places, which I may confidently call a Necessary, as well as a
Reasonable Service.

But as we ought thus to hallow every Day, by devoting some part thereof to the
public Service of GOD; so we are obliged to Sanctify for this end one whole
Day in seven, viz. the first day of the Week, commonly called the Lord's Day,
partly because of its being peculiarly consecrate to the Service of GOD, and
partly because of that special Honor whiich the LORD JESUS CHRIST conferred on
this Day, by his Triumphant resurrection from the Dead, which was the Reason
for its consecration: we should set a part one day of the seven, not that this
portion appears necessary by Natural Light, but because 'twas expressly exacted
of the Jews, and that we are unjust if our expressions of Piety and Devotion
toward GOD be less then what was sought of them; and what oblidgeth us to the
observation of the first day particularly, is the practice of the Holy
Apostles, who either had an express command for what they did themseves and
enjoined others in the Worship of GOD, or were led thereto by the holy Ghost.
Now their practice in this particular is declared to us Act. 20. 7. 1. Cor. 16.
2. And is witnessed by a constant universal Tradition of the Church.

Besides the LORD'S Day, no other is strictly necessary to be kept, except in
obedience to our Rulers Civil and Ecclesiastical; who without all question may
(as well as the Jewish Church and State formerly) appoint days for the public
Worship and service of GOD, upon the account either of some particular
emergency wherein Church or State is concerned, or of some special Mercy
granted them. But they ought to be careful neither to burden People with too
many such appointments, nor yet to give them a disgust by ordering Solemn Days
upon mean and silly accounts: if Men be not serious in these Solemn Addresses,
they are a mere Mockery and Dishonor to GOD; and it is impossible to make them
Serious when the cause and occasion of them is frivolous and unworthy to be
made the matter of Divine Worship. And so the Church of Rome has miserably
transgressed, for first, she has so multiplied her Fasts and Festivals, that
the number of them almost exceeds the days of the Year; the year would need to
be enlarged, if all their Holy Days should be distinctly and exactly keept.
And though it be pretended that all are not required to observe each of them;
yet there be too many imposed upon every person and every place, so that the
French King was necessitate to deall with the Pope lately for the dispensing
with a great many in his Kingdom. Again the Church of Rome is not only to blame
for enjoining such an intolerable burden of days, but also because the Reason
of these injunctions, for the most part, are frivolous scarce worthy of a Man's
serious attention, much less of being the matter and occasion of solemn
Devotions, as for example the invention of some pitiful Relicts, the dedication
of Bells, some ridiculous passage of their Legendary Saints, etc. and as most
of their Holy Days are in honor of their Saints, so the most of their Saints
according to their own relation did nothing memorable, their lives are more
Foolish and impertinent then Old Wives Fables, or the Tales of Children, as we
might show by several instances did we not fear to be tedious.

But leaving this, we come next to speak to the Nature of this Worship, which
should be paid unto GOD publicly, and to show the Particulars whereof it
should consist, which ought especially to be considered.

And First, as to the General nature of this Worship, it must first answer the
end thereof, which is the Glory of GOD, the Celebration and Praise of his
Greatness, Wisdom, Goodness and other Glorious perfections; that the Souls of
the Worshippers may be enflamed with the love of GOD and that they may be
excited to Fear, Trust, and Obey Him.

2ly. It must be agreeable to the Will and Mind of GOD, and altogether free of
what he has forbidden, or signified his displeasure with: otherwise it will
be so far from being acceptable, that it will be very abominable.

3ly. It must not only contain all the parts of Natural Religion, but besides
carry Characters of the Gospel, for it is not only Reasonable, but Necessary
that the Worship of GOD be Regulate by special dispensations of his Grace, and
made to express the particulars of such Dispensations. the Jews were required
to Worship God in a different Manner from what is discernable by Natural Light;
and so those who believe the Truth and Mysteries of the Christian Religion,
must have a Peculiar Worship, that is distinct from such as own no Revelation,
or only that of the old Testament.

Fourthly, from these considerations it follows, that Christians must Worship
GOD together, in spirit and Truth: For so our Savior directed us, John 4. 23.
Where he says, The hour comes, and now is, when the true Worshippers shall
worship the Father in Spirit and Truth: For the Father seeks such to Worship
him, GOD is a Spirit, and they that Worship, must Worship him in Spirit and
Truth. Which words, whither we consider them abstractly and in a general
notion, as delivering a certain Natural Truth, or with a reference to the way
of Worshipping GOD then usual in the World. I say, which way so ever we
consider them, they teach us that GOD will now be Worshipped, not by a
Multitude of carnal and external Observances, or a number of Mysterious and
almost unintelligible rites and Ceremonies, as the Gentiles used to do, and as
he thought fit for a time to impose upon the Jews: But by actions of a
Spiritual Nature, and whose signification and use is Reasonable and easily
understood. The Law considered Men as in a weak Infant State, and so prescribed
a Worship suitable to such a State; but the Gospel endeavors to bring us to the
full Stature of perfect Men, and considers us as such, and therefore our way of
worshipping GOD now must speak out more perfect Reason and understanding. The
worship required of Christians is not a Pompous show of Ceremonies, which may
affect Children or Childish Persons; but Real and Substantial expressions of
Faith, Love, Fear, Joy, and Confidence in GOD: There must not be more, or other
Ceremonies used in the Worship of GOD, then what is requisite for Order and
Decency, or necessary to Excite and Fix the inward attention of our minds; for
that is not True or proper Worship which is wholly External, and does not come
from, and is not performed by the inward Mind. Thus in a word as we should
Worship GOD in Spirit and Truth, So to Worship in Spirit, is to Worship with
the inward acts and Affections of the Soul, and to Worship in Truth is to
perform such Outward Acts as does not Mystically and Figuratively but plainly
and properly, signify and hold forth these inward ones.

Having thus viewed the Nature of Public Worship in General, we pass to the
consideration of the parts thereof In particular.

And First the Public Worship of God should consist of Prayers, this is so
clear from Scripture, Reason, and the practice of all the world, that it were a
vain thing to prove it: the parts and Qualifications of Public Prayer, are the
same with those of private Prayer, whereof we have spoken already. And because
it is so useful to know before hand what we should Pray, and so unworthy a
thing to utter rash and indiscreet expressions before GOD, especially in
public, therefore the Church in Ages have ever thought themselves oblidged to
compose deliberatly Forms of public Prayer, and not to leave them to the
extemporary effusions of him who officiates; there is not at this day any
Church (except our own) without a public Service and Liturgy: But because we
are driven to the necessity at present, not to use one, therefore it is
incumbent on the public Ministers to take the more care in composing their
Prayers, that their expressions be grave and Decent, and that as to the Matter
of them they contain all things proper and necessary, and nothing disagreable
to God, or which may disgust and stumble the Worshippers. they should study to
make their Prayers to express truly the general needs and desires of the
People; for he who Prays is their mouth, employed to speak in their name,
what every one should do if they were allowed to speak: and so all public
Prayers should be so ordered, that every one may be able to join heartily with
them. And here I cannot pass two faults ordinarily committed in this part of
public Worship, the one for the most part in Country Parishes, the other
generally both in City and Country: by this last I mean a careless
unconcernedness in Prayer, many think not themselves oblidged to join with the
Minister while he prays, they do not consider that he is but their voice, and
that it is necessary for them to say with the heart what he does with the mouth,
else the Prayers cannot be heard as theirs, or for them. Though one Pray but
audibly to shun confusion, yet it is necessary for all to assent thereto. The
other Fault is committed often by the Common People (especially in the Northren
parts of the Kingdom, as the former in the Southren parts) who fall to their
particular Prayers when the Minister is praying in the name of the whole
Congregation: this is an irregular and undecent thing which obstructs the
Edification Designed by this part of Worship, see 1. Cor. 14. 26. When the
congregation comes together, it should be with one Heart and Mind, they ought
not to have different exercises but always the same; they should pray one and
the same Prayer with one accord, as we read the Disciples did Act. 4. 24. To
prevent both these Evils, if 'twas usual in all, both Jewish and Christian
Liturgies to Appoint the People to utter sometimes some short sentenes, and
always to speak out audibly, Amen, at the conclusion of every Prayer, as is
inti mate to us, 1. Cor. 14. 16.

Another Act of Divine Worship especially in Public Assemblies, is singing of
Psalms and Spiritual Songs. This was always a part of the Worship of GOD under
the Old Testament, 'twas observed by our Savior with his Disciples, Matthew. 26.
30. And St. Paul enjoins it to all Christians, Ephesians. 5. 19. Col. 3. 16. Singing
Hymns and Psalms is of great use in the Service of GOD, both to prepare our
Minds for it, and to make us take Pleasure in it. It fixes our thoughts,
elevats our Spirits, fills us with Joy in GOD, and leaves on our Minds a
deeper impression of Divine Truths, then almost any other part of Religious
Worship: for which cause it has been an universal practice in the Church
through all Ages of the World.

And as Singing is our Duty, so the Psalms of David are excellently fitted for
the purpose, they furnish us both with proper Matter and apposite Expressions:
They were dictate by the Spirit of GOD to be employed particularly in this
Divine exercise; and we must not think the use of them to have ceased with the
Law or Jewish state; no certainly they are still useful to the Church and
proper for the times of the Gospel. Without doubt S. Paul in the forecited
places, and S. James Ch: 5. 13. Are to be understood of the Psalms of David,
because the tittle of Psalms has been always appropriate to them. And from
this Injunction of the Apostles conformable to their Practice, and which is
most Reasonable and u^efull, the Church has ever used these Psalms in her
Public Service.

I know there are some who not only scruple at some of the Psalms, but say
expressly they ought not to be sung and when it is done they refuse to take a
part. But truly I think there is no Reason for this. Indeed all of them are not
proper for all occasions, some are more pertinent and suitable at one time then
another, and therefore they who have the ordering of the Public Service,
should make a Prudent choice of Psalms suited to the occasion, however all of
them may be sung, and because People have not their own choice, but must take
them as they are prescribed; I will here propose some Considerations to show
how we may freely join with any Psalm and both sing it with understanding and
also with edification.

First there can be no Question of those Psalms, which Declare the Divine
Attributes, Display the Works of GOD, hold forth the excellency of his word, or
the General State of Man. To Sing and Meditate on these cannot be improper at
any time, but always useful and seasonable.

2ly. As for those Psalms which were Writ upon particular Occasions, besides
the Literal sense which relates to those Persons, their actions and
circumstances upon which account they were penned; there is a Mystical sense
belongs to them which referres them to Christ and his Church; and moreover,
they are capable of being accommodated to several Conditions and Circumstances
both of Private Persons and Public Societies by allowing some Liberty to
Figures, Allegories and other Poetical Strains which are usual in Songs and
Hymns: Now though we should be little concerned in the Literal sense, yet we
are in the Mystical* and if they will suffer an accommodation to our selves or
the Church and State we live in, then we not only may use them, but the use of
them will be both pleasant and edifying.

3ly. These Psalms which contain narrations of the Wonders which GOD wrought
for the People of Israel, or the Special mercies conferred upon them, or David
in particular, they are very proper to be sung; for besides that we ought to
celebrate the Praises of GOD for his goodness to others as well as our selves,
and that all the world are concerned in these favors heaped on the Jewish
Nation, because they served to Usher in the Gospel and contributed to the
Manifestation of the Son of GOD. I say, besides these two Considerations, those
Acts of GOD toward his People in former times, are instances of his Power and
Goodness, and so proper matter for his Praise; they are also grounds of our
hope, and Motives to trust and confidence in Him both for our selves and the
Public; see Romans 15. 4.

4ly. GOD'S plagues upon the Heathen and his punishments upon His own People,
are instances of GOD'S Justice and Holiness, and therefore the Psalms which
narrate these may be sung to put us in mind, that he is not a GOD who has
pleasure in wickedness, and that no relation to him will excuse sin, or hold
off judgments, if his Laws be broken. And so they are useful to stir up our
repentance le^t we likewise smart, and our thankfulness for whatforbearance and
gentle dealing we have met with.

5ly. The Psalms where David lays out his own Troubles, and the success of
his Enemies are be meditate on, as Proofs that the Just will be afflicted and
the wicked prosperous, to teach us Patience and Contentment. The high
Assertions of his Integrity and Uprightness, and Love to the Law of GOD, etc.
We should sing, thereby to testify, that it is our Duty to endeavor this way
to please GOD, and that without these Endeavors we ought not to lay hold on
the Promises, nor presume to crave the Privileges of His Children.

6. The Psalms of imprecations are most scrupled at, but it is because persons
are not at the pains to take a right view of them: for whatever was the
particular Occasion of them, or whom ever they were primarly designed against,
we should consider them now as intimations of the Divine vengeance toward
obstinate and incorrigible sinners, and as declarations of the irrevocable
Sentence which his justice has passed against them. Nay, I may say this is the
special intent of them, for if they had been only to vent David's private
wrath, and emnity, GOD would not inspired them, nor approved of them. And it is
no less lawful and proper sometimes to sing them, then to meditate on the heavy
judgments and severity of God toward impenitent sinners; that thereby a
wholesome fear of God may be excited in us. By them also we may be supported
against those tentations which arise from success of the Enemies of God, and
their insolency in opposing the Truth and oppressing his People: And as it was
never thought unlawful in times of War, and public Trouble and Disorders to
pray against the unjust author and instruments thereof, not that GOD would
damn their Souls, but that he would defeat their Devices, give them shame and
confusion, and by his Judgments on their Persons, put them in fear to carry on
their wicked enterprises; and all this not to satisfy our revengful Passions,
but that it may be known there is a GOD who rules the world, and who will
defend the innocent and righteous to the end all people may be engaged to put
their trust in him. So I do not see why it should be thought improper on such
occasions to sing these Psalms, and to wait patiently for the accomplishment
of them. They are very unreasonable and unjust who would wrest this to the
countenancing of private revenge, and the cursing of Enemies, whither public
or Private, for its not lawful for us to do, what GOD does as he is Supreme
judge, and by virtue of his sovereign authority, vengeance is mine says the
Lord, it belongs to him to punish, but not to us; and as it is not lawful for
us to take Vengeance, because GOD does it; so neither is it unlawful to
meditate on the just judgments of GOD, to sing of them, and to give our assent
to them, because we are forbidden to curse or revenge our selves.

7ly. It is alleged against some Psalms, that we cannot turn them to Prayers,
or if we should they would not be true as from us, and therefore it is not fit
to sing them: But to this may be answered, that there is a difference between
praying and singing; every Prayer may be made a Hymn or Song of Praise, but
that may be fit to be Sung which cannot properly be Prayed. In Prayer we turn
our Minds wholly to GOD himself, speak to him, and therefore it is necessary
that our Words be strictly true and suitable to our Particular State: But in
Singing we speak not so directly to GOD, as of him to others. Singing is a
mutual calling upon one another to Laud and Praise GOD, together with a
proposal of what makes for his Glory; and therefore it is proper enough to sing
any thing which makes for the Glory of GOD, though it do not quadrate with our
own case in all Circumstances.

But as we have made it thus appear that all the Psalms of David may be sung
properly and with Edification, so we do not say that none other may be sung, it
is certainly lawful to have other Hymns besides, and most Reasonable to have
some more appropriate to the Gospel and the Mysteries revealed therein, that
our Worship in this as well as in other things may be distinguished from that
of Jews. Pliny in his Letter to Trajan, tells that the Christians were wont to
sing a hymn to CHRIST as to GOD, which must have been some other then the
Psalms of David, wherein there was some more express mention of CHRIST, or
which had some more peculiar reference to him, then what is to be found in
these Psalms. It is impossible to give any Reason why the Hymns of the N. T.
should no be used as well as those of the Old, seeing the same Spirit dictate
both, and that there is some special propriety in them to the Christian Faith.
And as for the Doxology, the questioning its lawfulness, bewrayes such
Ignorance or humor, that I think it needless to prove the use of it: if People
would lay aside their prejudices, they might easily discern it very fit and
proper to join this to each Psalm, for thereby we give the Psalm an
Evangelical sense and make it refer to every Person in the Holy Trinity, who
as they are undivided in their essence, so they should be united in our Worship
and as they are distinctly revealed to us, so we ought in all our Devotions to
pay them distinct and particular Worship.

3dly. The reading of the Holy Scriptures is a necessary part of Gods public
Worship. This was used in the Jewish Assemblies as appears from Neh. 8. 8. Luke
4. 16. Acts 13. 15. 15. 21. St. Paul expressly charge The reading of his
Epistles, Col. 4. 16. 1 Thessalonians. 5: 27. And for the same Reason the rest of the
Scripture ought to be read, and the Church has been still in use to do so. Now
the main Reason hereof, is not our own instruction, but to do honor to GOD,
for as hereby we own the Scriptures to be from GOD, so we solemnly acknowledge
our selves bound to hear and obey his word, and tie our selves to walk as it
diercts us. The public Worship of GOD is not rightly performed, when there is
no reading of Scriptures; and it is all one almost as if they were cast out of
the Worship, when they are only read while the People are coming to Church, but
not after they are met: For then the reading is only used for a divertisement
to put off the time, and not as a Honor or Acknowledgement due to GOD. They
understand little of the Nature or end of public Worship, who would have the
reading of Scripture laid aside, because it can be done at home, Such have more
regard to their Fancy, then to the true honor of GOD; and do come to Church
rather to feed an impertinent Curiosity, and desire of Novelty, then to perform
a reasonable Service to GOD. Not to speak of the inability of a great many to
perform this exercise in Private, the reading at home makes not so much for the
Honor of the Sciptures, and consequently of GOD who is the Author of them.
Respect to the Majesty and Authority of GOD require that his Will and Pleasure
be Promulgate with solemnity, and heard with reverence. We have an eminent
Instance hereof, Neh. 8. 5, 6.

4thly, To the reading of the Scripture was always wont to be joined Preaching
on the Sabbath and other Festival-dayes, as appears from the forecited places,
which custom the Church has continued, and it is most necessary and
profitable, It shows our deference to GOD, and a regard for his Authority, when
we are willing to hear such as he has Commissioned to inform us of his Will
anent us. He that hears you, said Christ to the Apostles, hears me, and he
that dispiseth you, despises me, and him that sent me. Kings and Princes are
Honored or Affronted according as their Servants and message are received: now
the Ministers are Ambassadors in CHRIST'S stead, by whom GOD befeecheth People
to be reconciled unto himself. 2 Cor* 5. 20. Reconciliation with God is the
Errand on which Ministers are sent, and seeing the terms of this Reconciliation,
and the means by which it is wrought, are set down in Scripture, therefore the
subject matter of preaching should be to give the sense and meaning of the
Scripture, and to exhort to a Compliance with what is there contained. Sermons
are not ordained to teach men curious things, or to tickle them with fine neat
speeches; but to make them understand the Scriptures, to instruct them in the
Doctrine thereof, and to stir them up to observe the same, thus Ezra preached,
Neh. 8. 8. And ordinarily in the primitive Church, their Sermons were only
Explications of such Portions of Scripture as were read in the public Service,
together with an Exhortation to obey it. The principal design of Preaching is
to unfold the meaning of God's Word, and to help men to discern the mind of the
Lord revealed therein; and as these are the best and most Edifying Sermons
which discover this plainly and clearly, so it is the duty of all to hearken
diligently to these instructions, and to receive them gladly. It speaks out a
Love to GOD when we are willing and very desirous to know his will: but there
is little regard for God, where there is no desire to understand what he says
to us in and by his word. But though the Priests lips should keep know ledge,
and that it is the peoples duty to seek the Law at his Mouth, yet this is not
to render the private search and study of the Scriptures useless: Guides are
ordained to be helps, but not to take away our own sight; we may find them
useful though we do not put out our eyes. As the Noble Bereans did, we should
search the Scriptures daily whither these things we hear be true or not; And
this is the more necessary, because we are forewarned of false Prophets: Every
Spirit is not to be believed, none ought to be received with an implicit Faith,
but only the Spirit of GOD: all other should be tried before trusted. And it
needs be no hard task to try the truth of Doctrines, if we lay aside prejudice,
and search the Scripture impartially: A man by applying his eye narrowly,
especially if he has the advantage of a Rule, will soon discern whither a
thing be straight or crooked; and it is indeed no less easy to judge in
matters necessary to Salvation.

5thly, I cannot omit here what was Anciently and Universally used though now
turned into desuetude among us; and it is the Solemn and explicit profession
of the Christian Faith, by a rehearsal of some Summary thereof, as the Apostles
or Nicene, or Athanasian Creed. The express declaration of our Faith is much
both for our profit and the honor of GOD: It is for the honor of GOD that we
believe in GOD, and in JESUS CHRIST, and give our assent to all the truths of
the Gospel; without this faith it is impossible to please GOD, unless our
worship be founded on the belief of these things, it is altogether
unacceptable: And it is not only necessary to have this Faith always in our
hearts, but we must also sometimes openly testify it, by confessing the same
with our mouths, as the Apostle tells us, Rom: 10. 9. Where he says, that if
thou shall confess with thy mouth the LORD JESUS, and shall believe in thine
he art that GOD has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved; For with
the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is
made unto Salvation. This is also profitable for our selves, for these Creeds
are the Badges of Christianity, which instruct us in our profession, and teach
us how to answer every man who asks a reason of the hope that is in us. A
frequent repetition of the Creed fixes the great Articles of our Religion in
our mind, brings them often to our remembrance, and serves to excite us to walk
worthy of the Gospel. Persons of Honor are careful to behave sutably while
they have the signs and badges of their Dignity and Quality upon them; and sure
it could not but oblidge and quicken us to study a Christian Behavior, if we
frequently made a serious and solemn profession of our Faith. Lastly, the
celebration of the LORDS Supper should frequently accompany our other acts of
public worship; the Apostles with their Converts did this daily, as we read
Acts 2. 42. 46. which practice continued long in the Primitive Church. St.
Augustine in one of his Epistles to Ianearius says 'twas the custom to do so
in many places vid: Gessel: Hist: Eccl: p: 426.
The Council of Antioch condemns such as do not communicate when they come up
to Church to hear, so do those Canons which carry the name of Apostolical.
Thus it appears that the participation of the Lord's Supper, was looked upon as
a necessary part of Divine service, which could not be well omitted; and there
can be no reason given, why the use of this Sacrament (at least every LORDS
Day) was left off, but the decay of Piety: The Zeal and Devotion of the
Apostolic Ages wore out, and so men became careless of giving this expression
thereof. Or out off a Superstitious regard to their chief Festivals, they would
only communicate on these days, that they might seem to do them the greater
honor. But as for the present custom of communicating only once or twice a
year, it is so unaccountable and speaks out so little true love to GOD, and the
memory of our Savior, that Calvin had good reason to call it Diabolicum
inventum, a mere device of Satan's to stiffle Piety, and to keep back Peoples
endeavors after Godliness.

This is a piece of Worship peculiar to the Christian Religion, which our LORD
has expreslly enjoined; It Is a great testimony of our Faith, a solemn act of
Adoration paid both to the Father and Son, and a visible commemoration of the
Mystery of the Cross, which as S. Paul speaks, is both the Wisdom of GOD, and
the Power of GOD: In a word, the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, is the Chief
Rite of our Religion, which in a manner comprehends all others parts thereof,
and by the serious participation of this Sacrament we truly glorify GOD, and
bring good to our selves, for CHRIST has ordained it to be the instrument of
our union with him, and the conveyance of the benefits of his death. And
therefore this Sacrament should be often administrate, and who would testify
their love to GOD, should as frequently partake thereof.

It is alleged against frequent communicating, first, that 'twould take away
much of the esteem due to this Sacrament. But if this Reason were good, 'twould
follow also that we should seldom think on GOD, Pray, read the Scriptures, and
perform other Acts of Religion. It is no true esteem, which arises only from
the consideration of the rarity of the thing; and certainly acquaintance with
Spiritual actions and frequent exercising them, begets the highest esteem of
them and delight in them: He Prays best and with most pleasure who Prays
oftnest, and so of other things. Another pretense is that if men Communicate
frequently, they would not have leisure to prepare themselves: But this runs
upon a mistake of the nature of the Sacrament, and of the preparation requisite
thereto. A Cessation from sin is always necessary, but not from our civil
business, especially if we had any occasion of Communicating. He who firmly
believes the Gospel, heartily repents of his sins, and is resolved to live
according to the Gospel, is truly disposed for the Sacrament any day, and
every day; and who is not thus disposed for the Sacrament, neither is he fit to
pray, or to go about any other Religious exercise, and so is in a state of
enmity with GOD. If a Person once understand the Nature and Design of the
Sacrament, and daily exercise himself in Prayer, as we have showed in the
former Section, if his Life be a continual walking with GOD, he is ever
sutablely prepared for it. And if we ought to be always thus prepared,
therefore the want of preparation will not excuse the Ommission of this Duty,
the Omission whereof does of it self imply (though People are loath to
acknowledge it) a renunciation of the Christian Religion.

Thus we have gone through the several parts of public Worship, showed the
necessity of them, and let see the right manner of going about them. And by
what account we have given, which certainly will hold true, it appears that the
public Worship in all Reformed Churches is Proper and Acceptable, so that none
have any just Reason to withdraw from it, and who do it are undoubtedly guilty
of Schism: it is true, in some Places perhaps (and particularly among our
selves) there would need some Rectification for the more Grave, Decent and
Orderly performance of Divine service; but however neither we nor any other of
our Protestant Brethren want any essential part of Worship, nor have we or they
any thing disagreeable to GOD, or which destroys the end of Worship, so that
they are without all excuse who refuse to have Communion with this or any other
Reformed Church.

But as this must be acknowledged for all Reformed Churches, so the quite
contrary is true of the Worship in the Church of Rome: For it neither answers
the end, nor agrees to the right rules of GOD'S Worship; it is not, it cannot
be acceptable to GOD, for it is full of Abominations.

For First, in general the Popish Service is neither Spiritual nor Reasonable.
Though we do not consider it in Retail but in Gross, it must be acknowledged an
ignorant brutish service, a service which is not conform to the Scriptures, nor
does it tend to the Glory of GOD, or the Edification of Men, because it cannot
be understood being performed in an unknown Tongue. As the Learned D. Tailor
says, we may as soon reconcile Adultery with the seventh Command, as the
service in a Language which cannot be understood, with the 14. of first Ep. to
the Corinthians; and if public Worship need not be understood, neither needs
it be pronounced at all; for if the Priest speaks not to let Men understand
him, he needs not speak to inform God, and so a Dumb Priest is even as good as
one whom the People does not understand. This practice of the Church of Rome is
both contrary to the practice of all the World, and is condemned by common
Sense; so that the Papists in defending themselves use a deal of impertinent
nonsense and vent intolerable absurdities which render Religion ridiculous, and
destroy the very Nature and Design of it. What an Absurdity is it, to teach
People to use Prayers only as Charms? To think ignorant prating as acceptable
to GOD, as the sincere desires of the Soul? and that judgment and discretion
are useless in Religion, though it be the great end of our Creation, and though
for it especially we were endued with Reasonable Faculties? I shall conclude
this point. with what a late Popish Writer has Moyens confessed, It is
necessary to have the pub- surs par lick service in the common language of la
converthe Country; for it is certain that this is de Hereagreeable to the Holy
Scripture. The tiques Mysteries of GOD are not as those of 147. Pagans; these
behoved to be hid from People, because they were shameful and ridiculous, but
GOD would have his Children instructed fully in his. There cannot be greater
reproach thrown upon Religion, then to say as some do, that Faith without
Knowledge is best. He must be an Impostour and Seducer who speaks so, for St.
Paul commands nothing more then that we should increase in knowledge; The
reading of the Holy Scripture should be recommended to People according to the
practice of all the Fathers, It was not the People who wrested the Scripture,
and spread Heresies; they were the Bishops and Doctors and Persons of the
Clergy. Arrius, Macedonius, Nestorius, Eutyches, Pelagius, were all Churchmen.

2ly. The Worship of the Roman Church has not a Resemblance to the Christian
Religion, because it wants the purity and simplicity thereof to make Worship
look like Christian, as we formerly showed, it should be Plain and Simple, that
is, free of Ceremonies, except what are requisite to Excite and Fix the
attention, and should chiefly consist of Actions, which are Grave and Serious,
and which do properly express the Divine Majesty and Glory: But the Worship of
the Papists is merely Pomp and Pageantry, a vain external Show of Ceremonies,
fitter for the Theater then the Church. Their Churches are dressed with Gaudy
Scenes like Play Houses, and like them too they use not the light of the Sun,
but the dazzling and deceiving light of Lamps and Wax-Candles; their Priests are
sumptuously decked with various kinds of Garments, and as for the Service it
self, it consists in sprinkling of holywater, kindling Perfumes, Kneeling, and
bowing and often crossing, Turning to the Right or Left Hand, according to the
Sign given, the Elevating and Lowing of the Voice at certain Times, the vain
repetition of unintelligible Words, and in a multitude of impertinent and
insignificant Ceremonies which chock the very Spirit of Religion, and which
would render what is read or spoken to no purpose though it could be
understood: For it is impossible that the mind can be attentive or make any
Serious application, where there is such a multitude of external performances.
The Worship enjoined and practiced in the Church of Rome has more resemblance
to Paganism then the Christian Religion; it contains indeed Acts and Instances
of the true Worship of GOD, but so buried in Heathnish Superstition that they
lose their Efficacy, both with GOD and Man. Their Sprinklings, Processions,
Scourgings, Pilgrimages, and in a word, the most of their Ceremonies both in
their Ordinary and Extradinary Devotions are derived from ancient Paganism,
and are indeed more suited to Pagan tempers then Christian minds; for such as
understand the Gospel know that GOD takes no pleasure in such Actions. The
hour comes says Christ, and now is that the true Worshippers of GOD, shall
Worship Him in Spirit and in Truth, for the Father seeks such to Worship Him.

3ly Popish worship is not only full of Superstition but Idolatry, it not only
is made up of many foolishly and useless Actions, which can pretend to no
Shadow of Reason or Divine Authority: But it contains also many things expressly
forbidden, as the Invocation and Adoration of Angels, and Saints, etc. What St.
Paul said of Rome Pagan, holds true of Rome Christian, they have changed the
truth of GOD into a lie, and Worship the creature more then the Creator. For
the most of their Worship is not tendered to GOD and JESUS CHRIST, but to
Angels, the blessed Virgin, and other departed Saints, to Images, Relics,
that is, the Bones, Ashes and other forged appurtenances of their supposed
Saints, I say supposed, for their is no evidence for the most of them but the
Popes Cannonization which is very unsufficient: It Is laid on the name of one
Pope Gregory, that he should have said, multorum corpora venerantur in terris,
quorum animae cruciantur in infernis, that is, many are Worshipped as Saints,
who are damned in Hell. The Papists in their public Worship are required to
adore Bread as GOD, to Pray to the Dead, and for the Dead, and to do several
other things which not only have no warrant in Scripture, but are quite
contrary thereto, and therefore GOD can be pleased neither with such a worship,
nor those who offer it, more then he was with the Nations whom the King of
Assyria planted in Samaria, of whom it is said, that they feared the LORD, and
served other Gods besides.

4ly. The Mass which is the chiefest part of their Worship, is the highest
abomination: For it is used in stead of the Holy Sacrament which our LORD
instituted that night wherein he was betrayed, but in Truth, it is is quite
another thing, because they have added to it and pared from it, and use it in
another sense and to other purposes, then what that Sacrament was designed for.
First, they withhold the Cup, which is the one half of the Sacrament, though it
be clear that our Savior commanded All to drink of it, as both the Council of
Constance, and Trent, acknowledge in their Acts which prohibit the use of the
Cup to the Laity. And as for the other part of the Sacrament, besides that
their Wafers cannot be counted Bread, they do not use the rite of breaking it,
which is so essential that this Sacrament is ordinarily denominat by it in
Scripture. Indeed what the Priest takes to himself, he breaks in three pieces,
one whereof is cast into the Cup, another is left upon the Altar, until the end
of the Service, and the third he puts in his own Mouth: but this does not
answer to that breaking which our LORD used, and which is necessary to hold
Forth the purport of the Sacrament. That this Action may be agreeable to our
LORD'S institution, it is necessary that all the Communicants eat and have
distribute to them one broken Bread. 2ly. Our LORD ordained the Bread in this
Sacrament to be only a symbol of his Body, but they give it out to be His very
self, and command Divine Adoration to be paid thereto, which is the greatest
absurdity and the grossest Idolatry imaginable, as we have formerly made out.
3ly. Our LORD designed this Sacrament to be only a memorial of his Death, and
of that satisfaction was given thereby to the Justice of GOD for the sins of
men: but they teach and command under pain of damnation to be believed, that in
the Vid. council. Trid. sess. 22. cap. 1. and 2.
Mass there is a real propitiatory Sacrifice for the living and the dead,
because according to them, Jesus Christ is daily Sacrificed and Offered
therein: Which Doctrine contains a heap of Absurdities, and makes their Mass a
Blasphemous action and most injurious to the Sacrifice of the Cross. For hereby
it would follow that Christ was Sacrificed before he was Crucified, viz. when
he instituted this Sacrament; that his Death was no sufficient Atonement there
being such necessity for repeating it so frequently; and that St. Paul erred
grossly in thinking it absurd that he should offer himself often, in saying,
he was but once offered to bear the sins of many; and in preferring that one
Oblation of JESUS CHRIST upon the Cross to all the legal Sacrifices, because
they behoved to be offered year by year continually to show their
insufficiency; whereas he by one offering, has perfected for ever them that
are sanctified, see Heb. 9. 25. 28. 10. 1. etc. farther from the Papists
Doctrine of the Sacrifice of the Mass, it follows that our LORD'S Priest hood
is not Eternal, or peculiar to himself as the Scripture teaches, particularly
Heb. 7. Seeing many succeed him in the Office. Nay it may be inferred by good
consequence, that Men are preferrable to JESUS CHRIST Himself, for the Priest
is always preferrable to the Sacrifice; and therefore if their Priests are
empowered to offer up Jesus Christ they must be esteemed better then he. None
was worthy to offer that saerifice which takes away sin, but such an high
Priest as was holy, harmless, undefiled, separat? from sinners, and made higher
then the Heavens, Heb: 7. 26. Wherefore as none could be the sacrifice but
JESUS, so none other could be the Priest to offer that Sacrifice, both the
Sacrifice and Priest are one, which makes the Opinions of the Papists
concerning a sacrifice of the Mass impious and blasphemous. It would require a
particular Treatise, to set forth the corruptions of the Church of Rome in this
part of their Worship, as the Priest partaking alone, the offering it for such
are dead, the celebrating it in honor of Saints, etc. And therefore if there
were no more but this alone, 'twere too much to make People leave the communion
of that Church. But,

Lastly, besides these Impieties mentioned, whereof every one is actually
guilty who join in the Worship of the Church of Rome, there be a great many
other errors, abuses, and corruptions taught and practiced in that Church,
which all they who keep her Communion must necessarly be reckoned guilty of:
For as joining in Worship is a sign of holding Communion, so thereby persons
testify their belief of, and assent to all which that Church with whom they
hold Communion teaches and practices as necessary to Salvation. Now seeing
the Church of Rome requires all under pain of damnation to believe the
infallibility of their Church, the Supremacy of the Pope, Purgatory, Auricular
Confession, Pennances, Indulgences, the Insufficiency of Scripture, the equal
Authority of Unwritten Traditions, the unlawfulness of Clergy Men's Marrying,
the necessity of observing Days, Meats, etc. Without particular dispensations
from the Pope, who arrogates to himself a power of rescinding both Humane and
Divine Laws, these and many more Falseshoods and Absurdities are enjoined by
the Roman Church as Articles of Faith, and as necessary to Salvation, and
therefore who keep communion with her, do ipso facto approve of all her Errors
and Abominations, and must be thought to exclude from Salvation those who
refuse to submit thereto, for she does so. It will not avail any to say, that
in their Private judgment they are otherwise persuaded, neither have made any
express Verbal Acknowledgement to the contrary, seeing they do that which
necessarly import the same. Men give their assent by their Actions as well as
by their Words; and what we cannot approve in our Hearts, we ought not to
approve by our Profession or Practice. Hypocrisy in Religion is damnable, and
they are Hypocrites who profess what they do not believe: The belief of the
Heart and confession with the mouth should not be disjoined, neither ought we
by our Actions to countenance what we judge false and abominable. This I
thought fit to say, because it is a trick used to gain persons to the Roman
Communion, if otherwise they cannot be induced, to pass them a formal
abjuration of the Protestant Doctrine, or an express consent to all the Tenets
of that Church: But such would do well to remember and consider, that they do
the one and the other, really and upon the matter as much as if they gave more
express Declarations. I shall conclude with these words of Scripture which
certainly are as applicable to the Church of Rome, as ever they were or will be
to any. Come out from among them, and be ye separate, says the LORD, and touch
not the unclean thing, and I will receive you, and will be a Father unto you,
and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters, says the LORD Almighty; 2 Cor: 6. 17,
18. And again, Come out of her my People, that ye be not partakers of her Sins,
and that ye receive not of her Plagues: For her sins have reached unto Heaven,
and GOD has remembered her Iniquities; Rev: 18. 4. 5.

CHAP. IV. Of the last Words of JACOB'S Vow, The Question about the Churches
Right to Tithes waved, but the taking them away is showed to be Sacrilege.
Every Particular Person owes to GOD a part of his Estate; The Proportion
considered, and some Motives pressing Charity, and Alm's-Giving, are proposed.
THat GOD is to be Worshipped and Adored, that there should be Endeavors to
please Him, will be readily acknowledged by All: This is the very Dictate of
Natural Conscience, and who have no Sense thereof, nor own any Obligation
thereto, must needs be very Profligate and Debauched. And though it cannot be
denied, but that there are such Monsters of Wickedness who have no Fear of GOD
before their eyes, yet it must be confessed also, that the Generality of
Mankind as they profess and believe in GOD, so they seem to wish and be
desirous of His Favor and Good*wil. It is not then gross Atheism and
Infidelit^ which damnes and undoes the greatest part of the World: but the Rock
upon which Men split most is Hypocrisy, and the want of sincerity in serving
GOD. They would please him, and are content to do something in order to it, but
yet have not a Heart to ply all that is requisite: thus they will observe the
smaller and lesser part of the Law, but in the mean time slip over what is more
Weighty and of Greater Moment; they are very ready and willing to pay that
Service which is cheap and easy, and which puts them neither to great pains,
nor much cost, but what imports and includes either they are averse to and
shrink from. Some will be very Religious whilst it is counted Religion to hear
the Word of GOD, to read it and talk of it, to pray and to frequent the outward
Ordinances of the Gospel, but when they are told of denying themselves, of
taking up the Cross, of Mortifying the body, Subduing lust, Bridling their
passions, and particularly, of distributing their goods to the poor, then they
discover the Naughtiness and Hollowness of their Heart, how much they mock GOD
and deceive themselves: for they look upon these as hard sayings, and cannot
digest them, but with the Young Man in the Gospel, they turn away sad and
sorrowful. Such will seem sometimes to contend earnestly for Heaven, but yet
they keep a fast hold of the Earth; they seem very zealous for the service of
GOD so long as it costs them nothing, but when Chargeable and Expensive Duties
are required, then they find out many Shifts and Excuses, they either pretend
the non-necessity of them, or their own inability; and when none of these can
be pretended, they still delay and put off till another time, and it is very
long before they can be drawn to the Performance; and some never think it time
to bequeath any of their Goods to Pious and Charitable uses till Death, that
it is impossible for them to hold them any longer.

This Pievish and nigardly disposition toward the Service of GOD is very far
contrary to what the holy Patriarch Jacob shows here, where we see that as he
devoted himself to GOD, so heartily and freely the Tenth of all that he
possessed, By giving this portion to GOD, we are to understand the allotting
and Settling a part the same for such Ends and Uses as tends to the Honor and
Glory of GOD, such as to the maintenance of his House, and his service therein,
and to the relief of the Poor and Indigent, for whatsoever is employed this
way, is given unto GOD: We cannot reach himself immediately with our Presents
and Gifts, nor stands he in any need of them, but the LORD is pleased to take
that as done to himself, which is done for the public good of Mankind,
particularly for the relief and comfort of such as are in Poverty and Distress:
Verily I say unto you, says our Savior, in as much as ye have done it to one
of the least of these my Brethren, ye have done it unto me; Mat: 25. 40.

I doubt not but upon the first view of the title of this Book, it will be
apprehended that we intend to assert the Churches Right to the Tithes, but as
this is a Doctrine which few are disposed to hear, so the entering upon this
Question would but oblidge us to enlarge this Treatise beyond what we designed
it, and seeing a discourse of this head is fitter to be addressed to Public
States, than to private and particular persons, for whose use only we have
intended this, therefore we resolve not to meddle with this Question. However
by the by, we cannot but say, that whatever may be pretended by the Law of
Nature, or the Written Law of GOD, it is certain that our Tithes were Sacred
and Consecrate things, by the Donation and Charity of Men; and therefore ought
never to have been ali^nated to any profane use. It Is true indeed they were
most vilely abused by such as possessed them, but their abuse of them did not,
neither could annul and cut off GOD'S right unto them. The abuse might have
been rectified without taking away the use of the things themselves, and
certainly the Sacrilegious robbing of GOD of what was so Solemnly and for so
many Years Devoted unto him, is such a stain upon our Reformation, as that our
Orthodox Faith and the soundness of our Judgments, in other Particulars Will
never atone or sufficiently wipe away; these words of St. Paul, seem to touch
us very nearly, thou that abhorests Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege, Rom: 2:
22: The brazen Censers which Corah and his accomplices made use of; though their
use of them was not only unwarrantable, but even contrary to the express
command of GOD, yet the LORD would not suffer them to be cast away, or to be
turned unto any other use than that of the Sanctuary, but commanded to make of
them Broad plates for a covering of the Altar: For, says he, they offered
them before the Lord, therefore they are hallowed; Numb. 16. 38. So
notwithstanding the great abuse of those things which the Church possessed in
the times of Popery, yet being they were once dedica^ unto the Lord, therefore
they ought never to have been employed to other than Sacred uses. I say, sacred
uses, and not the Ministers of the Gospel only, for I confess the appropriating
all that Wealth to the present small number of the Clergy, and to their
particular use allennarly, were neither Reasonable nor Convenient: But as this
Kingdom would require a greater number to serve in the Ministry, so it would be
fit and proper to bestow a better Maintenance upon some then what they enjoy.
People testify their respect to GOD, when they Honor His Servants, in
allowing them a Liberal Maintenance, and indeed as a liberal Share is first due
to the Ministers of the Gospel, and such as officiat about Holy Things; so this
might have been given out of what the Church formerly possessed, and enough
besides for other pious uses. Out of what remained, Hospitals might have been
maintained for Sick and Diseased Persons, and for a Refuge for such as were
decayed through Age or other Infirmity, and thereby rendered unable for any
Calling or Office, there might have been an Allowance for Widows and Orphans,
and the training up Children in Lawful Trades, and some Charitable Banks
erected for lending Supplies to such, as were broken in their Fortunes, whereby
they might Recruite themselves, and be enabled to set up again. I am confident
the former Church Revenues* and consecrated Lands would have been almost
sufficient for these things, and this use thereof will I think be acknowledged
more for the public good then what they were employed unto: And as this would
have made less complaining in our Streets, so it would, been more for the
Honor of our Reformation, and would have stoped the mouths of our
Adversaries, whereas now they Cry out, that the Zeal for the Reformation was
not Sincere, but that there was more regard to the spoils of the Church, then
to the taking away the corruptions thereof; for which the Pious Mr. Mede, and
some others, are very confident, GOD will some time or other signify his
displeasure by some signal judgment, and indeed Sacrilege seldom or never
passed unpunished. But enough of this.

What we intend at present is, First, to show that every Particular Person owes
to GOD a part of his Estate and Fortune, and that GOD does require and expect
it from him. 2ly we shall consider what Proportion or Quality every one should
think themselves oblidged to give. And Thirdly, we shall propose some Motives
for pressing home, and stirring up to the Practice of this necessary, but I
suppose much neglected Duty.

As to the First, that every one owes a part of his estate and fortune, to be
thus employed in the exercise of Charity toward Men, is a thing which will
easily appear by the Laws of Justice and Gratitude; for all that we have is
from GOD, what ever we possess comes from His Bounty, and is the effects of his
Goodness, by whatsoever Means and Methods it has come unto us. Was thy
inheritance entailed upon the By birth, thou art nevertheless oblidged to GOD
allennerly for it, for it was his Providence who Ordered thee to be born in
Lawful Wedlock of such Rich and Wealthy Parents, it was he alone that cared
thus for thee before thou had a being, and before thou could make any
choice for thy self. Is all the Fruit of thy Labor and industry? Though it be
so, yet it does not lessen they Obligation to GOD, for he gave thee, the Wit
and the Head by which thou have contrived, and the hands by which thou have
wrought and labored; and his Wisdom did appoint and find out all those
Favorable Circumstances which have been the occasion of they Prosperity and
success; and it is his Providence alone which has prevented those many
Casualities, which might have divested thee of all, so that if it had not been
for Him, thou might long ago been stripped naked and reduced to a piece of
Bread. How many have gone to Bed rich and wealthy and have awakned poor and
Miserable? have we not seen persons turned out of their possessions, and robbed
of all their Wealth; and who have not been so dealt with must ascribe it to the
Goodness and Care of GOD toward them. Certainly what ever Wealth or Riches,
Honor or Advantages any man enjoys, is still to be considered as the Gift
and Gratuity of Almighty GOD, as Jacob does here: For he says not, all that I
have, or shall have, but all that thou shall give me; Acknowledging thereby
that whatsoever should accrue to him by whatsoever means would be nevertheless
GOD'S doings. But when I say by whatsoever means, it is still to be understood
of lawful means, for what comes by unlawful ways, as by fraud and violence
etc. Is not from GOD, but from him who promised to our Savior All the Kingdoms
of the World if he would fall down and Worship him: And though a man should
give all this to the Poor, and in Charitable uses, it would not be accepted, it
would be but an abomination.

But to return, if all be owing to the Divine bounty, it is just and
reasonable, and our bound Duty to allot and consecrate a part to his Glory. We
are unworthy receivers of his Benefits if we do not thanfully acknowledge his
Goodness in bestowing them; and without such an acknowledgement we cannot
pretend to a right or sanctified use of them: For the Apostle tells us, every
Creature of GOD is good, if it be received with thanksgiving, and not
otherwise, which thankful acknowledgment must be made not only verbally, by
Speeches and Expressions, but by real works and deeds, viz. by devoting a
certain part of what we enjoy to such pious uses as he has appointed. As
Tenements own their Landlords, by paying their yearly rent, and Subjects their
Sovereign by yielding tribute, so it is no le^s our Duty to Honor GOD with
our substance as Solomon enjoyneth Prove. 3. 9. It was thus to honor GOD by
acknowledging him to be the LORD and Giver of all, that David with the Princes
and Captains of Israel made these great offerings for building the Temple of
the LORD, and the service of the Sanctuary which we find 1. Chron. 29. for
verse 11. David says thine O LORD is the greatness, and the Power, and the
Glory, and the Victory, and the Majesty, for all that is in the Heaven and
Earth is thine, thine is the Kingdom O LORD, and thou art exalted as Head above
all: both Riches and Honor come of thee, and thou Reignest over all, and in
thy hand is power and might, and in thy Hand it is to make great and to give
strength unto all; now therefore our GOD we thank thee, and praise thy Glorious
Name, and of thine own have we given thee.

Now as Reason teaches it to be just, thus to honor and acknowledge GOD, by
consecrating a part of our Substance to his Glory, and for his use, so there
never was a time wherein GOD did not particularly require it. In the State of
Innocence there was not occasion for alms or other such pious uses as now, but
the tree of knowledge in the midst of the Garden was reserved to GOD as holy in
token that he was Lord of the Garden; and therefore was man cast out of
Paradise and had the earth cursed for his sake because he had violated the sign
of his Fealty unto the LORD of Heaven and Earth. After the fall until the Law
of Moses, we do not indeed find any express particular precept for making such
offering out of our substance to GOD, but yet all holy men did it; Jacob you
see here vowed it, and Abraham gave the tenth of his Spoil to Melchisedeck the
high Priest of GOD. And though reason and the mere light of nature, might teach
them that something was due and proper to be given, yet we cannot conjecture,
how they could come to condescend so generally upon such a Particular Portion
without learning it by Divine revelation. In the law of Moses the Tithes of all
things are expressly Commanded to be paid as an acknowledgment of GOD'S being
the Proprietar of the whole Earth, and that men hold their possessions only by
his bounty and good will therefore Deuteronomy: 26. As there is a Command for paying
Tithes, and bringing the First Fruits as an offering unto the house of the
LORD, so there is set down the particular confession to be made at these
Offerings in which is showed the reason for requiring them viz: That even GOD'
S Tittle to the whole land might be acknowledged, and that he might thereby be
moved to bless the possession thereof to them, seeing that they thus own him to
be their LORD and GOD. Now as for the Gospel, this Precept is not renewed in
it; and the Ceremonies of Bringing up to the house of GOD, the first Fruits of
our increase and what is due out of our Substance, does not much concern us:
But though the Ceremonial part of this Precept be not now obligatorie, yet the
Moral thereof is; for CHRIST has not taken away our Obligation to these moral
observances, which the Honor of GOD calls for, think not, says he, that I am
come to destroy the Law or the Prophets, I am not come to destroy, but to
fulfill; Matthew. 5. 17. There is not indeed in the New Testament such frequent
and particular mention of making these offerings by way of Tribute unto GOD,
because there we are not considered as in a Servile State, by the Gospel GOD
has exalted us to the Nobler State of Friends and Children, and deals with us
as such, which yet does not take away our obligation from paying necessary
Duties, whereof the thing we are now speaking about is one. And though as we
have said the Devoting some portion of our Goods, be not now called so by way
of Tribute as from Servants or Subjects, yet the thing it self is very often
enjoined and inculcated, viz. of Alms giving, Beneficencie, and Works of
Charity and Mercy, and though the phrase of giveing Alms be generally used,
yet it is so spoken of, as to let us understand that it is a debt due unto GOD
which we are unjust if we do not pay: for it is usually Styled Justice or
Righteousness, as Mat. 25.

We must not think that GOD has now under the Gospel quit his Right and Tittle
to our Goods and Possessions, or that he does not require any acknowledgment of
them from us; we are much mistaken if we think so, He requires this now as much
as ever; and therefore to this end it is, that his Providence continues to Poor
and Distressed persons in the World, and other occasions of doing good. Ye
have; says our Savior, the Poor always with you; Mat: 26. 11. Which is the
repetition of a Promise made Deuteronomy: 15. 11. Where it is said The Poor shall
never cease out of the land, tberefore I command thee, saying, thou shall open
thy hand wide unto thy brother, to thy Poor, and thy Needy, in thy land. The
Poor and Distressed are GOD'S Assigns, to them he has assigned the Debts we
owe Him; or we may look upon them as his Chamberlanes whom he has appointed to
take up his Rents; by them he does as 'twere Draw Bills upon us for what is due
to himself, and when they ask us in GOD'S Name, it is no Forgery, they have
GOD'S Warrant and Commission for it: Wherefore as the Wise man teaches, with
hold not good from them to whom it is due, when it is in the power of thine
hand to do it. Prove: 3: 27. Thou shall not harden thine heart, nor shut thine
hand from thy Poor Brother says the LORD, but thou shall open thine hand wide
unto him, and shall surely lend him sufficient for his need in that which he
wants. Deuteronomy: 15. 7. The Poor and Needy are GOD' S Altars, whereon we must
offer Sacrifice; and seeing he has broken down these other Altars of stone
which were under the Law, and has freed us from the burden of these many
expensive Sacrifices which were then required, we should not take in our hand,
nor be sparing in the works of Charity and Mercy, but should look upon our
selves as obliged in all justice and Gratitude to abound in them the more
Liberally. GOD has not abrogat Sacrifices and Oblations altogether, but only
changed the use of them, and the way and manner of offering them; he will have
them offered upon Living Altars, for the greater Comfort and delight of the
Sons of Men: and as by the Law many Sacrifices and Offerings were exacted of
the Worshippers, so the Gospel now requires Alms and charitable deeds no
less; and as under the Law, he who contemned sacrifices, and refused
oblations, was not counted Religious toward GOD, but without all fear of Him;
so now under the Gospel, they must be reckoned void of all Piety and Devotion.
who do not express it by works of Charity and Mercy which are our Spiritual
Sacrifices for St. James tells us, that pure Religion and undefiled before GOD,
and the Father is to visit the Fatherless, and Widows in their affliction, and
to keep our selves unspotted from the World. Iam. 1. 29.

Thus we have made out our obligation to devote some part of our Goods to GOD,
that is to Works of Piety and Charity, because it is expressly commanded. It Is
both a Sign and an Essential part of Religion, and it is a necessary Act of
Homage whereby we acknowledge GOD to be the Sovereign of the World, a^ the true
Owner of all our Possessions. He ther^ ^e who gives nothing this way, (...) a
Divine command, casts off the Badge of (...) ^gion, and is not only unjust to
Men but to GOD; he rebelleth against the LORD of Heaven and Earth, in refusing
to pay Tribute which is due, and whereby our Vass^llage is signified.

It follows next, that we show what quantity or proportion of our state should
be paid unto God. It is ordinarily thought that Alms is an Arbitrary thing,
left altogether to Peoples own Discretion; and that being their Goods are their
own, they may give as much or as little as they please, without deserving any
blame: But truly it is not so left to Peoples own Discretion; For he is as
unjust both to GOD and Man, who gives nothing in Charity, so one may give and
yet be nevertheless uncharitable, and consequently undutiful to GOD, because he
gives not enough, not proportionally to his Estate, and that measure of Wealth
which GOD has bestowed on him. Little will be accepted of, from him who has
little; but to whom much is given, of them much will be required, and to whom
is committed much, of him the more will be asked, as it is Luke 12. 48. Our
LORD indeed commended the poor Widow for casting i^ two ^tes into the Treasury
of the Temple: But that will not justify the unworthy custom, which is now
become very general, of throwing a Penny or Farthing or thereabouts to our
offering when we come up to the House of GOD; nor because of this, have any
reason to think they deserve Commendation, if they in any thing exceed the
Widows alms, unless what they give, bear as great a proportion to their Fortune
as her two mites did to hers. Now says Christ, all these have of their
abundance cast in unto the Offering of GOD, but she of her penury has cast in
all the living that she had, Luke 21. 4. Wherefore every on ought to give
proportionally as God has blessed him, and when a Man's Alms or Charity bears
no proportion to his Means and Estate, he may des^dly be charged with
Ingratitude to God, and a Defrauding him of his Dues, even as he is unjust who
pays not the just reddenda of his Charters, and the real Take-duty of the
Lands he possesses.

Now in finding out the true proportion of our Alms and Charity, as we must
consider our own Ability and God's bounty toward us, so we must distinguish
between ordinary and extraordinary Occasions: for neither can all Men give
alike, nor is any oblidged to the same measure at all times. Men are bound to
be more Liberal and Charitable in times of great Dearth, Famine and Scarcity,
when many People are ready to perish for want at such Occasions, there is no
other set rule but the necessities of People, which every one who has must be
careful to administer unto. Then these Precepts, Go sell all that thou have,
and give unto the poor. Let him that has two Coats give to him that has none,
and let him that has bread do so likewise, these I say must be obeyed even to
the very strictness of the Letter: For we are but stewards of the good things
which we receive and must despense them out again when God calls for them; as
certainly he does on all such Occasions, when it is not possible otherwise to
keep People from Starving, As Stewards we ought first to serve ourselves and
then to distribute to the rest o^ the Family; but he is an unjust Steward, who
leteth any want or perish for hunger, if he has beside him wherewith to supply
them. Hence 'twas that the Disciples and the first Converts to Christianity,
did sell their whole possessions and gave them to the Treasury of the poor:
they had all things then in common, and it is St. Paul's advice to the
Corinthians, that every man lay by in store what God has prospered him, viz.
For the poor, 1 Cor. 16. 2. which rule and practice is not always binding, nor
are any now tied to follow the same unless we were in the same circumstances.

But leaving what is extraordinary, we will speak to that which men are
obliged to, even when there is no such great or universal Calamity: As in
times of Dearth and Famine all must be given, if it be necessary; so even at
other times, we must be careful to devote something to God, and the use of his
poor Servants. That proportion which Jacob vowed here, was the practice of all
the Patriarchs and Servants of God before the Law: When the Law was given by
Moses, God required the first fruits of all things, and one Tithe for the use
of the Priests and Levites; he commanded also another Tithe every third year
for the use of the poor Deuteronomy. 14. 28. The first Tithe was Debitum fundi, the
tribute upon the Land, and may be called GOD'S ground*rent, or Few duty which
the very Land owed to him: The other Tithe was Debitum Personae, which every
one owed out of his own property, thereby to make an acknowledgment of God's
Favor and kindness to him, in allowing him Possessions while others wanted.

But besides this Trienial Tithe, they were ordained every year to leave the
corners of their field at Harvest, and were forbiden either to reap the rest of
their field clean, or to gather all the fruit of their Vine yards, but to leave
in them for the poor, Lev. 19. 9. And moreover every seventh year, the poor and
Stranger had the whole profit of all the land. see, Exodus 23. 11. All which
reckoned together, the Jews besides the Tithes to the Priests and other Public
Dues, will be found to have paid more then the tenth of their yearly incomes
for the use of the poor only. Which proportion, though it be not exacted by any
express positive Law repeated in the Gospel, yet all Good and Holy Persons
have ever looked upon themselves as obliged to it in strict Justice, seeing the
Jews were tied to it. Some offered to prove Tithes due to GOD from the Law of
Nature, but I could never see any forcible argument why either the tenth of our
Estate, or the seventh of our time should be allotted and condescended on if we
abstract from Divine Revelation, and the express Command of GOD: certainly a
one concerning the proportion of our time so the other which measures the
quantity of our Goods and Estate, has been fallen upon by the particular
direction of GOD himself. And therefore seeing the Worshippers of GOD under the
Old Testament were obliged to give the tenth of all they possessed, I cannot
understand how any can be satisfied with giving less under the New Testament.
Our Righteousness must not come short of those under the Law, I say unto you,
says CHRIST, that except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharis^es, ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven;
Mat. 5. 10. ^f therefore they gave the tenth, sure we can do no less. This is
no part of the Ceremoni^ Law abrogated by the Gospel, for as the Devoting
something is clear by Natural Light, so this quotum we see was enjoined before
the Law; and there is so little reason for mincing it now, that there is much
Reason rather to Augment it, for we live under a clearer light, have received
greater manifestations of GOD'S Love and better promises, that is, Promises
wherein a future happy Life is more plainly expressed. We pay 6 of the hundred
for the use of Money, and sometimes more for the exchange of it, now the tenth
is but four more, and shall we grudge to give this ^ GOD for the property, when
we are oblidged to give the other to men for the simple loan and use. Sure none
will refuse this, or think it too much after they have seriously considered the
matter, but such as are too much obliged to the World, and are but too little
sensible of their obligations to Love and Honor GOD. How small a matter is an
100 Merks to him whom GOD has Blessed with a 1000 free of yearly Rent? He who
has much over and above the Payment of Public and Particular Burdens, may
very well let one go to the poor in Testimony of his Thankfulness to GOD who
gives all Liberally. But would to GOD! That Men in his Degenerate Age could be
prevailed on to give the fifteenth or sixteenth part of their yearly gain and
incomes, which is but the proportion of the Ordinary annual-rent of Money in
this Country: and unless they be resolved to baulke this Duty of Charity
altogether I cannot understand how they can satisfy their Consciences with
less then this comes to; if they will not be convinced of their Obligation to
pay the tenth, yet I hope at least they will acknowledge themselves bound to be
as Thankful to GOD as to Man, and to return him as much for the Property as
they give to, and exact of others for the Loan and use. If one were borrowing a
1000 Merks* he would give Forty Pounds in the year for it; now he who has a
Thousand merks per annum free, I think should be ashamed to offer less then
forty pounds to God, or indeed to give so little.

I suppose my Reader before this time is convinced of the necessity of Obeying
and Honoring GOD, and that the Communicating a part of our goods for the use
of the Poor, etc. Is one instance of our Obedience, and one necessary way of
Honoring him: Now he who is thus convinced, may be easily persuaded of his
Obligations not to reckon with God too narrowly or particularly; but that he
ought to be as free and Liberal in the Expressions of his Thankfulness as GOD
is to him in the effects of his Bounty. Every one has more then he deserves,
and the rich have more then they can lawfully ask, for Daily Bread is all we
are allowed to Pray for, and considering what Sinners we are, it is more then we
are worthy of, and therefore when GOD hears our Lawful Desires, yea gives
beyond them, I think common Equity should teach us to deall with him in like
manner, and to give back more, at least as much as he seeks from us, that is, I
think we should not hesitate at the Tenth, but give even over and above, if our
Circumstances will allow it: If we think the quantity of our Charity be wholly
left to our own Discretion, then should not the Rules of Discretion teach us to
give rather more then what would be sought? Now the tenth was required before
the Law and under the Law, and there can be no Reason pretended why it should
be abated under the Gospel.

Let me therefore entreat all who would keep a Conscience void of offense in
this particular, to consider how GOD has Blessed them, what is their yearly
Rent, Gain, or Income to give GOD His due out of the same freely and
Cheerfully. And whatsoever they purpose in their Heart to give, I would advise
them to set it a part by it self, to separate it from what is reserved to their
own use, for hereby several Advantages would arise. First, They shall be sure
to make no encroachment on what they Devote to GOD, which would be no less
then the Heinous sin of Sacrilege. 2ly. They should hereby give more Readily
and Cheerfully, because they have so much by them, for no other use then to be
given. 3ly. This would make them seek out occasions of bestowing Charity, and
not wait until Occasions present themselves which is an Ordinary fault, and the
Reason why this Duty is so seldom performed; who devotes a certain part of
their Goods and estate to GOD, should do as Men use when they have Money of a
Friend, even seek out Good hands to lay it in.

Perhaps 'twill be best to pay this Debt to GOD in Parcels as our gain and
Advantages come in; for as hereby we shall best know whither we do justly
agreeable to our vow or purpose, so 'twill be more convenient, and a less
Tentation to grudging, then if all were paid together. And besides what we
think fit thus to Consecrate to GOD, for his Ordinary constant Kindness to us,
'twill be proper to enlarge our hand on special Occasions, as upon the receipt
of some particular Mercy, or in time of Sickness or other Affliction, that we
may give a Testimony of joy and thankfulness for the first, and secure some
Special comfort to our selves in the last case.

Some it may be will imagine that all this does only concern the Rich and
Wealthy, but let none be so mistaken. These indeed are especially Oblidged to
give Alms, or rather they are Oblidged to large and Liberal Measures: But
others are not exeemed from Works of Charity, this is a Duty incumbent on all.
Who have Much, must give Much, who have much of this Worlds Gods and Little to
do with them, are oblidged to bestow more this way then those of equal Fortune,
but who have more to do with it, as having more Children, or being Obliged to
keep a greater retinue: but even all who are not themselves objects of Charity
are oblidged to contribute something to the relief of the Poor and indigent
thereby to testify their Homage to, and Dependence upon God; and if Persons be
wiling, they easily may render themselves able to do either more or less. They
who live on their proper industry, and have nothing but as they earn it, may
lay by a days or half days work in the Week, and Servants who work to others
may give a part of their Wages, or one or two Meals a week; and if every one
study to enable themselves, and give according to their Ability, though it be
little 'twill be as acceptable as the gifts of the Rich. I never saw the meaner
sort of People, even such as seem scarce to have their necessaries, but they
would find out some shift for Money when they had a Friends or Neighbors
Marriage to go to, and sure if they were as intent upon Charitable Deeds, they
might take the same course to enable them thereto. The want of ability
therefore proceeds too often from the want of will, it is because we think not
our selves Oblidged to do Good, or that it is enough if we do any though never
so little: but we should consider that we ought to lay our selves out to this,
we should be industrious in this matter, and ought to endeavor as much to be
Rich in good Works, as to be Rich in Worldly goods; nay the main Reason why we
should Labor to be rich toward the World, is that we may be Rich toward GOD,
and that we may have to give to them that need.

Which leads me to the Third and Last thing proposed, viz: to give some Motives
to Persuade and Excite to the Exercise of this Duty of Charity.

And First, we shall begin with what indeed should be the Chief end of such
good works, and alms-deeds, and the Principle from which they should flow, viz:
The Love of GOD and desire of pleasing him. Though one would give never so much
this way, even all his goods to feed the Poor, if 'twere not out of Love to
GOD, 'twould profit nothing, he would neither find Acceptance nor Reward: But
as what we do of this kind should be out of Love to GOD, so if we have any
Sincere Love to him, any true Regard for him, any Hearty desire to infinuate
our selves in his Favor, we cannot but be forward to, and much set upon the
works of Charity and Mercy: Because he Delights in these things, is well
pleased with them, and truly oblidged by them. To do good and to communicate
forget not, says St. Paul, for with such sacrifices GOD is well pleased, Heb:
13. 16. And writing to the Philippians of the supply they sent him, he tells
them 'twas an odor of Sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable, well pleasing to
GOD. Phil: 4. 18. I shall not offer to show how much we ought to Love GOD, or
how much it is our interest to seek his Favor, for who will not*acknowledge
it? But certainly if we have any love to him for the many Blessings Spiritual
and Temporal bestowed on us, or be desirous to secure his Kindness for the time
to come; we will exercise our selves in acts of Charity, seeing they are so
acceptable to him. Every good and Charitable deed gratifies GOD, and endears us
to him; hereby we both requite his past Favor, and also secure his future
love. O how fond are People of Occasions of oblidging Kings, Princes, and other
great Persons? How much will they stretch themselves even beyond their Power,
to get rare and acceptable presents to offer them* with what joy will they
receive them into their houses, if they have the least hope thereby to make
Court, and to obtain acts of Grace from them? But O how small a happiness is
this? And how contemptible in Comparison ^f that which arises from occasions
of Gratifying GOD, for his court is not unstable like Earthly Courts, his
Favor is a certain thing, and attended with many more desirable Blessings. Now
all the occasions of doing good, are as many occasions of Gratifying and
oblidging GOD; he who is capable of giving Charity is capable of befriending
GOD, and of engaging his Love; to feed the hungry, to cloth the naked, to
loose the prisoner, and to do other acts of charity, is to entertain GOD
himself: For in as much, says CHRIST, as ye have done it to one of the least
of these my brethren ye have done it to me. Mat: 25. 40. And seeing GOD thus
presents himself to us in the persons of the Poor, we may very well say with
St. John, Who so has this Worlds goods, and sees his brother have need, and
shuts up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love of GOD in
him? 1. John. 3. 17.

Secondly. It is a generous and praiseworthy thing to be Charitable. To be set
upon doing good is both lovely in it self, and in the eyes of all the World;
this gains the Hearts, and wins the Affections of all. Wit, Learning,
Dexterity, and Courage will be talk^d of indeed with some Admiration, but
Bounty and Charity is truly loved and Esteemed; instances of these do tickle
the Fancy chiefly, but this really affects the Hearts of all who know it. Every
ones heart is open to embrace him whose hands are always ready to the relief
of the Poor and Miserable every Mouth blesses him, and every tongue speaks of
his Praise; People honor his Presence, Pray for his Life, and count it a
Blessing, and when he is gone hence his memory is dear to them: Such an one
needs no Brass Statue, or Marble Tomb to perpetuate his Name, it never rots,
but lasts to many Generations, and like precious Ointment has still a sweet
Savor, which refreshes the Spirits of those who smell it. The Righteous says
the Psalmist (that is the Charitable Man, as appears from the context) shall be
in everlasting remembrance. Ps. 112. 6 And how can it be otherwise? for

Thirdly, Charity is a God-like thing, it makes a Man truly resemble GOD in the
most Lovely of his Attributes (if I may be allowed to speak so*) GOD'S
Omnipotence and Omniscience are proper Objects of fear and Reverence, but it is
the consideration of his Goodness which especially begets our Love to him; yea
it is this which makes him most Glorious, therefore when he showed his Glory to
Moses, he did it by proclaiming his Name, the LORD GOD, Merciful, and Gracious,
long suffering, and abundant in goodness, etc. Exodus: 34. 6. Because Goodness is
the chiefest of the Divine Attributes, therefore the rest are set on work for
the manifestation thereof; his Wisdom contrives, and his Power Acts, that by
both he may show his Goodness, his Mercies are over all his Works. Now as
'twill be acknowledged the Highest Perfection to be like GOD so the best and
truest Likeness to him is to study to be good and Merciful as he is Good and
Merciful: Though we could come to some resemblance of his Wisdom and Power,
'twould neither endear us to Him, nor to others, so much as the imitation of
his Goodness. Who therefore would be Like GOD, who are Acted with such an High
and holy Ambition, let them busy themselves in doing good, and according to
their Power let them abound in Works of Charity and Mercy: For hereby they
shall become partakers of the Divine Nature, and shall purchase a right to the
same Tittles which GOD takes to himself in Scripture, and indeed glories in, as
the Father of Mercies and Comforts, the Helper of the helpless, the Reliever of
the needy, and such as are distressed, etc. The half of the Money which some
lay out for Worldly Tittles would procure these Divine Designations, which are
by far preferrable, and upon many considerations more Honorable.

Fourthly, this Duty of Charity is most pleasant and taking, it is not more for
the Comfort of the distressed, then it is for the satisfaction of the Charitable
Man himself: wherefore our Savior said, It is more blessed to give then to
receive; Acts 20. 35. Acts of Bounty and Charity truly rejoice the Heart, and
fill the Soul with large measures of solid joy; there is far more Joy in
Spiritual Exercises, then in any other; other pleasures are but skin deep, they
are only some Titillations in the Body which soon evanish; but the Joy which
results from Virtue and Religious exercises peirceth the Heart, and causes the
very Spirit to exult: and there is in Particular a special Pleasure in doing
Good. As the desires of doing Good are of all other the Noblest, which made a
Heathen Poet to call them Sensus pars Optima Nostri, so certainly the
fulfilling thereof is attended with the Chiefest Satisfaction, has a gust and
relish proper to delight a Heaven born Soul. It Is but small delight which
comes from dainty Morsels, quaffing of Healths, for these are Brutish
exercises and inferior to the Dignity of our Natures: But to feed the hungry,
to afford drink to the thirsty Soul, to cloth the naked, to comfort those who
mourn, to save the life which is ready to perish, and other the like Charitable
deeds, are Exercises worthy of GOD himself, he delights in them, and how can it
but delight and rejoice us to be so Nobly and Divinely employed? If Men have
reared up magnificent Structures, great Buildings, and made fine Gardens about
them, they are ready to contemplate them with vanity, as Nebuchadnedzar did his
Babylon, saying, Is not this great Babylon which I built: O how mean a thing is
it to be vain of these works which Wind and Weather can deface, Storms batter
down, and time wear out! But certainly there is Reason to rejoice in being
instrumental to rear up living fabrics, to repair the Temples of the Holy
Ghost, and to preserve those who are capable to sound forth the praises of GOD
to all Eternity. If People will but consult their Reason, and reflect on their
own little Experience, they cannot but be persuaded of the unspeakable Pleasure
in doing Good, in contributing seasonable comfort and relief to their fellow
Brethren, in being able to step in and pull them out of some Sad Strait, or to
hold off the weight of a Cross whose pressure is likely to fill them with
excessive grief: It Is only the consideration of this pleasure, which makes
Worldly Greatness desirable or Supportable, for abstracting from this, it is an
useless burden, and a great impertinence which a Wise Man would shun and seek
to be rid of.

Fifthly, Acts of Charity and Bounty are most profitable; and that upon many
Accounts, First, they are Profitable, because hereby the Creatures of GOD are
Sanctified to our use, and our enjoyment of them becomes Lawful, Every creature
of GOD is good, says the Apostle, and nothing to be refused, if it be received
with thanksgiving; 1 Timothy: 4: 4. The Creatures are only good then, when
thanksgiving is Joined to the use of them, which thanksgiving does consist in a
deep sense of GODS Propriety in the Creatures, and of his goodness in bestowing
them upon us, and this sense must be expressed not only in Words but Deeds. The
violating the Signs of GODS Dominion over the Creatures brought a curse upon
them, for this cause the Earth was cursed to us; and this curse is not removed,
but by returning to our Allegiance, by making an acknowledgement of GOD'S Right
and Dominion, in paying the Tribute which is due, and which he requires: The
neglect of this keeps GOD from blessing our enjoyments, this is the reason why
some as the Prophet Haggai speaks, sow much and bring little, eat but have not
enough; drink but are not filled with drink; Cloth themselves but are not
warm; earn wages but it is put as 'twere into a bag with holes Hag: 1: 6: And
as the giving GOD his due, sanctifies the Creatures by taking away the curse
upon them, So it renders our enjoyment of them Lawful and Sweet. We may freely
use the Creatures, may Eat our Meat with gladness* and Singleness of heart,
when we have discharged the Debt lying thereon, and paid the tribute of
Gratitude we owe to GOD: But without this, our enjoyments can have no Delicious
Relish, nor afford true satisfaction: They are attended with remorse and sting
of Conscience, as the feasting of Bankrupts, or the riotous living of Tennents,
who have not paid their Masters rent. It Is not Lawful to sit down to full
Tables, to be always Eating the fat, and drinking the Sweet, whiles there is
no regard of those who are at the point of starving; it is not Lawful for any
to ruffle it out in Silk, to hang their rooms with Arras and other costly
hangings, whiles they see any perish for want of Clothing, or any Poor without
covering, and will not offer to help them, that their Loins may Bless them as
Job speaks, It Is an heinous crime which will not pass unpunished, to cast the
Childrens Bread to Dogs; and are not they guilty of it who spend much on Dogs,
Hawks, and other idle sports, but give nothing to the Supply of the Poor, the
Fatherless, and Widow? But as the Enjoyments and pleasures of uncharitable
Persons are unlawful and accursed, so who exercises Charity may lawfully
indulge his desires, and allow himself what Innocent Comforts and conveniences
this World affords.

Secondly, Charity is profitable for securing and preserving the Good things a
Man has; Every days experience may teach us the uncertainty of Earthly things;
one may have much and soon come to Poverty; Fire, Violence, Treachery, and a
thousand other Accidents, to which all are exposed, may very easily divest a
man of his Wealth and Possessions, and it is impossible to prevent this, by our
Foresight, Care, and Industry: our chief, yea, only security is in the Divine
Providence, which we may lean to, if we testify our thankfulness by acts of
Charity and Bounty to the Poor. By giving to the Poor, we clip the wings of
Riches, so that they can not flee so fast from us: But if the Poor be not the
better of our Wealth it wants the Divine protection, and so is altogether
defenseless, it has no sure hedge about it. By denying the Tribute of Charity
we break our Tacks, forfeit our right by which we hold our Possessions: And as
Masters use to turn out those Tennents who pay not their Rent, so GOD takes
away the good things of this World from them who do not use them to his Glory,
not make any acknowledgment to him for them, or if he let them keep them, it is
because he reserves them to a Heavier judgment.

Thirdly, Charity is profitable, because it tends to the increase of our
Wealth and Estate. As it is the best means to preserve our Fortune, so it is the
likliest way to enlarge it: The Blessing of the LORD it makes Rich, and he
adds no sorrow with it; Prove: 10. 22. Which Blessing is particularly entailed
on the Charitable Man, and therefore Moses having commanded to pay the
Triennial Tithes to the Poor, adds for an encouragment, That the LORD thy GOD
may bless thee in all the work of thine hand which thou do, Deuteronomy: 14: 29:
Some are ready with Judas to count all lost which comes not into heir own
bag, but what is given in Charity is so far from loss, that it is great Gain,
it returns with Usury. He that has pity on the Poor, lends to the LORD, and
that which he has given will he pay him again. Prove: 19. 17. And that more may
be expected then what is laid out we learn from many Texts in Scripture, The
liberal Soul shall be made fat, and he that wattereth shall also be wattered
himself, Prove. 11* 25. Alms and Charitable Deeds may seem to impoverish us, but
really they do it no otherwise then the Husband Man's throwing his Seed upon the
Ground, which after some Months he receives with increase; There is that
Scatters* says Solomon, and yet increases; and there is that withholdeth
more then is meet, but it tends to Poverty. And because Charity contributes
as much to Wealth as the ordinary way and Arts of Thriving, therefore he
advises to use it, In the morning, says he, sow thy seed, and in the evening
withhold not thine hand for thou know not whither shall prosper, either this
or that, or whither they both shall be a like good. Ecel: 11: 6. Men indeed
ought not to use Charity with this Design to be Rich, but neither need they be
Discouraged from the Exercise thereof, for fear of redacting themselves to
Poverty: for this is the ready way not only to prevent Poverty, but to ensure
Wealth. if the Word of GOD may be rested on. And who but Infidels will not rely
on it? GOD'S hand is both the surest and most profitable Bank to put our Money
in, other Persons and States may, and we see daily do break and fail, but he
will never fail nor turn unable to repay us with Advantage he has promised
perhaps to try Men's sincerity. GOD will keep up for some time^ this gain of
Charity, but they shall recei^ (...) one time or another; Many instan^s might
be produced of these Advantageous returns of Charity, but I choose rather to
let every one recollect their reading and Experience in this point, then to
detain them farther. What do thou know (they are the words of a dear Friend)
but those showers which did lately refresh thy corn, that prosperous gale which
brought home thy commodity unto the desired haven, that advantageous bargain
which thou have made, that plea of of Law which thou have gained may have been
designed as a recompense of which thou have bestowed? However I am sure that no
Man shall have occasion to complain that he is a loser at GOD'S hands, and that
he has been decieved by that promise, that he who gives to the Poor shall not
lack.

Fourthly, Charity is profitable in that it either prevents the days of evil or
procures us solid Comfort in them. Man is born to trouble as the sparks flee
upward; we are but of few days, but we are liable to many Troubles, and
therefore every wise Man should provide against them: but the best Provision we
can lay up against the evil day of affliction, is to be liberal and Charitable
in Prosperity. When Daniel laid before Nebuchadnezar the disasters of his
D^eam, he advised him to take this cours^ (...) ^vent them: O King, said he,
let my couns^ acceptable unto thee, and break off thy sins by righteousness,
and thine iniquities by showing mercy to the Poor, if it may be a lengthning if
thy Tranquillity, Dan. 4. 27. But if Charity does not altogether prevent
Calamity and Affliction, 'twill be sure to lighten them, and to give us Comfort
in them, even solid Comfort, the Consolations of GOD. Riches pro^ little in
the days of evil, friends may the and (...), or if they come near, all they
can do is to weep and wail; true and certain comfort comes only from above,
which a Charitable Man is sure of. For Blessed is he that considers the Poor.
the LORD will deliver him in time of trouble. The LORD will preserve him and
k^ep him alive and he shall be blessed upon the Earth, and thou will not
deliver him unto the will of his enemies? The Lord will strengthen him upon the
bed of languishing, thou will make all his bed in his sickness. Psalm. 41. 1. 2.
3. If says the Prophet Isaiah, thou draw out thy Soul to the hungry, and
satisfy the afflicted Soul, then shall thy light rise in obscurity, and thy
Darkness be as noon day, and the LORD shall guide thee continually, and satisfy
thy Soul in drought, and make fat thy bones, and thou shall be like a wattered
Garden, and like a spring of Watters whose watters fail not. Isa. 58. 10*

Fifthly, the profit of Charity (...) ^rther then Earth, it reaches to
Heaven, and gets us an interest there. It Is true Heaven is not merited by any
deed of ours, we must not entertain any such thought: but certainly such good
Deeds are followed with Heaven and happiness of the other Life. How much
respect GOD will have to Acts of Charity and Mercy in bestowing Heaven, we may
see from Mat. 25. and therefore St. Paul would (...) ^he Rich to do Good, to be
rich in good works, ready to distribut, willing to communicate, thereby laying
up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that
they may lay hold on Eternal Life, 1 Timothy: 6* 18. 19. Here is the greatest
advantage of Charity, and here we may see that the most profitable way of
expending our Wealth, is to lay it out upon Works of Charity: For the profit of
all other Works is limited to this life; the good of them as to us expires with
our Breath, and it is but seldom that it lasts so long; when a man dies he
carries nothing away of all that he has done otherwise, except perhaps a
troubled Conscience for being employed so much to so little purpose. But the
profit of good and Charitable Works accompanies a man to the Grave, nay
follows him to the oth^ (...) and purchases Friends there, Friends (...)
never die, and which receive and welcome him to their everlasting Habitations.
And seeing it is so, what senselesness is it to neglect Charity? How much do
they sit in their own light, who give not all diligence to abound in Good
Works? nill we, will we, we must remove hence; here we cannot stay always,
sometime or other we will be forced to pack to another World, and should we not
then before hand secure a Habitation, and Endeavor that it may be well with us
there? if we were to be banished this Kingdom, or saw any necessity of leaving
it, we Would take care to Transport our goods whither we intended to take up
our residence or we would make money of them and carry bills thither, that we
may have wherewith to sustain and comfort our selves: Now what madness is it,
not to be as provident for our Souls, as for our Bodies? why do we not
distribute our Goods to the use of the Poor and needy, that we may have
Treasures in Heaven? And that when this Earthly tabernacle is dissolved we may
be lodged in glorious and Eternal mansions? It Is strange to see how fond Men
are upon Possessions here below, they will give all they are Worth, nay
contract for more (though it Make their Life burdensome) to get an Heritage
upon Earth, notwithstanding they are persuaded that they cannot abide with it.
Now a Purchase iu Heaven may be had easilier, it needs not all, nor half, nor
the Fourth part of our goods to this, a Tenth part Devotely disposed will do
the business: And is it not Wisdom then to lay out money rather upon this,
which may be had so easily, which is best in it self, and which is of Eternal
Advantage? A Charitable Person of all others is the Wisest and Happiest, for he
both enjoys the good things of this present life, and also has the better
things of the Life to Come reserved for him.

6ly. The profit of Charity is not confined to the Persons of the Charitable
Man, it descends to his children, it entails a Blessing upon his Posterity,
and it goes well with them for his sake. His seed shall be mighty upon Earth,
the generation of the upright shall be blessed, Wealth and Riches shall be in
his house: For such as be blessed of him shall inherit the Earth, and they
that be cursed of him shall be cut off. All Parents that are no^ unnatural
wish their Children well, and desire they may have wherewith to live honestly
in the World after themselves are gone; now the best course for this is to be
Charitable, for Charity secures to them the Favor of GOD, and the Providence
of the Almighty which is the Chiefest Treasure; this makes GOD their Tutor and
Curator, who is best ab^e to manage their interest; and without him others can
do but little. How many have left great Sums behind them, and much riches,
whose Childr^n have been Vagabounds running up and down Seeking Bread? The
Blessing of the LORD is the best Inheritance, It Is the best Portion Parents can
leave their Children, and Charitable Persons may bequeath it confidently. The
bountiful Man needs not be troubled that he has Little to leave among his
Children, for GOD will Bless that little, and make it sufficient; A little
that a righteous man has is better then the riches of many wicked; Psalm: 37.
16. That is, it goes farther, does more good, and is more profitable for the
Owners. And though he has no means at all to bestow, yet he has no Reason to
vex himself upon that account; For GOD will then surely ^e their Provisor, GOD
will repay to his Children what he lent to the Poor. I have been young says
the Psalmist, and now a^ Old, yet I have not seen the righteous forsaken, Nor
his Seed begging Bread; Psalm: 37. 25. I shall not say no instance to the
contrary can be showed, but truly I believe very few; let Men look abroad the
World, observe themselves, and ask at others, and they shall find it generally
true that the Children of the Good and Merciful have met with singular
Providence. do not therefore excuse thy self from Charitable Deeds because
thou have a numerous Family and many Children, this is but to mock GOD and
deceive thy self: Thou should rather take Pity on the Poor, that mercy and
compassion may be showed to thine; that when Father and Mother forsake thy
Children the LORD may take them up. What would People say or do if they were in
the Widow of Zareptha's Circumstance, who had not a cake but an handful of Meal
in a Barrel, and a little Oil in a cruse, and that too in the days of great
Famine? I suppose many would think they had Reason to deny even a Prophet
himself, but did she loss by giving a Morsel to Elijah? Did she prejudge her
self or her Son? If she had refused the Prophet, she and her Son would have
eaten all at one meal and then died: But because she fed the Prophet,
therefore the word of the LORD was that the barrel of Meal shall not wast,
neither shall the cruse of Oil fail, until the day that the LORD sends rain
upon the Earth; 1. King: 17. 14. Learn by this Example to obey the LORD, who
has commanded* thee to give bread to the Hungry, and Drink to the Thristy;
Grudge not because thy Substance is small, trust in GOD, believe and obey his
Word, and he will cause thy small Quantity of Meal and Oil to last, and to be
sufficient for ^hee and thy Children.

In the Last place it may engage us to be Charitable to consider the Wretched
state and circumstances of Uncharitable and hard Hearted Persons. Their Betters
despise them their Neighbors and Equals value them not, and the Poor envy and
curse them; people talk of their Misfortunes and Disasters with Complacency,
and murmr at any good which befall them: They have not the Love and Goodwill
of the Generation they live in, and when they die their name die with them, or
it is unsavourie and remembered with disgust. But this is the least part of
their misery, they are no less odious to God then to Man; he hates and abomi
nates them, because they violate his Laws, despise his Authority, abuse his
Mercies, and are unthankful for his Goodness; they counteract the Methods of
his Providence, keep People from discerning the Beauty and Wisdom thereof, yea
occasion many to Blaspheme his Name, therefore his Soul abhors them: And as
Blessings are upon the head of the Righteous and Merciful, so curses are
heaped upon such wicked and hard hearted Persons. If GOD blast not their
Fortune altogether, it is keept to their hurt; as they harden their Hearts
against the Poor, so the LORD shuts their own Bowels upon themselves, so
that they can as little allow themselves as others the necessary Supplies of
Nature, he has, but uses it as little as they who have nothing, which
certainly is a great plague and curse; Behold, says Solomon, it is good and
comely for one to Eat and to Drink, and to enjoy the good of all his labor
that he takes under the Sun, all the days of his Life which GOD gives him,
for it is his Portion. Every man also to whom GOD has given Riches and Wealth,
and has given him power to eat thereof, and to take his Portion, and to
rejoice in his Labor, this is the gift of GOD. But says he, There is an evil
which I have seen under the Sun, and it is common among Men, (and indeed among
none so common as among Uncharitable Men.) A man to whom GOD has given Riches,
Wealth, and Honor, so that he wants nothing for his Soul of all that he
d^sireth, yet GOD gives him not power to eat thereof, but a stranger eats
it, this is vanity and it is an evil disease. Eccl. 5. 18, 19. 6. 12. Farther
it may be observed, that GOD often deprives such persons of the comfort of
Children, or if they have them, for the most part they have little comfort in
them: The Children of such ordinarily are graceless and debauched, they are
averse from all Honest Callings, and use to lavish away what their Parents
sordidely hoorded up; But as often they want Children: and he who has Means
and wants Children, has but little satisfaction in his means, and far less
in his Relations and Acquaintances; for he is filled with Jealousies and
Suspicions against them, that they look greedily after his ^state, and wish him
dead that they may grasp it', therefore he is ever altering and renewing his
will; partly through jealousy, partly through his peevishness he puts off the
m^king a wise disposition of his goods; he cannot think on it till his death,
which surprising him, hence it is that what he so anxiously gathered, and
keept, often falls into the hands of those he little thought on, or cared for,
which foolish end is all the subject of discourse at his Funeral, and every
Bodies sport and laughter then and afterward, Finally* let us follow the
Uncharitable Man* unto the other World, and we shall see his case yet sader;
there he stands more despicably then ever the Poor here did at his own door,
and cries for help to as little purpose GOD has no M^rcy upon him, Angels and
Saints stand aloof, he has no Testificats from the Poor, can produce no
Letters of Advice from these Factors of their here below to recommend him, and
so those Heavenly inhabitants declar^ they know him not, they will not receive
hi^ to their Everlasting Habitations, and thus he is forced to lodge with
Devils and Damned Spirits where there is weeping and wailing and g^shing of
Teeth.

Thus we have proposed some M^tives to Charity, more might have been laid
before you, but these are sufficient; he who is not excited by these would not
be moved by other Considerations, and he must be strangely hardened who is not
convinced and persuaded by them. If what has been said has any influence on
the Reader, if he thereby find his Bowels moved and his heart inclined to
Charity, I shall only say this farther to him, that he delay not the expressing
his Charity till his Death, as too many do; the time and manner of thy Death is
very uncertain, do good therefore whiles thou have Health; leave not this work
to thy Heirs or Executors, for thou know not how faithful they will be;
exerce Acts of Charity in thine own Time, give Alms with thine own Hand, and
thereby thy Sincerity shall the better appear, and thou also shall have the
greater Satisfaction thereof.

The end of the Second Part:
THE CONCLUSION.
I Have now gone through both Parts of Jacob's Vow, and illustrated them by the
Light of the Gospel, thereby to demonstrate where our true Happiness lies, and
by what Means we may compass it, The Reason why Jacob's Vow was pitched on to
afford Instructions in these Material Points, was because I judged it very
propper, and that such Instructions as are drawn from Examples are the most
convincing. Now that I may summ-up all which has been said, As all will
acknowledge that it is of the greatest importance to be rightly informed about
Felicity, and the Means of accomplishing it, so every one may learn this
necessary knowledge here. In the First Part, is laid out the Folly of being
fond on the things of this World, of thinking Happiness depends on Wealth and
Worldly greatness; For as the pursuit hereof is certain Slavery, Toil, and
Vexation, and of very uncertain success, so when one is arrived to a more then
ordinary Measure of these things, what is he the better? He is as far from
being Happy as he was before, except that ^e may be a little more sensible that
Happiness lies not there, and is able to witness^ from his Experience the truth
of Haman's Verdict All these things avail me nothing, E^h: 5. Never any sought
Happin^sse in Worldly things, but met with a disapointment: For it is too
weighty and important to stand upon such a Sandy Foundation, Men are not Happy
by the Splendor and Grandeur of their Outwa^d Condition and Circumstances, but
when* they have Inward peace and Satisfaction of Mind, Which they only have
when they enjoy something agreeable to the Nature of their Souls, which answers
their large (and I may almost sa^ infinite) Desires which gives what is
pres^ntly requisite, and ensures the continuance of all things necessary and
Desirable. Therefore GOD only is and can be the Author and Matter of Man's
Felicity, for his Favor can only secure us of what our Present Life calls for,
it is always attended therewith, and does infillibly lead to Eternal and
unspeakable Felicity, the very Hope whereof gives more Pleasure th^n all
Worldly Enjoyments; yea, is able to make one* Rejoice in the midst of all the
Troubles and Disasters of this Life.

Thus then instead of running hither and thither in the search of this or the
other Particular, we ought to seek GOD, and altogether to intend and endeavor
the possessing our selves of his Love and Favor, for the Favor of GOD is the
foundation of true Felicity, and the enjoyment of Him, is the very Height and
Compl^on thereof.

And as the scope of the First Part is to persuade Men of (...), so it is
endeavored in the Second to (...) before them the true and proper ways of
ende^g themselves to GOD, by which they may purchase his Favor here, and
qualify themselves for the E^rnal Enjoyment of him hereafter. In showing this
nothing necessary has been omitted, every thing indeed could not be
particularly handled, but what is not expressly mentioned is clearly included in
the things spoken of; so that who does all here required, does all that is
necessary to Please GOD: Nor has any thing been proposed as necessary which is
not really so, for on these Terms only GOD offers Himself and his Benefits to
Men. The acceptance of these Duties, when we perform them, is only in and
through Christ, as has been made appear: But they are in themselves necessary,
even as necessary to obtain the Favor and Enjoyment of GOD, as this is to
procure Happiness. They neither understand what GOD is, nor have they right
notions of Eternal Life, who think to arrive there any other way, without
Holiness, says the Apostle, no Man shall see the LORD. And the Duties spoken
of are necessary parts of True Holiness, as will appear to any who considers
the account given of them. As by the foregoing Treatise, the Nature of true
Religion may be understood, and the right Manner of Performing the Public and
Private Exercises thereof, if people have a mind to set about them, and desire
to be instructed* in them: So if they be desirous to be informed of the Truth,
and will not obstruct their own Conviction, they may here see the absolute
Necessity of doing these Duties here laid before them. Let me therefore
earnestly entreat the Reader to give way to his Conviction, and to beware of
letting either his former Inclinations and habits, or the Customs of others
divert him from the Practice of what he is convinced is necessary to the
obtaining True and Eternal Felicity. I shall not offer to persuade any to seek
to be Happy, for this would be as vain and impertinent as to bid a hungry Man
eat, or a Thirsty Man drink; but I would entreat all to consider that it is the
height of madness to expect to be happy without using the means necessary
thereto, even as 'twould be great folly in a Hungry or a Thirsty Man to desire
the allaying of his Appetite without eating and Drinking. What is it which
hinders you from closing with these Means of Happiness? What keeps you from
observing the Duties here enjoined? Do you think them unnecessary, that cannot
be now pretended. Do you think them too much? What? Can there be too much
Pains, or Cost bestowed on Eternal and perfect Felicity None have Reason to
grudge at these Conditions of Happiness, they are Just and Reasonable: This
Service which GOD requires is no present Drudgery, and though 'twere, it could
not be complained of, seeing so Glorious a Reward follows it, His yoke is easy,
his Burden is Light, and this service he exacts is most Reasonable and
desirable, ^ake a view of the several Exercises and Employments of the Sons of
Men, of the vari^s ways of spending their Time, and there will be found none
preferrable to this. Idleness is an uneasy thing, and of all Occupations
Religion is the most Manly, the most Noble the most Desirable. As it has the
greatest Reward, so it gives at present the greatest Pleasure and Satisfaction.
The ways of Wisdom, that is of Religion, are waves of the pleasantness, says
Solomon, and all her paths are peace: And they are so even when they are set
about with Thorns and Briers. Great peace says David, have they who love thy
Law, and nothing shall offend them. And he tells of himself* That he rejoiced
in the way of GOD'S Testimonies, as much as in all Riches. I shall conclude all
therefore in the words of our Savior, if ye know these things, happy are ye,
if ye do them.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
In the First PART.
Page 11* line 20. for St. Laurence, read St. Dominicus. p. 12. l. 22. for
Either. r. Rather. p. 74. l. 23. for mi. r. cui. p. 75. l. 13. for Rita. r.
Vita. p. 111. l. 21. for Wisdom. r. Fr^edom p. 122. l. 27. for absurdity. r.
obscurity. p. 133. l. 25. for and r. as.

In the Second part.
Page 147. line. 4. for measure. read. Treasure. p. 148 line. 27. for and r.
but. p. 239. l. 16. r. Reference p. 281. l. 25. for every. r. ever. any. p.
314. l. 16 r. confirmed. p 333. l. 22. r. undertakings p. 329. l. 4. for that
thing. r. nothing. p. 406. l. 28. for any r. daily p. 425. l. 21. for quality
r. quantity. p. 431. l. 13. for so. r. for. p. 440. l. 6. for oblidged* r.
addicted.

ADVERTISEMENT.
Books Sold by Alexander Ogston Stationer in the Parliament*Closs.
The Acts of Parliament in large Folio, and likewise in 12mo. in two portable
Volums. The Model of the Government of East-New-Iersey. The Scots Gardener.
Chalmers Writting-Book of the Round Hand. All sorts of Bibles, and Common
Prayers.

