A SALUTATION TO THE Suffering-Seed OF GOD, WHEREIN The things are declared and
fignified beforehand that must shortly come to pass.

By a Servant of the Lord, Josiah Coal.

I will send you the Spirit of Truth the Comforter, and it shall show you
things to come:

John 16.13. LONDON, Printed for William Warwick 1663.

A Salutation to the Suffering-Seed of God, etc.
DEarly beloved Friends, Brethren and Sisters, Babes, Lambs and Children, who
are of the Election of Grace, and of the true Shepherds Fold, whom it has
pleased my heavenly Father in his Love, Life and Spirit, to gather out of the
World, and to separate from amongst men, to be the first fruits unto Him, and
to the LAMB, in this Day of his Power and glorious Appearance, and has
manifested his Power, and revealed his glorious Arm of Strength in and amongst
you, and has made known his blessed, sweet, refreshing Presence in the midst
of you, whereby you have been refreshed, comforted and strengthened in the
midst of many Trials, Tribulations and Temptations, which have been suffered to
come upon you for the trial of your Faith since you were a People unto him: and
you know right well, that he has not been wanting unto you in any state or
condition that you have been brought into, as you abode faithful unto him: And
the mighty things which he has done for you, and the great deliverances which
he has brought unto you in the time when you were in great distress, surely
cannot be forgotten by you, but is worthy to be had in everlasting remembrance:
And the things which you have seen of this kind, and the endless
loving kindness of God unto you therein manifested, is and (I hope) will be for
ever sufficient to engage you to walk with the Lord in singleness and
uprightness of heart, that in all trials of what nature or kind soever that you
meet withal for the future time, you may hold fast your testimony for him, and
your Faith and Confidence in him, and and be nothing daunted in your minds
hearts, nor spirits, but in all things give up unto the Lord, and resign up
your Cause unto him alone, and he will certainly plead for you in the hearts of
your Enemies, and they shall assuredly know that his controversy is very great
with them for your sakes: For he has regard unto your sufferings, and the
cries and deep groans of his oppressed suffering Seed, is continually before
him, and he is near to bring deliverance unto all who in patience and
contentedness wait upon him, and that trust in him with an upright, and with a
perfect heart.

Wherefore I say unto you all, my beloved Friends, Lambs and Babes of God, be
patient, and therein wait upon God, for the coming of the Lord draws nigh,
and the day of a great deliverance is at hand, wherein lie will do, and bring
to pass such things which cannot be believed by many, though they should be
told unto them: Therefore murmr not against the Lord in any wise, because of
these things which are come to pass, and happened unto us, nor because of the
greatness of the rage of the Adversary, for it is because he has but a very
short time, and though you have born long, and suffered much in diverse kinds,
and the oppressive yoke of Antichrist is not yet removed nor taken away, yet I
say, my Friends, Fear not, nor faint not in your minds, but endure to the end
in the Faith and Patience of Jesus, and when the things determined shall be
accomplished, and the measure of iniquity shall be filled up, then shall the
day of a great deliverance come unto you, and your eyes shall see Jerusalem a
quiet habitation, the praise of the whole earth: And then shall the Lord God
Almighty be known to reign in the Kingdoms of Men, and his Glory shall spread
forth its self to the ends of the world, and be declared of throughout all the
Nations of the Earth, and the Knowledge of God shall cover the Earth as the
waters cover the Sea. These sayings are faithful and true, and things that must
shortly come to pass and be fulfilled, the Lord has spoken it, and blessed are
all they who believe and obey the Word of the Gospel, and waits for the
fulfilling of these things.

Wherefore my dear Friends, dwell low in God's fear, and in his Covenant of
Light into which you are gathered, and wait to receive his pure, Divine,
Heavenly wisdom to order you, and be you ordered thereby, and that will keep
you out of all extremes, so that none will be lifted up above what is meet,
because of the Promises of God, nor yet be cast down because of the threatenings
of the Enemy, that so you may neither turn aside to the right hand, nor to the
left, but that you may walk on in the even way, which is the path of peace, and
feel the Eternal Life which is of God, to remain and abide in you, so will you
be kept fresh and lively in the beauty of Truth and Holiness, and shine as
Lights to the World: For you are the Salt with which the Earth must be
seasoned, and with which all things must be salted to make it savory unto God,
and acceptable unto him: For as the state of the World is in which they now
lie, they are unsavory unto God, and not at all a pleasant smell, neither has
he any delight in their Sacrifices, for even their prayers are abominable unto
him, and their solemn Assemblies he has no pleasure in, but his soul even
loathes and abhors them, and he will certainly work a Reformation in the Earth,
and he will beat down Babylon with a mighty blow, and will bring a great
desolation upon her, and amongst her Merchants shall the noise of a great
howling be heard, and all her delicacies shall come to naught, and all her
costly attire (the works of cunning Workmen) shall be consumed, for she is come
into remembrance before the Lord, and as she has loved blood, so must she have
blood to drink, for the Cup of God's Fury is already filled into the hands of
the Saints of the Most High, to pour out unto her: And as she has lived
deliciously, and glorified her self, so much torment and sorrow must she have
given unto her, yea she shall have doubled unto her according to all her works,
and then shall the Saints, Prophets and holy Apostles rejoice over, when God
shall have avenged us on her.

And now my beloved Friends, this I say unto you in and by the Spirit of the
Lord, That the time hastens and draws nigh in which these things must be
brought to pass, yet nevertheless the things decreed and determined of the Lord
must first be accomplished: So that although the power of darkness has been
long working, and does still work, as it were, in a prevalent manner, by which
sufferings and tribulation are brought upon us, yet I say, it is by the
permission of the hand of the Lord, that these things are so, and he has an
end in suffering it so to be, and that for his own glory, and who shall say him
nay for so doing, or reason with him about matters of so deep concernment,
seeing his way is hid from man, and is not known unto any, but only them unto
whom he reveals it.

But this my Friends, I know from the Lord, That he has an intent and purpose
of good unto us thereby, and why then should not we all be content, and
willingly submit unto the hand of the Lord, whose Fatherly care is over all
his. And truly Friends, though we may say we have suffered long by the
afflicting hand of our Enemies, and their stroke has fallen hard upon many of
us, and that great sufferings and afflictions seem still to attend us, yet my
Friends (blessed be the Lord) my heart is not at all troubled at these things,
neither do thoughts of fear enter, because I see the end of the Lord in it. And
I know it is not contrary, but according to the determination of the Almighty
that these things are so: Yet I dare not but acknowledge, that they by whom
these sufferings are inflicted upon us, do go beyond their bounds and
commission, and that is the very thing which will break them, when they have
filled up their measure.

Wherefore my beloved brethren, be you all like-minded with me in this matter,
and settle it in your hearts to bear all things with patience and
contentedness, that may yet come upon you for the farther trial of your Faith,
and put on Valor, and Courage, and Boldness, and be strong in the Lord, and in
the Power of his Might, and be nothing daunted before the face of your Enemies,
but let them see your courage in the Spirit of the Lamb, and in the Wisdom of
God: For the Lord is assuredly with us, and amongst us, and will be an Enemy
unto our Enemies: And what is it makes a people more dreadful and terrible,
then to have the Presence of the Lord with them? And truly Friends, this I know
from the Lord, and this I have received from God, That he will yet make his
people a terror to the Nations round about them, and they shall come bowing and
bending, and shall desire to be at a League and Covenant with all those who
are, and abide in Covenant with God, because they shall know that God is with
us.

Therefore all my Friends, abide in that where you may have and enjoy the
presence of the Lord, and know it to continue always with you, who will be your
everlasting Comforter and your stay and strength in all states and conditions,
and you will not be left comfortless by him, though you may be yet further
tried, and sometimes it may be cast down, yet you will not be forsaken that
trust in him, and repose confidence in him, for he will be always with you, and
will give you of his Counsel and Wisdom, by which you will be directed to walk
in the path of peace, and all occasions of stumbling will be removed out of the
way, and you will not at all think it strange that the Lord suffers you so to
be tried, for you will see the end and purpose of God therein, and so in
submission to his Heavenly Will in all things, you will have satisfaction,
peace, joy and content: But if the reasoning part enter, that will soon darken
the understanding, and vail the life, and the Counsel of God will be obscure to
thee, and thou will not see the end of the Lord in his thus exercising of thee,
and then sufferings will be grievous and hard to be born, and the murmurer will
get up, that will murmr against God, and peace will fly from thee, and the
afflicting hand of God will be upon thee also, because of thy unfaithfulness,
and such a state is worse then his that never knew the way of Truth: Wherefore
consult not with flesh and blood, but in patience continue to the end, in
well-doing, and none to be weary therein, but be circumspect and diligent every
one in your minds and spirits, and watch unto prayer, that you enter not into
the temptation when it comes, for your Adversary the Devil goes about like a
roaring Lion, and waits to devour, and lurks to destroy the precious life, and
will lo se no opportunity that possibly he can get to make an entrance upon
you, to deprive you of your treasure: Wherefore I say, Resist him steadfast in
the Faith, and be you armed with the whole Armor of God, that you may be able
to withstand him in all his appearances, for now he will bestir him with all his
force and might, and will make many great oppositions and assaults both within
and without, if by any means to beguile you as he did Eve in the beginning: but
as you dwell in him who is the quickening Spirit, in him the Devil has no
part, neither can he prevail there, so in him your safety is from the devourer,
for he that is begotten of God into this quickening Spirit, and therein abides,
he it is that keeps himself, and that wicked one touches him not. And so my
dear Friends, I am full of unfeigned love to you all, and my heart is indeed
greatly enlarged toward you with the goodness and love of God which abounds in
me, and not in me only, but in all the Flock of my Fathers Fold, who are
faithful and upright-hearted unto him, and a Table richly decked he has spread
before us in the midst of our Enemies, and what could we more desire then the
Lord has done for us, and promised to do? He has begotten us unto himself,
and nourished and brought us up unto this state in which we now stand, and this
he has done by his own right hand of power, and has formed us for his praise,
to be a peculiar people unto himself: And now this he requires of every one,
That you walk worthy of his Love, that it rise not in judgment against any
one, and that every one answer his requirings, and the leadings and drawings of
his Spirit, so shall his Love continue with you for ever, and you shall be as a
watered Garden, whose springs does not fail: So to the Lord do I resign you up,
and commit you all to the Word of his Grace, who will preserve you, and keep
you thereby who trust in him, and the Almighty Arm of God be amongst you, and
prosper and preserve you unto his everlasting Kingdom, Amen.

And this was I moved by the Spirit of the Lord to write unto you, as a
Salutation of my endeared Love unto you, and that the things that must shortly
come to pass, might be signified unto you beforehand, and that you may be
refreshed thereby: And so in the Faith thereof I rest and remain

Your Brother in the patience and tribulation of the Lamb, Josiah Coal.
Written at Kingstone upon Thames, the 22. of the 7th month 1663. and is to go
amongst Friends, to be read in their Assemblies in the Lord's fear.
POSTSCRIPT.
ANd Friends, not in any wise to forsake the assembling of your selves
together, in as much as you know the exceeding benefit you have received
thereby, and you know full well, that it was the usual practice of the servants
of God by whom you were begotten into the Truth, and instructed therein (of
whom some remains amongst you unto this day, and some are fallen asleep) I say,
it was their usual manner to exhort you, and to stir you up to that obedience
of assembling your selves together: And when did you meet together to wait upon
God, and your hearts kept stayed upon him, but that you received your expected
end? Wherefore let the remembrance of these things encourage you to continue in
this well-doing while you have a being and liberty so to do: And though there
were such in ages past, whose manner was to forsake the assembling of
themselves together, and some such there are at this day also: Yet my Friends,
let not them be your example to walk by, but every one to walk as you had and
have them for examples amongst you who begat you into the truth, and by whom
the Way of Life has been made known unto you, and be ye followers of them even
as they were, and are of Christ: For this my Friends I say unto you, There are
some sprung up amongst us who have in effect, labored to dissuade Friends from
their usual way and manner of meeting and assembling together, with whose
Spirit and proceedings therein we have not unity, but must in the Spirit of
Christ Jesus the Lamb of God, give testimony against them, and forewarn you not
to receive that Spirit which goes about to divert you from your usual way and
manner of assembling together, in which you have had the comfort of the
presence of the Lord, and received the Justification of Life, and thereby your
growth has been much added unto: So that certainly my Friends, that Spirit
which would turn you aside from this godly practice (of assembling together) is
a dangerous spirit, and is not of God, whatsoever it pretend, or though it
cover it self with never so fair expressions. Wherefore my dear Friends, have
Salt within you to savor withal, and keep your first Love, and your first
Faith, through which you received life eternal; and hold fast your first
simplicity, and your former integrity, and gad not abroad to change your ways,
but meet together in the Name and Fear of the Lord, as your wonted manner has
been, so shall you find the presence of God with you in your Assemblies, as in
the days past, and his wonted goodness and love you will feel, which will warm
your hearts, and refresh your souls, by which you will be kept living unto him,
and a good savor, and be to the praise of his Name, who is God over all
blessed for ever.

J. C.
After the writing hareof, this following Paper came to my hands, which I judge
very seasonable to publish herewith.



To all that believe in Christ.
YE that believe in Christ Jesus the Light of the World, and are convinced of
the way of God's Truth, and know it by his Light in your own Consciences,
continue all of you in this Faith, and be steadfast in it all your days, and let
there be no neglect in any of you of meeting together, but approve your hearts
to God, and to his people, in this thing of assembling your selves together to
wait upon the Lord, for it is his will thus to do, and it is according to the
example of the Saints in former days, and it is according to our practice who
are the first fruits to God, and to the Lamb, in this last age, and by the
Spirit of the Lord, and in the Name and Power of Christ Jesus, we have given
example therein, and instruction and exhortation thereunto, again and again,
even that all that believe in Jesus, and are convinced of his Truth in their
Consciences, should assemble themselves together once or twice a Week, or as
the Wisdom of God teaches, for in such practice of so meeting together, we
have found much of the Lords presence many times refreshing our souls, yea many
have received of the Lord in their Assemblings together, the sense, and virtue,
and peace of the Lord in an unexpressible manner, and we can certify to all,
that it is the way of the Lord, and he is found in it, when people are turned
to the gift of the Spirit of Christ in them, in their Meetings the Lord
descends amongst them, every one being turned to their own, then the Lord is
near unto them: And therefore again and again I exhort all, Meet together in
the Name of Jesus, and you will find the Life, Peace and Comfort of Jesus
amongst you: For if any being convinced, and believing, and will not assemble
themselves together, it shows such to be unfaithful, negligent, and of a
careless heart, and not regarding the honor of the Lord, nor their own peace,
and amongst the disobedient must such be accounted, when the Lord comes to
reward every one according to their works: And forasmuch as this very thing of
our meeting together is become the main concroversie at this day between us and
them that would destroy us, and out of their envy against God and his People,
and to destroy the way of his Truth, do they contend against us in this case:
Therefore as ye love the Cause of God, and would have it prevail against its
Enemies, and as ye would not give the wicked one that occasion to say he has
overcomed, and as ye would not give God's Cause into his Enemies hand, I say
unto you, neglect not to meet together, that the Lord may delight to dwell with
you, and to reveal the Mystery of his glory unto you, and that the Enemy of
his Truth may be overcome both within and without: And hereby shall all know
you to be the Lord's People, and that he has a people that will serve him
above the fear of this World.

Edward Buroughs.

THE END.

