A CONTINUATION OF THE Historical Relation Of the late General Assembly IN
SCOTLAND, With an Account of the Commissions of that Assembly, and other
particulars concerning the present State of the Church in that Kingdom.

They know not, neither will they understand; they walk on in Darkness,

Psalm. 82. 5th. Licensed, November 14th. 1691.

LONDON: Printed by B. Griffin, for Samuel Keble, at the Great Turk's-Head in
Fleetstreet, over against Fetter-lane-End. 1691.

A CONTINUATION OF THE HISTORICAL RELATION Of the Late GENERAL ASSEMBLY IN
SCOTLAND, etc.
IT is in Writing as in Building, when once a man engages him self in it,
before he has done he is necessitated to carr^y it on further than what he
first thought on. The Historical Relation of the late General Assembly in
Scotland, was at first extorted from me by the Curiosity of a private Friend,
who afterward prevailed to have it published: When I yielded to it, I thought
my business was done, and expected no further trouble, but now I am made to
believe, that there lies an obligation upon me, to continue the History of our
Presbyterians in Scotland, because my former Relation has increased in many a
Curiosity to understand more and more, of the Genius and Actings of that party,
and because what I have done, will be incomplete if I do not add to it an
Account of the Commission of that Assembly, for the South and for the North of
Scotland. I know that by such enterprises, I expose my self to the malice and
aspersions of a party, of whose Revenge and Calumnies we have frequent
instances, but seeing I have already dipped my Hand in the affair, I will proceed
in it, for what ever prejudice it may be to my self, it may be an advantage to
Posterity to lay open the Errors and Miscarriages of those, who, to the
destruction of many, have set themselves up as the true Lights of the World.
The false Opinion which the World had of the Presbyterian party, has twice been
the occasion of Shipwreck to the Church of Scotland, and it may be expected,
that the showing them such as they are, may both prevent it a third time, and
also help to recover it for this, for I hope people will not be so mad as to
suffer themselves any more, to be led blindly by such Guides as they see have
not knowledge enough to qualify them for the Office; and who while they
pretend to be the purest part of Christians, commit such things as even
Heathens would scruple at.

Since the publishing of the Historical Relation of the General Assembly, they
have Printed the principal Acts of the General Assembly, with an Index or
Table, of such Acts as were not thought fit to be published. By this, the truth
of many particulars in my former Relation is confirmed, only I find a mistake
in one or two Acts I made mention of, as also one or two more which were
altogether omitted. In the 52d page of the Historical Relation of the General
Assembly, It was said that Pedagogues, Chapla^ns and Students, were appointed
to own and subscribe the Confession of Faith, but I find in the first Article
of that Act, Entitled, An Act approving several Overtures, which relates to
that matter. That Probationers Licensed to Preach, Intrants into the Ministry,
and all other Ministers and Elders received into Communion with them in Church
Government, are obliged to this, and no mention of Pedag^gues, Chaplains, and
Students; but I am assured, that they were named in the first draught of the
Act presented to the Assembly, and those who informed me, did not advert to the
alteration of it, which was caused by the Commissioner, who knew that otherwise
it would occasion no little disturbance in this Country, for as there were many
Pedagogues and Chaplains, who would have refused it, so the Families, in which
they are, would have been disgusted with the Government, if they had been
obliged to part with them.

Again, it was said, page 61. That Mr. Gilbert Rule was joined to Mr. Alexander
Pitcairn, for writing an answer to the printed accounts of the Persecution of
the Episcopal Clergy, and that the latter had excused himself for not doing it
sooner, by the want of due information of matter of fact, but it appears now
from the Index of their imprinted Acts, that this task is wholly committed to
Mr. Gilbert Rule: And Mr. Pit^airn declared lately to one of my acquaintance,
that he refused that employment altogether at the Assembly, because by some
informations that had been sent to (...), he saw these accounts could not be
otherwise answered than by justifying of the Rabble, which he neither would,
nor could do. My Authors do not remember, that they heard such free and plain
Language at the Assembly, and certainly it was too remarkable not to be taken
notice of^ but because Mr. Pitcairn says it, I make no doubt but this has
passed in some private Committee, where he has expressed himself so freely
upon this head, that they found him too honest and ingenuous for serving their
designs, and have thought Mr. Gilbert Rule a fitter Tool by far for their
purpose. The time of the sitting of a new Assembly does approach, to which he
is obliged to give an account of his diligence, and yet nothing of this nature
has appeared from him, from which we may conclude, that he finds the task very
hard for him, and that he is much puzzled both at once to save his honesty, and
to excuse his party. If he be the Author of that Pamphlet, Entitled, A
Vindication of the Church of Scotland (which is an answer to the ten Questions
about Presbyterians) as is commonly reported and believed, we may easily guess
how, and after what manner he is to answer these accounts, viz. First, By an
impudent denial of the Truth. Secondly, By extenuating the sufferings of our
Clergy, in comparison of what they suffered; for it is said there, that all the
instances alleged are false, and that any one of many amongst them, suffered
more than all the Episcopal Clergy. His ingenuity in the first, appears from
what I have said of Mr. Pitcairn, who refused to make any reply to these
printed accounts, because the information sent to him confirmed the truth of
them: And as to the other, tho it were true that they suffered as much, or
more, yet that is no reasonable excuse for the present sufferings of the
Episcopal Clergy; as the common Proverb is, Two Blacks make not a White: Nor
will it justify the ills and grievances of the present times, that in former
times there were as great and as many. If they had had a due sense of their
sufferings, or if they had rightly improved them, this would have prompted them
to Mercy and Compassion. The Spirit of Christ teaches us as to bear the Cross,
when it is on our selves, patiently and cheerfully, ^o to prevent it in others,
as much as is possible, and when it falls upon them, to ease and relieve them
all we can: It makes men gentle and meek, and to deal tenderly with one
another, but it seems they are acted by another Spirit, viz. A Spirit of
Bitterness, Cruelty, and Revenge, which makes them forward to render others
miserable, and to take pleasure when they see them afflicted. But it is not
true, that either any or all of them suffered so much as the Episcopal Clergy
have in this Revolution. Indeed, by the Act of Glasgow, which proved fatal both
to Church and State, a good many Ministers were laid aside, or rather they made
a pretext of it to lay themselves aside, thinking by their number to render the
Government odious, or to oblige it to revoke that Act, which required their
submission to Episcopacy; but this is nothing comparable to the treatment our
Ministers met with from the Rabble. They were forewarned by the Act of Glasgow,
and had several months allowed them to deliberate upon it, and were suffered,
even after the expiring of the term prescribed by that Act, to possess their
Houses, and to take up their Stipends; nay, very many continued still in the
exercise of their Ministry, and were con^ived at by the Government till the
year 1683. and a great many also of those, who were actually turned out, were
again indulged by the Clemency of the King and Government, to go to other
Parishes, which was the occasion of a Schism among them, for they who had not
the benefit of the Indulgence, envied them who had it, and divided from them,
and uttered bitter words against them, which obliged them to make a Vindication
of themselves in a Book, Entitled, A Review of the History of the Indulgence;
but the treatment of our Ministers was summary, and the proceedings against
them very cruel and severe. The Rabble surprised them, assaulted them in the
Night, allowed them not the least respite, but Barbarously thrust them, their
Wives and Children, instantly out of Doors. Nor had they time given them to
dispose of their Goods, to gather in their Debts, or provide necessary
sustenance for themselves and Families: So, many who might have otherwise lived
well enough, are at present in a starving condition, and are necessitated to
receive Alms, that they and their Families may not quite perish. Besides, some
have sustained the loss of their Wives, others of their Children, and some of
both, occasioned by the inhumane usage of the Rabble. And whatever the
Episcopal Clergy have suffered at this time, they have suffered merely upon the
account of Episcopacy, whereas in the late times, none ever suffered merely
upon the account of Presbytery. See Sir Geo. Mackenzie's defense of the Reign
of King Charles the 2d. Some of them indeed were Hanged, as King, and Kid, and
two or three more, very deservedly, because they were guilty of Sedition and
Rebellion against the Government. There was never any severity showed toward
them, till they were found Ploting, and then indeed the security of the
Government did oblige our Rulers to have a strict eye over them, and by all
means to curb them. And what Government would not be severe to men of their
principles, who hold it lawful to Deth^one and Kill Kings, and to Murder those
employed by them, if they do not act agreeably to their minds; and who have put
those principles in practice as often as they had occasion?

The Acts which were omitted were, first, That whereby John Blair was Elected
to be Agent for the Church. This person serves the Kirk as the Kings
Solicitor serves the State; he conveyeth the Orders of the General Assembly
and Commission, to particular Presbyteries and Synods; pursues all the causes
wherein the Kirk is concerned; and that the Civil Authority may assist that of
the Kirk, he takes out Letters of Summons from the Council against such as
contravene, and refuse obedience to their Acts: Nay, in his Name, some have
been charged only (...) not complying with the Civil Government. This the
Solicitor takes ill, and considers it as an encroachment on his Office,
which has made him put a stop to some of the Letters of Summons that were thus
issued out; but if Presbytery prosper, the Solicitor may come to pay for this,
and be made sensible that their Agent is his equal, if not his superior, for
they will not acknowledge their power subordinate to that of Kings. It Is
allowable enough in the Agent to assume a part of the Sollicitors Office, when
his Masters taken upon them to manage and direct the supreme Civil Power it
self. In the Reigns of K. Charles and K. James, the Laws sometimes put
Ministers on the invidious employment of giving up Lists of Dissinters and
dis^ffected persons within their Parishes, for which the Presbyterians accused
them, as having a persecuting Spirit; but let it now be considered, who may
most truly be charged with it, whether the Episcopal Party, who did what they
did with great reluctance, by force and compulsion of the Law, and who, as is
well known, endeavored to save all they could, or the present Presbyterians,
who willingly, and without Law, dela^e and accuse such as they think obnoxious
to the Government; and who have established an Office, and installed a person
in it, on purpose to search out such as might be thought guilty, and who at
their instigation has caused Summon and charge several, whom the Government
conni^ed at and passed over; but this is conform to the fourth Article of the
Solemn League and Covenant, which binds every man to be a Spy and an Informer,
even against his dearest Friends, and nearest Relations.

Another thing passed over, is a Declaration of the Moderator, that this
Assembly would depose no incumbent, simply for their Judgment anent the
Government of the Church, nor urge Reordination upon them. I do not remember
to have heard of this before, and now we have it only in the Table of their
unprinted Acts. If this had been set down at length, we could have understood
it better, and that it has not been fully printed, but hudled obscurely in
amongst the unprinted Acts, which few read over, makes me suspect that there is
some trick in it. When the Moderator made this Declaration, it was then, as it
seems, designed to show their Moderation, and seeing they would not have it
known to all men, it is a sign that they are now ashamed of it. However, we may
observe, that this (...) Act of the Assembly, but only a Declaration of the
Moderator, which cannot bind Synods and Presbyteries, for if any objection
should be made to them about it, they can easily reply. That he had done it of
his own hend, and not by any order of the Brethren. An instance of the like
treatment we have in Mr. Lion of Kinghorn, he was suspended by the Presbyt^ry
of (...), from whom (...) to the General Assembly, which appointed a Committ^^
^or ^ons^^^ring his (...); this Committee found nothing material for inflicting
such a censure upon him, and therefore gave their advice that he should be
reponed, which was done; but since that time, a Synod in Fife will have him
again laid aside upon the former Indictment, telling him, that the private
judgment or advice of a particular Commit, did not oblige them, seeing the
Assembly made no Act in his favor. `Again, it is said, that they will not
depose them simply for their judgment about the Government of the Church, that
is, for this thing only; but withal, it implies, that this may be one reason,
and we see it is often made a principal one, for they lay such stress upon it,
that for this cause they set Spies on persons actions, and search out all that
can be said to render any odious, who differ from them in this matter. It is
evident, that persons principles, together with the places which they held, has
been the great motive of prosecuting them hitherto; but what is most remarkable
is, that its said they will not urge Reordination upon them, for not to urge a
thing, certainly imports this much, That they may require it, tho for grave and
weighty reasons they will also dispense with it. It was advisedly done to make
this only a Declaration of the Moderator, for it would not probably have passed
into an Act; for tho there be none other in the World, who call in question the
lawfulness and validity of Episcopal Ordination (Boxter himself believed it so
necessary, that he would needs be ordained by a Bishop (if I remember aright
'twas Bishop Hall) after he had received the Ordination of Presbyters) yet the
most of them at present, carry things so high, as to deny the lawfulness of it,
and there are some instances of Reordination in the former times of
Presbytery; so little do they regard the Ordination and Ministerial Authority
of Episcopal men, that it has been declared frequently in their Sermons, that
all the time of Episcopacy, people have been without a Ministry, and without
Sacraments. Some two or three years ago, there was one who preached up this
Doctrine so warmly, in and about the Lead-Mines of Hopton, that, as was
reported, he prevailed with many to suffer themselves to be Rebaptized, and
Re-married, and had twelve pence from each of them for so doing. And one Mr.
Cassine in Fife, when he was admitting Elders in the Kirk of Flisk, caused them
before the Congregation, to renounce their Baptism, and all the Sacraments and
Ordinances, which they had received from Curates, as he called Episcopal
Ministers by way of contempt. This is so true, that the Heritors and
Parishioners of Abdie, did upon this very head protest against Mr. Cassine, his
coming amongst them; but notwithstanding this, the Presbytery of Couper
admitted him, so that it seems they have not looked upon that as any fault or
error.

Now what juggling and hypocrisy is it? how do they play at fast, and loose
with us, when sometime they tell us, that they will make no difference on the
accounts of men's judgments, and sentiments, about matters of Government; and
yet never check or censure such gross and wild extravagancies; nay, so far from
it, as to encourage such as are guilty of them, and to be forward to settle
them in Churches, while others more moderate are slighted and neglected: As Mr.
Alexander Orrok, who (as all that know him say) has more sense and learning
than the most of them; and yet, for all the vacancies, they have never bestowed
one Church upon him. And they joined with Mr. Rymer, to keep him out of St.
Andrews, to which he had a Call, from the Presbyterian party there, and where
he himself desired to be: And all this, because he is somewhat moderate, as to
the distinguishing principles, and entertains some favorable sentiments of
many of the Episcopal Clergy. And as they do not encourage their own, unless
they be rigid and severe about their model of Government, and Discipline; so
they give all discouragement to such as have served under Episcopacy, but are
willing to submit to Presbytery, and to live peaceably with them, Mr. William
Hamilton, offered himself with such submission, that they had no shadow of
excuse, for refusing to admit him into their Communion; but they deny him all
other kindness and favor, they neither offer to repone him to either of the
Churches out of which he was rabled, nor do they encourage any Call to any
other; for they have so concerted it among themselves, as that none shall
invite him to Preach, or any wise employ him. He had lately an invitation to
serve the Cure at Curry, in the absence of another Mr. Hamilton, who is settled
Minister there; at first the Presbytery of Edinburgh agreed to it, but
afterward Mr. Hugh Kemedy revoked the order, and dashed it out of the minuits
of the Presbytery with his own hand. He had also another Call to the Kirk and
Parish of Lauder, subscribed by the Magistrates of the Town, and the most of
the Heritors and Parishoners; which when he presented to the Presbytery they
rejected it, and preferred another made by five Weavers. We have another late
instance of their want of moderation toward these, who differ from them, in
point of Church Government, which if it do not expressly contradict the
abovementioned Declaration of the Moderator of the Assembly: Yet, it clearly
shows, that the inferior Judicatures of Synods and Presbyters are not of
that mind, nor, resolved to bind themselves up to these measures. Mr. John
Miller a Licentia^e under Episcopacy, who lived with that Reverend and good man
Mr. Laurence Charters, and sometimes officiated for him, when he was under any
bodily indisposition. This person was no ways scandalous, nor had he maleversed
in any manner, nor was any crime or fault objected to him; yet the Presbytery
of Hadington did prohibit him to Preach any more within their bounds. And tho
he has at diverse times, addressed to them for a License to Preach, at such
times only, when Mr. Charters sickness and infirmity disabled him for that
exercise: Nevertheless, they peremptorly refused it, and do continue the former
restraint, merely because after conference, they do find him not such a (...)
Presbyterian as themselves, as is manifest from the final (...), which he had
from the Moderator of the Presbytery in Present^a, which was as follows.

For as much as your answer is the same that it was the last day, and after
further deliberation, you seem to be more confirmed in it, and are not clear
simply to say, that you wish the conti^ance of the present Church Government,
and to declare your approbation of it, and your preference of it to all others,
we do think fit to continue the restraint formerly laid upon you by the
Presbytery.

Whilst I am showing my own omissions, I may be excused if I give an account of
an omission of the Clerk or Recorder of the Assembly: Who had forgot to set
down an Act said to be made by them, either amongst the Printed Acts, or in the
List of the unprinted ones; and I confess, for his excuse that I cannot meet
with any person, who remembers to have heard it once mentioned in the Assembly:
So that we owe the knowledge thereof, only to the Presbytery of Dalkeith, who
lately declared it, upon this occasion.

They sent one or two of their number sometime ago, to the Parish of Inverask,
which lies within four Miles of Edinburgh; to entreat them to choose a
Minister; and because this people unanimously showed their aversion to a
Presbyterian (for of three or four thousand in that Parish, there are only some
twenty, or thirty that incline to that party) therefore there was a promise
made them, that if they made choice of any good or pious man, who would submit
to the Civil Government, he should be accepted of, whether he were a
Presbyterian or Episcopal; whether the person who promised this, spoke
ingenuously his own sentiments, or the mind of his brethren; whether it was
said only to dispose the people to be more favorably inclined toward the
Presbytery of Dalkeith, or because they saw it impossible to to get their
consent to a Presbyterian Minister, I shall not enquire.

But the Parish laid hold on this promise, and accordingly did commissionate
some of their number to wait upon the Presbytery of Dalkeith, with a List of
seven or eight persons, Episcopal Ministers, who had submitted to the Civil
Government, and to entreat their allowance, for their Preaching to them,
according to the promise which was made that such of them as pleased the Parish
best might be called to be their, Ministers. When this was first proposed, the
Moderator huffed and grew angry, and asked, if they came to abuse and reproach
the brethren? The Gentlemen replied, they designed not to abuse any; that what
they alleged was true, and they were ready to prove it, or they would appeal
to the persons themselves, who had said it. Then the Moderator told them, That
if any Brother had said or promised so, he had done it rashly of his own head,
and would receive a Reprimand from the Presbytery for it, that the Presbytery
could allow of no such thing for there was an act of the, Assembly forbiding
Episcopal Incumbents to preach out of their own Churches, or people to give
them a call. So under the shadow of this invisible Act, and, in all appearance,
of their own devising, they shifted the promise made to the Parish of Inverask.
It was said at that time, that there was no such Act in all the History of the
Assembly: To which it was replied, that if it was not Printed, it would be
Printed very shortly, which I have done, lest the honest man should fail in his
word.

Before I leave their Acts, it will be fit to take notice of the reasons of An
Act, which was mentioned in the Historical Relation of the Assembly viz. An Act
which prohibiteth private use and Administration of the Sacraments, on any
account whatsoever. The Reasons of this Act are worthy to be remarked.

The first of them is, That by the Authority of this Church, in her former
Assemblies, the private use of them has been condemned: Which brings to my
remembrance the Character, that the Reverend and Pious Bishop Leighton, was
wont to give of the Presbyterians, viz. That they made themselves the Standard
of opinions and practices, and never looked either abroad into the world, to
see what others were doing, nor yet back into the former times, to observe what
might be warranted or recommended by Antiquity; and as by this means, they
become singular in many things, so in the point in hand, they differ from all
other Churches in the World. All the Reformed Churches abroad allow the use of
the Lords Supper to sick and dying persons, which they have peremptorily
prohibited; as there was nothing more ordinary in the Primitive times, which
might be made appear from several instances.

It was from this practice, that it received the name of Viaticum; and seeing
our Blessed Lord did institute this Holy Sacrament, for the commemorating his
death, and for the conveying the blessed effects of it, to strengthen our faith
and hope, and to assure us of the pardon of our Sins, and of a victory over
Death and Hell, through our Lord Jesus Christ: It may be truly thought great
Cruelty, to deny this sensible consort to sick and dying persons; because they
stand most in need of it; for then it is they have the deepest sense of their
sins, and the greatest fears of Death and its consequences. The other reason
given by them for this prohibition, is that by allowing the private use of the
Sacraments in pretended cases of necessity; the superstitious opinion is
nourished, that they are necessary to Salvation, not only as commanded duties;
but as means without which Salvation cannot be contained. Therefore the
Assembly discharges the Administration of the Lords Supper to sick Persons in
their Houses, and all other use of the same, except in the public Assemblies
of the Church; and also do discharge the Administration of Baptism in private;
that is, in any place, or at any time, when the Congregation is not orderly
called together, to wait on the dispensing of the Word. In which we may take
notice of these particulars. First, that they deny the comfort and benefit of
Christ's own Ordinances to some, because others entertain wrong notions of
them, which may be more safely removed by public and private instruction.
Secondly that they restrain the use of Christ's Ordinances, to times and places
without any Divine warrant, for the same; And yet Mr. Rule has laid it down as
a principal (Representation of the Presbyterian Government, page 2.) That
Christ as head of the Church has given forth Laws, by which the affairs of the
Church should be managed; and has not left any nomothetick power in the Church
to make Laws, for her self; her work being to declare and ex^^ute the Laws of
Christ: Thirdly that they have no regard to what our Lord says, Math. 18. 20.
Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there will I be amongst
them; otherwise they would not prohibit the private Administration of the
Sacraments in cases of necessity and great convenience; in which they use only
to be desired; and even then they were never wont to be administered, but in the
presence of a greater number than that our Savior speaks of. Fourthly, this
Act of theirs about Baptism proceeds from a mistake of Math. 28. 19: as if
thereby Teaching or Preaching, were appointed to go before Baptizing; whereas
the word in the Original signifies not to Preach; but to make Disciples; and if
their sense were true, none ought to be Baptized, but such as were first
taught; and consequently Infants ought not to be Baptized at all, because
incapable of being taught. Fifthly we may gather hence, their wrong notion of
P^eaching and dispensing the Word, as they call it: For as Baptism was never
used to be Administered, even in private, among us in Scotland, without the
Word, that is, without some previous discourse of the nature of the Sacrament,
of the Covenant of Grace, of our Redemption through Jesus Christ, and other
points per^inent to that occasion, so their prohibiting the Administration of
Baptism, without the Dispensing of the Word, (which is done with respect to the
practice of the Episcopal Clergy) clearly shows, that they do not think the
Gospel is preached, or the Word dispensed, but when one takes a Text, divides
it, raises Doctrines and Uses from it, and runs (...) into Firstlys, Secondlys,
and Thirdlys, until they come to Twelf^hly and Twentiethly beloved. Finally tho
the stream of this Act runs (...) as if the Sacraments could not in any case be
lawfully or duly Administered in private, yet in the conclusion it is said that
this be carefully observed, when and wherever, the Lord gives his people
peace, liberty, and opportunity for their public Assemblies; which is added,
to prevent the casting their own practices in their Teeth, and to justify
their private Administrations, if they shall happen to be reduced to the state,
in which they were before this Revolution; for they are pretty dextrous at
binding and loosing themselves. And it is further to be observed, that when
they want peace and liberty, it is happier for their Children; for then they
may have the benefit of Baptism in any place and at any time; whereas now they
suffer them to die without it, unless they can wait their leisure in the
public Assemblies, which falls out but once a week, except it be in some
Cities.

I must not let pass, how they have recorded the dissolving of the Assembly,
and the appointing of another. As was said in the former relation, both these
were done by the Commissioner in the Kings name, to which at the time they
submitted; but yet they intended so to record it, as if the same had been done
by the simple Authority of the Assembly it self; for they had it thus. This
Assembly thought fit to dissolve it self, and to call another; which when it
was read, the Commissioner found fault with it, and desired, that it might be
said, that he in his Majesty's name had done it, to whom the Moderator replied,
Your Grace needs not be offended; these things are but words, and we will not
stand upon them: But the Commissioner pressing a change of the first form; they
have at last worded it thus. This Assembly being dissolved, and the next
general Assembly appointed to be held at Edinburgh the first day of November
next to come, the Members were dismissed with Prayer, neither did this please
the Commissioner, but they would not make any express mention of the Kings
Authority or of the Commissioner representing him, lest it should prove an ill
president. They were careful to leave nothing upon Record, that might make
against the Sovereign Supremacy, which they claim.

This being all that is needful to be added to the former Relation of the
General Assembly, I therefore proceed to give an Account of what has passed
since, and to show the effects and consequences of the measures laid down in
the Assembly for the establishing and securing the Presbyterian Government.

To keep the order of Time; the first thing to be taken notice of, is the Synod
of Lothian and Twedal, which sat down at Edinburgh on Tuesday the second of
December, Mr. Areskin, who preached in the Trone Church of Edinburgh, was
chosen Moderator of it; in that Synod there was an early proof, that either
moderation was not seriously recommended by the Assembly, to the particular
Synods and Presbyteries, or that they had no disposition to obey: For Mr.
Alexander Heriot Minister of Dalkeith, being referred to this Synod by the
general Assembly, they were so far from redressing him, that instead of
relaxing him from the sentence of suspension, pronounced by the Presbytery of
Dalkeith; they added to it the Sentence of Deposition and deprivation. They
concluded the affair without calling upon him, or hearing his defenses, and his
first appearance was to hear himself deposed after the formality of reading his
Libel or Indictment. Mr. Heriot was much surprised with this method and manner
of proceeding, and complained of it: He told them, there was nothing more
unjust than to condemn a man unheard, to let his Parties and Enemies (meaning
the Presbytery of Dalkeith, and particularly Mr. Calderwood there) sit his
Judges, and to refuse him the liberty of vindicating himself, and of clearing
his innocence; he showed them, that the Libel or Indictment, upon which they
were going to pronounce Sentence, differed from that which was given to
himself, which was not fair dealing; that a double of the particulars, which
were added, should have been delivered to him, and time allowed him to answer
them; but all these things availed nothing; for they were resolved to have him
out per fas and nefas: but having told them, that as the only gross thing laid
to his charge was the dancing about Bonfires, October, 14 th. 1688. So it was
evident, that he was charged with this falsely and maliciously; and that if any
had sworn it, they were perjured; for the 14 th. of October in the Year 1688,
happned to be a Lords Day, on which there never were any Bonfires, upon the
hearing of this the Synod was surprised, and kept silence for a while, and
sta^ed one upon another in the face; but at last Mr. Areskin the Moderator
answered, that the thing had been proven by deposition of witness; that if
there was any error or mistake, it lay at the witnesses door, and if they had
Sworn falsely, let them, said he, look to that, we are not to blame for it; you
may seek reparation from them: But in the me^n time they refused to tell him,
who the witnesses were, that he might prosecute them; Yet the starting of this
made them delay the depriving him at that time, until they should try, whether
he would willingly dimit his charge; and for that end they appointed some of
their number, both Laics and Ministers, to wait upon him and confer with him.
They told him that the Church of Dalkeith was a conspicuous place, and the
Presbytery seat; and therefore they could not suffer it to be in the possession
of one of his Circumstances, that is, of one who had served under Episcopacy;
but if he would dimit, they would pass from the libel and recommend him to some
other vacant Church, which he peremptorily refused, because he thought a
voluntary dimission seemed to infer an acknowledgement of the guilt; therefore
the next day they overcame all difficulties, and formally deposed him, thereby
showing, that they would commit the greatest injustice, and betray the g^ossest
partiality, rather than not obtain what they would be at. And therefore in
respect to Justice and Equity, all the Members of that Synod, who consented to
the Sentence of Deposition against Mr. Heriot, o^ght to be exauctorated and
declared for ever incapable, and ought to have some Stigma of Infamy fixed upon
them. This one instance might make the whole party bl^sh, if they were capable
of blushing at any thing: But as the Scots Proverb is, Shame is passed the shed
of their hair.

Mr. Heriot being so much injured, by this Synod; appealed from it, to the
first Lawful G^neral Assembly, and in the mean time to Their Majesty's
Protection, for Justice and relief, and in pursuit of this appeal, he Addressed
to the Lords of the Privy Council, entreating their Lordships to right him, and
(...) all further proc^dure against him, as appears from the Information
anne^ed to the Historical Relation of the General Assembly; but the Council
were unwilling to meddle with the Kirk, for fear of clashing together; to
examine what they had done, and to oblige them to alter or revoke the sentence
was to assume the Supremacy abolished in Parliament, which was not rashly to be
attempted; wherefore all that the Council did for him, was to pass an Act for
delivering up the Depositions of the witnesses, and for recognizing the affair
in the next Synod; neither of which has yet been done: Both the witnesses names
and their Depositions are still concealed and kept up from Mr. Heriot. And as
if he had been justly and legally deposed, they have proceeded to plant
another, in the Church of Dalkeith, notwithstanding both he himself, and almost
all the Heritors and Parishoners protested against it. Some of the Heriters and
Parishoners in name of the rest, went to the Presbytery, and desired them to
consider, that Mr. Heriot's affair was still depending, and his Appeal not
discussed, so that they could not admit of another Minister, and as they
thought themselves obliged to own Mr. Heriot, as their Lawful Pastor, whom they
knew to be innocent and greatly injured; so they objected against Mr. Mean (so
the old Man is called, whom they have put into the Church of Dalkeith) and
showed that he had not the call and consent of the people; for they had almost
all of them declared against him; and to prove this, they produced a Paper
under their hand to this purpose. After this they went to Mr. Mean himself, and
repeated the same to him, who answered, that their prejudice against him was
groundless, that he was misrepresented as a very severe and rigid man, but he
would prove otherwise; for such as came and heard him, should be welcome, and
they who did withdraw should be let alone, and have their Liberty to go whither
they pleased: So to facilitate his entry, he gave smooth words, and dissembled
both his own temper, and the Spirit and Genius of his party. But tho his
discourse showed, that he desired to be settled at Dalkeith, upon any terms and
conditions, because it was a good and convenient Living, yet at his admission,
he professed publicly, a great reluctance and aversion to it, and that it was
mere constraint that made him accept of the Charge. This was so gross, that
several who were present, could not hear it with patience, but at the very time
exclaimed, and charged him with Impudence, Hypocrisy, and mocking of God; for
it was well known, that he had for a long time a great desire to that place,
and himself knew, that he got it against the Will and Inclinations of the
people (a very few excepted). If this be not Intrusion, I know not what may be
called so.

The next thing which falls under our consideration, is the observation of the
Fast, appointed by the Assembly; the Act and Reasons for this, which was
enjoined to be read by all the Ministers in Kirks and Meeting Houses, and the
Civil Sanction enforcing it, were published with the Historical Relation of the
General Assembly. This Fast was long and much discoursed of before the day of
keeping it. They who smell Political Designs, in all the Presbyterian Fasts,
said, That the intent of it was not to pay Devotion to God, or to conciliate
his favor, by a general Humiliation, throughout the Kingdom, as was pretended,
but that it was a Contrivance to ruin the Interest of the Episcopal Clergy,
that those who should observe it, might be looked upon as men of no Conscience,
and that whosoever should slight it, might become obnoxious to the censure of
the Government. A Gentleman told me, that some time before the sitting of the
Assembly, he and some others were pleading for the Minister of that Parish,
whom they designed to turn out, and that when the Presbyterian Ministers, and
Lay Elders (among whom there was a present Lord of Session) were deliberating
what answer to give, he overheard one say, We may grant the Gentlemen their
request at this time, for the Assembly is to sit shortly, in which there will
be an Act made, which will turn out all the Curates very easily. The Gentleman,
at the time, could not understand of what nature that would be, but afterward,
when the Fast was enjoined, he concluded, that was it which was designed to
give so severe and universal a blow to the Episcopal Clergy. It is certain,
that something of this nature was designed from the beginning, for as they were
resolved not to admit any Episcopal Minister into Communion without some
acknowledgment; so understanding, that enjoining every one to do Penance in
particular, for his defection from the Covenant, and complying with Prelacy,
would be obstructed, therefore they thought a general Humiliation would be a
fitter expedient, which was Equivalent upon the matter. Whosoever had read and
considered Mr. Rule's Representation of Presbyterian Government, might have
foreseen this, for in his answer to that objection (which is the seventh) That
if Presbyterians got power, they would force all to make public Repentance who
have owned Bishops, taken the Test, or other Oaths which they dislike. He
says, our principle is, That public Scandals ought to be publicly rebuked,
yet there are Cases, in which the strictness of Discipline, in this matter,
may, and must be relaxed: As first, When the matter of offense is controverted,
and the sinful practice is from the misinformation of the Conscience. And
secondly, When the fault is Universal, and either the w^ole, or the greater
part of the Church is Guilty, and so he concludes, that a general Humiliation
of the whole Church, may be instead of particular application of Censures.

The Presbyterians gave out, that this Fast was a Reconciling thing, and that
whosoever duly observed it, would be taken in upon very easi^ terms; but the
Episcopal Clergy were mightily offended with it, and nothing gravelled them
more than the Civil Sanction, for they would not have much regarded the Act of
the Assembly, if that had not been added to it, but seeing that was added, they
were puzzled how to excuse themselves from a contempt of the Civil Government,
if they did not keep the Fast, as they found it difficult to keep up their
Reputation, among the people, with the observation of it, for the people were
no less disgusted with it than the Clergy, looking upon it as an Unchristian
Act, to impose such a task upon the Ministers of the Episcopal Persuasion; and
on all occasions they plainly said, that none but ^ordid Compliers would
observe it, for, in truth, the Presbyterian Fasts are not so taking now, as
they were formerly in the reign of the Covenant, for it is observed, that
Mountebanks never thrive so well the second time they set up, in any place, as
the first.

This time there were several Papers emitted, containing reasons why the
Episcopal Clergy would not observe that Fast, because they could not own the
Authority of the Assembly that enjoined it, as a Lawful Representative of this
Church; that by the Laws of God and the Church, the Ministers of the
Presbyterian Persuasion had no right to impose Commands upon those of the
Episcopal, seeing the essential Constitution of their Government, which is
Parity, gives them no Jurisdiction over the Brethren; and consequently, their
Acts cannot bind them without their Consent, which cannot be p^etended to here,
seeing they had no Delegates, or Representatives in the Assembly. It was again
argued, that the Reasons of the Fast were very ambiguous, and not easily
understood; that if by the general Defection, and taking of unlawful Oaths,
they meant the compliance with Prelac^, and swearing Allegiance, and the Test,
the Episcopal Clergy could not profess Repentance and Humiliation for these,
without a horrid Profanation of the Name of God, while in their Consciences
they were not convinced of the unlawfulness of these Compliances, and that it
showed the little regard the Presbyterians had for the Sacred Offices of
Religion, to enjoin their observance of this, when they knew what their
Judgment and Sentiments were, as to these things. But amongst all the papers
which came abroad on that occasion, there was none more diverting than the
Burlesque Poem on the Fast, which one witily called the Present State of
Scotland, for it not only gave a lively Picture of the Presbyterian party, but
also it wittily represented the Humors and Characters of the several parties
within the Kingdom, and of many particular persons, so that even those
concerned, thought their Neighbors part was well done; however, displeased
they might be with their own.

When the time of observing the Fast drew near, the Clergy of the Diocese of
Aberdeen, took occasion to communicate their thoughts together, and found
themselves obliged, both in Conscience and Reputation, not to observe it: Those
of Angus, Perth, and some other places, followed their Measure;, so that it was
kept by very few in the Northern parts. The Episcopal Clergy in the South, had
not such opportunity of meeting, and therefore were not so unanimous, either in
their Sentiments or Practices. Some few made no scruple, either of keeping the
Fast, or of reading the Assemblie's Reasons for it. Some others kept the Fast,
but would not read the Paper appointed by the General Assembly, and what
persuaded them to this, was a Report that the Court had given Assurance, that
they who observed the Day should not suffer, tho they had no regard either to
the Authority or Reasons, of the General Assembly. And to make this the more
probable, there was a Paper handed about amongst them, concerted and agreed to
(as was said) at London, by some Bishops and others there, to be read instead
of that appointed by the Assembly; I shall set it down, ^ut I know none who
made use of it.

A Copy of a Paper, appointed to be read instead of that set forth by the
Assembly about the Fast.
FOrasmuch as a Fast is appointed by Their Majesty's most H^nourable Privy
Council, to be observed throughout this Kingdom, upon the second Thurs^ay of
January next, and the great and many crying Sins of this Nation, and especially
the sad D^solation of this poor Church, and the common want of Zeal, which
appears in this Land, for the Truth and Interest of the Gospel; together, with
the great Intestine Divisions and Commotions among us, that at once shake both
our Religion and the Civil Government, do call aloud to all ranks and degrees
of people, seriously to humble themselves before Almighty God, and to
supplicate his Divine Majesty, that in the midst of that Wrath, which this
Nation deserves, he may remember Mercy, that he may heal the Breaches that are
made in the Walls of his Sion, and pour out the Spirit of Meekness, Charity and
Moderation, upon all men, particularly upon these that serve at his Altar. And
finally, That he may graciously preserve the Sacred Persons of King William and
Queen Mary, our Dread Sovereigns, and prosper them in the Defending their
Kingdoms from the Common Enemy, that all their Subjects may had a quiet and
peaceable life under them, in all Godliness and H^nesty: Therefore you of this
Parish, hereby are earnestly Exhorted to draw near to God, in this his House,
upon the foresaid Thursday, being the next ensuing, and to come with a Holy and
Religious preparation of Soul and Bedy, for offering up the Sacrifices of
broken and contrite Hearts and Spirits, to the Father of Mercies, that so his
Judgments, that are so hanging over our Heads, may be diverted, and by the
pious Groans and Interc^^^ions of our humbled Souls, he may, through the
Mediation of his only Son, our Redeemer, be prevailed with yet, to make us a
blessed people, in the happy continuance of our Protestant Religion, in
settling his Church so amongst us, as may most tend for the Glory of his Name,
and for advancing all the great Ends of our most Holy Faith. And lastly, in
establishing Peace and Prosperity, under our most Gracious Sovereigns, so as
both we, and our Posterity after us, may reap the comfortable fruits of them.

Some being persuaded that there were but too many Reasons for a Fast, and
considering too, that there were particular Reasons given for this Fast, by the
Assembly, who enjoined it, which were in every bodies hands, therefore they
thought themselves obliged, not only to observe a Fast, but also to take notice
of these Reasons, and so they read the Assemblies Paper, and Commented upon it,
and by an excess of Charity, made the Assembly speak what they ought to have
done, rather than what they actually did. The Ministers of East Lothian, and, I
suppose, some from the Mers, met at Haddington, the Week before the Fast, to
take joint measures for the observation of it: It was soon agreed to, That they
could neither in Reputation nor Conscience observe it, as it was enjoined by
the Assembly, and therefore it was first resolved to do it with a Protestation;
accordingly the following Protestation was Composed, which each of them was to
take a Copy of, and to read it from the Pulpit, both on Sunday, at the
Intimation of the Fast, and on Thursday, the Eighth of January, which was the
day appointed.

A Copy of a Protestation, which some Ministers offered to make, at the
Intimation of the Fast, that was kept upon the 8th. of January 91. if some of
their Brethren of the Presbytery, where they have their Residence, would have
joined with them in it.
WHereas Their Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, by their Act and
Proclamation, of the date November 21 -- 90, has ratified and approven an Act
of the General Assembly, of the date November 12. that same year, appointing a
Solemn National Fast and Humiliation to be observed in all the Churches and
Meeting Houses within this Kingdom, the 2d. Thursday of this Instant. We
declare, That we judge our selves obliged to give obedience to the foresaid Act
of Council, in so far as that is consistent with good Conscience, and the Duty
we owe to God and his Truth; and that we are most desirous to join with all
others within this Nation, in the public and solemn Confession of our Sins,
deprecating the Wrath of God, and supplicating for his Mercy, and in all the
other Pious and Religious Exercises, proper for that Day of Humiliation and
Fasting. But being that there are several Causes and Reasons expressed and
specified in the said Act of the General Assembly, which do manifestly
contradict our Principles and Opinions, and some things affirmed and asserted,
irreconcilable to Truth and Charity, and other Christian Duties; and lest our
observance of that Fast, should be Interpreted the Homologating of these, or a
sordid or deceitful Compliance against our Consciences, we judge ourselves
bound to declare, as hereby we do declare, That we intimate and publish this
Fast, and will observe it, for these Reasons and Causes only that are
consistent with our Opinions, which we have owned by Solemn Oaths, and with the
Charity, and other Duties, incumbent on us, by the Laws of the Gospel; and do
renounce all Grounds, Reasons and Causes, contrary unto, or inconsistent
therewith: And in particular, We do protest

1. That by keeping of this Fast, we do not own or acknowledge, the Power and
Authority that the foresaid Assembly does arrogate over us, in so far as that
is contrary to the Word of God, and never heard of in the Christian Church
before this time, to wit, That Presbyters should have a power of Government and
Jurisdiction over other Presbyters, who are of the same Office and Degree.

2. We do protest, that we do not approve of these Words, That the Supremacy
was advanced in such a way, and to such a height, as never any Christian Church
acknowledged, being we know, and are ready to prove, that they are false, and
being, tho the Supremacy is taken away by the Law, as unsuitable to the present
circumstances of affairs; yet it is not declared a sinful Prerogative of the
Crown, neither do we esteem it as such.

3. We do protest, That we do not own or assent unto that Reason of the Fast,
That the Government of the Church was altered, and Prelucy, which has always
been grievous to this Nation, introduced without the Churches consent, and
contrary to the standing Acts of our National Assemblies, etc. being we
certainly know, that Episcopacy was never more grievous to the Nation than
Presbytery, and that it was settled with the Churches consent, in free General
Assemblies, after the Reformation, and was afterward received and submitted to,
by the Church, in free Meetings and Assemblies: And, in particular, we do
assert, That the Assembly held at Glasgow 1610. which established and settled
Episcopacy, was as lawfully Convocated, and of as undoubted Authority, as the
Assembly held at Glasgow 1638. which turned it out; as also that Episcopacy was
restored by a lawful Parliament, An. 1661. and approved by the subsequent
actings of the Church, in so far as that was necessary, in referenc^ to a
Government, formerly settled by Acts of Parliament, and Assemblies of more
unquestionable Authority, than any that had Abolished the same.

4. We do protest, that we do not approve of these Words, That Prelacy was
introduced contrary to the standing Acts of our National Assemblies, being it
does imply, that the King and Parliament cannon make any Law, anent the
External Government and Polity of the Church, if contrary to any Act of a
General Assembly; which is to give an Absolute and Uncontrollable power to
Church men, and is inconsistent with the undoubted Right and Power the State
has for reforming Abuses in the Administration of Church Government and
Discipline, and disposing of that as may best serve the ends of Religion, and
the peace of the Kingdom.

5. We do protest, that we do not approve of these Words: An^ yet,
nevertheless, of the then standing Ministry of Scotland, many ^did suddenly and
readily comply with that alteration of the Government, some out of Pride and
Covetousness, or Men pleasing, some through Infirmity and Weakness, or fear of
Man, and want of Courage and Zeal for God, many faithful Ministers were
thereupon cast out, and many insufficient and scandalous thrust into in their
Charges, etc. for these do necessarily imply the Divine Right of Presbyterian
Government, that ^no Humane Authority can alter it, and that submission unto,
or compliance with any other is sinful; and that submission to Episcopacy
restored, An. 1662. did proceed from vicious Causes; as also they do imply an
uncharitable Censure of many faithful Ministers, as Men pleasers, wanting
Courage and Zeal for God, and the like, which we think very opposite to the
temper and disposition wherewith the Duties of Fasting and Humiliation should
be performed.

6. We do protest that we do not approve of these Words, That there has been
under the late Prelacy a great decay of Piety, so that it was enough to make a
man be Nick named a Phanatick, if he did not run to the same excess of Riot
with others; for tho we do grant there has been much Impiety under the late
Prelacy, and do mourn for it, yet we do affirm, That it abounded as much under
Presbytery, and it is not agreeable to the sincerity of our Confessions, on a
Day of Solemn Humiliation, or at any time, to be partial in the Rehearsal of
our Sins, or to distinguish our selves from others, as if we were more
Righteous, and to confine Religion and Godliness to a Party.

7. We do protest, that we do not approve of that Reason of the Fast, That the
Nation has been guilty of breaking their Oaths, and imposing and taking
ungodly and unlawful Oaths and Bonds, etc. in so far as these may signify the
Oaths of Allegiance, Supremacy, and the Test, which Oaths, as we Swore in
Judgment, Righteousness, and Truth, so we do still acknowledge the equity and
obligation of them.

8. We cannot approve of that Reason of the Fast, The wonted Care and Religious
Sanctifying of the Lords Day is gone, etc. And of that Petition we are required
to send up unto God, that the preaching of the Word, and dispencing of the
Sacraments, may be accompanied with the wonted presence, power, and blessing of
the Spirit of the Lord: in so far as they may imply, that the power of the Word
and Sacraments is restrained and true Godliness decayed under Episcopacy, and
that they abounded under Presbytery; which is to make the Life of Religion
depend upon Opinions and outward Forms of Government, or to have the persons of
men in admiration, and favors of that Spiritual and pha^isaical pride, which
will render all our solemn humiliations hateful to God.

9. We do protest, that these words, We have sinned notwithstanding of Promises
and solemn Vowing and Covenanting with God to the contrary, are not understood
by us with any reference to the Solemn League and Covenant, which some do
apprehend to be the meaning of the General Assembly.

All these and the like Reasons and Causes of the Fast, tho not here expressed,
that are inconsistent with our declared opinions are renounced and disowned by
us. And we do protest, that our observance of this Fast shall not be
interpreted as the approving and homologating any of these; And we do desire
and entreat all that are of the same Principles with us, as they will avoid the
Sin of Hypocrisy and mocking of God, and would be accepted of him, that they
carefully separate betwixt these grounds and reasons of the Fast, that are
agreeable to, and these that are contrary to their duty and good Conscience,
and that they join with us in this our Protestation, openly owning and
declaring their Judgment anent the same: We do also earnestly exhort all, in
the love and fear of God, that laying aside all prejudices, malice,
uncharitableness, and indiscreet and irregular zeal, lying, and slandering;
that they may unite together in confessing the Sins they are guilty of; and
humble themselves in the sight of God, for their Sins, and the Sins of their
Fore fathers, without any partial respect to the opinion, that has occasioned
some divisions and differences in present and former times; and that they send
up their fervent prayers to Almighty God, that he would be pleased to bestow,
of his Grace and Spirit upon all Orders and Ranks of People, that they may live
as becomes the Gospel, and show forth the praises of him, who has called them
from darkness to his mavelous light; and in particular that they would pray,
that it may please our most merciful Father, to inspire all the Members of his
Church, with the meek and loving Spirit of our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, and that every one may seek after these things that make for peace, and
whereby they may edify one another; that there may be a mutual forbearance of
one another, as to the opinions anent the Government of the Church, which has
occasioned so much disquiet and disorder to this Church and Kingdom; and that
none be forced or tempted to declare or do against their Consciences, and that
amidst the differences of opinions, there may be a cheerful concurrence, in all
things that have a respect unto the glory of God, and the advancement of true
Godliness.

Finally we do exhort all (as we our selves do resolve by Divine Assistance)
religiously and devoutly to observe the Fast for all these ends and purposes,
and in the manner specified in the Act of the General Assembly, in so far as
that is consistent with this our Protestation, and is allowable by the Laws of
the Gospel.

But upon second thoughts, it was concluded, that the Protestation might give
greater offense than the total neglect of the Fast, and so at last it was
agreed, that none should observe the Fast in any wise. But one Mr. D. who was
not present, being advised, that it was safest to make some observation of it,
that he might not be singular, he prevailed with the Minister of Haddington,
and one or two more, to break off from that general resolution, and to keep the
Fast with him.

In Edinburgh it was only observed by Mr. Wilkie in the Tolbooth, and Mr. Craig
in the Lady Yesters Church: But no man's Behavior in this affair was so worthy
to be remarked, as that of the Reverend Mr. Charters heretofore Professor of
Divinity in the College of Edinburgh, and at present Minister of Dirleton. All
who have any acquaintance with him, know that he is a person both of great
learning and piety, whose Charity prompted him to think all the good of every
one that can be reasonably conceived. He was convinced, that there were too
many reasons and causes, which called for fasting, mourning, and humiliation,
but as he well knew the practices of Presbyterians in former times, so it
seemed evident to him, that at this time they were endeavoring to carry on
their own Selfish ends under the color of Religion and had appointed this Fast
to be a snare, whereby the weak and ignorant might be drawn unawares to own and
acknowledge their false and narrow principles, and which might afford a fair
opportunity of inflicting Ecclesiastical Censures and other punishments upon
others who would not so sordidly desert their Principles, nor debase their
former Character and Profession. He had such an impression of this base
dealing, of the scandal and prejudice, which Religion suffered by it; and of
the danger, which threatened the best part of the Church, that he thought every
one obliged to testify against this Act of the Assembly, and to do all he
could to prevent the peoples being deceived. And because a bare forbearing a
Fast in his judgment was not a sufficient Remonstrance, (...) to be read the
Assembly's Act and Reasons, publicly in the Congregation, and afterward he
spoke to the people to this purpose.

Ye have heard the causes of the Fast, as they are represented by the General
Assembly; they have recommended it to Pastors and others to be serious and
sincere in the Confession and acknowledgment of their own and the Nations
transgresions, and to be earnest in the^r Supplications for such favors from
God, as the present condition and circumstances, in which this and other
Reformed Churches are, do call for. I hope after the hearing of so long a
Paper, you will have a little further patience, while I sincerely represent to
you somethings concerning the sins we are to confess, and the mercies for which
we are to supplicate. All who are wise and have a right sense of true Religion
and Christianity, cannot but see, that there has been a great defection
amongst us.

This defection has not been from the truth, or from the fundamental Articles
of the Christian Faith, but from the life of God and the power of Religion, and
from that temper and conversation, which the Gospel requires in us, so that I
doubt not but we and all good men will join with the Assembly, in acknowledging
the sins and defection of the Nation.

But whereas the Assembly seems to represent Episcopacy as a principal and
capital point of the defection, and as introductory into further degrees of
Corruption; I find my self obliged to declare my sense in this affair upon this
ocasion. I do not take my self to be bound to endeavor to justify the manner
of the introduction of Episcopacy into this Church An. 1662. nor the manner of
Election and nomination of persons to that Office, which was in use among us,
nor the legal Establishment, nor the Laws, by which it was established among
us, nor the conduct of those who were in Office; and I will not say but some
who were in the Office of Episcopacy and that complied with that Government,
might have been in some measure accessory to the corruptions, by their bad
example or Connivance, and neglect of the true Exercise of Discipline. But yet
I cannot think that the settling of an Imparity of the Officers of the Church,
is to be looked upon as a defection, or that it is a thing in it self unlawful,
or that it is of it self introductory of the abounding of wickedness and
scandals in the Church. This I may with the greatest confidence affirm, that
Religion never flourished more in the World, than it did when and where there
was an Imparity among the Officers of the Church And this I know, that some
famous Protestant Churches, do allow Episcopacy, and continue till this day
under that form of Government; and I am sure that most of the Wise, Pious, and
Learned men abroad, tho they live where the Government is not Episcopal, have
not such bad thoughts of it as our Brethren here have. And whereas they charge
many of the then standing Ministry with compliance with the alteration of the
Government. I do not see that the continuance of Pastors to serve God and the
Church under the late settlement, is to be looked upon as a defection, for
which they are to repent; diverse of them having continued to serve in the
Ministry, neither out of Pride, nor Covetousness, or Fear, or Weakness, or want
of Courage, but out of Conscience, and a fear to offend God, by refvsing their
service in that station, when there was no insuperable stop, or bar put in
their way, as they thought there then was not. And the like may be said of many
others, who entered afterward into the Pastoral Office, under the the late
Government. But notwithstanding of what we have said of this matter, we cannot
but acknowledge, that there has been a great defection among us. Men generally
have shaken off the Yo^e of Christ; and expressed none of that respect, which we
all owe to his Laws, and have abandoned themselves to their Lusts, and corrupt
inclinations, so that iniquities and Immoralities of all sorts have abounded,
and generally men of all ranks have corrupted their ways. Covetousness, Fraud,
Oppression, Injustice, Sensuality, Drunkenness, and diverse kinds of
uncleanness, Cursing, Swearing, Atheism, neglect of the worship of God, and
other Sins, besides these reckoned in this Paper have abounded. The Assembly
acknowledges, that there have been some disorders, among those of their
persuasion: Which, they say is matter of humiliation, such as, scandalous
divisions, injurious reflections against worthy men, and some dangerous
principles drunk in. They say, it should be lamented, that some of their way,
who in the main things did endeavor to maintain their Integrity, did not give
seasonable and necessary testimony, against the defections and evils of the
times, and did not keep a d^e distance from them. If they do mean hereby (and I
know not what else can be understood by it) that it is to be lamented, that
some of their way did not separate from such as complied with the Government,
but did join in worship with them: This will not appear to any others, besides
some of themselves, to be matter of Lamentation. It is rather matter of
Lamentation, that so many of them did behave themselves so schismati^ally, and
refused to join in worship on such slender grounds, with these who were not of
the same persuasion with them concerning the Government.

They seem to appropriate to those of their way, that they endeavo^^ed to keep
their integrity in the main things, and that they did own (...), and bear
witness against the co^rse of defection; but I know that not a few amongst
those who complied did endeavor to maintain the integrity of the main things,
and did own all the necessary and fundamental truths of the Gospel; and did
bear faithful witness against the course of the true and real defection from
Truth and Righteousness. They confess, as I understand it, that all of
whatsoever persuasion, generally do not receive Christ, nor imitate him, etc.
But,

They have passed over many sins of these of their way, which all other people
see, whereof some are almost proper to them; how many of them are Proud,
Fierce, Content^lous, Turbulent, Seditious and Ungovernable; many of them
presume to judge and censure, reproach, revile and traduce such as are not of
their way, tho Magistrates and Ministers. Not a few seem to place all Religion
in a zeal for their proper opinions, and in running separate courses from those
who are not of their persuasions; many of them are of a Factious, Schismatical
and uncharitable temper, and have by their bitter and indiscreet zeal, been
prompted to such inhumane, barbarous and cruel actions, which have been so much
the more scandalouss as being acted under color and pretense of Religion.
These and such like should be confessed ingennously, and mourned for: And O
that it might please God to make us all sensible how far we have declined from
that Spirit, and temper, and that behavior and Conversation, which the Gospel
requires in us, and to dispose us to reform and amend.

As to those things for which we are desired to pray, we have all reason
heartily to join with them. There is only one expression which I have observed,
in which I fear they mean, something for which I cannot join in Prayer with
them. The expression is, Tha^ all the Lords people may be of one mind in the
Lord; if they mean by it as they should do, that they may all agree in the
fundamentals of Religion, and may with one mind and one mouth glorify God, and
may live in Love, Peace and Concord together; and jointly pursue the attainment
of everlasting Life: It is a very fit Petition, and we are all earnestly to
pray for it. But if they mean, we are to pray that all may have the like
sentiments with themselves, about the Government of the Church, and may
consider Presbyterran Government to be of such concern and importance, as
themselves take it to be; I cannot join with them in it. That opinion being the
source of most of the distractions, which abound among us, and depriving them
who hold it, of what they owe to all, who hold the fundamentals of the
Christian Faith, and walk agreeable to the Laws of the Gospel. It incapacitates
them who hold it for performing all Offices of Love, to these, who are not of
their persuasion, and prompts them to behave themselves toward all such as
Enemies to God and Religion; it makes them look with an evil eye upon these
Protestant Churches, which have not such a model of Government, and begets in
them, a neglect, dislike, and aversion from these Churches.

I use not to speak so much of these things in such an auditory, nor had I now
spoken of them, if we had been so discreetly dealt with as not to be driven to
it. This was said on Sunday. On Thursday, which was the Fast day, he added as
follows,

This day is set a part for Fasting, and humbling our selves under the Sense of
our Sins, and the Sins of the Church, and Nation, of which we are Members, and
to deprecate the wrath and heavy judgments, which our sins deserve, and to beg
mercy from God, etc. And indeed it is evident that we are all highly guilty
before God, and have grievously provoked him to wrath, and indignation against
us; we have disobeyed and despised the Gospel, and almost Universally under the
Profession of the Christian Religion, have lived as Heathens; and whereas the
Gospel teaches us to live Righteously, Godlily and Soberly; Unrighteousness,
Ungodliness, Uncharitableness, and Intemperance have abounded among us, it is
fit, that we confess these things with grief and sorrow. The Assembly in that
Paper which was read to you the other day, tho they lay open the sins of
others, yet are too sparing, in confessing these of their own way. They say
among other things, that Episcopacy was introduced, many faithful Ministers
were cast out, and insufficient and scandalous men thrust in on their Charges;
but there was not a word in all the Paper of not a few faithful Pastors cast
out by some of their way, in a disorderly and tumultuous manner, they being
private persons and without Authority. I wish the vacancies they have made may
not be supplied by scandalous persons, or such as are weak and insufficient,
and destitute of a right sense and understanding of Religion.

This much may suffice of the behavior of Episcopal men; as to the
Presbyterians themselves, to be sure, they kept the Fast with a great deal of
fervor and zeal; but as if it had been only appointed for confessing the
errors of Episcopacy, and the Sins of Episcopal men: They spent the whole day
upon this: Their Sermons and Prayers were nothing else, but so many invectives
against the Episcopal Clergy, and the former Reigns, which was done partly to
satisfy their Revenge, because they could do no more at present; and partly to
inflame the peoples rage; and to render them more keen upon their destruction.
Only Mr. Wilkie in the Meeting house of the Canon-gate, thought he would be too
partial, if he should only reckon up the Sins of others; wherefore in the
Afternoon, he resolved to confess his own sins and the sins of his Party, and
so he instanced among other Peccadillos, their taking an Indulgence from a
Popish King, which was only granted to make way for Popish Priests and Jesuits,
who sought the ruin of the Protestant Religion: We knew this, said he, well
enough; but self interest biased us: and the same principal of self interest
made us guilty of sinful silence; for all that time, we never Preached against
Popery, fearing that we might lose that Liberty, if we did. And none said he,
was more guilty than my self; for Mass was said daily at my Lugg, and yet I
never opened my mouth. Indeed these men were very cautious then, and careful to
abstain from every thing, that might be supposed to give the least offense; by
which, they showed that they had their Tongues under great command; for before
they were wholly addicted to railing against Popery, and every thing, which
they fancied to be like it. Yet they could tie themselves up instantly, when
they apprehended it might do them hurt. This cautiousness was very observeable,
one day in Mr. Geo. Johnson, who Preached in the same Meeting House of the
Cannongate. He had in his Prayers unwares, contrary to the concerted measures,
let fall these words, O Lord confound the Land of Graven Images, which no
sooner passed from him, than he instantly checked himself, and with the same
breath, cried out, But O God save our King.

Thus I have given a full account of the Fast, which occasioned as great
variety of sentiments and practices, as any one thing that ever was enjoined.

It is evident, that from the beginning of this Revolution, the Presbyterians
have had the turning out of the Episcopal Clergy wholly in their Head, at
least, more than any other thing: Revenge, as as well as Interest and Security,
prompted them to this, for they concluded it hard, if not impossible, to
preserve the Interest and Reputation of their great Diana Presbytery, or to
oblige people to a Superstitious Worshipping of this Goddess, by which they
have their Wealth, while there were so many, who thought and taught, that there
was no Divinity in it; and consequently, both their Craft would be in danger to
be set at naught, and their Diana should be despised, if these men were not
removed from amongst them. And to compass this, they tried various methods:
First, as Demetrius raised an uproar in Ephesus, against St. Paul, so they
began with a Rabble in the West* and some places of the Southern Borders, in
which they succeeded according to their mind; for, in a short space of time,
they emptied all these Churches to the number of about three or four hundred.
But this method was only proper for these places, where the ignorant Bigots,
and Partisans of Presbytery are, it could not be attempted in other parts of
the Kingdom, where the people were better Instructed, not so rude and
barbarous, and who generally were very well pleased with the Ministers of the
Episcopal Persuasion, whom they preferred every way, and in all things, to the
Presbyterian Preachers. If it were narrowly examined, it would be found, that
even this method, in the West, is no demonstration of a total aversion, in the
people there, to the Episcopal Clergy, as it was given out to be; for there was
not a General Insurrection of the Parishes of that Country, but a certain
Rabble combined together, and run up and down, thrusting out Ministers, the
Parishes being no less surprised with it than the Ministers themselves, and in
many places the Parishes would have defended the Ministers, if either they had
been forewarned, or sufficiently Armed, to make resistance. But however, they
could not gain their point in the rest of the Kingdom, by these means,
wherefore their only recourse was to the Civil Authority, which was very
favorable to them at the time, so that they resolved to improve the occasion
diligently, not knowing how long it would last. Here the E. Crafurd was very
useful to them, for his Zeal caused them to search out all that might be
attacked upon the head of difference from the Civil Government, and he held
Councils for several Months together, only for depriving such. Oversights,
Omissions of little Formalities, and small Escapes, were aggravated as if they
had been willful and heinous Crimes. The gaining and encouraging compliance
with the Civil Government, was so little studied, that all discouragement was
given, that the Episcopal Party might thereby be Incapacitated, and
consequently the danger prevented, which the Presbyterians feared from their
number. There was no place for Repentance, nor could second thoughts be of any
use, every one was judged by his first resolution; and if there were but the
least flaw in ones compliance, he was dealt with as if he had not offered any
compliance at all. By these means a great many more of the Episcopal Clergy
were laid aside, and the Presbyterians would have been glad to have had all
turned out this way, for then they thought the Odium would not lie upon them.
But this method failed at last too, for the Council became weary of it, as they
had reason; so the next thing resolved on, as was reported, was to procure an
Act of Parliament, for declaring all the Churches within the Kingdom vacant:
The pretense was, that the present Incumbents were all obtruded upon the
Parishes, and therefore it was fit that the people should have their free
choice, and be allowed to call Ministers suitable to their own Inclinations;
but they were advised not to propose this, as that which would be very far from
serving their design, because upon calculation it would be found, that most of
the Parishes within the Kingdom would call back their own Ministers, or other
Episcopal ones, for by this time the people were every where showing their
disgust both at Presbytery, and the present Presbyterians, and by manifold
instances it appeared, that neither of them were acceptable to the greater, and
better part of the Nation. Seeing therefore they could work no more by other
men's means, the Presbyterian Clergy resolved to do the work themselves,
howsoever invidious it may seem to be, and for this end they got the Government
of the Church, and all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, by Act of Parliament, put
into their own hands. When the Covenant was in force, they found good service
of Itinerant Committees or Commissions, and they judged it would be of no less
use now, to set them up again; and so, before the rising of the Assembly, two
were appointed, one for the South, and an other for the North, with full power
to visit all Ministers, and to purge out of the Church such as should be
thought Insufficient, Scandalous, Erroneous, or supinely Negligent.

The Names of the persons appointed for these Commissions, together with an
Abstract of their Instructions, are set down, page 53, 54, and 55. of the
Hi^^orical Relation of the General Assembly: The giving them Instructions
seemed to limit them, but in truth, they have all the power of a General
Assembly it self, and are so much freer, that they have not one from the King
to check and control them.

I shall begin with the Committee or Commission for the South, which, according
to appointment, sat down at Edinburgh, the 21st. of January, 91. being the
third Wednesday of that Month. Several Ministers up and down the Country,
received citations to appear before them, and among the rest, Mr. Alexander
Malcolm, Mr. James Hutchison, Mr. John Farqhuar, three Ministers of Edinburgh;
Mr. Kay at Leith, Mr. Samuel Nimbo Minister of Collinton, Mr. Andrew Lumsden
Minister at Dudduston, and Mr. John Monro Minister at Sterline. There was also
many others, whose Processes had been referred to them, either by the General
Assembly, or some particular Presbyteries. The three Ministers of Edinburgh,
received the Citation on Saturday, the 10th. of January, betwixt Nine and Ten a
Clock at Night, which both the Ministers, and others, constructed to be done on
design to discompose them for Preaching the day following. At this very hour
also, they sent a Summons to Dr. Robe^^son, Minister of the Gray-frier-Church
in Edinburgh, who had been Sick for a long time, and whom all the City knew to
be then in Articulo mortis, as indeed he died some few hours after.

The tenor of the Summons was this, To compeir before the Commission, upon the
twenty first of January, to be tried in Life and Doctrine, and discharge of the
Duties of the Ministerial Function, and censured by the said Commission as they
shall think Just.

Mr. Alexander Malcolm, Mr. James Hutchison, Mr. John Farqhuar, Mr. Samuel
Nimbo, and Mr. Andrew Lumsden, met, and all of them resolved to take the same
joint-measures, seeing they were all in the same Circumstances. Accordingly, on
the 21st. day of January, to which they had been cited, Mr. James Hutchison
presented himself before the Commission, and in his own Name, and in Name of
the other four, he desired of the Commission a special Citation, containing,
and expressly naming, their Crime or Crimes, for which they were to be tried
and censured, the Accusers and Witnesses Names, and a competent time for
preparing such Defenses as were legal and just; but all this was flatly denied.
The next day Mr. Malcolm compeired and proposed, in his own Name, and in the
Name of his Brethren, the same things, and had the same answer, for Mr.
Kennedy, the Moderator, said, That the Commission was not bound to give an
account why they Summoned them, nor to tell who were their Accusers, nor for
what they were Accused, or who were to Witness against them, but that being
cited, they were obliged to answer instantly to what should be asked of them,
and if they refused, he told them the Commission had power to Censure them, and
would do it. To which Mr. Malcolm replied, That it was illegal to Summon any
Super inquirendis, that he and his Brethren were not bound either by Civil
Laws, or Ecclesiastical Cannons, to regard or obey general citations, and that
none of them would answer, except they got citations which were special and
particular. He added, That they were more unjust than Festus, a Heathen Judge,
for he thought it unreasonable to send a prisoner to Caesar, and not withal to
signify the crimes laid against him, but (says he) we are here convened
before you, and you will not tell us for what cause. Upon this he was ordered by
the Moderator to remove.

January the 23d, these five Ministers, to free themselves of farther trouble
from the Commission, resolved to disown and decline their Authority, and so
they sent one Mr. French as Proctor for them, with the following Declaration,
which he delivered, and took Instruments upon the delivery of it.

WE under-subscribers, Mr. Alexander Malcolm, James Hutchison, John Farqhuar,
Ministers of Edinburgh, Mr. Samuel Nimbo Minister of Collinton, and Andrew
Lumsden Minister of Duddiston, being continued in the peaceable Exercise of our
Ministerial Function, notwithstanding of the alteration of the
Church Government, by Act of Parliament, and being under the protection of
their present Majesty's, by our Submission and Obedience to Authority; and we
being, nevertheless, cited to compeir before the Commission of the late General
Assembly, to hear and see the Judgment of the said Commission, given anent us,
and our Session Books and Records, and to hear and see such trial taken of our
Life, Doctrine, and discharge of the Duties of our Function, as the said
Commission shall think Just. We having all of us, considered the import of the
said compeirance, upon the Citations given us, do hereby declare, That we have
no freedom in our Consciences to compeir, or subject our selves, to any trial
whatsoever, before the said Commission, and that by reason of our known
Principles, and former Engagements to Episcopacy; and this we own to be our
Judgment, with all due deference and submission to Authority. In Witness
whereof, we have Subscribed these presents with our Hands, at Edinburgh,
January 21. 1691.

Sic Subscribitur Alexander Malcolm, James Hutchison, John Farqhuar, Samuel
Nimbo, Andrew Lumsden.



This being the first declinature from their Authority which any had made,
therefore the Commission resolved to put some severe Censure upon it. Some
proposed immediate deprivation and deposition, others were for Excommunication,
and, as was said, the first carried it over the last, only by two Votes, which
was intimated in the several Churches the very next Lords day. As the
Commission was censured by some, for their rigid and summar proceedings against
these Ministers, and never offering to treat with them in any gentle manner, so
these five Ministers were blamed by others, for their precipitancy in declining
the Commission; for it was said, that having so far owned them as to appear
before them, and formerly to give up their Session Books, when they were asked
of them, it was no ways agreeable now to give in a declinature: And as their
practices were disagreeable and inconsistent, so they had thereby much wronged
themselves, for by this means they had occasioned their own deprivation and
deposition, whereas, if they had taken an other course, compeired before the
Commission, and suffered them to accuse and lead probation, as they would have
been obliged to do, they might have continued in their Offices a longer time
and perhaps defeat the Commission altogether, because it would have been very
hard to have proven any thing, that might have deposed any of them; and if they
had only appealed, when the Commission was about to do them some palpable
Injustice, they then might have expected protection and redress from the Civil
Authority* but these Ministers answered thus for themselves, That some of them
had never any ways owned the Presbyterian Government as yet, and others of them
but very little, and that that little acknowledgment which they had made, could
neither infer that they had renounced their former Sentiments about Episcopacy,
nor yet entirely submitted to Presbytery, and that they had good reason to
decline or disown the Commission, considering the Injustice and Illegality of
their proceedings, which was both contrary to Scripture, the Canons of the
Church, and the Acts of Assemblies, owned by themselves; for as in Scripture it
is commanded, first to tell men their faults in private, and not to receive any
accusation against an Elder of the Church, but before two or three Witnesses.
So by an Act of the Assembly at Perth, March 1. 1596. none ought to be
summoned, super inquirendis, without instancing the Names of the Accusers, and
the crimes and faults they are accused of. And by an other Act of a General
Assembly at St. Andrews, April 24. 1582. it is appointed that Ministers within
the Kingdom should have forty days allowed them, whereas only ten had been
given them. They said further, that they had reason to disown the Commission,
and to refuse to appear before them, considering how they had treated others,
and how partial they were; that they were not Judges properly, but Parties and
Enemies, who had resolved upon their ruin before ever they met, and, who had
not only determined to have them out, quovis modo, but had also assigned their
several Churches to particular persons, viz. The Grayfrier Church to Mr.
Gilbert Rule, the Old Church to Mr. Blair, and the Tolbooth Church to Mr.
Kirkton, which was indeed commonly talked long before, and it proving true, was
a demonstration that there was a laid and formed design of turning out all the
Ministers of Edinburgh, by one means or other, though they themselves were the
occasion of the more speedy execution of it.

Notwithstanding the Act and Sentence of the Commission, these five Ministers
were resolved to continue the Exercise of their Ministry, unless they met with
violence from a Rabble, or that the Civil Magistrate concurred with the
Commission. Many thought the Civil Magistrate would not meddle in the matter,
and a Rabble was not much feared in Edinburgh. These who frequented the
Episcopal Churches, were resolved to defend their Ministers, if they met with
any disturbance, but on Saturday and Sunday mornings, the Provost of Edinburgh
sent to Mr. Malcolm, Mr. Hutchison, and Mr. Farqhuar, forbidding them, upon the
highest peril, to attempt Preaching, or to be seen about their Churches that
day, so they kept their Houses; and the Episcopal Party being disappointed,
came back from the Churches both in discontent and rage, and if their temper
were as much inclined to Tumults, as the Presbyterians are, a little matter
would have occasioned one that day: And indeed, the Provost feared it, and upon
the apprehension of it, ordered the Captain of the Town Guards to have all his
Men together in readiness, for preventing any such thing.

All the Ministers of Edinburgh were now laid aside, either by the Council, or
the Commissions, except Mr. Wilkie in the Tolbooth Church, who was also at this
time turned out by a cunning Trick, which had no parallel then, and indeed none
but the Presbyterians are capable of giving any; but if they continue we may
come to have enough such instances; for Mr. Craig of the Cannon Gate, his Case
is much like it, as shall be related afterward. Upon Dr. Robertson's death,
Mr. Wilkie was appointed by an Act of the Town Council, to go to the Gray Friar
Church, to be Colleague to Mr. Hutchison there, because no Presbyterian would
join either, and because by putting them together, they saved a Church, for the
use of one of their Presbyterian Ministers; who keep at as great distance from
these that are Episcopal, as ever their Predccessors the Pharisees did from
Heathens and Publicans, whom yet our Savior often preferred to them: When Mr.
Wilkie was advertised of this by Two of their numbe^, viz. George Hume Bailiff,
and James Crawford Apothecary, sent to him for this end; he replied, That he
would very readily obey the good Town, provided his Legal Right, as one of the
Ministers of Edingburgh, was not thereby prejudged or obstructed: And then it
was told him, that he needed not fear that, for there was no design to wrong
him, by transplanting him. This was on the 23d. of January, and on the 25th.
Mr. Kirkton was brought to the Tolbooth Church, and settled Minister in it,
without the Call or Consent of the Parish, the Formality of an Edict, or any
thing of that Nature, usual in the admission of a Minister: But while Mr.
Wilkie was thinking to take possession of the Gray Friars Church, the Lord
Provost sends for him, acquainting him, that the Commission had appointed Mr.
David Williamson to preach in the Gray Friar Church, for intimating the
Sentence of Deposition against Mr. Hutchison, wherefore his Lordship desired to
forbear that day, for Mr. David craved both forenoon and afternoon, and he
assured him, that he should sustain no prejudice by it, to which Mr. Wilkie
also yielded, being very desirous to please them, and gain their favor. Some
other Excuse was invented for shifting the next Sunday to, and so on for two or
three Sundays, till Mr. Wilkie turned impatient at their delays to settle him
in the Gray Friars Church, when he had so easily parted with the Tolbooth
Church: And he was not a little apprehensive of some disingenuous T^i0ck, when
it was told him, that they who preached in the Gray Friars Church used to pray
for the Reverend Brother abroad, whom that Parish belonged to: This Mr. Wilkie
concluded was not himself, as indeed it was meant of Mr. Gilbert Rule, who was
then in England about the Affairs of the Kirk. Then private entreaties could no
more prevail with Mr. Wilkie, so that they were forced to interpose the
Authority of the whole Town Council, to which Mr. Wilkie only consented, for
some two or three days, as appears by the following Act, given under the Town
Clerks own hand.

Edinburgh, the 13th. day of February, 1691.
THE which Day the Lord Provost, Bailiffs* Council and Deacons of Crafts, being
Convened in Council, having considered their Act, transplanting Mr. Tho. Wilkie
from the Tolbooth-Church to the Gray-Friers, they do appo^nt some of their
number to commune with the said Mr. Thomas Wilkie, and to represent to him, for
several weighty Considerations, that it is necessary the said Mr Thomas Wilkie
should forbear Preaching for some Lords days, which the said Mr. Thomas Wilkie,
in obedience to the Councils Commands, consented he should forbear Preaching
for three Lords days, only providing the said forbearance do not prejudice his
legal Title as one of the Ministers of Edinburgh.

Extracted by me AeNEAS MACKLAND.


But when pretenses and dissimulation could no more be used, it was plainly
told him, that the Gray Friar Church was to be otherwise bestowed,
notwithstanding he had not only the private promise and assurance of the
Provost and other Magistrates, but also the public Faith of the Town Council,
by an Act of theirs dated. January 23, which was the condition on which he
parted with the Tolbooth Church, Tho Mr. Wilkie might have guessed this from
the first time that they desired his forbearance to preach; and tho he was
forewarned by several Persons, that a Trick was designed him, yet he could not
keep himself from being mightily surprised and troubled at this final Answer
and Resolution: The loss of his Living vexed him, and the manner of taking it
away was matter of more vexation, than if it had been done by the formality of
a Sentence, tho never so unjust. It galled him exceedingly, that he should have
been so simple as to trust men of no ingenuity, and that by currying the favor
of those, who designed him a Cheat, he had suffered himself to be Trickt ont of
his Ministry without Citation or Process, and while he was under no Sentence or
Censure, neither was accused of any crime or maleversation, which might have
deprived him. He made great Complaints, but they had no success. The good Lord
Provost and Bailiffs excused themselves in that the Ministers would not quit
the possession they had got, and the Ministers on the other hand, told him,
that his business was with the Magistrates, for they had not meddled with him;
he had not consulted them, when he dimited the Tolbooth Church, and as they
were not to enquire upon what terms he did it, so he could not blame them for
taking possession of Churches that were vacant. Thus betwixt the two he was
kept out of his just rights, and all the defense that can be made for it, is,
That the Presbyterians had now declared open War with the Episcopal Party, and
their Allies, and all that had been in confederacy with them: And in War men
use not much to regard the points of Justice and Ingenuity; If the enemy be
defeated and weakened, it is no matter by what means, whether by giving fair
and open Battle, or by secret Ambuscades; the Cities or Castles which are once
in possession are kept, tho they have been won not by force or generous valor,
but by baseness and treachery.

After much importunity to silence his clamor, they first proffered him Mr.
Kirtons Meeting House, in the Castle Hill, which he refused, because it was an
uncertain thing, and none of the legal Churches of the City, to one of which he
had an undoubted Right. Then at last they bestowed on him the Lady Yesters
Church, Which he has accepted of, and seems to be contented with at present:
But it will be found, that they are still befooling him; for besides that the
Earl of Twedale debates with the Good Town the Right of planning that Church,
it has no Parish annexed to it, and the Magistrates of Edinburgh, when they
find their opportunity, may have many pretenses, for the shutting it up again.
But it was believed, and not without Reason, that the giving this Church to Mr.
Wilkie, was done not so much to repair the injury he had received, as to be a
pretext for turning out Mr. Craig and his People, that having no other place to
go to, they might find themselves under a kind of necessity, of uniting with
the Presbyterian Congr^gation in the Connon-gate.

Because I have mentioned this Case of Mr. Craig, and that it has some
resemblance to that of Mr. Wilkie, I will give some short-account of it here,
tho it was posterior to the other in time, by several months. This Mr. Craig is
one of the Ministers of the Cannon-gate, and has had the whole charge of that
Parish these two or three years, because Mr. Burnet, the other Minister, was
deprived by the Council. This Parish of the Cannon-gate had the use of the Lady
Yesters Church, from the Town of Edinburgh, until such time as a new-one of
their own should be built. When this new one was finished, which was only in
Summer last, the Presbytery of Edinburgh appointed another Mr. Wilkie, who
preached in the Meeting House to take possession of it, and with his Elders to
choose another Minister, as if there had been a total vacancy, never regarding
Mr. Craig's right to be a Minister there. Mr. Craig, and those of the Episcopal
Persuasion in that Parish, which are in proportion more than three of four,
when they heard this they addressed the Presbytery for the maintenance of their
rights and privileges, and receiving no satisfactiun from them, they brought
it before the Lords of the Council, where also the Presbyterian party
prevailed; for the Council, ratified and approved the Orders of the Presbytery,
and so Mr. Craig was shuffled out of his Right, tho he was willing to submit to
Presbytery, and to join with Mr. Wilkie the Presbyterian, and had condescended
not only not to pretend to any priority and preceedency, as the Elder Minister
and possessour, but even also to yield the precedence to Mr. Wilkie, and to
serve only as second Minister. Mr. Craig being thus kept out of the New Church
of the Cannon-gate, resolved to continue preaching in the Lady Yesters Church,
and his wonted Hearers were also resolved to wait still upon him there; but
that being considered as dangerous to the Presbyterian Interest in the Cannon
gate, and a too great occasion of withdrawing the people from Mr. Wilkie the
Presbyterian, therefore the Magistrates of Edinburgh were advised to give the
Lady Yester-Church to Mr. Thomas Wilkie, who had been Minister of the Tolbooth
Church, by which means Mr. Craig has no Church at all to preach in, and is
forced to take refuge in an old Chapel, lying near the Watergate, in the foot
of the Cannon-gate.

But to return to the Commission of the General Assembly, who were busy about
their work of purging, the Church: Great endeavors were used to fix some
scandal or other upon Mr. John Monro, Minister of Sterlin, and Mr. Kay,
Minister of South Leith, that the Commission might, take occasion to deprive
them, and by that means, get those two conspicuous Churches into their
possession; but both of them appeared for themselves, and defended themselves
so shoutly, that the Commission could gain no ground. Mr. Monro upbraided the
Presbyterian party, to their face, with Ingratitude toward him, for he showed
how kind he had been to them in former times; that some of them he had visited
and relieved while they were in Prison, and that he had even been Instrumental
in saving some of them from the Gallows; and yet, for a requital, they were
designing not only to deprive him of his Livelihood and Ministry, but also of
his good Name, which is dearer to one than his Life. When they perceived that
sufficient Probation could not be laid against him, they tried to work him up
to a voluntary dimission. The chief Accuser and Leader on of the Process, came
to him one day, and told him, That if he would dimit, they would pass from the
Libel, and give an ample Declaration of his Innocence. This past in private,
and being for his Reputation, to have some public and undoubted evidences of
the same, he went presently to the Commission, and told the Moderator the
proposal that had been made to him, and made the Person to own it publicly
before them; for it was so recent, that he had neither a Face to deny it, nor
yet time to consider the inconveniency of acknowledging it. And Mr. Monro says,
that this Man confessed before them all, that the Libel was not true, and they
were only desirous to be rid of Mr. Monro, that by his removal they might get a
Minister of their own Persu^sions: Upon which Mr. Monro took occasion to reason
his Case with the Commission, and to convince them how much he was injured: but
the Moderator would not be rash in as^oiling him. Another Day there fell out a
remarkable Passage, which shows what an honest Witness a Presbyterian will
make. While Mr. Monro was pleading his Case before the Commissi^n, he had a
Nephew attending him without Doors, who fell a discoursing with a Countryman,
whom he perceived very curious to know what the Commission was a doing;
disguising his own Sentiments, he asked the Countryman, what was his Business,
he told him he was come in to help away the wicked Curates: Then the other said
the Curate of Sterlin was presently before the Commission, that it would be for
the Glory of God and good Service done to the Church to have him out, but that
they wanted Witnesses; and so he asked if he would go in and witness against
him, to which the Fellow replied, that indeed he knew him not, but for the
Glory of God and the good of the Church he was very ready and willing to do it:
Just as he was saying this one of the Presbyterian Ministers passes by, and
overhearing it, cried to the Fellow to take heed to himself, for he was amongst
his Enemies; and he added that he ought not to witness falsely upon any account,
that it might not be thought that they approved of such things.

But in truth there are too many Instances which prove that the Presbyterian
Clergy look at Truth as little as their Witnesses that are adduced before them:
for they do not receive the exculpation of any Episcopal Minister so readily
and willingly as they do a Libel or Indictment against them: They mark
punctually what has a tendency to render him odious or criminal, but nothing
which makes for his Vindication, or the clearing of his Innocence. So this very
Commission, having charged Mr. Key of South-Leith with Drunkenness; none of the
Witnesses could prove it; and one of them was so far from doing it, that he
evidently proved the contrary: Upon which Mr. Hugh Kennedy the Moderator, bad
the Clerk write, Nihil novit in causa. The Witness understanding Latin,
replied, Sir, how can you say so, for I know very^ much of the matter; I have
declared and made it evident to you, that Mr. Key was not drunk at that time
you speak of: Upon which another Brother rose up and spoke in Passion, Sir, you
were brought hither to witness against your Minister, and not to clear him or
plead for him. Whence it is evident, that it was not the Truth they were
seeking; and all the reason they had to conclude Mr. Key drunk at that time,
was, because he had baptized two Children in one day, and was at both their
Entertainments, as if one could not be witness to a Feast without running to
excess.

During the sitting of this Commission, the 30 day of January, returned, which
is the Anniversary of King Charles the First's Martyrd^m. The Observation of it
last year was opposed by the Presbyterian Clergy, they both refused to preach
upon the Subject Matter and Argument of the Day; and also to delay the going to
Sermon till ten a Clock, which was desired, that the Lords of Council and
Session, and others of the Nobility and Gentry might come to Church more
solemnly as the Day required. And because they were so strict upon their Hours,
the only Remedy was to keep back the Clock, which was made to strike eight only
when it was ten by the Course of the Sun, because that is the ordinary hour of
beginning their Weekly Sermons. It was Mr. Hugh Kennedy's turn to preach, and
tho the Pulpit and all the rest of the Church was hung with Black, yet the
little old Fox came up in a Gray Cloak, and held forth his Hour without
touching the occasion directly or indirectly, either in his Sermon or Prayer:
He durst not condemn the thing, because most People in the Church knew he was
an Accessory to it. And I know a Gentleman, who made haste to see him in the
Pulpit, saying, he thought the Pulpit should break, or the Black fall of while
Kennedy was in it, as well as the Corpse used to bleed at the presence of the
Murderer. To which it was answered, that Miracles were wrought to detect
secret and hidden Murders, but not to attest those which were known and
transacted in the Face of the Sun.

This Year, to get this Anniversary duly observed, the Court of Session was
adjourned for that day, and both Lords of Council and Session sent some of
their number to wait upon the Commission, and to desire that they would appoint
one to preach to them a Sermon for the Day; Sir Colin Campbel of Arbruchell was
one of them who was sent after he had delivered the Request of the Council and
Session, which all others think in such Cases to be equivalent to a Command:
the Moderator said to him, My Lord, we are very busy and have much to do, and
should not be hindered: And you and the rest all know well enough that it is not
agreeable to our Persuasion to keep days. To which it might have been replied,
that none of them make any scruple of keeping Days, which bring them in Money,
for they preach very frankly at the Anniversary of George Heriot in Edinburgh,
by which an hundredth Marks Scots come to the Preachers Pocket. The Commission
was so civil as to deliberate about the Request: but the Result was, That they
could not obey it; which the Lords of Council and Session were highly offended
with, as being an Affront to their Authority; and therefore sent them Word,
That unless they did obey them, they would not suffer them to have any other
Sermon that day. The Lord Provost had Orders to see that their Will in this was
observed; who therefore forbad ringing of Bells to the ordinary Weekly Sermon,
but forgot to call for the Keys of the Church Doors, so that they caused the
Trone Church to be opened, whither they went and set up Mr. Shields to preach,
which was interpreted a greater Contempt of the Authority of Council and
Session, than if it had been any other Person; because this Mr. Shields in a
Book of his, entitled, The Hind let loose, does expressly defend and justify
the Murder of King Charles the First, and the Assassination of the Archbishop
of St. Andrews. In the beginning of his Sermon he said, It may be expected that
I should speak something of that Man that dyed forty years ago: He either dyed
justly or unjustly: If unjustly, it was the better for himself: if justly, we
need not trouble our selves more about him. The rest of his Sermon was stuffed
with Invectives against Bishops, and the Episcopal Clergy and the Church of
England; and he held forth, that it was very unlawful to keep any Confederacy
with Papists and Idolaters.

This Mr. Shields is one of the Three Cameronians, who addressed to the
Assembly, as was said before in the Historical Relation thereof: since that
time he has published a Pamphlet, called, An Account of the Methods and
Motives of the late Union and submission to the Assembly: in which all the
steps of his and his two Brothers Proceedings are narrated, and the larger
Paper published; which the Assembly thought to have suppressed altogether,
because it contained some Reflections on the Members of the Assembly. When all
is considered, the coming in of these Cameronians appears a kind of Mystery
which cannot be well understood, for there seems not to be a true Union, but
only a kind of Truce for present Convenience; or if there be any Union, the
Condescendence is upon the Assembly's side; so that it may be said, the
Assembly has turned Cameronian: For Mr. Shi^lds and his Two Brethren declare,
That they have not retracted any thing they said or did formerly; and as they
would not condemn their own Principles and Practices, so they have laid heavy
and grievous things to the charge of those in the Assembly, inconsistent with
the Principles of true Covenanted Presbyterians; which, as Mr. Shields
observes, the Assembly has not contradicted nor refuted. And as their Silence
is a tacit Confession of their Guilty, which they also acknowledge in general
Terms, in the Act and Reasons for the Fast, so the receiving Men into their
Communion without Check or Censure, who teach publicly in their Sermons, and
maintain in their Books, Tenets, and Positions, which are both Scandalous to
Religion, and also destructive of human Society: I say this is an evidence that
they are of the same mind, and have no abhorrence of such scandalous and
pernicious Principles, as those men have vented. But though the Assembly and
Mr. Shields, Mr. Linning, and Mr. Boide have made an Agreement, without coming
to particulars* or expressing the mutual Terms or Conditions; yet the other
Cameronians refused to patch up a Peace so easily; they require express and
particular Declarations from the other Presbyterians, and desire that what Mr.
Shi^lds and his Two Brethren did, may be considered as their own Private Deed,
and not the Deed of the whole Party: and it is said the Breach is rather wider
than it was before. Mr. Howston, who now heads the Cameronians, refused to
submit his Call to the Kirk of Kilsyth, to the Presbytery of Glasgow; and when
one who was sent from that Presbytery to preach there, possessed the Pulpit,
it is reported, that he went up to a Loft or Gallery in the Church, and instead
of instructing the people, they fell soul upon one another: Whatever be of
this, it is certain the Parish was divided upon this Head, and one part followed
the one, and another the other. To such a height is this difference arrived,
that it canbe decided by no meaner person than the King; so that Mr. Howston
went to Flanders that King William might interpose his Authority for repairing
the Injury he had received; and I am told that he not only complained of his
own Treatment, but also represented to his Majesty, that the Assembly and other
Presbyterians took measures that were not good either for Church or Kingdom.
Thus, though they will not acknowledge the King to be the Head of their Kirk,
yet they, as well as others, will have recourse to him on occasion. He
succeeded so well, that he procured two Letters from the King in his behalf,
one to the Council, another to the Presbytery of Glasgow: He delivered the
first to my Lord Crawford, and went with the other to Glasgow: The Presbytery
received it; and to prevent any Protestation he might make for their not
obeying it, they said to him, that some of the Brethren should be appointed to
confer with him; and in the mean time they dissolved the Meeting and did
nothing. Upon this he returned to Edinburgh to be redressed by the Council; but
when he came there he found that his Letter had never been produced, and
Crawford, to whom he had delivered it, had taken Journey for London, so that he
is still where he was: and by this it appears, that Kings Recommendations avail
but little with some Men.

This Howston has a Brother, who also will not unite with our Assembly men; but
goes up and down drawing People from them, as they were wont to do from the
Episcopal Ministers: being found in Edinburgh, he was shut up in Prison, and
detained several Months; till of late with difficulty he has procured his
enlargment. So little reason is there to talk of their Harmony and Union,
except it be in the opposition, which both make to the Episcopal Party, that
the Cameronians, to distinguish themselves the better from the other
Presbyterians, have taken up a new Name, viz. That of the Society; they do not
add, of Jesus, lest they should be taken for the Disciples of Ignatius Loyola.
Those of this Sect sometimes begin their Meetings at Ten or Twelve at Night, or
at the dawning of the Morning, and they use to be well armed with Swords and
Staves; and I Am told there have been hard blows given betwixt them and the
other Presbyterians in the Southern and Western Shives, as happened in the late
times: so now we may expect variety of Sects and Opinions, which will ruin
Religion, as well as disturb the public Peace and Quiet. For Fanaticism is a
Spiritual Vertigo; which makes people reel and stagger from side to side, and
run about till they fall into Atheism and gross Impiety.

To return to the Commissi^n, which sat down again upon Wednesday the Fifteenth
of April: When they were met, Sir William Leccart the King's Solicitor came
and presented to the Moderator a Letter from the King, which was not received
with that Respect which was due. The Moderator, without rising from his Seat,
bad him give it in to the Clerk, telling him, That there was very much noise of
that Letter: For indeed it was not only talked of, but also several Copies of
it were spread up and down both City and Country. Then the Moderator turned to
the Clerk, and said, Man take off the Scab of the Wamb of it, and see what is
within it, for so, as is said, he called the King's Seal upon it. This Letter
was the effect of that Address, which those Commissionated by the Episcopal
Clergy, who were still in place, made to the King before his going to Flanders;
whither also Two of them followed him, viz. Dr. Canaries and Mr. Lesk, that
they might even there negotiate the Affairs of their Party, and get that stop
put to the Proccedings of the Presbyterians; which was promised them, but which
could not be presently given, because of the King's haste to go beyond Seas.
This is a true Copy of the Letter.

To the Right Reverend and Our Well-beloved Ministers and Elders, Commissioners
of the General Assembly of the Church of our ancient Kingdom of Scotland.
Right Reverend and Well-beloved, We greet you well:
WHereas there has been humble Application made to us, by several Ministers,
for themselves and others, who lately served under Episcopacy in that our
ancient Kingdom, We have thought good, as well for the Good and Advantage of
that Church, as the Public Justice and Welfare of the Nation, and the Interest
of our Government, to signify our Pleasure to you, That you make no
distinction of Men, otherwise well qualified for the Ministry, who are willing
to join with you, in the Acknowledgment of, and Submission to the Government of
Church and State, as it is by Law now established, though they have formerly
conformed to the Law introducing Episcopacy; and that ye give them no vexation
or disturbance for that cause, or upon that head; and that in regard many of
these Ministers are turned out summary, without any Sentence or Order of Law,
if such shall be called to be Ministers of any Congregations, by plurality of
Heritors and Elders, we judge it reasonable that you admit them, where there is
no just Cause to the contrary, without making any difficulty. Whereas some of
these Ministers complain of Severities and Hardships by several Sentences
pronounced against them, we think fit to give you opportunity to review what
Cases shall be brought before you, that your selves may give such just
Redresses as the matter requires, before we take any further notice of these
Complaints.

We will assure you we will protect you, and maintain the Government of the
Church, in that our ancient Kingdom, by Presbytery, without suffering any
invasion to be made upon it: And therefore we will expect; That you will avoid
all occasions of Divisions and Resentments, and cordially unite with those that
will agree with you in the Doctrine of the Protestant Religion, and own the
Confession of Faith, which the Law has established as the Standard of the
Communion of that Church. And it is our Pleasure, That during our absence out
of Britain, until we give our further Directions, that you proceed to no more
Process or any other Business, and dispose your selves to give out your best
Means, for healing and reconciling Differnces; and apply your selves to give
impartial Redresses upon any Complaints that shall be offered unto you, against
Sentences already past, that we be not obliged to give our selves any further
trouble thereanent. So we bid you heartily farewell. Given at our Court in the
Hague, Feb. 13. 1690. and of our Reign the Third Year.

Sic subscribitur, by his Majesty's Command, JO. DALRYMPLE.


When this Letter was read, the Anger and Displeasure of the Brethren was to be
seen in their Countenances: One said that there was no regard to be had to it,
because the King's Hand was not at it. Another replied, That whether it had
come only from the Secretary himself, or been sent by the order of the King,
there was no reason to take any notice of it, or be concerned with it; for it
proceeded from a mistake and misinformation, as if they had turned out any
summarly, without any Sentence or Order of Law, whereas they were conscious of
no such thing. It is reported of the Moderator, That when the Contents of this
Letter were first imparted to him, he said, If the King had not so many Men at
his back, he would make two of it: But a Person of Honor assured me, That when
he was speaking to him of it, his answer was, That the King would be as wise to
let these matters alone.

After much deliberation, it was resolved to write an Answer to the King, and
to send two of their number to negotiate their Affairs with his Majesty, and to
remove the Prejudices he might have conceived against them by false
Representations. The Persons who were thought fit to be sent, were Mr. John
Law, and Mr. David Blair. The Letter which they were to carry with them, was
but once read publicly; nor did the Moderator suffer any at the time, to
propose his Judgment about it; for he said, That there was a private Committee
appointed for that matter, and so he desired every one to come in apart by
himself, and there to declare his Mind, what he would have added to it, or
taken away from it: Which was done either to keep the thing more secret, or
that the Draught of the Letter, which the Moderator and other leading Men had
made, might pass more easily without any change. The King's Letter required two
things: One was to redress the Grievances which the Episcopal Ministers
complained of: The other was, To forbear the proceeding any more against them,
so long as the King was absent from Britain. They had no Mind to grant the
first at all; but in compliance with the last, they thought it convenient to
stop a little, that they might not give their Adversaries occasion to irritate
the King against them, and to withdraw his Favor, which was their only present
support. The yielding to this, was only a delaying their Affairs, till they
were better stated, which afterward might be ea^ily compensated; and by doing
so, they would dispose the King's Mind for receiving their Defenses for what
was already done. So leaving all things as they were, the Commission was
adjourned till the next Qarterly Sessi^n. But it must not be forgot, that they
left particular Presbyteries and Synods, to act their part in the mean time,
for they issued out no Order to stop them, neither made they any intimation of
the King's Letter, or of his Will and Pleasure therein unto them; so that when
it was objected by any Episcopal Minister, they still pretended ignorance.

This Month the Synod of Lothian and Tueddale met at Edinburgh, and concluded a
Monthly Fast to be kept for some time: For this end, the Secret Council was
addressed to, that they might ratify and approve the same by an Act: Which
indeed they did; but Duke Hamilton would admit of no other reason for the Fast,
than that of the present War, and the King's Expedition to Flanders. This did
not a little displease the Brethren, who, to delude and amuse the People, and
to serve their own particular Ends, had heaped up a number of such Reasons, as
the Assembly gave for the former Fast: Wherefore, because the Council would not
accept of, and agree to the Act and Reasons as they were drawn up by them, they
resolved to show no regard to what the Council had done: So at the intimation
of this new Fast, they did take no notice of the Act of Council or Proclamation
published by them; but enjoined it in the Synod's Name and Authority, reading
to the People the Act and Reasons of the Synod for it. Particularly Mr. Kirkton
in the Tolbooth Church of Edinburgh, said, That they ought to look to this
Paper which came from the Synod for their direction, in the end and nature of
this Fast, and not to that other which was selling up and down the Town; by
which he meant the Act and Proclamation of the Council. The Earl of Crawford
and two more of the Council were present. One of them said, That the Council
could not sit with this, nor let it pass without censure; for their Authority
was baffled and affronted: But it seems it was found convenient to take no
notice of it, lest they should be more baffled and affronted, by meddling with
these peremptory and stubborn Kirk-men, who are like an imperious Wife, that
will both have all her own Will, and a part of her Husbands.

About the middle of July, the Commission met again. Some few days before, the
two Ministers they had sent over to Flanders, returned, of whose Reception by
the King, there were various Reports: But in answer to that Letter which they
carried from the Commissioners, there came a second Letter from the King, which
was ordered to be delivered to the two Ministers, if they returned before the
Meeting of the Commission: But if they were late a-coming, another was
appointed to give it to the Commission at its first sitting down. So the night
before Mr. James Elphinston went with it to Mr. John Law, and Mr. David Blair,
who presented it to the Commission the next day, with an account of their
Negotiation and Diligence.

A Copy of the second Letter from the King to the Commission of the General
Assembly.
To the Right Reverend and our Well-beloved Ministers and Elders, Commissioners
of the General Assembly of the Church of our ancient Kingdom of Scotland,
W. Rex.
RIght Reverend and Well-beloved, We greet you well. By the Letter presented to
us from you, by Mr. John Law, and Mr. David Blair, Ministers, your two
Commissioners, we do perceive you sufficiently understood our Intentions
contained in our Letter, directed to you from the Hague; and we are
well-pleased with what you write, both as to your own unanimous Inclinations to
redress those, who may be lesed, and to unite with such of the Clergy, who have
served under Episcopacy, and fallen neither under the Qualifications of the Act
of Parliament, nor the Terms of our Letter, and that you are sufficiently
instructed by the General Assembly to receive them: From all which, we do
expect a speedy and happy success; and that ye will be so frank and charitable
in that matter, that we cannot doubt but that there shall be so great a
progress made in this Union betwixt you, before our return to Britain, that we
shall then find no cause to continue that stop, which at present we see
necessary; and that neither you, nor any Commissioner Church-Meeting, do meddle
in any process or Business, that may concern the purging out of the Episcopal
Ministers: And we do not restrain you a^ to other matters relative to the
Church or your selves; nor did we ever intend to protect any in the Ministry,
who were truly scandalous, erroneous, or supinely negligent; and therefore we
did propose their subscribing the Confession of Faith, as the Standard of the
Church Communion, which takes off the suspicion of Error: And as for those who
are really scandalous, insufficient, and supinely negligent, if such shall
apply, either by themselves or with others, though they were willing to
acknowledge our Authority, and to join with you, we do not oblige you to
receive such; and in that case where there is just cause, you may proceed to a
fair impartial Inquiry, in order to their being received in the Government of
the Church, but not in relation to the turning them out of their Benefices and
Ministry: as the Act of our Parliament has left them to our further Orders, we
will not doubt of the sincere performance of what you have so fairly promised
in your Letter, whereby you will best recommend your selves to us, and answer
that Trust reposed in you, by the Act of our Parliament. So we bid you heartily
farewell. Given at our Court at Aprebrux, the ^^/^^ of June, 1691. and of Our
Reign the Third Year.

By his Majesty's Command, Sic subscribitur, JO. DALRYMPE.


Ever since this Revolution, the Kingdom of Scotland has been divided about the
Government of the Church. The Episcopal Party have been upon the defensive
side. First, they studied to preserve the Government of Episcopacy it self; and
for that end addressed to the Parliament, which proved altogether in vain. In
the next place, when Presbytery was established by Act of Parliament, the
Episcopal Clergy petitioned for a share of the Government of the Church, or at
least to be secured from the Jurisdiction of the Presbyterians, who had
declared themselves a stated Party against them. But neither was this harken'd
to. Then, as their last Refuge, they considered how to save themselves, their
personal Rights and Privileges, that they might sustain no Prejudice, upon the
account of their private Sentiments and Persuasion. And for this cause, they
resolved to address King William himself, seeing the Applications made to
others were so ineffectual: Therefore Dr. Canaries was sent from some of the
Clergy, on the South Side of Tay; Mr. Mac Gill, and Mr. Small from Angus; Dr.
Gaider, Mr. Leisk and Mr. Fobess from the Diocese of Aberdeen. This last Design
succeeded better than any of the former; for the King thought their Request
reasonable, and promised them his Protection in this matter; and in both his
Letters to the Commission of the Assembly, he required this, as that which was
most just and equitable. Nay, the refusing it was judged so unreasonable, that
it is said, that those Presbyterian Ministers, who were sent up from the rest,
did expressly promise to receive such Episcopal Ministers, not only into
Communion, but into the Government, as could not be excepted against, either
for Life or Doctrine. And which is yet more, it appears from King William's
second Letter, that the Commission has given some such thing under their Hand.

Wherefore to try their Sincerity, it was thought fit to put them to it, by
making some of the Episcopal Clergy address to them. The nature and form of the
Address was drawn up, and concerted at London, and sent down to Scotland with
Mr. Mac Gill and Mr. Small; for it was judged requisite they should Address all
after the same manner; the tenor of which is as follows.

To the Reverend the Ministers and others by Law empowered to establish the
Judicatories of the Church of Scotland:
The humble Petition of the Ministers of the Episcopal Persuasion,
Humbly shows,

THAT whereas Episcopacy is by Law abolished in this Kingdom, we who have in
the most dangerous Times manifested our Zeal against Popery, are now ready to
give all the Assurances that are or can be by Law required of us, of our
Aversion to Popery, of our Firmness to the Protestant Religion, of our Duty and
Fidelity to their Majesty's, King William and Queen Mary; we are further ready
and willing in our respective Charges and Stations to do every thing that is
incumbent on us, as Ministers of the Gospel, for advancing the Power of
Religion, or repressing of Scandal and Vice, and for the securing the Peace and
Quiet of their Majesty's Government, and to act in Church-Judicatories for
carrying on of these Ends, without any regard to the Difference of Persuasion
in matters that are not fundamental.

We do therefore humbly and earnestly desire, That in order to these Ends, we
may be suffered to act as Presbyters in this Church, in our several Precincts
and Paroches.

This being proposed to the Episcopal Clergy, several Arguments were used to
persuade the subscribing it; which some declined for one Reason, and some for
another. Some guessing the success from the Presbyterian Temper, thought it
would be a prostituting their Reputation to offer a thing which would not be
accepted: Others apprehended that to be yielding of the Episcopal Cause to the
Presbyterians, and therefore would not do it. But in the Diocese of Aberdeen,
the most part condescended, and gave a Commission to Mr. Leisk, to wait upon
the Commission at Edinburgh so soon as it should sit, and in their Name to
address them as above; which he did: But the Moderator said to him, That they
could not receive it; for there was a particular Commission appointed for all
on the North side of Tay; and if the Ministers of these places had any thing to
say, they ought to say it to them. Mr. Leisk replied, that there was no
Commission sitting in the North at that time; that he was Moderator of both
Commissions, and he judged it all one which of them he applied himself to! That
the King's Letter was directed to them, which required them to receive such as
should make application unto them; and if they refused it, he would protest,
and take Instrument. The Moderator bad him do what he pleased; and so after
Protestation, he removed. Mr. Small went along with Mr. Leisk; and while Mr.
Leisk was talking with the Moderator, one of the Brethren rises from his seat,
came toward Mr. Small, took him by the Shoulder, and with a most frowning
Countenance said to him, Ye are a pack of profane Raskals, and deserve no
pity, neither ought to be received. After which, he returned to his seat,
leaving Mr. Small surprised with his Discretion and Civility in such a place,
and at such a time.

The same day, or the day following, Mr. Tho. Wood, Minister at Dumb^r, and Mr.
William Denune, went and offered to the Commission the same Address subscribed
by about a dozen of Parsons; which being done by Ministers on the South Side of
Tay, they had not the former pretense for rejecting it. They craving an Answer,
the Moderator said to them, Sirs, you are very hasty^ you took time to draw it
up, and you must allow us time to answer it: And so he put them off for some
days. At their next Application, they were desired to explain some parts of the
Address, as what they meant by acting as Presbyters; whether they meant the
acting separably by themselves independently on them; or if it was to (...)
understood of their joint Concurrence with them. To this it was answered, That
they had it not in their Commission to make any Explications, and therefore
could not do it. So upon the 22d of July, they had this Answer given them.

THe Commission for Visitations on the South Side of Tay. appointed by the late
General Assembly of this Church, having considered a Petition presented to them
by Mr. Thomas Wood, and Mr. William Denune, signed by them and twelve other
Ministers, who call themselves of the Episcopal Persuasion, do find that some
of these Petitioners are deposed, some suspended, both of them for gross
Immoralities; others of them are in processes referred by the General Assembly
to this Commission, and some declared contumacious by the Presbyteries of the
Bounds, where they have their residence; and some live without the Bounds
committed to the inspection of this Commission. They do also find, That not
only these Petitioners do not look upon this Commission as a Judicatory of this
Church, but also do mistake their Work, by ascribing to them a Power to
establish the Judicatories of this Church, which is not committed to them by
the General Assembly; and though the Commission be satisfied to hear of their
Zeal against Popery, and Firmness in the Protestant Religion, Duty and Fidelity
to their Majesty's; yet they find, that seeing the Petitioners have not offered
to own and subscribe the Confession of Faith, which by Law is made the Standard
of the Doctrine of this Church, they give no security against Errors; nor do
they offer to submit and concur with the present established Government of this
Church, according to the Instruction of the General Assembly, much less to
acknowledge it, as is required by his Majesty's gracious Letter: And whereas in
the Petition, the Petitioners seem to desire an allowance for setting up a
Government separate from, and independent upon that which is established by
Law, and have refused, when desired by the Commission, to explain either for
their Brethren, or for themselves, this or any other Expression that seemed
dark and doubtful to the Commission; declaring also expressly, That they had no
further to say, than what was contained in the Petition, and that they could do
nothing separately by themselves without their Constituents, Therefore on these
grounds the Commission cannot grant this Petition, as it stands in terminis,
however willing they be to receive such of them as personally shall be found
duly qualified according to the Instructions of the Assembly, and his Majesty's
grac^ous Letter

Mr. Wood and Mr. Denune having got this last Answer, they made a Protestation
against the Commission, for refusing them the Favor which the King's Letter
required of them.

Some blamed both the Ministers and the Commission; and thought that neither of
them acted so heartily as did become them; for while both pretended a
willingness to unite, each of them kept at a distance, and studied what might
hinder, rather than what might fu^ther the Union. It was said, That the
Ministers did needlessly offend the Commission by the Title of their Address;
for seeing they made no scruple of addressing to the Commission, they might
have made as little of giving them their due Title: And it was either mere
nicety to refuse it, or it was done with a design to pique them, that they
might not accept of the Address. Again it was said, That they were very
unreasonable in refusing to explain the ambiguous terms of the Address, and
that they gave the Commission a good pretext for denying their Request, when
they would not tell what was the Nature and Import of it; for the Commission
could not be obliged to grant what they did not understand.

On the other hand, the Answer of the Commission was found fault with very
much, and it was said, that by it, they clearly showed that they were no wise
willing to receive Episcopal Ministers, whatsoever they had professed or wrote
to the King. The very Addressing to them was thought such a Condescendence in
Episcopal Ministers, as to deserve a better and more kindly reception than that
which it met with. And the Commission was censured not only as very indiscreet,
but as most unjust, for giving them these odious Epithets in the beginning of
their Answer; for there was but one or two, whom they had any shadow or
p^e^ence to name so; and even these two offered to vindicate themselves, if
they were allowed a fair Hearing. The greatest part of those, who subscribed,
were neither under Process nor Censure, nor had they been at any time Libelled;
so that the Answer was unjust to them, whatever it might be to the rest.
Further, it was very unjust, to reject the Address, because the Confession of
Faith was not offered to be subscribed; for though this was not expressed in
terminis, yet it was clearly enough implied, and it was then only time to make
that Objection, when the Confession was put to them and refused. Finally,
Though the Ministers keep to generals, and refused to explain what they meant
by Acting as Presbyters; yet that was thought no just or sufficient Reason for
denying their Request: For if they could not grant it in the largest extent, it
was in their power to set limitations to it. They might have been sure that
Episcopal Ministers would not be received at all, if not under the Notion and
Character of true and lawful Presbyters, without being obliged to receive new
Ordination: And in this Sense they ought to have interpreted the Petition,
unless the Ministers had, in express terms, craved more. And as they could not
be blamed for refusing to allow them to act independently; so their not
admitting them as Presbyters, and not consenting to their having the Power and
Privilege of such, which was all that seemed to be required, is a clear
demonstration that either they did not own them to be Presbyters, or that they
did not desire to join with them.

They had so few Ministers of their own Party, that it might been thought, they
would have been glad to have received any that were willing to come over to
them; but, in truth, they chused rather to want, than to admit of any who had
served under Episcopacy; and thought the one a less inconvenience than the
other, as appears from the treatment, which some Ministers, who were called
Anti-Testers, met with. Five of these who refused the Test, viz. Mr. Lundy, Mr.
Craig, Mr. Paterson, Mr. Marchiston, and Mr. Carmichael made Application to
them, both at their last S^ssion in April, and this in July: They thought their
case more favorable than that of other Episcopal Ministers; and it was said
that they designed to go a very great length: I cannot tell positively what it
was they would have done; for they resolved to deliver their Mind by word of
Mouth, and not to give any thing under their Hand, but they would not so much
as give them access; they would neither hear them nor take their Case into
consideration.

Thus it is evident, that they were resolved not to admit any Ministers of the
Episcopal Persuasion, nor any who had heretofore served under the Episcopal
Government: For though the King had required this in his Letter; yet by their
Instructions they were enjoined to receive none, but such as they had ground to
believe would be true and faithful to the Government. And it was concluded,
that none could be trusted to, who did not renounce their former Sentiments,
abjure Episcopacy, and cry Peccavi for their compliance with it. But it might
be reasonable enough to trust to them who did this, because such would be so
much abhorred by the Episcopal Party whom they deserted, that they would then
find it their Interest to keep up Presbytery. This was expressly required of Mr.
Thomas Wilkie, Minister of the Tolbooth Church: for when he humbly supplicated
them to be received, making great Promises of an entire Submission to their
Government; the Moderator asked if he had no more to say, and pressed him to
declare himself more fully. To which Mr. Wilkie replied, That he thought he had
said enough, and given a sufficient Declaration of his Mind. And indeed perhaps
he had said more upon the Head than could be well justified. Yet nothing would
satisfy them unless he would say that his Compliance with Episcopacy was a
Sin: And because he made a Scruple of that, they obstructed his Business, as
was related before, and refused to receive him. But upon these Terms they
admitted one Mr. Menzies, Mr. Hugh Nisbet and Mr. Arrot Minister of Ginglekirk,
who are the only Persons that have gone entirely over to the Presbyterian
Party, and the Episcopal Party have sustained no loss by their Desertion. For
Mr. Hugh Nisbet has the Character of being Ignorant, Insufficient and
Scandalous; Mr. Arrot, besides that he is ignorant, he is so sordidly Covetous,
that he is not ashamed of any base thing, if it will bring in filthy Lucre: To
save himself from the Rabble, he, at the very beginning, went to the Pulpit
with Invectives against the Episcopal Government, and was not short of the
wildest Cameronian in Raillery and vile Expressions: And that he might oblige
the Presbyterians to let him keep his Possession, he offered to put on
Sackcloth and to do Penance in as may Churches as they pleased. And as for Mr.
Menzies; he was first a Hill-Preacher; next he submitted to Episcopacy, and
received a Church under that Government; which afterward he deserted, and run
again to the Hills, and was in the Rebellion at Bothwell-Bridge, which rendered
him obnoxious to the Laws: And that he might escape the due Punishment of his
Crime, he surrendered himself to the mercy of the Government, and took and swore
the Oath of the Test. By these Instances it does appear what Qualification is
requisite to recommend one to the Favor of the Commission.

And as we have seen one part of the King's Letter disobeyed; so neither was
the other regarded, which required the redressing the Grievances which the
Episcopal Ministers complained of. No Censure was abated, no Process revised;
nor did they recall the Sentences of Suspension and Deposition pronounced by
particular Presbyteries and Synods against Ministers, whom all the World knew
to be innocent. But whether the Censures were inflicted justly or unjustly,
they continued them. And to make it evident that some Episcopal Ministers had
reason to complain of Partiality and Injustice, I shall, instead of many
Instances, which would make me tedious, narrate fully the Case of Mr. Simon
Cuper Minister at Dumfermlin, and Mr. George Johnson, Minister of Brunt-Island.

But first I will divert the Reader with an Account of something which happened
in Fife while this Commission was sitting. The noise of the King's Two Letters
spread abroad, and the intimation of his Favorable Inclinations toward
Episcopal Ministers who would own his Government, both alarmed and awakened the
Presbyterian Party, and put them upon diverse Inventions how to prevent what
they so little desired, and what they thought would prove prejudicial to them
at the last. This was thought the best expedient, which might keep the
Episcopal Clergy from owning and submitting to the Civil Government, because it
was upon the Hope and Promise of this that so much favor was procured to them.
And to effectuate this, it was resolved to make use of their Common Stratagem;
that is, to let the Rabble loose upon such Ministers as they would be rid of,
and to fright them from a Compliance. Indeed they have not prosecuted this
Design; But the Attempt upon the Minister of Kemback in Fife is a sufficient
Proof of it: an Account of which I have from one who was present, who upon a
mistake was near to have suffered for the other; and it is as follows: On
July the 22, 1691. about Twelve a Clock at night there came two men and knocked
at the Gate, of the Minister of Kembock's House, desiring a Servant to direct
Two Strangeer Gentlemen, who had lost the Road through the darkness of the
night. A short while after, they came up to the Chamber Window, and asked the
same Favor in the Name of one Andrew Clepan, a near Relation of the Lord of
Kembock, and who belongs to Major Balfour's Troop, which was lying at St.
Andrew's some four Miles distant. The Minister himself was not at home, for he
had gone the day before to Angus, to visit his Father who was sick, and there
was only a deprived Minister lodging at his House at the time. This Stranger
made them no answer at first, apprehending they were Rogues who were come to
rob the House. When therefore their Lies and fair Language proved ineffectual,
they began more plainly to discover themselves, calling at the Window to open
in the King and Council's Name, threatening, if it was not done, to Pistol the
Minister, and fire the House about him. Then the Stranger answered from within,
your Design cannot be just, seeing ye have twice made use of Lies; the Minister
of Kembock, whom you pretend to seek, is not at home; I am unknown to you, and
you do not pretend to search for me, and therefore I entreat you to be gone.
Upon this answer they beat up the Windows, fired Pistols into the Chamber and
thrust in their Swords, which made the Stranger leave his Bed and run naked out
of the Chamber; for his Clothes were so near the Window, that he durst not go
to fetch them. Finding the lowest Windows well barred with Iron, they scaled
the House, and attempted to get in at the upper Windows: But being disappointed
there too, they next battered the Door of the House with great Stones, and at
last, by frequent pushing with a long Tree, or Pole, which they found in the
Closs, loosed the Bands, broke the Lock, and forced open the Door: But
nevertheless they durst not venture forwards at first, fearing that he who was
within had laid some Snare for them, or that he was in readiness to kill the
first who advanced. This made them with great Oaths and strong Asseverations,
promise safety to his Person, which somewhat encouraged him. But as soon as
they found him, they dragged him in his Shirt to the Gate, abusing him with
most opprobrious Language, as Hell-Hound, S^ul-murdering Dog, etc. He assured
them he was not the Minister of the place, whom they pretended to seek, but
acknowledged that he was a Minister deprived by the Council; and they still
supposing otherwise, Twelve of them in Country Cloths, with drawn Swords and
cocked Pistols, made him twice kneel, swearing that they would allow him but
one minute for Prayer; and that all of them were resolved to have the Honor of
taking his Heart Blood. But while he was in this sad Case, expecting the worst,
a Boy, whom they called Guide, when he perceived they were in earnest, cried
out vehemently and bitterly, That man is not the Minister of this Place, for,
said he, I know the Minister very well. Ten of them upon this went aside to
consult the matter, and returned with a Resolution to let him go, if he would
swear never to preach again. He asked if ever any of them had Oaths forced upon
them? Two of them answering Yes; he asked in the next place, if they did keep
them; and they saying, that they thought they were not bound to do it: Then he
replied, Why would you impose an Oath upon me, which your selves acknowledge
one is not bound to keep? After some Communing, they agreed to accept of his
Oath never to preach under King William, nor to pray for him, nor to accept of
any Allowances from the General Assembly; assuring him that it was resolved
that King William 's Letter should never do any good to an Episcopal
Soul-murdering Hell-bound. Though they spared his Life, yet they pulled his
Shirt twice or thrice over his Head, and beat his naked back and Breast with
the Buts of their Muskets: and before they parted with him, they sent some of
their number to find out the Schoolmaster, and Church-Beddel, whom they also
threatened and treated barbarously, to make them deliver the Keys of the Church,
and swear never more to officiate in it. The Beddel hesitating a little, one of
them advanced to pistol him: and would certainly have done it, if the Pistol
had not by a happy Providence misgiven. Then the fear of Death made both him
and the Schoolmaster do, what was required of them* They declared that they
were put upon this by Persons of the greatest Quality in the Kingdom, and that
they were obliged to give account of their Diligence to the Assembly, that the
one half of their Company was gone to the next Preaching Episcopal Minister,
and that it was resolved none should escape. As they were parting, one of them
said, It is my Judgment you should not let this Fellow pass so easily:
Complyers and Non-Complyers should be treated alike. Upon which a part of them
returned; which the Minister perceiving, went and hid himself in a Field of
Corn till they were gone, being all the while in his Shirt, for they never
allowed him time to put on his Clothes. What hindered the other Party, or what
stop either of them met with is not known; but afterward they came not near
any other Minister.

A true Representation of Mr. Simon Cupar, and Mr. James Graham, Ministers of
Dumfermlin, their Case; with the pretended Presbytery of Dumfermlin.
UPon the third of September, 1690, The Ministers at Dumfermlin were cited to
compeir before the Presbytory there, the tenth Instant, to hear and see
themselves deposed. The Ministers being certainly informed that no Libel had at
that time been offered against them to the Presbytery, nor any Warrant given by
the Presbytery for citing them (Mr. Frazer of Brae, their Moderator, having
declared to the Lord of Pitliver, and Mr. George Gray, Minister at Beath, that
he knew nothing of a Libel against them, nor of any Order for citing them)
thought not themselves obliged to answer that illegal Citation, ordered by some
private Cabal, probably the Compilers of the Libels that were to be given in.

Whereupon the Heritours of the Parish, and Magistrates of the Burgh formed a
Representation, and gave it in by some of their number to the Presbytery,
complaining of the Injury done them and their Ministers, craving that they
would be pleased to give the Authors such Rebuke as the matter deserved; and
withal desiring that if there were any particular Libels offered against their
Ministers, or any of them, the Presbytery would be pleased to impart the same
to them, to the effect that they might give due Information concerning their
Ministers, of their Life, Conversation, and Deportment in their Charge.

Mr. James Graham, one of the Ministers, went also to the Presbytery, and in
his own and his Collegue's Name, complained of encroachment made on the
Presbytery's Authority, and the Injury done to them, desiring, that at least
they would declare that Citation void and null: After some Consultation, the
Presbytery returned answer to the Heritors and Magistrates, that they sustained
the Citation, and accordingly caused call the Ministers at the Church-door:
None of them compeired: A little after they sent their Officer, desiring the
Ministers to come to the Presbytery. Mr. Graham went; the Moderator told him,
the Presbytery had sustained the Citation; Mr. Graham Pleaded that it could not
be sustained, being both Informal and Illegal given without any order from the
Presbytery, Appealing to the Moderator himself, who had lately declared that he
knew nothing of a Libel against the Ministers of Dumfermlin, nor of their being
Cited; and, producing the Citation it self, showed that it was in prima
instantia, to hear and see the Sentence of Deposition passed. The Moderator
confessed that he had said so, but now he remembered, there had been a motion
before them at their last Meeting concerning the M^nisters of Dumfermlin: The
Draught of the Citation he acknowledged was informal, the first Citation being
only to answer to the Relevancy of the Libel. Mr. Graham is removed, and, after
a little while, called; the Moderator told him, that though they sustained the
Citation, yet, in his favors who had compeired, they passed from it, and gave
him the eighth of October to answer to the Relevancy of his Libel: He pleading
the same favor to his Colleague, it was absolutely refused.

That Day Mr. Simon Cupar, the other Minister, is cited to compeir before the
Presbytery the Seventeenth instant, to hear and see Probation led against him;
the which day the Heritors and Magistrates went to the Presbytery and insisted
on their former Representation, and pleaded that the first Citation might be
declared null. Notwithstanding of which, the Presbytery proceeded and called
Mr. Cupar before them; the Moderator told him, that by his not answering the
first Citation, he had forfaulted the benefit of objecting against the
Relevancy of the Libel; that the Presbytery had judged it relevant, and that
now he was called to hear and see Probation led. Mr. Cupar answered, That he
had not forfaulted the benefit of being heard on the Relevancy of his Libel,
seeing it had been sufficiently represented to them by his Colleague the last
day, that That first Citation was informal and illegal; that his Colleague had
compeired, not as answering that Citation, but as a Plaintiff in both their
Names: That the Citation was previous to any Libel offered to, or considered by
the Presbytery, and without any Judicial Order, or Warrant granted by them,
that the Citation was to hear and see himself deposed, and not to answer to the
Relevancy of a Libel; and therefore he ought as yet to be heard on that head.
The Moderator answered, That they acknowledged the Informality of the first
Citation, but sustained the Legality of it, seeing it had been proved before
them, that there was a motion the day before of Citing the Ministers of
Dumfermlin. Mr. Cupa^ urged, that a motion was not a sufficient ground, except
a Libel had been presented, considered, and Warrant given thereupon, etc. He is
removed, and, after a little space, called on.

The Moderator makes return, that the Presbytery sustained that first Citation,
and were resolved now to proceed to the Examination of the Witnesses.

Mr. Cupar pleaded, That before they proceeded to Examine Witnesses, he might
be allowed to see the Libel, and to give in his Answers to it, because his
Answers might perhaps prevent the necessity of putting any to their Oaths; and
if any thing should be deponed, which he could disprove, he behoved either to
be debarred from just defense, or an occasion must be given to contradictory
Oaths. This was absolutely refused him, only a double of the Libel is given
him; and the Moderator told him, That though immediately after the Deposition
of the Witnesses, they might proceed to Sentence, yet he should have the Eighth
of October to hear the Depositions, and make answer.

The Heritors pleaded, that, conform to an Act of Parliament, Mr. Cupar might
be present at the Examination of the Witnesses, (which being denied, alleging
that Act reached not Church-Iudicatories,) they protested and took Instrument.
Then pleading that they might be present: This also was denied. Notwithstanding
several who were not Members of the Iudicatory, were admitted. The Witnesses,
about thirty, were called; five only compeired at that time; against whom Mr.
Cupar objected not: They are sworn; the rest of the Witnesses answered, some
that day, some on the morrow; Mr. Cupar was not called, nor enquired if he had
any thing to object against them: One Robert Mody, who had an hand in forming
the Libel, officiates as Clerk at the deposition of Witnesses; whose
Depositions were not read over to them, nor they required to subscribe the same.

Upon the Second of October Mr. Graham is Cited to the Eighth, to hear and see
Probation led against him, and receives a double of his Libel, notwithstanding
the Presbytery had allowed him that day to be heard on the Relevancy of his
Libel: An Evidence that the Citations were not ordered by the Presbytery, but
by the Libellers.

October the Eighth, The Heritors and Magistrates made a second Address to the
Presbytery, complaining of their procedure against their Ministers, and bearing
an ample Testimony of their Life, Conversation and Deportment in the Exercise
of their Ministry, etc. Notwithstanding of which they proceeded to call Mr.
Cupar. The Moderator proposed two Questions to him: First, By what Authority he
could presume to exercise any Ministerial Office independent upon them, seeing
the Power by which he was Installed, was dissolved? Secondly, Whether or not he
owned their Authority? And by another Minister it was proposed that he should
be charged with his Absence from the several Dyets of the Presbytery, since
their sitting at Dumfermlin.

Mr. Cupar answered, That he came to hear the Depositions of the Witnesses, and
to make his Defense, but understood not the design of these Questions, seeing
by the Laws of the Land he was in bona fide, to exercise his Ministerial
Function, and had not hitherto declined their Iudicatory. Hereupon the Heritors
gave in another Paper; in which, narrating their former Representation, and
their Address that day, with the Presbytery's slighting of both, they protested
against the Presbytery's further procedure; and did Appeal from them to the
General Assembly ensuing: Upon several grounds therein contained, which being
read, and Instruments taken. Mr. Cupar did in his own Name also Appeal from
them to the said Assembly, upon the Reasons contained in the Heritor's Appeal,
and others, which he reserved liberty to himself more largely to propose.

About an Hour after they sent for Mr. Cupar; the Moderator told him, the
Presbytery had considered his Process, and had referred the same to the General
Assembly; and in the mean time they did prohibit him to exercise any
ministerial Office, until the Meeting of the said Assembly, without giving any
ground on which they founded such a Censure. Mr. Cupar told them, he thought
strange of that Step of their procedure, that after Appeals and the Process
referred by themselves, they should proceed to Sentence.

About six a Clock Mr. Graham is called; he complained that though the
Presbytery had given him that Day to be heard on the Relevancy of his Libel;
yet he had received a Citation to hear and see Probation led. The Moderator
disowned that Citation, and offered to burn it. Tomorrow at nine a Clock is
assigned him, and the Witnesses are apud act a cited to the same Diet. After he
had been heard on the Articles of his Libel, the Relevancy of it is referred to
the General Assembly, and he apud act a summoned to the same, the Witnesses
were dismissed unexamined.

The LIBEL against Mr. CUPAR.
THat, First, He has been a great Persecutor of the Godly, such as through
tenderness of Conscience could not go along and join with him in his Apostasy,
by sending of his Elders in the Year (...) to inform against them, to the
Judges appointed for that effect, at Cupar of Fiffe, whereby great trouble did
arise to many good Persons, as Fining, Imprisonment, etc.

Secondly, That he has been supinely negligent, contrary to 1 Timothy 3. 2. As, 1.
That he does not visit Families ministerially. 2. Has not privately and
personally stirred up the People to the Duties of Holiness. 3. In neglecting to
visit the Sick. 4. That he omits to lecture or explain the Scriptures,
according to an Order of the General Assembly for that effect.

Thirdly, That he has horribly profaned the Ordinance of the Lord's Supper, by
his admitting of unclean Persons to that holy Ordinance, etc. That he admits
and keeps on his Session, ungodly scandalous Elders, some of which are
Drunkards, Tiplers, others Swearers, and the most part ignorant, and Neglecters
of the Worship of God in their Families, Profaners of the Sabbath.

Fourthly, That he has not brought several scandalous Persons, such as
Adulterers and others, nor so much as endeavored to bring them to Repentance,
nor to undergo just Censures in order thereto.

Fifthly, That he has sacrilegiously robbed the Poor of the Charitable
Offerings of the People; which is aggravated by this, That he has bestowed the
same to carry on Persecution against poor, wellmeaning, godly People; for the
proof of which, the Session-Book is required.

Additional Article: That he entered and has been admitted to the Charge of the
Parioch of Dumfermlin, by presentation of the Patron, Collation, and
Institution of the Prelate, and that against the Consent of the generality of
the godly and serious persons within the said Parioch; and that he has in all
things joined and complied with, and assisted Prelacy, contrary to the Word of
God, established Law of the Church, and the Lands solemn Engagements thereto;
and by taking the Oath of the Test, has manifested his incorrigibleness: For
which, and the forenamed Scandals, the generality of the serious and godly in
this place never accepted of him, or received him as Minister, but have been
groaning under his persecutions upon that account.

His ANSWER.
TO the First and Fifth Articles, bearing his persecuting Dissenters, by his
sending Elders to inform against them, and his sacrilegious robbing the Poor to
carry on his Persecution. This is utterly false, and is not so much as
probable, that the Elders should be sent on that Errand, or that they would go.
The only ground of this is, That in the Year -- all the Elders were summoned to
Cupar of Fi^^e, to give Informations to the porteous Roll, in order to the
Circuit Court held at Sterlin. The Elders complained of this Burden; and
application being made to some then in power, that they might be freed of that
trouble, it was answered, That the ordinary course of such Jud^catories
required it; but that two or three might go in the Name of the rest: Which
being represented to the Elders three are condescended on, viz. John Cupar,
Thomas Steinson, and John Main, the rest, each one contributing eight Shillings
Scots to defray their Expenses.

To the Second, The Parioch of Dumfermlin extends on every side, two Miles from
the Town, in some Corners three: It consists of above two thousand seven
hundred examinable persons; every Family in the Town is visited ordinarily once
a year, and twice examined: the Landward is divided into upwards of twenty
Districts.

These are visited twice a year, and all persons capable are convened to be
examined on the principles of Religion, the Duties of Holiness, and relative
Duties are particularly recommended, besides on all accidental Occasions of
Baptism, Marriage, Difference in Families or between Neighbors, etc. they are
particularly treated with in private. The Sick, upon notice given, are
carefully attended, and the Scriptures explained, sometimes in larger,
sometimes in lesser portions.

To the Third and Fourth, all due Endeavors are used to debar scandalous and
notarly vicious persons from the Lord's Supper: The Elders are Men of as
unquestionable Integrity as any of their Quality in the Parioch; at least
nothing to the contrary, of either Communicants or Elders, was ever privately
or publicly signified to him. Discipline has been carefully and impartially
exercised.

To the Sixth, His entrance to the Charge was by presentation of the Heretors
and Magistrates, the then undoubted Patrons; his Admission was legal and
approved, by the favorable reception of the Parioch; his Ministry countenanced
by all (a few excepted) being ordinary Attenders on the public Worship, and
Partakers of other Ordinances of Religion under his Ministry.

Indictment and Libel against Mr. James Graham, Incumbent at Dumfermlin; given
in against him to the Presbytery of Dumfermlin, the Twentieth of August, 1690.
THat whereas by several Acts of the General Assemblies of this Church, and
consonant to the Word of God, and in particular by Act of the late general
Meeting, ratified by an Act of this present current Parliament, all scandalous,
erroneous, persecuting, and supinely negligent Ministers are to be cognosced
upon, and censured according to their Demerits, by the respective Presbyteries
in which they live. And it being of verity, that the said Mr. James Graham is
guilty of the Scandals, Enormities, and Transgressions following, viz.

As, First, That he has entered and been admitted to the Charge of the Parioch
of Dumfermlin, by presentation of the Patron, Collation, and Institution of the
Prelate, and that against the Consent of the generality of the godly and
serious Persons within the said Parioch; and that the said Mr. Graham has in
all things joined and complied with, and assisted Prelacy contrary to the Word
of God, established Laws of this Church, and the Land's solemn Engagements
thereto, and his taking of Declarations and Canonical Oaths, has testified his
Incorrigibleness.

Secondly, That he has been supinely negligent, contrary to 1 Timothy 3. 2. As,
1. That he does not visit Families ministerially. Nor, 2. Has not privately
and personally stirred up the People to the Duties of Holiness. 3. In
neglecting to visit the Sick. 4. That he omits to lecture or to explain the
Scriptures, according to the Order of the General Assembly for that effect. 5.
That he Catechises not, according to the Larger and Shorter Catechisms. 6. That
he takes no notice of Quakers in his Parioch, who exercise all the Duties of
their Religion without control.

Thirdly, That he has horribly profaned the Ordinance of the Lord's Supper,
by his admitting of unclean Persons to that holy Ordinance. 2. That he has
admitted and keeps on his Session very scandalous Elders, some of which are
Tiplers, others Swearers, and the most part ignorant, and Neglecters of the
Worship of God, in their Families, Prophaners of the Sabbath.

Fourthly, That he takes no notice of Persons publicly profaning the
Sabbath Day, in the Town and about it, by dighting of their Beer to the Pot,
bringing in of Water and Kail, and their Walking, Drinking, and Caballing;
Children's playing (and his own among the rest) and that in a constant course;
which is not unknown to him, at least should not be, being so publicly acted.

Fifthly, That he has not brought several scandalous Persons, such as
Adulterers, Fornicators, and others, nor so much as endeavored to bring them
to Repentance, nor to undergo just Censure in order thereunto; for Proof of
which, the Session-Book is required.

For all which, and sundry others not expressed, he is justly censurable; and
therefore it is humbly craved, that the Brethren of the Presbytery of
Dumfermlin would take cognizance of the same; and being found guilty thereof,
that the Presbytery may inflict such Censures, as in their godly Wisdoms they
shall think meet: And that he may be examined upon his Doctrine and
Sufficiency, is desired by Andrew Rolland of Gask, and William Smith, in
Dumfermlin, in Name of several Presbyterians in Dumfermlin.

The Life and Conversation of these two Ministers, were so innocent and
exemplary, that there was not the least Pretext of charging any Immorality upon
them, nor any Crime, but what was forged by Ignorance and Malice: Wherefore
their Libels were adduced as a special and particular Proof, to show how unjust
and ridiculous the Presbyterian Clergy are toward such as are of another
Persuasion; especially when it was required to try Mr. Graham in his Doctrine
and Sufficiency; a Person whom all know to be an able Divine and an eminent
Scholar. It happened that some carried these Libels to London, where the matter
was represented to a certain Person of Quality, a great Friend and Prop to the
Presbyterian Party and Interest; and he was so set upon for this, that he
thought himself obliged to write to the leading Men of his Party in Scotland,
to meddle no more with the Ministers of Dumfermlin, because it was made a great
Objection against them. This was the Cause why the Process against Mr. Graham
was let fall: But though there was the same Reason to right Mr. Cupar, yet
because the Sentence was already past against him, they would not re-call it,
as if all their Acts were of the nature of the Laws of Medes and P^rsians. The
General Assembly referred them to the Commission; and from one Session of the
Commission, he was put off to another, with this Excuse only, That they had no
leisure, for other Business, to consider his Case. At last, Mr. Cupar being
wearied with so long and so frequent attendance, and finding his Parioch
grudging the want of his Ministry, at their importunity he has returned to the
exercise of his Ministry, the Presbyterians not being able to oppose or hinder
it, unless by the French method of Dragooning the Parioch.

Mr. George Johnston his Case Represented.
Information to the Presbytery of Kirkaldie, against Mr. George Johnston,
pretended Minister of Brunt-Island.
IT having been humbly represented to the Reverend Presbytery, That the said
Mr. Geo. Iohnston ought to be tried by them; and by their Sentence deprived of,
and removed from his pretended Ministry at Brunt-Island, upon these Grounds and
others to be added, as there shall be occasion.

First, As to the said Mr. George his entry to his pretended Ministry. It was
by Episcopal Ordination, Presentation, and Collation, and which obliged him to
take Declarations, Oaths of Allegiance, Supremacy, and Canonical Obedience,
which are contradictory to our National Engagements, and inconsistent with
Presbyterian P^inciples, which has involved in them Persecutions and bloody
Cruelty, that has been exercised upon Presbyterians, these bygone Years, nor
have we heard ever of any resentment he ever had or has thereof till this day,
whatever length he may now come to, to secure his Benefice; yea, we are obliged
to judge him the same Man he was, seeing he keeps at his old forms of singing
the Doxology, etc. Nor can there any change be seen upon him from what he was:
And how in this case Presbyterians can submit to his Ministry, we cannot see.

Secondly, As to his entry at Brunt-Island, it then gave great g^ound of
Jealousy, that he was a Man of bad Principles, and Jesutically inclined; for
having bee^ Curare at Fala, and having been deserted of that People, and they
deserted of him, he was dispensed with by the Earl of Perth, Chancellor, and
others of our Arbitrary Rulers, anent the Test that time imposed; and the said
Earl of Perth, and that Cabal, then being his Patrons, they did by the Earl of
Melford, procure for him a Presentation to the Benefice of Brunt-Island (being
then vacant, and the King Patron) till a more eminent place should be provided
for him; which at that time gave great Offense to all sorts of people here; and
which yet more increases this Jealouse, not only of the Presbyterian Party,
but even of his own Brethren, the Curats of their Meeting at Kirkaldie: for
without acknowledging that Meeting, upon his obtained Presentation, he received
his Institution from one single Neighbor Curate (by what Authority is unknown
to us) who came and gave him the Keys of the Church-Doors and Bell-tows, as
Symbols of possessing his Benefice; which was so received by that Meeting, that
they then judged his Practice irregular, and this Man who used it, to be of bad
Principles; for which they resolved to disown him for a Brother, and (for any
thing known to us) they continue in the same mind still, having hitherto heard
nothing of their further Brotherly Correspondence; so that at his Entry here,
he was under a very bad Character.

Thirdly, The Jealousy mentioned (not without just Ground) of his unsound
Principles and Practices, is so universally entertained, and has taken such
impression amongst all that are Presbyterian in that Congregation, that there
can be no ground to expect that his Ministry can do good in that place, though
it were submitted to (as it never will be) by the Presbyterians in that Parish.
It must therefore certainly be very inconvenient (if not unjust) to force him
upon us, or to require or expect our Submission in this Case to a Man's
Ministry we have such Resentments of, and Reluctance against, as is expressed.

Fourthly, Since his Settlement here, his Negligence in his Ministerial Work
has been visible to all: For except upon Invitation to visit sick persons, we
know no Ministerial Work he has performed, except his custom^^y preaching,
which he must perform for his Hire; and in those Visits, be the Persons never
so ignorant, he seldom (if eve^) fails to find them in that good Case, as to
assure them of Heaven, and so sooths them in their Sins, etc. But as to any
other part of the Ministerial Work, in Visitation of Families or Examination
(though he has been near two years incumbent here,) there is no shadow of
Account can be given, until the Act for settling of Presbyterian Government was
past; wherein he and his Adherents finding his supine Negligence in this would
readily meet him. To prevent this hazard, he goes about to take up a Roll in
the Parish in order to Examination: And even in this last he has made some
discovery of himself: for in his Circuit of his coming to some of the
Presbyterian's House to enquire their Names, and interrogating if they used to
come to Church. It was answered, they did not; for being Presbyterians, they
waited on the Ordinances of the Meeting House; which he affirmed was their
great Sin: and it being replied to that, That they judged it no Sin, but a
Duty: He asserted it to be their greatest Sin, and so left them: and if what is
said infer not Insufficiency, we know not what will.

Fifthly, His unconcernedness in matters of Scandal seems also to infer, both
Negligence and Scandal against him; whereof Providence has lately afforded us
a sufficient Instance while he was Curate in Fala. A Scandal of an Adultery in
the Parish of Dalkeith, pursued before the Session there, and the persons
guilty, being contumacious, it was by a Reference brought to their Presbytery
(such as it was) where he was a Member* and from them to the Bishop and his
Synod, where he was a Witness to the whole Process, which is very dexterously
conducted, and the Guilt fully and clearly instructed; so that the Scandal was
manifestly notair to him. But so little was his Zeal and Tenderness, that
though the Adulterer, has as a Stranger being valetudinary, lived in
Brunt-Island ever since Mr. Iohnston came here, unknown to any Person but to
him; yet he never made discovery of him to any Person, but suffered him of late
to be m^rried (though under Suspicion also to be married to another Woman at
London) without any Intimation of the Scandal: but a little after, upon an
emergent, the Magistrates of Brunt-Island, finding it their Duty to enquire
after that Scandal, and making their Application to the Incumbent at Dalkeith,
he gave them a full account of the Process, and produced very freely to them
the Session and the Presbytery Books; where they saw the Process very clearly
instructed, where that incumbent did exceedingly marvel, that Mr. Iohnston,
that had been a Witness to this whole Process, had past over this matter; and
did then write a Letter or Declaration anent that Business, and directed it to
the Magistrates and Ministers of Brunt-Island to be looked after, which was
delivered to Mr. Iohnston by the Magistrates, and he urged to publish the same
by them, that the people might be upon their Guard and know how to carry
toward him; which with the advice of his Adherents he refused to do.

Sixthly, The Presbyterian Party here (as in other places) having for
Conscience sake been fined, persecuted, and born down for Non-complyance with
Prelatical Courses, carried on by such Instruments these years bypast; and
having had this Yoke of Bondage thus wreathed about their Necks, could not but
in all reason and Justice expect, that when the Lord should return to have
mercy upon Zion, and put the Government of his House in the Hands of his own
Servants, to manage the Affairs of his Church, that we should be eased of this
unsupportable Burden. And can it be supposed any feigned submission Mr.
Iohnston can now give for this World's sake, can either satisfy our
Consciences, or persuade us of his Sincerity in this matter, whose Principles
have been to follow Courses to maintain that wicked Hieratchy? Nor can it be
supposed the Reverend Presbytery, who have it in their Power to ease us of this
Burden, will instead thereof wreath this Yoke yet upon our Necks, and thereby
sink us under it, and make our Bondage yet more grievous to be born.

Seventhly, The Presbyterian Party in the Parish are all Unanimous never to
submit to Mr. Iohnston's Ministry, nor to own him in that Station, whatever may
be the Event; and if the gratifying of him and his Adherents in this matter be
the way to secure and settle Presbyterian Government, it may easily be
conjectured, when it is considered, that there is no Person for him who is not
an Enemy openly declared in Judgment and Practice against Presbytery; which but
corresponds to Mr. Iohnston's own Declaration and Judgment in his Case; for
when Summons were given him to appear before this Reverend Presbytery, he did
even then disown their Authority, affirming he would not appear before them,
having another Presbytery of his own, to whom he would answer, but not to them;
or he would answer to the Council.

Eighthly, It is not to be doubted but a disappointment in this matter, will
occasion such a rupture amongst us, as will not be easily healed; And what the
end or event of that may be, who can tell? Nor can it be expected or judged
just, to impose upon us the keeping up of a Meeting House to prevent other
inconveniences, since there is a Legal Maintenance due to the Faithful
Ministers there, in whose Ministry the Presbyterians there pretend the largest
share.

Ninthly, How can it be supposed that this Man is of Presbyterian Principles,
or a Friend or Well-wisher to the late Happy Change in the Government of Church
and State, since all his Familiarity is with such as are well known to be
Friends to neither; nor have we an instance of any thing done by him to
signify his satisfaction with the Change, except his Praying for K. W. and Q.
M. which is not doubted was done by Advice to keep off a present stroke: And it
was observed, and generally talked of, when he was ordered to read that
Proclamation for Praying for their Majesty's, he did read it, but with that
contempt in his reading, sitting on his bottom and mu^^ering it, that his
manner of reading of it made many think there was more contempt in doing
thereof, than if he had forborne it. And such like there having been a Sol^mn
Day of Thanksgiving appointed to be kept, and a Proclamation issued out from
the Convention of Estates for that effect; for his own security, he preached
one Sermon that Day, but spoke not one word to the occasion of it. As also,
there being of late a Solemn Day of Humiliation to be kept, by appointment of
Parliament and general meeting of Ministers, for Happy Success in the King's
Expedition for Ireland, etc. he preached that Day, but was so general and
unconcerned, as no hearer could have judged, by his discourse, one Sentence in
his Sermon relating to the occasion, which cannot but give a discovery of the
Man's Spirit and Principles by which he is led, whatever he may pretend to the
contrary: And it is no wonder to see him contemn Authority, who affirms neither
Church nor State to be right.

Tenthly, How true a Friend he is to the Protestant Religion and Protestants
for its sake, may be conjectured by his Charity to the poor banished
Protestants, who were lately forced to fly from Ireland: For there having been
a public Collection appointed to be gathered for their necessary Supply, he
not only neglected to intimate the Appointment to his Hearers, and press them
to that Duty of Charity; but it was commonly said, he used all the means he
could to dissuade such as he had influence upon to contribute any thing in that
Charitable Supply; and the event was answerable to his design and desire, for
nothing was collected in that Church for that use; nor did any Person, within
his Association, contribute one Farthing thereto.

From what is said, it may appear what just grounds there are for trying Mr.
Iohnston anent his pretended Ministry, and the Exercise of it at Brunt-Island;
which is left to the Reverend Presbytery's Consideration, and their definite
Sentence for his removal from amongst us, as to his pretended Ministry, is
humbly expected and waited for.

This is given with Protestation to add further, as there shall be occasion:
And beside all that is said, Mr. Pitcairn was called to the Ministry of
Brunt-Island, and appointed by the Synod of Fife to serve there long before Mr.
Iohnston's intrusion amongst us, so that Mr. Iohnston can have no just pretense.

Sic subscribitur, THO. NAIRN.

Remarks upon the foresaid LIBEL, given in against Mr. GEO. JOHNSTON.
THE First Article will be confessed, and none, except the ignorant composers
of the Libel, will have the worse opinion of Mr. Iohnston on that account.

As to the Second, it may be said, That Mr. Iohnston might as well take a
Presentation from K. James, who was undoubted Patron of the Church of
Brunt-Island, as the Presbyterians an Indulgence from the same King; the one is
no Crime, the other cannot be well justified, because contrary to standing
Laws, and because they knew the Design was to make way for Popery, which Mr.
Iohnston is less a Friend to, than the Presbyterians are. Whereas it was said,
That he was deserted of the People of Fala, the contrary is very well known,
for that People had a great love to him, and he was in good esteem amongst
them: They expressed a great deal of regret when he parted from them; and if
there were any who ran to the Presbyterian meeting house while he was there,
they were very few, and very inconsiderable. His manner of Institution to the
Church of Brunt-Island, was not singular, nor yet irregular, according to the
practice of the Church, and can be no reasonable prejudice against him. Nor is
it true, That the other Ministers of that Presbytery disowned him; for they
always did, and still do, entertain a Brotherly Correspondence with him.

As to the Third, It might have been true, That the Presbyterians entertained a
Jealousy of him; and their groundless Jealousy might have raised a Prejudice
against his Ministry: But notwithstanding of that, Mr. Iohnston is very capable
of doing good in that Parioch, because the Presbyterians are not near the
number of the People of another Persuasion, who love Mr. Iohnston's Person, and
are so very well pleased with his Ministry, that they have testified a great
deal of Concernment for him.

As to the Fourth, All that know Mr. Iohnston, know that he makes Conscience
of discharging the Duty of a Minister; so that he cannot be liable to censure
upon this Head; except amongst ignorant and malicious Persons, his Omissions
will be found very pardonable: And what is there given as an instance, is to be
ascribed to the confusion of the Times* rather than to any neglect of his. It
is indeed a little strange to see an Episcopal Minister accused by
Presbyterians, for encouraging Persons with assurance of Heaven, without
pressing Repentance upon them; for the Presbyterian Ministers are known to be
much more guilty of this: And the only Reason why the Vulgar use to be more
affected with the Visits of Presbyterian Ministers, than with the Visits of
Episcopal ones, is, That the Discourses of the one goes all upon Comfort, and
the other mostly on Duty: It is the practice of the Episcopal Clergy, first, to
press Faith, Repentance, and Obedience to the Laws of God, and to give hopes of
Heaven only upon these terms; which, being somewhat hard to Flesh and Blood,
therefore some choose the Presbyterian way of it, which is more easy, but
certainly not so safe.

As to the Fifth, The scandalous Person there spoken of, was living in
Brunt-Island before Mr. Iohnston came to it, and had joined himself to the
Presbyterian Meeting House, so that he was never under Mr. Iohnston's cure; and
considering the Indulgence given, then to those of that Persuasion, there was
no Obligation on Mr. Iohnston to take notice of one who belonged not to his
Congregation. The Banns of Marriage, were proclaimed in the Meeting House, and
he was Married by the Presbyterian Minister; and therefore, if the suffering
him to be married was a Fault, it cannot be charged upon Mr. Iohnston. The
emergent which, they say, put the Magistrates of Brunt-Island upon their Duty
to enquire after this scandal, was only some difference that fell out betwixt
them and him; whereby it is evident, that their prosecuting of scandal proceeds
more often from a Pique, than from any sense of the Sin.

The Sixth Article is Trueblue Presbyterian, and if it be admitted as relevant,
the whole Episcopal Clergy must be dismissed.

As to the Seventh, whatever be the Resolutions of the Presbyterian Party, it
is the concerted Resolution of the Episcopal Party to own Mr. Johnson, and to
adhere to him. It is no more just to satisfy the one than the other, and it is
reasonable that the lesser number yield to the greater.

The Eighth is very unjust, for the accidental Inconvenience which some bring
upon themselves, is no good reason for the taking away ones Legal Rights and
just Possession.

There is nothing in the other remaining Articles but uncertain Sur^ises and
uncharitable Constructions; and therefore this very Libel is a great
Demonstration of Mr. Iohnston's Innocence. For when no real Crime could be
objected against him, by these whose M^lice prompted them to do it, if (...)
had been^ the least ground for it, it is evident, that his Depo^^ment: and
Ministry were unblameable; and consequently the Presbytery most unjust who
suspended him, and the Commission of the General Assembly no less, who refused
to repone him, and redress the Wrong^ he ha^^ met with.

The Commission res^^ing to right Mr. Iohnston, the Parish of Brunt-Island
being very sensible of the Injury which both he and they received, resolved to
do themselves right; and so they met, gave Mr. Iohnston a new Call, and put him
in Possession again of the Church, declaring that they will maintain him in it
by a strong Hand. And there can be no reason given why this way of possessing
Ministers should not stand and be justified as well as the dispossessing and
turning them out by a Rabble. The Presbyterians fret very much at this, as they
have reason, because it shakes one of the pretended Pillars of their Kirk, viz.
The Inclinations of the People; and therefore they have taken out
Council-Letters, requiring them to deliver up the Keys of the Church.

The End of the First Part.

